paid notice: deaths   cassidy, john g., sr.   cassidy--john g., sr. of rye, ny passed away at greenwich hospital on december 31, 2006 after suffering a stroke. john was born on august 15, 1928 to ellen and patrick cassidy of new rochelle, ny and swan linbar in county cavin, ireland. he was a staff sergeant in the u.s. air force, a u.s. marine corps reservist, a knight of malta, and a knight of the equestrian order of the holy sepulchre of jerusalem. he was a past president of the board of directors of the larchmont shore club and a former member of the board of trustees of sacred heart university. john founded the capital adjustment service corporation, was the co-owner of classic irish crystal, and cofounder of al imports. he also served as chief financial officer of the new york medical college in valhalla, ny. john was pre-deceased by his sons sean matthew cassidy and john g. cassidy jr. and his granddaughter katie cassidy higgins. he is survived by his wife of 55 years, nancy doherty cassidy and his children; patricia and harold o'callaghan of pound ridge, ny, kevin and jayne cassidy of briarcliff manor, ny, nancy and stephen mara of bedford hills, ny, james and heather cassidy of greenwich, ct, nora cassidy holmes of rye, ny, michael and sherry cassidy of windemere, fl, and megan and lawrence foley of southport, ct. he is also the beloved grandfather to 29 grandchildren: caitlin and erin cassidy; timothy and the late katie cassidy higgins; kerry cassidy; meghan, annie, stephen, cassidy, bridget and kelsey mara; james, savannah and scarlet tanager cassidy; nora, kirk, and zachary holmes; michael, diane, quinn, dylan, daphane, findlay, mairead, and wyatt cassidy; and lawrence john, liam, clare, and aiden foley. his family was his life! calling hours will be held on tuesday january 2, 2007 from 2-4 pm and 7-9 pm at graham funeral home, 1036 boston post road, rye, ny. a mass of christian burial will be celebrated at 10am wednesday, january 3, 2007 at resurrection church, 910 boston post road, rye, ny. in lieu of flowers please send donations to the katie cassidy higgins memorial lacrosse fund c/o convent of the sacred heart, 1177 king street, greenwich, ct, 06831 or cystic fibrosis foundation, 6931 arlington road, bethesda, md 20814.  