free the mind and fewer injuries may follow   in a high school locker room in worthington, ohio, sam maniar handed a piece of string tied to a washer to each of the field hockey players sitting around him. he told the athletes to use their minds to move the washer from side to side, and he watched as each girl's washer started to swing.  ''by thinking about moving the washer, we send a message from the brain to the nerve receptors in our fingers to move the string attached to the washer,'' said dr. maniar, a sports psychologist. ''most people are in total amazement. i use it show the connection between our thoughts and our bodies.''  every athlete and coach knows that harnessing one's mind can lead to feats of coordination and finesse on the field. but what many are just learning is that taking care of an athlete's emotional health -- and managing stress in particular -- can help prevent injury.  ''the research is there showing that high stress levels do increase the risk of getting injured, but few lay people realize the connection,'' dr. maniar said.  iona mackenzie, 35, a triathlete and adventure racer in boulder, colo., believes that a period of undue tension in 2001 led to her back-to-back injuries. ms. mackenzie had just started a highly stressful job in vancouver, was rowing competitively and was also dealing with a long-distance relationship that was financially and emotionally draining.  ''i'd been rowing for about seven or eight years completely injury free,'' she said. ''but during that year i fractured a rib and soon after that healed, i injured my lower back. both are fairly common injuries for female rowers, but i don't feel like either would have happened if my body hadn't been so weakened by how much stress i was under.''  the american college of sports medicine recently issued a consensus statement -- a joint effort by about a dozen sports medicine practitioners, team doctors and sports psychologists -- to inform team physicians, coaches and athletic trainers about the important link between stress and injury.  ''this concept is not always welcomed with open arms in the sports community where athletes are taught to be tough,'' said dr. stanley a. herring, chairman of the consensus statement committee, a team physician for the seattle seahawks and a consultant to the university of washington's sports medicine department. ''but you can't tough your way through mental issues.''  stress is an omnipresent problem, and the word is used to describe situations ranging from a long wait at starbucks to fear of a terrorist attack. so why, one may argue, isn't every athlete collapsing to the ground?  while the research has shown a consistent connection between significant negative life events -- the end of a relationship, a death in family, the loss of job, failing in school -- and the increased risk of injury, the key isn't so much the stressful event itself, but how a person handles it.  ''one man's stress is another man's vacation,'' dr. herring said. ''those at risk are the ones whose stress exceeds the resources they have to cope with it.''  there are several explanations for how stress leads to injuries. according to frank m. perna, a psychologist and associate professor at boston university, there may be multiple causes. ''studies have shown that when you're stressed you don't pay enough attention to visual cues,'' he said.  that, for example, could cause a football player to miss something in his peripheral vision and be blindsided and injured. physiologically, more stress means more stress hormones flowing through your body.  cortisol, a stress-related hormone, decreases the immune response, dr. perna said. ''athletes who are training hard are breaking down muscle,'' he said, ''and cortisol will impede the body's ability to repair muscles, making them more likely to get injured or exacerbate a chronic injury.''  stress also increases muscle tension, and tense muscles are more susceptible to tearing or can throw a person off balance and affect coordination. studies have shown that during a single school year, one in six athletes is likely to suffer an injury serious enough to miss games. other studies have reported that high stress levels make athletes at least twice as susceptible to injury.  the key to recognizing athletes at risk, the researchers agreed, is simply bothering to probe deeper.  ''when the athlete gets a preseason physical, it shouldn't be just about the 'physical,' '' dr. herring said. ''ask about what's going on at home, how are things with their girlfriend, do they feel overwhelmed? and if the answers are concerning, it's an opportunity to help them out.''  dr. margot putukian, director of athletic medicine at princeton university, said, ''most coaches don't perceive mental health as something they have to worry about.''  for coaches who don't have a sports psychologist on call, it is still easy enough to implement some stress-management techniques. dr. maniar said there was no reason a coach could not learn a few relaxation tips.  the american college of sports medicine recommends methods such as progressive muscle relaxation, a sequence of movements to tense and release muscle groups to bring tension levels down. visual imagery, which involves picturing certain images to create a different physical state, can also be employed.  ''for example, imagining being on a beach in the warm sand is likely to produce a physical shift that makes you feel more relaxed,'' said david b. coppel, a sports psychologist in kirkland, wash.  and doing deep, abdominal breathing helps change shallow breathing (a symptom of stress and tension) into deeper, rhythmic breathing.  most high school and college teams may not be sitting down for group yoga and meditation sessions in place of practice, but a few forward-thinking coaches are already heeding the college of sports medicine's recommendations.  terri simonetti frost, who coaches the field hockey team at thomas worthington high school in worthington, ohio, brought dr. maniar in teach her players imagery techniques. he also encouraged the girls to better communicate about what was causing tension in their lives.  ''communication is our biggest technique for coping with stress,'' ms. frost said. ''if a kid seems off during practice, i'll call her aside and we'll talk about what's going on in her life.''  ms. frost gives her players an extra day off each week -- they practice only four days -- to help reduce stress. she also talks to them about their study habits and what is going on in their academic schedules so that they won't feel overwhelmed by school and sports simultaneously.  ''i think on a sort of subconscious level it may play a role in keeping the players healthy,'' she said.  although it is impossible to prove cause and effect, she noted that none of her players were injured this last season, and the team was undefeated in the regular season.  the doctors who put together the college of sports medicine consensus statement also said that common emotional reactions to injury -- like loss of identity, fear, anxiety and depression -- could affect a player's recovery.  ''but people who have learned coping strategies for dealing with setbacks in life can better handle the stress of being on the sideline,'' dr. perna said.  stephanie heinsons, 21, a senior at ohio state university who competes in equestrian events, regularly practices controlled breathing and imagery to help cope not only with the stress of competition but also with everyday life. ''these techniques help to calm me down and force my focus back into the present,'' she said.  if she skips her relaxation techniques, she is more likely to feel anxious and tense up. ''when i take a deep breath and tell myself to focus on the present, i become calm,'' ms. heinsons said. ''that helps me like magic.''  