when the east coast was a nuclear bull's-eye   though nuclear bombs tests and titan missile silos are identified with the open spaces of the west, the fear of soviet attack also had the east on edge. most of the nike missile sites that once ringed new york, philadelphia and washington, ready to shoot down enemy planes that swooped too close, have been paved over or are capped off and overgrown with trees. but there are still places in the east that provide windows into the world of cold war defense.  new jersey: fort hancock  this former army base at sandy hook, n.j., guarded new york harbor until 1974 and is now part of the 26,000-acre gateway national recreation area. with 24 nuclear warheads at one time, its arsenal was substantial. what remains are three unarmed missiles and an attendant radar site.  from april through october, half-hour walking tours led by military veterans meet on weekends at the radar site's gate, and more comprehensive tours are given monthly. for details, call 732-872-5970 or check www.nps.gov/gate.  west virginia: the greenbrier  at this sprawling old resort in sulphur springs, w.va., beyond what is today a spa and three golf courses, a 112,000-square-foot bunker was carved into the side of a mountain as the secret refuge for congress in case of nuclear attack. lawmakers were to cast votes in an air-locked, radiation-free complex and then bunk alongside their cross-the-aisle rivals upstairs.  despite its size and the presence of a secret staff disguised as tv repairmen, the bunker was unknown to even longtime greenbrier employees until the washington post published an article about it in 1992. ''there were plenty of rumors,'' said dr. robert conte, the resort's historian, who has worked there for 28 years, ''but i couldn't get them confirmed.''  tours (age 10 and up) cost $20 and last about 90 minutes; no cameras are allowed. for reservations, call 800-453-4858.  florida: peanut island  of course, the president needed fallout protection even if he was kicking back in palm beach, as john f. kennedy often did. so a bunker came to the president, built on nearby peanut island. though the exterior resembles an earthen quonset hut, the inside is vintage cuban missile crisis, with old cans of water, collapsible spoons and president kennedy's desk.  tours ($10) are conducted on weekends by the palm beach maritime museum (561-832-7428, www.pbmm.org).  massachusetts: chesterfield  a grange hall, general store and 18th-century houses don't scream high-value target, but with a key interstate telephone line running through chesterfield, a few miles west of northampton, the government wasn't taking any chances. outside town, a 40,000-square-foot bunker was buried 40 feet below ground in the early 1960s.  today it houses chesterfield custom, a manufacturer of vinyl organizers and other office products, though it retains details like toilets spring-mounted to absorb shocks in an attack.  frank keefe, the company's chief executive, said that this bunker was where richard nixon's daughter julie was to seek shelter if a war broke out while she was attending smith college. ''there can be a blizzard going on, and you would never know it,'' mr. keefe said.  you can drive by 11 bofat hill road, off east street (chesterfield road), to judge for yourself.  