online: bed bouncers and pool leapers   hotel web site photographs don't always reveal the whole picture. a wide-angle lens can make a small room look king-size and a pool look palatial. enter hotelsbycity.net, a hotel reservation site, which started a ''hotel blog'' section in november filled with candid photos and videos on everything from beds to bathrooms.  in the ''hotel throne'' section, there are not only photos of bathrooms all over the world (one in japan has a sign stating ''on using a shower of toilet please stand up after you have stopped them'') and examples of bizarre art in hotels' public toilets (photos of women, one of them with a magnifying glass, looking down on the urinals), but also pictures of bathrooms with a view.  in ''hotel splash,'' viewers can peruse rooftop pools, urban pools, resort pools and pools with the best views (the hong kong four seasons pool and the parador hotel's adults-only pool in costa rica look amazing). they can also check out where the celebrities like to swim (one photo shows lindsay lohan at the hard rock hotel in maui) along with people's pool party pictures. and though the many photos of people jumping into various pools can get tiresome, the hundreds of photos of people jumping on their hotel beds (including instructions on how to do it properly) are hilarious.  those who take their sheets seriously, however, will be happy to know they also have ''hotel bed hq,'' where bloggers post photographs not only of boutique beds and honeymoon beds, but also of bad mattresses and even close-ups of bed bugs. in addition, there is ''hotel drink,'' which showcases hotel bars, lounges and cocktails.  the site also has residents of a number of cities blogging their recommendations to visitors.  in transit  correction:  january 21, 2007, sunday  a brief report in the in transit column on jan. 7 about hotelsbycity.net carried incorrect information from a blogger on the site who posted a photograph of the singer lindsay lohan. she was standing beside a pool with harry morton, the hard rock heir, at an unidentified hotel in maui -- not at a hard rock hotel. (hard rock cafe international has no hotels in maui.)  