new representatives from new york region take office   one tucked photographs of two young constituents who had died fighting in iraq inside the bible he used to be sworn into office. another held an open house in her new office here in the capitol for the busload of supporters her staff invited from new york. and a third met with prominent liberals on a newly created ''bloggers' alley'' here and appeared on c-span to introduce himself to a new national audience.  it was that kind of day for the crop of newly elected house members from the new york metropolitan region, as the 110th congress convened on a largely ceremonial day that was filled with joy and awe.  ''i didn't believe i had won on election night, and it's still barely real,'' said kirsten gillibrand, a democrat who represents new york's 20th district, surrounding albany, as she stood outside the house chamber after casting one of her first votes. ''there have been only so many members of congress in the history of the united states.''  john hall, the former singer with the band orleans and a democrat who captured the 19th congressional district seat in new york city's northern suburbs, was similarly struck. ''it's exciting and it's humbling,'' he said, as he stood in line waiting to attend a ceremonial swearing-in at the rayburn room in the capitol with the new speaker, nancy pelosi.  it was a day that promised to usher in a new direction for the nation, as democrats took control of congress for the last two years of president bush's term. the day also involved the largest number of new faces in recent memory for the house delegations from the new york region.  in the november election, democrats picked up at least five seats in new york and connecticut, taking one open seat and defeating four incumbents who had been hobbled by their party's problems, chief among them president bush's lagging popularity.  democrats predicted that the power shift here would almost certainly enhance the fortunes of the new york region, a democratic bastion whose entreaties for federal aid frequently fell on deaf ears in a congress dominated by conservative republicans from other regions.  in all, 34 of the 47 house members from new york, new jersey and connecticut are democrats (and the republicans tend to be moderates whose positions on social issues like abortion have long put them at odds with conservative leaders of their party and thus less able to help their areas, even when their party was in power).  as representative nita m. lowey, among the most influential members of the region's house delegation, put it on thursday: ''we have been waiting for this moment a long time. we are in a position to deliver.''  among the new members at the capitol on thursday was joseph courtney, who defeated a republican incumbent, rob simmons, by slightly more than 80 votes in the second district, in eastern connecticut. as he waited for the ceremonial swearing-in, he clutched a 65-year-old bible that belonged to his father. inside it were photographs of two soldiers he knew who died in iraq. he said he took the photos with him as a reminder of the awesome responsibility he was about to undertake.  there were jubilant celebrations across washington, including a reception at the rayburn office building for mr. courtney and another newcomer from connecticut, christopher s. murphy, who defeated nancy l. johnson, a 12-term republican incumbent, in the fifth district, in the state's northwestern corner.  it was packed with gleeful supporters who came from connecticut and munched on cheese and fruit, but the political significance of the day was not lost on mr. murphy, who ran on a platform of restoring ethics in washington. he recalled walking past scaffolding as he entered the capitol on thursday morning and said that it reminded him of the enormous work that overhauling the ethos of washington would entail for him and the other freshman lawmakers.  ''every one of us came down here with a little different background and mandate,'' he mused. ''but i think the unifying theme of this freshman class is to change the culture and tone of this place,'' mr. murphy said.  ''we are here at a critical moment in our history,'' said mr. courtney, who has been critical of president bush's handling of the war and who noted that he owed his own victory to voter disenchantment with the war. ''we have a huge challenge ahead of us.''  