strange love   it's odd, the feeling of comfort you get staring up at a 103-foot-tall intercontinental ballistic missile from the bottom of a hardened silo buried in the arizona desert.  it's not that there is any joy in knowing that an icbm like this, the centerpiece of the titan missile museum in sahuarita, ariz., about 20 miles south of tucson, could have been launched in just 58 seconds, hurling a city-destroying nuclear warhead at the soviet union. armageddon is not a pleasant prospect.  no, the sense of comfort in seeing a titan ii comes from knowing that it was never launched.  during the heart of the cold war, from the 1960s to the mid-80s, the 54 titan ii underground complexes like this one -- with its blast doors, firing console and spartan crew quarters, all preserved as the titan missile museum -- were part of the american program of nuclear deterrence, on constant alert to keep aggressive impulses in the soviet union at bay.  ''this is what it took to wage nuclear war,'' said chuck penson, the museum's archivist. ''and this is what it took to wage nuclear peace.''  since those days, both the enemy and the sense of what keeps the country secure have changed. in an age of color-coded threat levels, the cold war and concepts like mutual assured destruction can seem far away. but they are kept alive at museums and historical sites like the one in sahuarita, relics of a recent bit of american history.  i went to the titan museum, which is operated by the nonprofit arizona aerospace foundation, on a quick trip back to that time. the journey, last fall, also took me to new mexico, where the atomic bomb was invented, and nevada, where it was perfected during more than three decades of atmospheric and underground testing.  atomic tourism is not for everyone. after all, the focal point is a weapon that can, and did, kill on a horrific scale. the technology tends to appeal to those with an interest in science and engineering or the military.  but if you are so inclined, you can see things that not too long ago were among america's best-kept secrets. mr. penson, whose long hair makes him look like anything but a military man, guides lengthy ''top to bottom'' tours of the titan silo (shorter tours are available, too) and will show you every last detail, down to the safe that kept the launch codes that could start world war iii. at the nevada test site, the department of energy will proudly drive you through the ground zeros of its atomic wasteland.  albuquerque is a good place to get introduced to the atomic age. it is home to the national atomic museum, which is owned by the department of energy, the federal agency that oversees the nuclear weapons program.  the museum has basic exhibits on topics like radiation and nuclear waste, a detailed explanation of the manhattan project, which developed the first atom bomb, and artifacts like a calutron, an electromagnetic machine for separating the bomb-quality isotope of uranium. thousands of these were built during world war ii, and since copper was scarce, more than 14,000 tons of silver were requisitioned from the government for the electromagnets.  but most of the museum is devoted to the modern nuclear arsenal (which, despite the end of the cold war, still includes thousands of warheads deliverable by more modern icbms, bombers and cruise missiles). if you've ever wanted to know what your basic h-bomb looks like (with the active ingredients removed, of course), this is the place.  the nevada test site, where nuclear bombs were tested from 1951 until 1992, is on nearly 1,400 square miles of dry lake beds and mountains 65 miles northwest of las vegas. while much classified work continues there (including testing to ensure that weapons remain safe as they age), the historical areas are now open once a month for free all-day bus tours -- an attempt by the energy department ''to educate the public about what really happened out there,'' said roger staley, who worked at the test site for 32 years as a health physicist.  mr. staley was speaking from the front of a tour bus, serving as guide for a group that included a retired airline pilot from reno, a former school worker from oregon, a nuclear power plant operator and members of a recreational-vehicle club from nearby pahrump, nev. education is not a bad idea, given the history of the testing program, including the deliberate exposure of thousands of soldiers to atomic blasts.  mr. staley told his passengers that there was no radiation risk. he was required to wear a dosimeter only to keep the lawyers happy. current radiation levels where they were going, he said, were somewhere between extremely little and none at ground level.  ''beneath the ground,'' he said, ''is another matter.''  once through a security checkpoint at the nuclear company town of mercury, the bus wound its way up over a hill, past large ''radiation hazard'' signs and down into frenchman flat, where the first atmospheric tests (of 100 total) were conducted. like all the tests conducted there, they had two purposes: to develop weapons and to determine their effects on life and property.  evidence of the second purpose was all around us. as the bus headed toward the site of a 37-kiloton blast in 1957, it drove past the mangled remains of several shelters made of aluminum. nearby was a blasted bank vault, an experiment to see whether money and valuable documents could survive nuclear war. there were twisted i-beams from a section of a trestle bridge, large poles for testing window glass and concrete bunkers that looked relatively unscathed.  then there were the pig pens, where live pigs dressed in protective gear were exposed to blasts and examined to see how well the gear worked.  nothing was spookier than the remains of the apple 2 project, a 1955 explosion designed to test civil defenses. parts of a small town were constructed for the test, with stores, cars and houses complete with refrigerators filled with food and mannequins dressed in clothing.  most of the debris from the test has been long since carted away, but a two-story house remains, about a mile from ground zero. it was weather-beaten and lacked windows and the chimney had been shifted off its foundation, but otherwise it seemed normal, just another abandoned building baking in the nevada sun.  atmospheric testing was banned by treaty in 1963; from then until 1992, the site was the scene of more than 825 underground tests, most of which left subsidence craters on the surface.  the test site is so peppered with these craters that from some vantage points you'd think you were on the moon. the bus actually drove down into one: bilby, created in 1963 by the detonation of a 249-kiloton bomb buried several thousand feet underground.  as craters go, however, none can match sedan, in the northeast corner of the test site. the 1962 sedan test was part of operation plowshare, a program to see if nuclear bombs could be used for peaceful purposes -- in this case, creating harbors or canals.  a 104-kiloton hydrogen bomb left a crater 320 feet deep and about 1,300 feet wide -- a magnificent yawning space that can be viewed from a small platform at the edge.  the problem, mr. staley said, was that the explosion also sent a large plume of radioactive dust into the atmosphere. ''if we had known what would happen, we wouldn't have done the test,'' he said.  the plowshare experiments were eventually discontinued.  with more than 900 tests over four decades, it seems as if technicians must have been constantly detonating bombs at the nevada test site. by contrast, at a titan ii silo, a nine-megaton w-53 warhead could sit atop a missile for years, waiting for a launch order that never came.  at the titan museum, yvonne morris, the director, who as a young air force missile crew commander in the early 80s worked 24-hour shifts at this and other silos, said the warhead was almost the last thing to worry about. the complex was full of equipment and systems that could, and did, fail.  while on duty, ''i wasn't thinking about 'is today the day i might have to fire the missile?' '' she said. ''i was thinking about: 'is today the day that they're doing a propellant operation at my site? i really hate those, because so much can go wrong.' ''  mr. penson, ms. morris's colleague at the museum, may not have shared her military experience, but you'd never know it from the in-depth tours he leads -- he can describe practically every piece of equipment in the silo. he knows, for instance, that the diesel fuel tank for the emergency generator is about the only item that isn't shock-mounted. just about everything else, from the light fixtures to the entire crew module to the missile itself, is suspended from springs, as protection from blast shock in the event the soviets struck before the titan could be launched.  in all, it's an impressive demonstration of technology -- granted, early '60s technology -- that was dedicated, at fabulous expense, to one goal: keeping the missile ready for a launching that the whole country hoped would not be needed.  ''which was really the idea behind this,'' mr. penson said. ''to never use it.''  correction:  january 12, 2007, friday  a picture credit with an article last friday about visits to atomic age sites misstated the photographer's given name. he is jeff topping, not jess.  