a prince on flute and a count on guitar   benedikt schack, the tenor who created the role of prince tamino in mozart's ''magic flute'' in 1791, actually played the flute. so in the opera, when tamino tames the creatures of the forest and later leads his beloved pamina through the trials by fire and water, schack, by all reports, played mozart's magical flute melodies himself. has any tamino since both sung and played? no one i can think of.  in pop music, folk music and jazz the practice of singers' accompanying themselves on guitar, piano or whatever is so common as to be completely unremarkable. and there are many examples of great instrumentalists who were also fine singers. think of louis armstrong, whose gravel-voice singing was in its way as powerful as his dazzling improvisations on trumpet.  yet in classical music there have been few examples of singers who have accompanied themselves on anything. the soprano victoria de los angeles was a notable exception. sometimes, for the final segment of a song recital, she would take out her guitar and sing folk songs in her native spanish. the mezzo-soprano lorraine hunt lieberson began her career as a busy professional violist, an experience that undoubtedly enriched her vocal artistry. still, once she had made the switch to voice, she essentially gave up string playing in public.  i found myself thinking about all this recently when i attended the engrossing production of stephen sondheim and george furth's ''company,'' directed by john doyle, at the ethel barrymore theater. as in his shattering staging of mr. sondheim and hugh wheeler's ''sweeney todd,'' which had an acclaimed run on broadway, mr. doyle has recruited a multiskilled cast of singers and actors who also play a variety of instruments.  that variety enabled the music supervisor, mary-mitchell campbell, to prepare a much reduced yet ingeniously inventive arrangement of the original orchestral score. it's impressive enough just to see this versatile 14-member cast in action, deftly switching from singing and delivering lines to playing strings, saxophones, woodwinds, electric keyboards and piano -- everything from a piccolo down to a double bass.  there is more than gimmickry at work here. having the cast double as orchestra lends ''company'' an intimacy akin to that of chamber music. you hear all the intricate inner voices in mr. sondheim's harmonies, and his lyrics come leaping off the stage, since the singers do not have to compete with a brassy pit band.  beyond this, though, an uncanny dramatic enrichment results when every element of the music emanates from the performers onstage. in many productions ''company'' can seem a jaded work, with its bitterly honest look at the fissures in human relationships and the paralyzing fear of commitment. yet with the actors playing instruments, poignant elements of the musical come through affectingly. the show is softened, though without lapsing into even a trace of sentimentality.  early on, for example, bobby, the bachelor protagonist, who seems incapable of a committed relationship, asks his friend harry whether he is ever sorry that he married. in the piercing, deceptively breezy song ''sorry-grateful,'' harry (keith buterbaugh) explains that this is a complicated question: ''you're always sorry,/you're always grateful,/you're always wond'ring what might have been./then she walks in.''  by this point we have witnessed the tension in harry's marriage to sarah. but as mr. buterbaugh sings, sarah (kristin huffman) strolls off to the side, playing delicate flute lines as part of the orchestral accompaniment. this resonant musical gesture has a transforming effect, making sarah seem more vulnerable and harry more smitten.  as my colleague ben brantley pointed out in his review of ''company,'' with most productions you wonder why bobby would want to be like any of his bickering married friends. but in this one an unspoken subtext comes through the music. yes, the married couples may often bristle with resentment, pettiness, insecurity or whatever. but at least they are all members of the band. they all play music together, except for bobby.  bobby's isolation accounts for the overwhelming impact of the last scene, when raúl esparza, a bobby for the ages, sits down at the piano for the first time and accompanies himself in ''being alive.'' with this act, bobby joins the band of confused, struggling but music-making people.  watching this, i kept wishing that something similar were possible in opera today. i am not suggesting the absurd: that, say, the cast of the metropolitan opera's current production of bellini's ''puritani'' also double as a reduced orchestra.  but imagine how touching it would be if a tenor singing count almaviva's serenade to rosina in rossini's ''barbiere di siviglia'' could accompany himself on the mandolin or, to make things easier, the guitar, a suitable substitute. the same goes for don giovanni's serenade below the balcony of donna elvira's house. are there no don giovannis out there who can also strum a guitar?  i remember a production of ''barbiere'' that sarah caldwell presented with her opera company of boston in the 1970s. the dynamic bass-baritone donald gramm, a riveting actor as well as a thoroughly trained musician, sang doctor bartolo. when the suspicious bartolo interrupted the singing lesson of his ward, rosina (played by beverly sills), to demonstrate what fine music was like in the good old days, mr. gramm sat down at the fortepiano and accompanied himself. for a fleeting moment, you saw a wistful side to this prickly, buffoonish old man.  i'm not being naïve about the difficulties involved. the reason opera singers, or even singers in song recitals, concentrate all their effort on singing is that the vocal challenges are so formidable. yet the music that great singer-pianists like ray charles and nat king cole performed was plenty challenging, and they managed both to sing and to play brilliantly. if every aspiring three-chord rock guitarist can accompany himself, why should it be so very hard, so unheard of, for a singer performing a few schubert songs to play the piano as well?  it's more common to encounter instrumentalists, especially pianists, who bravely perform scores that also require singing. in 2005 at zankel hall, the adventurous pianist anthony de mare performed frederic rzewski's ''de profundis,'' a 30-minute work that combines ferocious and at times dreamy piano music with the speaking and singing of texts adapted from oscar wilde's harrowing ''de profundis.'' as mr. de mare played the piece he produced a mesmerizing array of vocal sighs, barks and growls, but also passages of soulful and quiet singing.  no one really expects the gifted tenor matthew polenzani, now singing tamino in the met's revival of julie taymor's production of ''the magic flute,'' to take up the flute, however enticing the idea. i am just lamenting yet another aspect of the ever-increasing move toward specialization in classical music.  these days, with notable exceptions like esa-pekka salonen and pierre boulez, composers and performers mostly operate from separate specialist camps. in earlier times almost all musicians practiced both disciplines, including schack, mozart's first tamino, who was also a successful composer of light operas. the current trend has also turned singers into specialists who almost never play an instrument in public. this is not likely to change. but mr. doyle's production of ''company'' demonstrates what could be.  in my fantasy production of strauss's ''capriccio,'' at the moment in the final scene when countess madeleine takes up her harp to sing a meltingly beautiful love ode, the soprano performing the role would play the harp herself. just imagine!  music  