paid notice: deaths   o'neill, trevor   o'neill--trevor, died age 55, at new york-presbyterian weill cornell medical center after a brave bout with lung and brain cancer on january 3rd, 2007. he is survived by the joy of his life, alexander trevor iseman o'neill, who has been blessed with many of trevor's fine traits, and his devoted wife of 15 years, ellen marjorie iseman. he is also survived by his adored mother, cornelia rockwell o'neill, his aunts rowena and jean, three brothers, bracken, denis and christopher, numerous cousins, nieces and nephews, his brothers-inlaw frederick and peter, sisters-in-law kathy and simone, as well as his wife's aunt helen and uncle stephen. born in connecticut, trevor was graduated from the hotchkiss school, followed by dartmouth college, the yale school of forestry and environmental studies and yale law school, where he was always an engaged student. upon graduation, he left academe and went to work at the u.s. commerce department in washington, d.c. and in the governor's office in california on coastal zone management and water-pollution issues. at his death, he had been a partner for 12 years at the law firm kasowitz, benson, torres & friedman in new york, a city he came to love through his wife and son. an environmentalist and a dedicated student of geology and marine biology, he wrote articles on offshore oil and related pollution topics. he was a huge history buff, devouring a volume a day on world war ii or the civil war, or a biography or spy thriller. he loved playing the guitar and piano and listening to jazz and songs from musicals. a gifted athlete, he enjoyed his days as co-captain of the dartmouth rugby team, sailing the maine coast and playing on soccer, hockey and baseball teams. as a child, he was dubbed ''the next mickey mantle'' by the local westport, ct. newspaper on its front page. in later years, he loved to coach his son on sports teams. soft-spoken, deeply intelligent, and observant until his illness claimed him, trevor will be remembered by his friends across the country, by his cousins in ireland and england, and most of all, by his son who will revere him as the best father ever. his widow ellen is planning a memorial service in february in new york, with details to be worked out and announced shortly. in lieu of flowers, donations may be made in trevor's memory to the trevor o'neill arboretum, c/ o dr. steven tobolsky, head of the lower division, the horace mann school, 4440 tibbett avenue, riverdale, new york, 10471.  $(6$)o'neill--trevor. we are deeply saddened by the passing of our dear friend and colleague trevor o'neill. trevor had been with our firm since its formation in 1993, including as a partner for the past 12 years. trevor, who always conducted himself with grace and dignity, was a brilliant lawyer and made significant contributions to our practice. he will be deeply missed by all of us and we send our thoughts and prayers to his wife ellen and his son alexander. kasowitz, benson, torres & friedman llp  