a store to make your feet say olé   many years ago, i lived in spain for a summer, teaching english at 5:45 a.m. to a group of pharmaceutical executives, most of whom knew only three words in english at the onset of the season: ''yes'' (enthusiastic bobbing of heads), ''no'' (sad frowns) and ''marketing'' (big smiles and thumbs-up gestures).  every day i took the subway to work with the city's construction workers, stopping for a sherry and a coffee (this is what the construction workers did, at least, and i always say, when in madrid ) and a churro, which considering the dunkin' donuts society we live in, might be described as a smaller, lighter bear claw.  unfortunately i was the most impatient teacher on the planet -- or maybe it was the 5 a.m. sherry -- and at the end of the summer that remained pretty much the extent of what my students knew.  everyone in spain, i noticed, wore beautiful leather shoes. like the italians, the spanish have a thing for footwear. in soho, we now have our own spanish outpost in the newly opened té casan, a 7,500-square-foot emporium for shoes alone.  the name of the store comes from the gaelic phrase for ''a woman's path,'' but that sounds like a self-help book for women going through menopause, so i prefer the spanish translation. if you don't count the accent on the first word, it translates as ''they marry you,'' and frankly i felt married to at least two pairs of the shoes by the time i left.  té casan, the brainchild of a spanish entrepreneur, has brought together young designers with experience at vivienne westwood, alexander mcqueen, versace and dries van noten, among others.  the aesthetic is deeply evocative of barcelona, a city known for its dripping gaudí cathedral and avant-garde artistic environment. it's a place where somewhere, any time of year, you can catch a staged version of ionesco's ''cantatrice chauve.''  the store's gimmick is that it offers high-quality shoes at relatively inexpensive prices, and it plans to change the merchandise and designs every few weeks. i think $400 to $850 is a lot to spend on a pair of shoes, but in recent years well-to-do american women have been suckered into a bewildering fashion conspiracy.  to anyone who looks at vogue or w, it would appear that in order to be fashionable, to be stylish -- to be, in fact, footwear -- shoes must cost $700. there is something dark about this, as if we have become stepford wives, marching off to the high-end shoe brands as if our brains had been sucked out of our skulls and replaced with slots for charge cards. ka-ching.  at té casan, the message is change and exclusivity: each style is manufactured in limited numbers, as the salesclerks will eagerly tell you. these editions, according to the company literature, are limited by state. so if a designer makes 80 pairs of the same shoe in size 40, there may be 80 women in new york wearing the same shoe in the same size. not all that different from other small-scale designers.  the heels generally have a more modest cant than your average jimmy choo but less of the grandmotherly quality and faux duck-toed modesty of shoes at, say, anthropologie.  have you noticed that while models in fashion magazines two decades ago stood with their feet in a proud position, straight forward and elegant, all the models and celebrities now seem to stand with their feet turned inward, knock-kneed as if they were ashamed, or 10 years old? when was the last time you saw a model in the j. crew catalog standing with her feet straight out?  this seems to be part of an ongoing infantilization of the american woman, along with an obsession for weighing 90 pounds. a shoe is a shoe, after all, not a statement of virginity or, perhaps, faux-virginity.  this is why i like the shoes at té casan so much. they do not force the wearer into a kind of submissive frailty. a designer named manuela filipovic did a pair (much photographed in the news media) with a solid heel and art deco-esque winged scrolls on either side, in black or green suede -- very 1980s maud frizon.  niki robinson, one of the more avant-garde designers at the store, offers flat boots made of leather, fronted with madras patchwork made from men's work shirts, snapped shut with wooden buttons.  gaetano perrone's shoes are shaped like pagodas, some with six-inch-wide taffeta bows at the back. there are cherry-red platform pumps with a square toe; evening sandals are made from woven strands of metal. fay.b's leather boots, plain on the outside with a hint of apricot metallic lining at the top, are $385.  the space itself could pass for a chic restaurant. although it was designed by ron pompei, the man behind anthropologie, it is a cleaner, more space-age gallery. a large central glass staircase is edged with mirrored circles; an open dressing room offers semiprivacy for the serious fetishists -- sorry, i mean fashionistas.  after trying on a dozen pairs, i was surprised to see that the clerk was still remarkably cheerful. to be waited on by a shoe clerk with such patience was as miraculous as if my spanish pharmaceutical students had learned to recite ''paradise lost'' in two short months.  té casan  382 west broadway (near spring street); (212) 584-8000  atmosphere -- jetsons meets arte povera in an all-white boutique.  service -- as is common with much-publicized new stores, excellent. time will tell if it remains so.  prices -- metallic sneaker bootie, $210; black, gold and cream leather pumps, $245; red patent-leather platforms, $315; flat patchwork madras and leather boots, $425; satin evening sandals with rhinestones, $395.  extras -- booths for privacy; tea bar downstairs. on two visits the bar was unattended. (memo to stores: give it a break; we get our caffeine elsewhere.)  critical shopper  