playing with a gleam in his eye   gilbert arenas turns 25 tomorrow and his washington wizards teammates thought that buying him a hibachi would be appropriate, though perhaps not very useful.  ''nah, gil doesn't cook,'' his teammate antawn jamison said. ''the only time gil's cooking is out there on the basketball court.''  which is precisely why arenas shouts his signature ''hibachi!'' after nearly every basket he makes, borrowing a phrase that his teammate brendan haywood first coined.  nobody in the n.b.a. was sizzling more than arenas in december. he averaged 34 points a game, including a 60-point night against kobe bryant's los angeles lakers, a feat that earned him player of the month recognition.  and then wednesday night, at home, arenas punctuated his play with a stunning 32-foot buzzer-beater that broke a tie score and gave the wizards a 108-105 victory over the milwaukee bucks. he did not shout ''hibachi'' or even ''guaranteed, yea-ah!'' or ''let's make it hot-aaah'' -- his other slogans these days.  arenas, a 6-foot-4 guard, did not have to; he knew the shot was good. he simply turned around and walked to the wizards' bench before it even dropped. for once, his drama was in the understatement.  welcome to arenas live, the hottest show in the n.b.a., and a show that is not always about basketball.  ''most of the stars, they're not entertainers,'' arenas said in an interview in washington on tuesday after a wizards practice. referring to heat center shaquille o'neal, he said: ''when i was growing up, that's what i loved about shaq. i want to be like that, fun-loving. i think everyone takes things too serious. for some reason, i look around, it's like, we're not grateful for what we get and what we are.''  arenas is indeed very grateful for his success, but he is also a little resentful about being drafted in the second round in 2001 after playing college ball in arizona. feeling disrespected, he uses every slight -- real or perceived -- as motivation.  ''in my mind, i arrived a long time ago,'' said arenas, whose jersey number is zero. ''it's just convincing everybody else that i arrived.''  in the same interview tuesday, arenas called himself a ''character,'' but said that compared to michael jordan, bryant or allen iverson, he was ''normal.''  he wants to be lighthearted, but he scored 54 points in an overtime victory against phoenix on dec. 23 after vowing to exact revenge on suns coach mike d'antoni, who was an assistant coach on the united states national team from which an injured arenas was the last player cut in august.  it is these types of contradictions that define arenas.  ''he loves the game of basketball, but don't let the fun fool the fact that he's an assassin,'' the wizards' president, ernie grunfeld, said in an interview wednesday. ''he loves to win, he loves to compete, and he's an unbelievably hard worker.''  arenas has paced the soaring wizards (18-13) to an average of 107.7 points a game, second only to the suns. after a slow november in which his team went 5-9, arenas hit his groove by scoring 60 points in his hometown of los angeles on dec. 17, pacing the southeast division-leading wizards' to a 147-141 overtime victory. he shot 17 of 32 from the field and 21 of 27 from the free-throw line, prompting bryant to criticize arenas for having ''no conscience'' by throwing up so many shots.  arenas took the high road. and then he doubled back.  ''truthfully, it's hard to go at somebody who's the best player in the league,'' arenas said. but he went on to suggest that bryant should follow his lead, engage in more charity efforts and boost his image.  when it comes to charity, arenas has developed his own niche. he always tosses his no. 0 game jersey to a fan after the final buzzer. he plans to give away 20,000 jerseys at a game later this season.  ''how does kobe get his mojo back?'' arenas said he asked his teammate caron butler recently. ''if he gave out 20,000 jerseys of that number 24, oh man, l.a. would eat it up because of how powerful he is. but he doesn't do it.''  arenas said he wants to fulfill a larger purpose in the community. ''i don't want to be the superstar they latch onto, i want to be the person they latch onto,'' he said.  arenas's teammates cannot help but be drawn to his talent, especially after he has, by the team's count, nailed eight jump shots to end a quarter, half or game this season. six of the eight have been 3-pointers.  ''gilbert has a unique amount of swag out on the court,'' jamison said after wednesday's game. ''the guy has been playing like this all year. he has been unbelievable.''  off the court, his teammates have grown to appreciate his quirky, obsessive behavior.  ''i think he understands when to press and when not to press and when to just be gilbert,'' jamison said. ''that's something in the past he had, but he didn't know how to use it. sometimes you may not agree, but he definitely tries to help out his teammates.''  butler has never been an all-star, but he is now posting career numbers worthy of all-star consideration, benefiting from the attention opposing teams pay arenas. and arenas gets an assist for the december coach of the month honor won by the wizards' eddie jordan.  ''it's clear he means so much to us, the way he approaches the games, the way he gets through games when he's focused and efficient,'' jordan said.  still, jordan said that arenas has not yet achieved elite status. ''he's shown that he's going in the right direction as a scorer,'' jordan said, before adding that he wants him to improve his defense and be more consistent and focused in practice.  but jordan cannot help but enjoy arenas for who he is, from the zero on his uniform to the personality within the player.  arenas chose his number to signify that he came from nothing as a child, when he and his father, an aspiring actor, survived by precarious means in los angeles.  now, fans are wearing the number and showing up with hibachi signs. last season, arenas finished with the fourth-highest scoring average in the n.b.a., at 29.3 points a game. bryant was first, iverson second and lebron james third.  this season, he is averaging 30.3 points, third behind iverson and carmelo anthony. ''i think it's opened up people's minds,'' arenas said of his consistency. ''they can look my way and see what i've done in the past is not a fluke. what i've done in this league i deserve because i've actually worked for it.''  in the 2003-4 season, his first in washington, arenas tried to vote himself into the all-star game, trading two pairs of shoes and a jersey in exchange for a box of ballots at a local athletic shoe store. but he did not make the team until 2005, as a reserve, and was a late replacement to the east squad last season.  dwyane wade and vince carter lead this season's fan voting for eastern conference guards; arenas, who was third in the balloting results released on dec. 28, said he would probably vote for carter, although he added that he was more deserving.  his true fan base extends to the internet, where arenas has been offering drills and advice to high school players via his myspace page. ''it's like every kid who got cut, or the coach passed him up, they all come to me,'' he said.  tonight, friends and celebrities will gather to honor his birthday. arenas is paying for a black-tie, invitation-only party at a washington nightclub. sean combs will be the host; various rap stars will perform.  ''how many players can say, 'hey, i threw a party and i had puffy host it?' '' said arenas, who does not plan to take the microphone to address his guests. ''i'm shy,'' he said.  butler said, ''he's shy until he gets comfortable, and then once he gets comfortable, he'll steal the show.''  basketball  