for democrats, a choice: forward or reverse?   democrats realized their political and legislative dream thursday. now they must face reality.  as they take control of the house and senate, members of the new majority must reconcile diverse ideological factions within their ranks and make a fundamental choice. they can spend their energy trying to reverse what they see as the flaws of the bush administration and a dozen years in which conservative philosophy dominated congress. or they can accept the rightward tilt of that period and grudgingly concede that big tax cuts, deregulation, restrictions on abortion and other republican-inspired changes are now a permanent part of the legislative framework.  the competing drives were on display amid the constitutional hoopla thursday and the emotion surrounding representative nancy pelosi's election as speaker, a position filled until now by the likes of sam rayburn, joseph cannon and nicholas longworth -- men whose names adorn nearby house office buildings. ''we have broken the marble ceiling,'' mrs. pelosi said after she was handed the gavel.  in a meeting with the congressional black caucus earlier in the day, mrs. pelosi made her own allusions to the competing tugs on democrats, noting the party was rooted in its traditions but not hostage to the past. she promised a new direction ''for all the people, not just the privileged few,'' a reflection of the leadership's political and policy calculation that democrats need to champion the average guy.  ''the agenda we have is about restoring economic security to a very vulnerable middle class,'' said representative rahm emanuel of illinois, chairman of the democratic caucus. ''the real activity will be in those areas.''  yet many democrats contend that president bush and the republican-led congress that was his partner moved the dial too far to the right in many cases. and they believe it will be the work of democrats to make a significant course correction.  ''i think there are a lot of things the people of america want changed,'' said senator patrick j. leahy, democrat of vermont, the new chairman of the judiciary committee and a tough critic of some bush policies.  mr. leahy and others made clear that the new direction had to begin with american policy in iraq.  but their domestic legislative agenda suggests that they are picking selected fights rather than going for wholesale change. on the economy, they will move swiftly to increase the minimum wage. on social policy, they will challenge mr. bush by calling for expanded stem cell research. they will try to pass legislation increasing college aid for the middle class. all of those issues have the twin advantages of broad popular appeal tied to measurable economic impact on individuals.  but democrats are in no rush to engage in a fight with mr. bush over the ideological centerpiece of his domestic policy, his tax cuts. and they have showed no inclination to wade back into the abortion issue, despite its potency among many of their supporters.  ''we have to keep our eye on the average american family and sort of push aside the interest groups left, right and center,'' said senator charles e. schumer, democrat of new york. ''the world has changed, and it demands new solutions, not the old democrat and republican nostrums.''  but there is no dispute that mr. bush's legislative and executive record will get a microscopic examination via a renewed emphasis on oversight, a congressional function democrats say was all but abandoned in recent years. and the results of those inquiries could determine what policies democrats try to unravel if they uncover a strong case against them.  ''the bush administration has passed an entire architecture of laws that are going to be reviewed,'' said representative dennis j. kucinich of ohio, one of the most liberal members of the house.  republicans are waiting to see what develops, uncertain if democrats sincerely want to join hands and produce some consensus on public policy. or, as one senior republican asked, will democrats hostile to the bush administration be more like the scorpion in the fable with the frog, unable to resist the urge to sting even if they hurt themselves?  democrats acknowledge that with their minuscule majority in the senate and one in the house that is not much larger, they lack the political muscle to go too far in reversing bush policy even if that was their chief goal. and they already have their hands full with delivering on their own ambitious legislative agenda, following through on their pledges of bipartisanship and ethics overhaul and avoiding anything that costs the party its chance at the white house in 2008.  leading democrats say their best direction is forward, concentrating on establishing a new party legacy rather than obsessing with the perceived failings of republican rule. the test for the party's newly empowered leadership and the congressional membership will be whether they can stick to that path.  the 110th congress: news analysis  