beware the no. 2 fighter with a fierce mission   ''afro samurai,'' a friend said recently, picking up the dvd from my desk. ''cool.''  ''afro samurai,'' he said again.  ''cool,'' he said again.  the new animated five-part series on spike tv, which starts tonight, has a strong title. and samuel l. jackson is the voice of the main character, afro, who's seeking revenge on justice (ron perlman), who killed his father. so it locks in an audience right there.  but like much anime, even the new americanized anime, ''afro samurai'' seems arcane from the start. it takes place in a black-orange post-apocalyptic landscape, overseen by an enormous statue of the buddha. sensibilities clash early on as christian gravestones emerge from the desertlike earth. a lithe, handsome giant in hoop earrings, a karate headband and a flyaway afro appears for a showdown with some sibilant bad guy who says, ''i've been waiting a very long time for thissss.'' the showdown starts off all kurosawa, with swords and solemn words, but soon turns ''superfly,'' with guns and funk.  oh, also, the giant with the earrings, who dies, has a little son. the lisping man, whose lily-white midsection is displayed at length -- that's justice -- tells the boy, ''you will be consumed with hatred for me.'' and he is indeed, drying his tears long enough to vow his revenge and kick off the drama.  there: you're in the club. afro's prime directive is in place. and, if you want to go deeper, spike tv has conceived some elegant multimedia options. for more of the wavy, bruise-colored anime created by takashi okazaki and produced by mr. jackson, and to get straight on the characters and plot points, i tuned to the web site, afrosamurai.com.  entering the site requires typing in a birth month and year -- the site suggested ''1969''-- and the tough security made the whole enterprise seem even more thrilling. for sure ''afro samurai'' is not for the faint-hearted. it's about swords, guns, machines, thugs and monks, y'all.  little afro grows into a man who looks very like his late father, and he regularly encounters the ironically named justice, who is none other than the no. 1 fighter in the world. afro is no. 2.  interestingly, ''no. 2'' is a fierce theme in japan these days, with some arguing that ceding first place in sectors of the world economy is the smart thing to do. afro's second-place role is much-discussed in ''afro samurai,'' but whether he'll turn it into an asset -- or merely defeat no. 1, old school, and take the top slot himself -- remains to be seen.  the atmospherics in ''afro samurai'' -- the mist, hazy glows, reflections, disparate light sources, shadows and plays of color on water -- are mesmerizing. the palette is limited but superb: smoky like overdone eye shadow, with hot flashes of candlelight and vast cold walls of translucent ice. new forms of animation do well rendering temperature, better even than live-action television. (partly it's that they can show frosty breath and inclement weather without using snow machines or losing days of shooting.)  what's missing is flesh, faces and mouths that move convincingly. i'd love to see the peerless animation artists from studio gonzo work as meticulously on the palettes and lineaments for the faces as they do on swords and cliff sides. flesh needs variety and unevenness, and mouths need to move like human mouths -- not like robots, or like stilted stop-action cartoons of old. ''afro samurai'' is excellent. but an atmospheric anime series like it, with a similarly front-loaded plot, and with characters that (for once) look human: that would be unprecedentedly cool.  afro samurai  spike tv, tonight at 11, eastern and pacific times; 10, central time.  created by takashi okazaki; leo chu, shinichiro ishikawa, samuel l. jackson, arthur smith, executive producers; chihiro kameyama, executive producer for fuji television; koji kajita, taito okiura, producers; eric calderon, co-producer; nobutaka kasama, animation producer; hiroya iijima, character design/chief animation director.  with: samuel l. jackson (afro, ninja ninja), ron perlman (justice), kelly hu (okiku).  television review  