noises off: playgoers sip, munch and crunch   patti lupone was playing mrs. lovett in ''sweeney todd'' early last year when she looked out from the stage of the eugene o'neill theater and saw something she had never seen before in a broadway theater: a popcorn war.  ''there were two people in the front row sharing a bag of popcorn,'' she said recently. ''when she stuck her hand in, he immediately stuck his hand in. they were wrestling for the last few kernels of popcorn while we were performing. everyone around them was distracted.''  while eating at your seat at a broadway theater used to be universally forbidden, theaters are increasingly allowing patrons to take their drinks, candy and even crunchy munchies to their seats during a show. this let-them-eat-snacks philosophy has been embraced at the helen hayes, hilton, new amsterdam, eugene o'neill and walter kerr theaters, as well as at all nine houses owned by the nederlander organization (the brooks atkinson, gershwin, lunt-fontanne, marquis, minskoff, nederlander, neil simon, palace and richard rodgers).  ''it's a reflection of changing audience habits,'' said jim boese, the organization's vice president. ''as the audience for broadway expands, there are changing audience needs. this is part of a broader attempt to enhance the audience experience.''  it also helps the bottom line for theater owners, who profit from sales at the concession stands. and when people can eat at their seats, they tend to buy more.  to make purchases easier, machines to process credit-card sales -- provided by visa as part of its sponsorship of broadway -- were recently installed at bars in the new amsterdam and nederlander theaters. there are also plans to create cafe areas with tables and chairs and higher-end products, like high-quality chocolates, in some theaters. one has just been constructed at the minskoff.  rosa hires, the general manager of concessions for the hilton theater, owned by live nation, said most audience members seemed delighted by the new rules. ''if anything, people want more food,'' she said. ''they're asking for wraps and salads'' to be available at the concession stands, she added. ''recently we've had people asking for hot dogs.''  concession sales there have more than doubled since the hilton began allowing products other than bottled water to the theater's seats about three years ago, ms. hires said. the other theaters mentioned above have seen significant increases as well.  some of them have taken steps to minimize distractions and guard against spills. the new amsterdam, home to ''mary poppins,'' serves all drinks -- even champagne -- in spillproof keepsake plastic cups that muffle the sound of clinking ice, some nederlander theaters have begun using similar items, though at these you have to pay for the privilege of taking beverages back to your seat. wine at the richard rogers, where ''tarzan'' is playing, costs $7 if you drink it in an open cup in the lobby, but is $12 for a spillproof commemorative cup that you are allowed to take back to your seat.  all the theater owners whose houses serve food said they were investigating packaging that would reduce wrapper noise. there is no hiding the smell and sound of freshly popped popcorn at the the neil simon or the hilton however.  in west end of london, where eating and drinking in the theater has long been allowed, quieter foods, including ice cream, are on the menu.  baz bamigboye, an arts writer for the daily mail, said in an e-mail message that in his experience london theatergoers ''try and be considerate,'' while new york audience members often take a contrasting stance. ''i think the view is, 'if we're paying $100 or so for a ticket, we can do what we like,' '' he said of broadway's audiences.  at a recent performance of the child-friendly musical ''hairspray,'' most of the 50 people interviewed said they were unaware of the rule change; they thought bringing food to a seat had always been allowed.  theatergoers at ''grey gardens,'' which attracts a metropolitan crowd, were more familiar with past rules and didn't like the present ones. only 4 out of 50 audience members surveyed said they thought allowing food inside the theater was a good idea. ''i came to hear christine ebersole, not a skittles wrapper,'' jacquelyn zimbowne of newark said after the show.  gerald schoenfeld, the chairman of the shubert organization, agreed with ms. zimbowne. ''it annoys many patrons,'' he said. ''it causes a refuse problem. it damages our carpets. it can be disconcerting to the performers.''  no midshow snacking is allowed at any of the shuberts' 17 broadway theaters. they restrict drinks and snacks to the lobby area.  and that's the way it should be, ms. lupone said. ''broadway is about a theatrical experience,'' she said. ''it's not about pulling out marie callender's chicken pot pie and a sterno. would you go to church and pull out a ham sandwich? i don't think so. then why would you do it at the theater?''  