2 top hollywood agents move to a rival firm   two leading hollywood agents with top-ranked writer and director clients in movies and television joined the endeavor talent agency on wednesday, after many years at the rival international creative management.  the announcement ignited a hollywood-style scramble over prestigious filmmakers and television producers, as each agency strove to claim -- or retain -- the agents' star clients. and it placed an obstacle in the path of icm, which has been pursuing an expansion strategy, notably with its acquisition last year of the television agency broder webb chervin silbermann.  robert newman, the longtime film agent, and matt solo, who recently left his position as head of icm's television literary department, both were made partners at endeavor. they join 19 other partners, including ariel emanuel, rick rosen and tom strickler; those three left icm 12 years ago to found endeavor.  in an atmosphere of tension over declining star salaries and studio pressure, endeavor has had a relatively successful year, with its star client sacha baron cohen and his box-office smash mockumentary ''borat: cultural learnings of america for make benefit glorious nation of kazakhstan.'' the agency's financing department helped to piece the budget together for this year's critical darling ''babel,'' written and directed by alejandro gonzález iñárritu, also an endeavor client.  robert newman is one of the movie industry's best-known agents for filmmakers, having helped navigate a number of successful careers in both studio and art-house films. clients have included robert rodriguez (''spy kids,'' ''sin city''), guillermo del toro (''hellboy,'' ''pan's labyrinth'') and baz luhrmann (''moulin rouge!''), all of whom mr. newman said would follow him to endeavor.  leaving icm after 17 years ''is the hardest decision i've made in my life,'' mr. newman said on wednesday. ''they gave me my start in the business. i'm honored to be asked to join endeavor, and do that with confidence that they have the greatest resources and opportunities.''  mr. solo had been at icm since 1996, until the agency chose not to renew his contract in december, largely because the broder merger had swelled icm's ranks by 58 employees. his client list included some of television's most successful executive producers, including david shore, the creator of ''house''; shawn ryan, who created ''the shield''; and mark wilding, the co-executive producer of ''grey's anatomy.'' icm said mr. shore would remain at that agency.  