help   scorecard, not scores  my son is a student at a miami prep school for children with learning issues. his sat scores, after much tutoring, averaged 900 on the verbal and math sections. he has a great grade point average -- 3.6 (no advanced placement) -- but is simply a terrible test-taker, even with untimed allowances. do you have suggestions for resources that will help us choose a college that cares more about hard work and perseverance than sats? he would like a school in a warm climate, and he is an excellent golfer, probably could play on a division iii team.  robin polsky,  coral gables, fla.  thanks to a growing trend, your son can start thinking about that collegiate hole in one. the sat and act are optional at a lengthening list of colleges that focus more on grades, essays and extracurriculars.  consult the web site of the national center for fair and open testing (fairtest.org) for a list of well over 700 colleges and universities, from portland state on the west coast to drew on the east, that have test-optional policies. the list runs by state as well as alphabetically, so you can do a circuit through the south looking for a division iii school.  david r. parker, director of the university program for college students with learning disabilities at the university of connecticut, suggests treating the search and application process as a training ground for college itself. your son should investigate his options from golf to whatever services he might need as a student himself. to succeed, dr. parker says, any student with a learning disability has to be ''independent and a self-advocate.''  one guide to leaf through is ''peterson's colleges with programs for students with learning disabilities or attention deficit disorder.'' schwablearning.org, started by the charles and helen schwab foundation, posts articles about navigating school issues. one by loring brinckerhoff, director of disability policy at the educational testing service, highlights colleges with good comprehensive programs, including the university of arizona in tucson, curry college in massachusetts, stanford and the university of north carolina, chapel hill.  older, not richer  do you know of any resources for older (58) people to obtain funds for grad school? living stipends to attend full time? i am interested in a master's in social work. my preference is to transition into a new career as a middle-school guidance counselor. another possibility, quite different from the above, is a degree at the fashion institute of technology in jewelry making, repair, gemology, etc. the goal would then be to start a business.  carol tannenbaum,  passaic, n.j.  attending grad school full time is never easy, but there are almost always financial options short of turning to a life of crime. first, though: financial advisers caution against taking on too much debt so close to traditional retirement age, even if embarking on a new career.  graduate students can get much the same financial aid as undergraduates -- work-study, federal stafford loans, merit grants -- but no pell grants or plus loans. and they can borrow a lot more with a stafford loan than undergraduates can, up to $18,500.  jacqueline e. king, director of the center for policy analysis at the american council on education in washington, warns that graduate programs in professions like social work and fashion tend not to give as much grant money. academic programs are more generous; they can raise research money, and graduate students offer teaching assistance to large pools of undergraduates.  dr. king advises to look broadly. for example, the manufacturing jewelers and suppliers of america in rhode island offers scholarship money to those working or studying in the field. for your social work goal, if you're willing to work in a critical-need area, the federal government and many states, including new york and new jersey, offer loan forgiveness programs. for information: www.socialworkers.org.  and though you don't yet qualify, many state schools offer deals for older students. rutgers allows anyone who is 62 and retired to audit for free an unlimited number of most courses. while you don't get credit, knowledge alone may help you break into a new field. you even get free parking and a school e-mail account.  have questions on education? send them to edlife@nytimes.com or to education life, the new york times, 229 west 43rd street, new york, n.y. 10036.  help  correction:  january 14, 2007, sunday  an article in the special education life section last sunday about the large percentage of asian students at the university of california, berkeley, attributed an erroneous distinction to the state. hawaii -- not california -- was the first state without a racial majority.  also, an article about financial aid for graduate students misstated eligibility for federal plus loans. graduate students may indeed apply for the loans; they became eligible in july 2006.  and an article about rigorous high schools misstated the student newspaper job held by prateek kumar of phillips academy, who talked about his challenging courses. mr. kumar is deputy managing editor of the phillipian, not the top editor. (stephen s. blackman is the editor in chief.)  