singing a new song   q: your voice sounds startlingly unchanged in ''an other cup,'' your first pop album of new songs in almost 30 years, during which time you abandoned a world-class music career as well as the name cat stevens in order to reinvent yourself as yusuf islam, a pious muslim who dressed in flowing robes and refused to pick up a guitar for religious reasons. i never actually committed myself to stating or believing that musical instruments were prohibited by islam. it was just a gray area, so i stayed out in order to avoid conflict.  have you been singing without instruments all these years, at least at home? yes. ''a is for allah'' is a song i wrote especially for my first daughter, hasanah.  i hear you returned to pop music after your son, muhammad, brought a guitar into the house several years ago, hoping to have his own career as a pop singer. i re-evaluated my position and realized i couldn't object. later, i forced him to get a better guitar.  did you ever perform for muslim schoolchildren in london, where you live? there is a myth that i became a teacher. i am petrified of walking into a classroom with 30 kids. but i have helped to establish schools.  right, the islamia schools, which are among the few muslim schools in london. what do you make of the widespread discontent among muslim schoolchildren raised in europe? the atrocities of 7/7 made everyone look very deeply at themselves. it's noteworthy to recognize that none of those people involved in that horrific attack came from muslim schools. they went to government schools.  which means what? it sounds as if you are blaming british public schools for breeding violence among young muslims. there is a lack of a curriculum where the student could understand his role in society rather than be estranged.  you were asked by tony blair to serve on an educational task force after the bombings. one of the main recommendations of the task force was that we introduce a picture of history where there wouldn't be this blackout of a thousand years, what we call the dark ages. that was the time of the flourishing of islamic civilization.  it's interesting that you became a convert to islam, considering that your father was a greek cypriot who belonged to the orthodox church and presumably was not enamored of muslims. yes, there was always enmity between the greeks and the turks. the reason for me coming to islam was a long, winding road.  how do you support yourself these days -- off your old hits? i think we sell about 1.5 million albums a year.  which is how much in royalties? about a dollar an album? probably more.  for all your devotion to education and good deeds, government officials in various countries have tried to link you to extremist groups, including hamas. what do you think of hamas? that's an extremely loaded question.  can you try to answer it? i have never supported a terrorist group or any group that did other than charity and good to humankind.  o.k., but many of us here in the states would like to see moderate muslims make more of an effort to denounce the extremist fringe of the faith. very few mainstream muslims have publicly criticized their radical brethren. if i am not an example of that, then tell me, who is?  so would you say you have contempt for a terrorist group like hamas? i wouldn't put those words in my mouth. i wouldn't say anything on that issue. i'm here to talk about peace. i'm a man who does want peace for this world, and i don't think you will achieve that by putting people into corners and asking them very, very difficult questions about very contentious issues.  deborah solomon  the way we live now: 1-07-07: questions for yusuf islam  