no matter its name, an ensemble finds its niche   as jazz ensembles go, a hammond b-3 organ trio heeds rather strict protocols. it usually consists of organ, guitar and drums; the organist doubles as a bassist, using foot pedals and a walking left hand. the blues are its lingua franca, even when bebop or modal vamping is involved. and within a certain range of tempo -- anywhere between a stroll and a jaunt -- its imperative is a hard, foot-tapping swing.  two of the best organ trios of the last decade have featured the same three players. technically speaking, it's just one group, variously billed as the larry goldings trio (on several albums) or the peter bernstein trio (on a recent dvd). consisting of mr. goldings on organ, mr. bernstein on guitar and bill stewart on drums, it fulfills all of the standard criteria capably and rewardingly, without trying to reinvent the wheel.  for their engagement at the village vanguard this week the musicians are companionably listed in alphabetical order. during the first set on wednesday night, though, mr. bernstein clearly held the reins. most of the tunes were his, and he took the melodic lead throughout. the presence of two serious guitarists in the house, the august jim hall and the virtuosic russell malone, further implied that he was the man to watch.  and he was, from the start of an easygoing original called ''simple as that.'' phrasing unhurriedly, mr. bernstein let each of his notes ring out. his tone was crisp yet rounded, with a slight citrus tang. and while his style suggested a guitarist's guitarist -- not a horn player or singer in disguise -- he seemed to be filtering out many of the stock patterns that fall most easily on the fretboard. he was thoughtful, rather than artful, in his hesitations.  mr. bernstein had a concrete foundation in his rhythm section, both in the sense of something solid and in the manner of something being churned. mr. goldings and mr. stewart have a rapport rooted in contrast: the warm, washy hum of the organ versus the tight chatter of a ride cymbal, high-hat and snare drum. they worked together most impressively on an original by mr. goldings called ''the acrobat,'' set in a polyrhythmic waltz time; even when the groove shifted into a walking swing, the tension stayed high.  a similar cohesive drive propelled mr. bernstein's ''jive coffee,'' which is based on the chord progression of ''tea for two,'' but in a floating 5/4 meter. by contrast, a light-funk number called ''dragonfly'' felt static, not only because of its harmonic drone but also the extent to which it dampened the expressive dynamics of the band.  on ''pannonica,'' a signature ballad by thelonious monk, mr. bernstein ventured an unaccompanied introduction with minimal amplification, producing a respectful but quietly inventive melodic statement. when mr. goldings entered, his chords seemed to rumble and swell into being. it wasn't a particularly monk-like approach, but it was true to the setting, and worked beautifully.  peter bernstein, larry goldings and bill stewart perform through sunday at the village vanguard, 178 seventh avenue south, at 11th street, west village; villagevanguard.com, (212) 255-4037.  music review  