arts, briefly   movie dividends  the number of visitors to the american museum of natural history in new york jumped almost 20 percent during the holidays, and museum officials gave credit to a hit movie, reuters reported. ''night at the museum,'' released on dec. 22, stars ben stiller, above, as a security guard at a natural history museum where exhibits come to life at night. the exterior of the american museum of natural history is featured in the film.  in memoriam  broadway theaters dimmed their marquees last night at 8 for one minute in memory of vincent sardi jr., the owner of sardi's restaurant on west 44th street, who died on thursday. ''broadway is deeply saddened by the loss of vincent sardi, this iconic and beloved man of the theater,'' charlotte st. martin, the executive director of the league of american theaters and producers, said in a statement. in 2004 mr. sardi continued a family tradition when he was given a tony honor for excellence in theater; in 1947, the first year of the tony awards, his father, vincent sardi sr., received a special tony award for ''providing a transient home and comfort station for theater folk at sardi's for 20 years.''  downloads on the charts  starting tomorrow, songs downloaded from the internet will be able to compete for the no. 1 single spot on the 54-year-old british pop chart, reuters reported. up to now, download sales were included in compiling the weekly chart only a week before an actual cd single went on sale and for two weeks after it stopped appearing in stores. the official uk charts company said the change reflected the fact that downloads now far outstrip over-the-counter sales in britain. over all, singles sales in britain have risen to more than 65 million last year from 32 million in 2004, thanks to almost 52 million download purchases.  simpson advance frozen  a judge has frozen the money o. j. simpson, below, was paid for his aborted book, ''if i did it,'' and a related television interview. the ruling follows a lawsuit by fred goldman, the father of the murder victim ron goldman, reuters reported. the united states district judge manuel real ruled that mr. simpson could not spend his advance pending a jan. 24 hearing on the lawsuit, said david cook, mr. goldman's lawyer. mr. goldman has sued mr. simpson, charging that his book and television deal, championed by judith regan, an editor at harpercollins, were structured to cheat mr. goldman out of damages owed him from a civil judgment. in the lawsuit mr. goldman charges that mr. simpson was advanced about $1 million for a book and a television interview exploring how he might hypothetically have killed his ex-wife, nicole brown simpson, and mr. goldman's son, who was her friend. mr. simpson was acquitted of the murders in a 1995 criminal trial but lost a civil judgment in 1997 for wrongful death. since winning his civil judgment, mr. goldman has been unable to collect his $19 million portion of the $33.5 million jury award.  anastasio pleads not guilty  trey anastasio, below, made a surprise appearance in an upstate new york court this week and pleaded not guilty to a drug possession charge, reuters reported. the 42-year-old former phish frontman, who didn't speak to reporters, had been pulled over by the police in whitehall, n.y., 65 miles northeast of albany, on the vermont border, early on the morning of dec. 15. police said they found prescription painkillers and an anti-anxiety drug that had not been prescribed for him. mr. anastasio showed up in court unannounced on wednesday. ''we didn't know he was going to be here until we saw that black limo out front,'' william redmond, the village justice, told a local newspaper, reuters reported. mr. anastasio, who lives in richmond, vt., is due back in court on feb. 14.  sony to pay damages  a french court has ordered sony to pay 10,000 euros ($13,000) in damages to the union fédérale des consommateurs, a consumer group, for selling downloadable songs that run only on its own music players, agence france-presse reported yesterday. the group sued sony's french and british subsidiaries in 2005 over the web site sony connect. the organization also sued apple, whose case is expected in court later this year. the award stems from a dec. 15 court decision that found sony had not properly disclosed to consumers that music files downloaded from the sony connect web site would run only on sony players, and that sony's digital walkmans would not play files purchased on rival music sites, like apple's itunes. the court also ordered sony france to state clearly on its players that they will not play the files of rival commercial web sites. a spokeswoman for sony france said the company was considering whether to appeal.  keeping a video private  the only video of steve irwin, television's ''crocodile hunter,'' being fatally attacked by a stingray in september has been given to his wife, terri irwin, to ensure that it is never made public, reuters reported. the coroner in queensland, australia, who is examining mr. irwin's death, said the police had released the video to ms. irwin just before christmas.  rocking shanghai  eric clapton will perform in shanghai this month, following other aging rockers like the rolling stones and elton john, the associated press reported. mr. clapton, 61, will appear on jan. 20 at the shanghai grand stage, where the rolling stones made their chinese debut last april. ticket prices range from $38 to $230, emma entertainment, one of the concert organizers, said friday. what mr. clapton will play, or be allowed to play, is not known.  