a forest, a prince and a slumbering lass, at a gallop   much was made of the fast pace and streamlined look of peter martins's restaging of ''the sleeping beauty'' for the new york city ballet at its premiere in 1991. the ballet, which opened the company's winter repertory season on wednesday night at the new york state theater, has been condensed to a mere two acts from a leisurely, sumptuous three.  mr. martins honors the supposedly ''neo-classical'' traditions set by the company that george balanchine founded, with lincoln kirstein, in america. and some saw, in the coronation that ends the new production, a metaphor for kirstein's handing over of the company to mr. martins after balanchine's death. but the production also honors balanchine's reverence for the traditions of the ballet training of his youth in st. petersburg, including marius petipa's ''sleeping beauty,'' and incorporates balanchine's delicately spectacular 1981 garland dance.  kirstein, who died in 1996 and whose centenary will be celebrated this year, had a special love for ''the sleeping beauty.'' reportedly he envisioned a tangle of skulls and bits of human bones and flesh caught in the overgrowth through which the lilac fairy guides prince désiré to find the sleeping aurora. the prince was probably not the first mortal, after all, to try to breach those impenetrable green battlements.  a thighbone or two would be welcome in mr. martins's production, which has jettisoned or streamlined to near invisibility some important elements in the magical fairy-tale narrative at the heart of this classic. the prince now zips through the forest with ease and kisses aurora awake so quickly that this central image passes by almost unnoticed.  a few moments of hyperkinetic mime on wednesday suggest that mr. martins's decision largely to forgo dramatic narrative may have been a wise one. but the crucial vision scene, in which the prince seeks out his heart's desire in a phantom aurora, is now a fast-passing blur. a great pity, because that theme of unfulfilled yearning helps give the 19th-century classic story ballets their generation-spanning relevance.  wendy whelan, dancing aurora rather jaggedly, came closest here to the kind of poetry that the work demands, though the staging did not give her a chance for eloquence. nikolaj hubbe's prince did add a touch of warmth and passion.  on the other hand mr. martins has blessedly streamlined the tedious hunting-party scene. he has showcased male dancing, and the six first-act fairy cavaliers were terrific, as were stephen hanna's buoyant, extra-elegant ''gold'' in the ''jewels'' divertissement and henry seth's swashbuckling wolf. andrew veyette was a muscular new bluebird that soared high, in part because of his clear foot beats.  merrill ashley, this production's original carabosse, returned in majestically seething form, though the character now has too little to do. the new and the old came together most impressively in teresa reichlen's ''diamond,'' a stylish and imaginatively danced role debut; in jennie somogyi's expansive, gracious lilac fairy; and in amanda hankes's daring fairy of tenderness, also a role debut. this crop of fairy attendants at aurora's birth -- which also included ana sophia scheller, just promoted to soloist (new as the fairy of vivacity), rebecca krohn (new as generosity), alina dronova (eloquence) and the superb ellen bar (courage) -- lived up to the challenge mr. martins gives the fairies to luxuriate more traditionally in the choreography, especially the port de bras.  the lead cast was completed by tiler peck, also a newly promoted soloist and new in ''emerald,'' abi stafford (''ruby'') and megan fairchild (princess florine). maurice kaplow conducted the tchaikovsky score.  the new york city ballet performs ''the sleeping beauty'' through jan. 14 at the new york state theater, lincoln center, (212) 870-5570 or nycballet.com.  dance review  