snowbound neverland   sam buckmelter, who is 10 years old and lives in denver, has spent most of his waking life studying the vainglorious snowboard acrobatics of the great ones -- riders like danny kass, jeremy jones and andreas wiig-- whose names and sponsors' logos are etched in the margins of his fifth-grade notebooks.  sam aspires to ride with the goggle-tanned gods who throw slow-motion 900s off flesh-eating cliffs and drop out of helicopters to outride thundering avalanches. given his dream, the path was clear. sam convinced his parents to buy him a season pass to the new neverland of freestyle stunt pilots, echo mountain park, near evergreen, colo.  perched at 10,500 feet with wraparound views of the frosted rockies, echo is the nation's first winter resort devoted exclusively to the contagious urge to ''go huge'' and ''get your switch-front boardslides dialed.'' there are no gently groomed slopes, no wide cruiser runs, not even a single mogul field. echo is 100 percent terrain park -- 50 acres of jumps, rails, boxes, picnic tables, stairs, mailboxes and pipe. with a good-times agenda, echo aims to be the x games proving ground for the young and indestructible.  echo, 35 miles west of denver, bodaciously bills itself as ''the most exciting place to be with snow pants on.'' so on opening weekend in late november sam buckmelter came to guinea-pig the claim.  he and an army of bandana-masked snow desperadoes -- freestyle skiers and snowboarders jacked up on sobe full throttle -- got their shred on until 9 p.m. under lights that blazed like a swedish solstice. they pinwheeled across monster gaps and surfed curvaceous dragon rails in ''steezy'' hood ornament poses while echo's jukebox rocked the freestyle world with their favorite thrasher tunes.  few parents could be found on the echo slopes -- the energy, aesthetics, acoustics and entire ethos of the place is aimed at kids. echo's owner, jerry petitt, said he hadn't built the park to please everyone. he has carved out a narrow, vigorous niche within the ski and snowboard market and is raising his newborn resort with a lot of parenting advice from the very 12- to 29-year-olds he hopes to serve. ''it's nothing against places like aspen, but the young people we consulted early on told us they can't afford to pay $75 for a lift ticket or $14 for a buffalo burger,'' mr. petitt said. ''what kept coming back to us was: 'keep it inexpensive. make it for us.' ''  the lift tickets at echo are priced for teenagers on a lawn-mowing budget, and the cuisine is spartan even by cafeteria standards: energy bars and nuke-able burritos from vending machines.  mr. petitt bought the echo property in 2003 for a mere $700,000. it was just a small defunct ski hill in the midst of a wooded 240-acre lot then. ''i called my wife and said, 'we've just bought a ski area!' which went over really well,'' he said.  still a passionate skier at 61, mr. petitt invested $5 million to develop the first 50 acres into a terrain park, hiring planet snow design, the company that built the superpipe for the 2002 salt lake city winter games, to finesse the flow on each slope. they mixed boxes, stairs and rail sequences on one run, a medley of jumps and rocketing ''kickers'' on another. for rookies laying the foundations for their melon grabs and switch noseslides, they installed a ''progression center.''  ''we've got to let our riders create us,'' said eric petitt, 30, jerry's son and the architect of echo's guerrilla marketing campaign, which focuses on an interactive web site with a ''rant'' page where kids weigh in on what they want echo to be. he hopes to make echo a year-round park, implementing the ideas generated in echo's chat rooms -- rock climbing, mountain biking, all-terrain skateboarding, even zip-lining.  ''we're not going to build any million-dollar homes or stone-and-timber lodges strewn with bearskin rugs,'' said doug donovan, 34, the general manager, surveying his singularly young clientele swigging red bull while recharging by the xbox at the base lodge. ''it's going to have a rock concert feel to it every day.''  echo's architecture makes creative use of pre-fab industrial design, with corrugated steel and glass jutting out at crisp angles. underground snowboarding and freestyle ski brands like 4frnt, unity and capita are stickered liberally on chair backs, tables and garbage cans. the walls are hung with artwork by denver area rider-artists -- a japanese woodblock print of mount fuji with a snowboarder flying through the air, psychedelic abstracts painted on skateboards.  ''we looked at the industry and realized it's impossible to build a new vail,'' mr. donovan said. ''their model is a giant real estate play more than anything. but if you're looking to make money on the slopes, you build a skateboard park on snow, close to a metropolitan area.''  all the growth over the last five years, mr. donovan argued, has come from snowboarders, freestyle skiers and the terrain parks that reel them in. conglomerates like intrawest, vail corporation and american skiing company have gobbled up full-service winter resorts where affluent baby boomers spend as much time shopping at ralph lauren and dining on corn-fed elk as they do out on the blue and green groomer runs. that has opened the door for smaller, easy-to-get-to day slopes to attract young, underserved locals with more chutzpah and less cash.  before starting echo, mr. donovan and jerry petitt looked at a trio of resorts in california -- bear mountain, boreal and mountain high -- that converted their beginner and intermediate slopes into terrain parks and halfpipes over the last several years, tripling their number of visitors per acre. other small-scale ski slopes like mountain creek resort in vernon, n.j., followed suit, and megaresorts from killington to mammoth dialed up the wattage on their trickster terrain. but echo is the only resort to be built expressly for baby boomers' kids -- ''echo boomers'' like sam buckmelter.  figuring prominently in sam buckmelter's's personal pantheon of slope stylists are pat milbery and chad otterstrom. both are professional shredders who came to echo on thanksgiving weekend to impart nuggets of launching and looping wisdom at a pro series camp. ''there was nothing like echo when i was a kid,'' lamented mr. milbery, 22. ''i learned how to ride by building jumps on the hill behind our house. this place is an incubator for the future of the sport -- it's going to spawn bazillions of talented young riders who'll invent moves we've never dreamed of!''  ''yeah, if i'm still in one piece by the time i'm as old as you, milbery!'' sam buckmelter said as he hiked up the hill. ''right now i'm learning to pop off of jumps with steeze'' -- style -- ''but one day, i'm going to throw something big off of that.''  that is a 1961 tucker sno-cat. back in the day, it groomed this former mom-and-pop one-rope-tow hill. echo's staff painted it an electric slime green and recycled it as the platform for a house rail, a trapezoid of logs with steel rails embedded in the tops. while the campers were working on their shred cred, echo was christening the sno-cat rail by holding a jibbing contest (jibbing being the term for riding gantlets of obstacles embedded in the slopes) sponsored by rome, a low-profile snowboard and apparel company with the advertising mantra ''corrosion of the corporate.''  ten brothers of the board were swarming around the sno-cat, taking turns shredcasting the contest with a handheldmike.  ''next rider steppin' up is lance machado out of breckenridge, co-lo-ra-do,'' one brother drawled with snow gangsta elocution. ''this jibber is comin' in fast, firin' it up, takin' it air  borne! pullin' a corked three outta the hat.'' (read: helicoptering 360 degrees on a tipped axis.) ''that, my friends, is lance-the-ripper!''  mr. machado, the stringy 19-year-old who won the contest, favors a sartorial style borrowed from pioneer punk rockers like iggy pop and the ramones -- skinny jeans and tight striped t-shirts -- placing him in a sectarian group within the soul-patched, hip-hop-influenced snowboard tribe: the sub-subculture sometimes derogatively labeled emos. ''i always hear, 'are those pants painted on or something?' from what i call the 'food court gangstas,' '' mr. machado said.  the politics of shred fashion are murky. but there is a shared ethic behind mr. machado's punk-chic and the standard saggy pants and xxl parkas: both are anti-brand and, if possible, label averse. it's a culture of irreverent individualism to which the echo design team is acutely sensitive.  loud banners advertising overexposed corporate brands (burton, salomon, oakley) are shunned here. only the echo insignia is stamped on the park's centerpiece, a 23-foot-high structure shaped like a stomp rocket called knuckles that riders and skiers slide up, flip off and soar over.  ''without a doubt, there'll be some carnage off of it,'' said marc vitelli, who helped design knuckles. ''for those who dare ride up it, it's game on -- anything can happen!'' he shouted as a twin-tip skier popped off the hip, arcing backward, arms outspread, a snowboarding greg louganis tracing the sky with his fingertips. seconds later, the rider lawn-chaired (collapsed) on impact.  ''insufficient rotation'' was mr. vitelli's critique, though he whooped approvingly. the only way to learn how to stomp tricks, he said, is by going huge and embracing the occasional yard sale (a total wipeout that litters gear all over the slope).  alas, there are no heated pools at echo to soak battered body parts at the end of the day, and in fact no overnight facilities at this stage. ''unless you want to crash on my couch,'' offered mr. vitelli, who lives in evergreen. eventually, echo may add a youth hostel-style bunkhouse to spare its customers multiple laps driving up and down the steep, sometimes treacherous 12-mile road between evergreen and the resort.  but echo has its advantages. set in the front range of the rockies, it typically gets late snows that can last until may. and unlike most colorado resorts, it isn't on forest service land, so there's no regulated close date. most riders won't complain about the drive back and forth from denver, since they'll completely bypass the i-70 parking lot of weekend skier traffic, and pay less than half the price of tickets at the ski-tropolises on the other side of the conga line.  still, echo isn't likely to spark a flood of émigrés from stodgy megaresorts. but for the sam buckmelters who are coming up at a time when freestyle skiing and boarding are gaining legitimacy, echo could be the fuse that lights the next revolution in snow sliding.  ''i'm stoked,'' sam said.  board and more  echo mountain park (303-325-7347; www.echomountainpark.com), 35 miles from denver, is open daily from 10 a.m. to 9 p.m. lift tickets are $25 on weekdays, $35 on weekends (less if you buy in ''six-packs'' or ''three-packs'') and $20 after 4 p.m.  boards, boots and twin-tip skis can be rented from echo's garage, the park's retail and rental shop, for $25 a day.  events are held every weekend, like the shut up and snowskate competition tomorrow and the armashreddin' colorado versus colorado state battle on jan. 20. the sports monster league on wednesday nights is billed as the first social snow-sports league in colorado.  ski report  