chair, borrowed. job, hers.   like halley's comet or swarms of 17-year locusts, the arrival of a freshman state senator in albany is so rare that it provokes fascination and uncertainty in equal measure.  ''there was some confusion about my chair,'' said andrea stewart-cousins, the only new state senator this year. ms. stewart-cousins, a democrat, defeated a powerful and popular republican incumbent, nicholas a. spano, in a close-fought election in november.  but when she arrived at the senate chamber for a brief meeting wednesday morning, ms. stewart-cousins found that there was, literally, no place for her: her personal chair -- bearing, like every senator's chair, a brass plaque with her name engraved on it -- had not yet arrived.  ''it's supposed to come on monday,'' she said. luckily, a colleague, senator george onorato, was not there, so she was given his chair.  after mr. spitzer's address, ms. stewart-cousins held court near an elevator bank, a stream of well-wishers and future favor-seekers clustered around her. as usual, she wore a scarf draped over one shoulder, a holdover from her early days in the westchester county legislature.  ''ten years ago, when i first became elected, there was another african-african woman who was elected, and people confused us,'' she said. ''i thought i would distinguish myself.'' she wore one on wednesday, as well, like a muted victory sash.  most everyone, she said, had been welcoming. ''even senator bruno was waving at me from across the aisle, even as he was shaking nick spano's hand,'' ms. stewart-cousins said. she herself, however, had not had a chance to say hello to mr. spano, her former opponent.  her office, unlike her chair, was waiting for her when she arrived. ''i have a wonderful office,'' she said. ''it's temporary, though.'' asked which room it was, she looked around at all the people waiting their turn with her, and lowered her voice as she smiled conspiratorially.  ''i don't want anybody coming in,'' she said. finally, she relented. ''eight-oh-eight,'' she whispered.  nicholas confessore  changeover in albany  correction:  january 9, 2007, tuesday  a brief report on thursday about andrea stewart-cousins, a freshman new york state senator, in an article about the opening session of the state legislature, misstated the number of new senators taking office and referred imprecisely to the historical significance of ms. stewart-cousins' election. counting ms. stewart-cousins, there are seven new senators; she is not the only one. she is one of a few candidates in recent years to have won by defeating an incumbent; more commonly, newcomers win by running for open seats.  