she's producing as fast as she can   the producer is late.  ''ten minutes?'' laura ziskin shouts down the hallway to a reporter, who is not. ''i'll be right back.''  she sweeps out the door, a blur of blond hair and rumpled trench coat, headed to the set of ''spider-man 3,'' a movie ms. ziskin is producing along with the feb. 25 academy awards telecast. (and no, a reporter may not tag along.)  busy? a little. ms. ziskin's various projects are spread through the astaire building on the sony studio lot, where she is based. one suite is labeled ''academy awards production office,'' while postproduction on ''spider-man 3'' takes place elsewhere.  back in her own office 20 minutes later ms. ziskin finally turns to the question of how she intends to bring something new to a 79-year-old american movie ritual -- that is, she'll get right to it just after she takes this one call.  in the corner, beside a series of miniature and life-size spider-men, a large white board with oscar notes offers some clues: ''content'' is written in capital letters. so are ''aspirational'' and ''potentize.'' (potentize?) she has written at the bottom: ''funny is better than serious. serious is better than lame. buck henry.''  she rushes to move the board from view, peeved at this glimpse into her inner thoughts.  ''this year i'm just in a party mood,'' ms. ziskin, 56, said. ''big. joyful. upbeat. i don't know what movies will be nominated, but with ellen'' -- ellen degeneres, the show's host -- ''we just want to have fun.''  with her streaked, shoulder-length hair, square glasses and all-black work outfit (she has removed the trench coat) ms. ziskin does not look much different than she has during her decades as a hectic, successful hollywood studio executive and movie producer.  but there is a particularly poignant undercurrent to her upbeat approach this year. since the last oscar telecast she produced, in 2002, ms. ziskin came close to dying.  in february 2004 she was hit with a diagnosis of stage 3 breast cancer, a disease doctors had repeatedly missed previously because of the diffuse type of cancer she had.  ''a lot of people go through cancer and re-examine their lives,'' she recalled, perching her feet on her coffee table. ''they say: 'this is a wake-up call. i should change my life.' but i love my life. i thought, 'if i survive, i want my life to go back to the way it was before the diagnosis.' ''  now married to the oscar-winning screenwriter alvin sargent (''ordinary people,'' ''julia''), ms. ziskin started out writing for game shows, then moved into the time-honored job of personal assistant, in this case to jon peters, a producer who went on to run sony pictures entertainment. in 1994 she was chosen to head fox 2000, a new filmmaking division of 20th century fox, where she championed the controversial and influential ''fight club'' and the critically acclaimed film ''the thin red line.''  she went on to become a producer based at sony, where the ''spider-man'' series, an assignment given to her by sony's top executives at the time, john calley and amy pascal, will probably turn out to be her most enduring contribution to popular cinema.  she ended up battling the cancer through the biggest moment of her career. ''i found cancer very inconvenient,'' she declared wryly.  she went through a mastectomy, radiation, chemotherapy. she lost her hair. and she struggled to keep working -- hollywood is quick to write off sick people, or old ones -- when she could. she attended the premiere of ''spider-man 2,'' which she had produced, and the next day entered the hospital for a stem-cell transplant.  ''only laura could do that,'' said ms. pascal, co-chairwoman of sony pictures entertainment and a friend. ''only laura could produce 'spider-man 3' and the oscars at the same time. she did it once, and she's doing it again.''  producing the oscars, it's fair to say, is a no-win assignment. no longer the ratings juggernaut it once was, the academy awards telecast now has to distinguish itself from a dozen other award shows, while also distinguishing itself from previous oscar telecasts.  chances are it will be too long. and too dull. or, if the producer fiddles with the tradition, as in recent years, it will be too irreverent, disrespectful. and that's not all. there's too much walking during the oscars. but if you cut out the walking, viewers feel rushed. and every year the producer begs the nominees not to thank their agents and lawyers. every year somebody does.  ms. ziskin has faced these problems before. when she produced the oscars in 2002, it was about six months after sept. 11. at that time she decided to embrace the movies as a communal experience, one that could help tie the country together after a national trauma. the mood was serious, if celebratory.  and it was long -- four hours and 20 minutes. ''i made the longest show in history,'' ms. ziskin admitted. ''i'm not proud of that.''  this year is different. ''i'm going to try something,'' she said. ''i may fall on my face.'' rather than focus on the experience of moviegoing, this year she wants to focus on the nominees: ''who are these people and how did they get to the oscars?'' is how she described it, giving as a model the olympic telecast, which goes behind the scenes to tell the athletes' stories as a way of dramatizing the sports events.  ms. ziskin won't do that exactly, she said. but she added: ''i want to try to make my tv audience be invested in some aspect of the award. i'm big on content. i want to have a lot of content, in context. the story for me this year is aspirational: how do you get to this moment? who are the 150 nominees, and how did they get here?''  as the television ratings have dropped, the academy of motion picture arts and sciences doyens have been trying to figure out how to make the oscars more of a must-see experience. two years ago chris rock was given license to shake off the institution's dust, but he shook it a bit too vigorously. some academy members took offense at his jibes at actors like jude law, and at mr. rock's recorded oscar walkabout in the hood. the ratings dropped (though not by a lot).  last year jon stewart took a shot in a season when most of the nominated movies were serious, politically oriented indies. the hope was to lure younger, hipper viewers. he was more respectful than mr. rock, and won wide approval in the post-mortem, but the ratings still dropped (though not by a lot).  this year ms. ziskin has been picking people's brains for new ideas, determined to get it right. with ms. degeneres as host, she is going back to a more mainstream, edge-free, warm-hug approach. but she's hoping to be hip too. there will be a ''thank-you cam'' backstage, with winners able to pour all their gratitude live onto the web via a streaming camera (with luck, reducing the number of agents thanked before an audience of many millions).  ms. ziskin has turned down suggestions that the academy solicit fan videos, like the stuff you can see on youtube. ''it's not amateur hour,'' she said. ''it's the oscars.''  and she wants to have a proper ending to the evening after the announcement of the best picture. ''the biggest award of the night gets thrown away,'' she said. ''we're always in such a hurry.''  the challenge is all the greater in a year when there is no clear front-runner for best picture, nor is there a particularly close race between any two films -- at least not yet. critics have been handing out awards to nonblockbuster films like ''united 93'' and ''letters from iwo jima,'' while the golden globes seem to like ''babel,'' which has seven nominations.  those who know ms. ziskin well say she was a logical choice as producer.  ''the thing people don't know about laura is she's a showman, and she is something that many producers are not: she's tireless, she feels accountable,'' ms. pascal said. ''she wants to make it good, no matter what. that isn't everyone's goal all the time.''  sid ganis, president of the academy, said: ''the cumulative knowledge she's gained over years about how to do this sometimes complicated, sometimes weird, sometimes unreasonable stuff sticks with her. she's endlessly creative, and always wanting to get it better.''  ms. ziskin has been free of cancer for two years. and while she sometimes wonders if she will ever feel like her old self, she certainly feels she has cause to celebrate, with the oscars as her playground.  ''i wanted to create a piece of entertainment,'' she said, tossing out her visitor when it was time for her next meeting. ''i want every second of it to be entertaining. i will fail. but that's what i want.''  the oscars  