after 2 years, yankees send johnson back to arizona   with every move they make, the yankees are looking back to go forward. they traded randy johnson to the arizona diamondbacks yesterday, effectively returning the pitcher they could not live without just two years ago. they also signed a first baseman, doug mientkiewicz, who is better known for his glove than his bat.  team officials confirmed the moves, but neither was announced, because the diamondbacks must formalize a contract extension for johnson and the yankees must approve the results of mientkiewicz's physical exam. but the thinking was consistent with the yankees' approach this winter.  in shedding johnson two months after trading outfielder gary sheffield, the yankees have jettisoned two expensive players with lengthy résumés who failed to bring a world series title to the bronx. in return, they have helped restock a farm system that is suddenly flourishing.  in adding mientkiewicz for one year and $1.5 million, the yankees tightened their first-base defense after years of neglect. jason giambi, now a full-time designated hitter, has limited range and a poor arm, and sheffield failed his brief audition at the end of last season. mientkiewicz won a gold glove in 2001.  in exchange for johnson, the yankees will receive the veteran right-handed reliever luis vizcaíno and three prospects: the right-handers ross ohlendorf and steven jackson, and shortstop alberto gonzalez. the yankees included $2 million to help offset johnson's $16 million salary for 2007.  at 4 p.m. yesterday, the diamondbacks began a 72-hour negotiating window with johnson to complete the trade. johnson will probably sign a contract for 2008 and could allow the diamondbacks to revise their payment schedule for the deferred money owed him from his previous arizona contract.  johnson went 34-19 over two seasons with the yankees, making 67 starts despite persistent back pain that required surgery oct. 26. but he often seemed uncomfortable in new york, and the yankees sensed this winter that he would be happier returning to arizona, where he lives and where he won four cy young awards for the diamondbacks.  general manager brian cashman called johnson last month to express condolences after the death of johnson's older brother. in that conversation, johnson emphasized the importance of being closer to home.  johnson had no contractual right to demand a trade, and the yankees could have kept him, hoping that he would be healthy enough to work his usual 200 innings. but succeeding in new york can be challenging, even for players who want to be there. if a player wants out, the yankees believe it is best to accommodate him.  ''we're going to talk tomorrow morning, and our hope is that we can reach an agreement,'' johnson's agent, barry meister, said last night.  so johnson will move on, ending another mercenary's unfulfilled tenure in pinstripes. the yankees have imported many stars since their last world series victory, in 2000, but no combination has resulted in a championship.  this winter's restructuring has included the return of starter andy pettitte, a mainstay from the title teams who signed a one-year, $16 million contract. the johnson deal also frees up money to sign the free agent roger clemens, who pitched in four world series for the yankees.  clemens' agent, randy hendricks, has advised him to wait until midseason to return, a strategy that worked well in houston last summer. the yankees will let clemens make his own timetable, but they are determined not to be outbid for him.  the astros and the red sox also have interest in clemens, but clemens seems to have grown weary of the astros' lack of run support. it would be surprising if clemens chose to sign with boston for a lower salary instead of returning to the yankees, where he could remain teammates with pettitte, his close friend.  even if they somehow lose out on clemens, the yankees found the johnson deal appealing because of the players they received in return.  vizcaíno, 32, ranks second in games pitched among right-handers during the past five seasons. he was 4-6 with a 3.58 earned run average last season, with more strikeouts than innings pitched over 70 games.  the diamondbacks are flush with strong right-handers in their farm system; they released one, brian bruney, who played well for the yankees late last season. now the yankees have two more in ohlendorf and jackson, both 24.  ohlendorf, who has an economics degree from princeton, was 10-8 with a 3.25 e.r.a. in 28 starts last season, all but one at class aa tennessee. jackson, who pitched four seasons at clemson, was 8-10 with a 2.65 e.r.a. in class aa. gonzalez, 23, hit .290 in class aa last season and, like ohlendorf, appeared briefly in class aaa.  the yankees acquired three minor league pitchers from detroit in their november deal for sheffield. after that trade, a writer from baseball america listed the yankees sixth among all teams for talent in their farm system. last march, the magazine ranked them 17th.  the foundation of the yankees' recent dynasty, from 1996 until johnson beat them in relief in game 7 of the 2001 world series, came from their farm system. derek jeter, mariano rivera, jorge posada, bernie williams and pettitte were all homegrown. as cashman tries to emphasize development again, williams, 38, is probably on his way out. the mientkiewicz deal ensures that the yankees will not have a roster spot for williams.  counting mientkiewicz as one of nine everyday players, the bench will include backups in the infield, first base and at catcher, with melky cabrera as the reserve outfielder. the yankees plan to carry 12 pitchers.  mets manager willie randolph admires williams, who could try to stay in new york by signing with the mets as a bench player. but the mets, who are close to signing the reserve david newhan, seem to like their bench as it is.  baseball  correction:  january 16, 2007, tuesday  a sports article on jan. 5 about the trade that sent pitcher randy johnson from the yankees to arizona referred incorrectly to the college degree held by russ ohlendorf, a player the yankees received from the diamondbacks. he has a degree in operations research and financial engineering, not economics, from princeton university.  