backhanded compliments lobbed by patriots' belichick   nick saban had left the miami dolphins only minutes earlier wednesday morning when patriots coach bill belichick was asked what he thought of the move. he praised saban's intelligence. he revealed that he and saban had spoken by phone tuesday night. he called him a good friend.  then someone asked if having saban out of the n.f.l. -- and out of the american football conference east -- would change the tenor of a friendship that goes back several decades.  ''it will certainly put it on a different footing,'' belichick said.  presumably much better footing than jets coach eric mangini is on. belichick and saban have been close for years, and when saban was the coach at louisiana state, belichick would visit him during the off-season so they could share their knowledge. those skull sessions ended when saban became a rival two years ago, but the friendship did not come to a halt. before each of the two annual meetings between the dolphins and the patriots, belichick could be counted on to speak effusively about saban -- his coaching, his personal friendship, how well he thought he was doing in miami.  it is a bit different from his treatment of mangini, the belichick disciple who left the patriots after last season to take over the jets. belichick has turned a cold shoulder to mangini this season, barely shaking his hand or making eye contact with him during postgame handshakes.  it is easy to imagine that there was nothing more galling to belichick this season than losing to mangini and the jets in gillette stadium. with the jets and the patriots about to play a first-round playoff game sunday, the time seemed ripe for a thaw, and belichick nearly provided it. he spoke of mangini by name -- something he had rarely, if ever, done in speaking about the jets this season.  ''eric and his staff have done a great job down there this year,'' belichick said, in what amounted to a breakthrough during his news conference wednesday.  but when it seemed détente might be at hand in their latest battle, belichick subtly pulled back.  ''this is a team that two years ago was a field goal away from the a.f.c. championship game,'' belichick said. ''those guys have a lot of playoff experience there. i'm not saying it's the same team from two years ago, but it's pretty close.''  in other words, herman edwards did a heck of a job with the jets.  it may be a new year, but there does not seem to be much holiday spirit between these teams. for most of the season, mangini referred to new england as ''the other place.'' but wednesday, mangini seemed to go out of his way to gush about all he had learned from belichick, noting that he is sure to be voted into the hall of fame when he retires.  ''one of the qualities i admire so much about him is, as smart as he is, as much success as he's had, his work ethic hasn't changed,'' mangini said in new york.  if this feud seems more farcical than anything else, it may be because nobody is quite sure what is at its root. when belichick and bill parcells feuded, it was because belichick had left the jets -- for whom parcells was general manager at the time -- to join the patriots.  could belichick be bothered that mangini left to go to a division rival that belichick had presumably advised him not to go to, and is now using some of belichick's techniques to beat the master at his own game? is belichick fuming over what the patriots alleged was tampering with the holdout receiver deion branch, who was eventually traded to seattle for a first-round pick after a contract stalemate, but not before the jets had offered a second-round pick? could it be that mangini, as he was headed out the door in foxborough, was hoping to take others with him, and belichick wanted him to keep his hands off the meticulously assembled organization?  those are a few of the prevailing theories, but nobody -- or at least nobody who will talk on the record -- can parse the truth from what is rapidly becoming a legendary feud.  when a reporter in new york asked belichick on a conference call wednesday why he had been so chilly during the postgame handshakes, belichick said: ''i made comments about eric when he was hired. but this game is about two teams this week trying to keep their season alive. it's a very competitive situation, but the focus is on this week and nothing else.''  later, he added -- three times -- another thought, ''i never said anything negative.''  that is because he has barely said anything at all. moments after suggesting his friendship with saban would be in full flower again now that saban is safely out of the n.f.l., belichick remained silent when a reporter suggested something that might patch things up with mangini:  ''maybe eric will take another job.''  extra points  patriots safety rodney harrison will miss sunday's game because of an injured right knee. coach bill belichick made the announcement wednesday but did not say whether harrison would be available for future games if new england wins. harrison was injured last sunday when he was blocked by tennessee receiver bobby wade.  pro football  