hey, young writers, that's mr. rolling stone to you   there must have been a time when jann wenner was scrappy and wild -- the kind of guy who bet his career on hunter s. thompson and begged, borrowed and stole to create a san francisco rocker magazine called rolling stone. that time was 1967, 40 years ago.  but today mr. wenner is famous for bottom lines, discipline, us weekly and draconian office inspections, during which he has his employees' desks examined for violations of obscure pencil-storage codes.  this rigidity is a well-known component of mr. wenner's sensibility. but like so much else about him and his business, it has apparently escaped the google capacities of the six young writers who appear tomorrow night on mtv's reality competition ''i'm from rolling stone.''  these six are hoping to score a yearlong position as contributing editor at mr. wenner's magazine. but without exception, on tomorrow night's episode, they greet the venerable and famous editor, when he calls to offer them a tryout, with a familiarity and an informality that seem almost hostile. they call him ''jann,'' ''man,'' ''skater'' and perhaps worst of all, ''ian.'' no one says, ''mr. wenner.'' no one refrains from squealing or shrieking.  this wince-inducing sensibility clash is highlighted as mtv's camera hustles between the improvised rooms of the contestants -- mostly chaotic condos and dorms -- and mr. wenner's sleek, high-altitude, venetian-blinded conference room. the out-of-town perception of rolling stone as a cool, loose, groovy place for rock stars is simply way off the mark. just as candidates for jobs at investment banks might want to show a little personality, candidates for jobs at rolling stone (if this show teaches viewers anything) might want to show a little less.  on the other hand, this is television we're watching, and not a magazine we're running. personality is good, as are vivid personality clashes. what's more, this is television's reality competition for writers, and ''i'm from rolling stone'' suggests that, like fashion designers and chefs, writers make superb reality characters; they're weird and talkative. in this way they're unlike network reality characters -- the ''apprentice'' and ''bachelor'' crew -- who are pharmaceutical reps or real estate agents, but mostly cast for their looks.  writing, unfortunately, is not very telegenic -- nothing so exciting as cutting and sewing a dress and fitting a great-looking model into it. but reporting, especially when that means interviewing rock stars, that at least looks pretty good on tv. ''i'm from rolling stone'' promises air time with the shins, snoop dogg and lionel richie -- and it must have been comforting to the producers to know they had those staple mtv faces to use in promoting the show if the reality junk didn't pan out.  but it seems to have panned out. the contestants appear to know something about music, and at least two of them seem to have talent as writers on the first two episodes. of these two, russell morse, a onetime juvenile delinquent from san francisco with some newspaper experience, seems picked to win. he's credibly hip but focused and not overly thrilled about being ''from rolling stone.'' (early on, he coolly tells a publicist, or someone, that he's ''russell morse, over at rolling stone magazine.'' ghostface killah, whom he interviews, responds to him, as do others.)  so maybe the contest belongs to russell. it's unlikely to go to krishtine, who's more performer than writer, or peter, who's represented as a problem drinker. colin, who believes ''boho'' is a nickname for brooklyn, is likable, but he's a shambles as a reporter.  krystal is beautiful and ambitious; one of her ambitions, however, seems to be to sleep with steven tyler. promos of forthcoming episodes suggest that russell's competition will be tika, an earnest young woman from buffalo who is first seen with her family in the grand old borough of boho.  but i worry for russell. reality television is pretty rulebound, and it works by upsets. if russell is the lead after the first and second episode, that almost guarantees there's trouble for him ahead. besides, he's the one who asked the fastidious founder of wenner media if he should bring ''socks, underwear and condoms'' to new york. reality television is also moralistic, and surely there will be a comeuppance for that.  i'm from rolling stone  mtv, sunday night at 10, eastern and pacific times; 9, central time.  jacquelyn m. french, heather olander and drew tappon, executives for mtv; jann wenner and gary armstrong, executive producers for wenner media; guy oseary and michael rosenberg, executive producers for maverick entertainment; joel stillerman, executive producer; doug davison and roy lee, executive producers; gabriel mason, co-executive producer for vertigo.  television review  