moma's off-the-wall cinema   doug aitken does not want you to sit back and enjoy the show. he tends to use multiple screens in his video installations to force you to move around. and he likes to project his films onto unlikely surfaces to snap you out of the usual cinematic reverie. in the past he has trapped characters inside a large wooden crate, flashed pairs of eyes on the facade of the secession building in vienna and flooded the basement of the serpentine gallery in london with watery images.  now mr. aitken, 38, is taking over a major new york landmark. for a month starting on jan. 16, the dramatic action (or by hollywood standards, inaction) of his newest film, ''sleepwalkers,'' will unfold outdoors -- on the facade and several other exterior walls of the museum of modern art. the film is to run nightly from 5 to 10 p.m.  it's a first for this california artist, who has not previously made a public work of art in the united states. and it's a first for the museum, which holds film screenings but has not, to date, become a screen itself. ''when most people think of moma, they think of the artworks inside,'' mr. aitken said in an interview at his studio in the venice neighborhood of los angeles. ''but i looked at the offices and saw this brilliant, glowing light box.''  a light box that he hopes will draw people in. ''i'd love to reach people who are walking up fifth avenue shopping and don't know anything about the project,'' he said. ''maybe they'll spot an image out of the corner of their eye and walk over, wondering if the nike swoosh or some other brand is going to appear on the wall. but it doesn't.''  rather, the installation -- which consists of eight film projections -- features rhythmic, poetic and sometimes abstract imagery relating to five new yorkers (an executive, an office worker, a bike messenger, a postal worker and an electrician) making their way through a full day in the city.  the sequence opens at dusk, marked by the red ball of the setting sun. then there's sleep. sheets rustle. eyelids open. day breaks. showers run. the men and women drink juice or coffee, grab cabs and cars and bicycles. wheels spin. corridors approach. the characters move through the city, and the city moves through them.  ''when i'm filming each project,'' mr. aitken said, ''i have a mantra that i repeat to myself to try to stay focused, a kind of nucleus thought that i keep coming back to. here the central notion was a city being a body, and the individual body being a city.''  the parallels start with the circulatory system. ''i think if you look at your veins and blood system, it's like a subway or freeway or highway,'' he said. ''but it's not always so literal for me. i also feel that every day that my motions are tied to motions of the external world, plugged in to some larger system.''  the characters' movements are also linked together, through shared rituals like showers and synchronized gestures as simple as blinking. but they do not appear on the same ''screen.'' each character gets an individual projection, which lasts roughly 15 minutes. when the time is up, the clips repeat on different walls, meaning that characters are thrust into new relationships with one another -- and with yoshio taniguchi's museum building.  the main viewing area is the sculpture garden, where the two largest projections, each roughly 64 feet wide by 31 feet tall, will float on the glass of the museum's offices. also serving as screens are the museum's granite facade on 53rd street and its west wall, visible from an empty lot nearby.  the modern's director, glenn lowry, imagines that a good part of midtown will also serve as a kind of ad-hoc, open-air theater. ''i was on a high floor of a building on 57th street looking south the other week and realized it would have a great view of the project,'' he said. ''this is something the museum recognized at the time of its founding in 1939, by putting its name on the roof. it recognized that new york was rapidly becoming a vertical city.''  so did mr. aitken, who said he originally planned to make a film about skyscrapers that would be screened on one. a few years ago he shared the idea with anne pasternak, president of the arts foundation creative time, who had already approached him about doing a project.  they began in 2003 exploring different locations, out-of-use buildings on which he could project a film. but nothing did the trick. ''i wasn't looking for just one surface,'' he explained, ''but for many planes, where i could develop relationships between them.''  then came a moment of ''synchronicity,'' one of his favorite terms for both his artistic process and content. he was in new york the following summer to attend the opening of a group show at p.s. 1, the modern's sister institution, and resumed his quest in midtown.  ''i saw a building with these large walls going up and thought they looked great. peter eleey'' -- a creative time curator -- ''laughed at me and said: 'don't you realize? that's the construction site for moma.' ''  the next night happened to be the opening for the p.s. 1 show, which brought him an introduction to mr. lowry and an invitation for a hard-hat tour of the museum. ''i thought it would be me tagging along with 50 donors, but it was just the two of us,'' mr. aitken said. before long creative time and the modern officially signed on to co-produce the work.  and last year mr. aitken, who was raised in california but spent most of the '90s in new york, set up shop again in manhattan to make his movie. he spent most of may finding locations for shooting, which took place in all five boroughs. ''this was the first time i found the city to be electric, ultra-charged,'' he said. ''every shadow, fence, parking lot structure was fascinating to me. probably because i was so immersed in this film, i saw the potential of everything.''  summer months went to production, with mr. aitken serving as writer, director, cinematographer and of course casting agent. he enlisted the actors donald sutherland and tilda swinton to play the business people, the drummer ryan donowho as the bike messenger, the singer-songwriter chan marshall (a k a cat power) as the postal worker and the brazilian musician seu jorge as the electrician in charge of signs in times square.  the number of musicians in the project is a reminder of mr. aitken's own history as a music-video director. ''this is a silent film,'' he said, ''so i couldn't rely on traditional things like soundtrack or sound effect to communicate tempo. i was really interested in working with people who can feel a tempo in a physical way, who can really communicate a pulse, a rhythm.''  and they do. all five segments culminate in rhythmic, even frenzied, performances, with shots of mr. sutherland tap-dancing, mr. donowho bucket drumming, ms. marshall spinning in place, mr. jorge throwing a lasso and ms. swinton aggressively playing a violin. after going through the motions of their days, the characters all enjoy moments of great, unbounded, physical release -- in a word, ecstasy. to quote a character from mr. aitken's 1999 film ''electric earth,'' another multi-screen, urban vision, ''a lot of times i dance so fast that i become what's around me.''  meanwhile mr. aitken is also blurring the boundaries between art and architecture. he has created art that envelops architecture, instead of the other way around. this is not altogether new, said the architect james sanders, who wrote the book ''celluloid skyline'' (2001) about the history of new york in the movies.  ''think about the way warhol used moving images as a sort of wallpaper,'' mr. sanders said. ''this kind of thing has interested artists for a while.'' but, he added, the technology was prohibitive until 10 or 15 years ago. ''in the old days you had to have a film projector and projectionist,'' he said. ''now there are digital projectors with high-intensity xenon lamps, coupled with digital source material that can be played on a dvd loop.''  or, in this case, off a computer hard drive programmed to deliver different characters to the different ''screens.''  mr. aitken also plans to make a smaller-scale version of the work, which could be sold. but don't expect a traditional home theater setup. the form will remain fragmented, simultaneous, synaptic -- anything but linear.  ''i don't think this would work as a straight narrative,'' he said. ''our way of living today is expanded, fragmented, kaleidoscopic. we have huge amounts of information coming at us, with our treos, pagers and ipods on us.''  ''a film that takes place simultaneously with multiple projects in different combinations every time it runs,'' he continued, ''is closer to our human experience than a traditional film. i don't think we really see life as a novella. i don't think we see life in ways that have clear beginnings and ends.''  art  