albany: investigation central   after years of live and let thrive in the back rooms of new york's state capital, there is suddenly a pack of official watchdogs on full alert for scandal. this is a good thing. but the real test will be whether all this high-minded energy produces real reform of albany's undemocratic and unethical ways instead of the empty chest-thumping and windy press releases to which we have grown accustomed.  in recent months, almost any time a real gumshoe has scratched beneath the surface of new york's state lawmaking business, somebody has gotten into trouble. the comptroller has been forced to resign. the senate majority leader is under investigation. another state senator, accused of stealing state funds, has been indicted. and this could be just the beginning.  there are two big reasons for this investigative fever. one is the new governor himself. eliot spitzer won by a landslide last year largely on promises of reform and openness and a new day, and brings to the office an agenda that includes many of the reforms that albany has desperately needed for decades.  the other reason is that the landscape is suddenly chockablock with local, state and federal investigators who seem to be gaining momentum by the day.  one key figure to have emerged from the shadows is the albany county district attorney, david soares, a democrat elected in 2004. after a slow start, mr. soares trained his searchlight on albany's secretive state offices a few months ago, and he played an important role in alan hevesi's resignation as state comptroller. he not only helped expose mr. hevesi's unauthorized use of state employees for personal purposes, but also engineered the deal under which mr. hevesi pleaded guilty to a felony and resigned.  a replacement for mr. hevesi must now be found. one hopes that sheldon silver and other bigwigs remember that this is not a patronage job and that it demands someone of courage and independence. mr. soares, meanwhile, has made it clear that despite a thin staff he intends to take a harder look at business as usual in the state capitol.  andrew cuomo, the new attorney general, also campaigned on cleaning up albany's legislative stables. in his inaugural statement, he stressed that he is now the chief public integrity officer of the state. and a few days after taking office, mr. cuomo announced plans to investigate member items, the pots of cash that flow to members of the legislature to use for personal favors and pet projects in their constituencies. a judge has now ordered legislators to release details of how these funds, amounting to $170 million a year, are actually distributed, which should give some idea of who has been using tax money to further legitimate public purposes and who has been using it to reward special friends and corporate donors.  then there is david grandeau, executive director of the temporary state commission on lobbying, who has already made his name investigating abuses of the state's porous lobbying laws. he has laid about him with nonpartisan zeal, pursuing politicians in both parties, and until the day he is succeeded by somebody even more fearless and independent, he must continue his crusade.  all this enthusiasm for reform makes it important to distinguish real reformers from the charlatans. albany is full of potemkin offices staffed by toothless investigators who keep their jobs by basically not doing them. and the ethics committees for the legislative and executive branches are basically self-policing groups that seldom get around to doing the necessary police work, much less actually accuse any of their own of wrongdoing.  equally useless is the state commission on investigation, which theoretically has broad powers to investigate ''any matter concerning public peace, public safety and public justice.'' in practice the commission is a sham, its members consisting largely of cronies of the politically powerful who do little to earn their annual salaries of $100,000 a year.  the newest member of the commission is john cahill, george pataki's loyal chief of staff, whom the former governor named to the commission as he was headed out the door. the energetic mr. cahill insists that he will take his part-time job seriously, and if this is so he could well add an important republican voice to the reform chorus, which is now largely democratic.  what is becoming increasingly clear is that plenty of people have the power to look under the rocks in albany. they just haven't been doing enough of the heavy lifting until now.  