arts, briefly   shakespeare's church is crumbling  the church where shakespeare is buried is ''urgently'' seeking nearly $400,000 for repairs to its tower and spire, agence france-presse reported. ''the new year brings with it a focus on the fund to help solve the immediate crisis of the tower and spire,'' said the fund-raisers, friends of shakespeare's church. the building is the holy trinity church in stratford-on-avon, where shakespeare was baptized, worshiped with his family and was buried in the chancel in 1616. the friends said, the church, dating to the 13th century, needs as much as $2 million in renovations, including work on the chancel roof, windows and stonework.  fox cancels 'the o.c.'  ''the o.c.,'' the popular teen dramatic series, will run its final episode on feb. 22, after four years on fox, the network announced. ''the o.c.'' followed a the lives of a group of teenagers in newport beach, a beach town in orange county, calif.  acropolis museum dig unearths hoard  excavations for the new acropolis museum in athens have yielded a trove of 50,000 relics, including a nearly perfectly preserved marble bust of aristotle, the guardian of london reported. ''thanks to the new acropolis museum, we were able to conduct the biggest ever dig within the walls of athens's ancient city,'' said stamatia eleftheratou, an archaeologist. the finds, amid the ruins of villas, workshops, bathhouses, courtyards and networks of sewers, also include cooking utensils, children's games and figurines of little-known deities. the decision to build the $183 million museum on an archaeologically rich site was criticized, but it allowed for a dig in a densely settled area of ancient athens. the bust of aristotle, with an aquiline nose, protruding forehead, floppy hair and minute eyes and mouth, is a roman copy of a fourth-century b.c. original. alkestis choremi, the former director of the athens department of prehistoric and classical antiquities, said: ''this comes closer to resembling him than anything ever discovered here. it offers a rare depiction of how he looked.''  nice work if you can get it  george michael, below, received nearly $3 million for an hour's performance at a new year's party outside moscow and was home in london by morning, the bbc reported. mr. michael's spokeswoman said the fee, paid by an unidentified russian billionaire, took mr. michael and his entourage by private jet to an estate 20 miles from the russian capital, where he entertained 300 guests. and though he was reported to have had fun, mr. michael left in time to reach home by morning. (flying time from moscow to london is three and a half hours.)  will 'divine comedy' play the vatican?  hell and the vatican will intersect in a new opera adapted from dante's ''divine comedy'' and created by a vatican composer. organizers plan to begin rehearsals in a few weeks and have asked permission for the premiere to take place at the vatican in the presence of pope benedict xvi, above right, the bbc reported. the composer, msgr. marco frisina, said the production, including 200 performers and musicians on a huge stage, will vary in musical style. rock, punk and rave will illustrate hell, and purgatory will be evoked through gregorian chant; heaven reportedly will be depicted through classical-style melody.  lithuanian court allows 'popetown' broadcast  a lithuanian court cleared the way for the start yesterday of telecasts of the irreverent cartoon series ''popetown'' by rejecting a petition by the lithuanian bishops' conference to ban the series as a mockery of the roman catholic church and clergy and an incitement of hatred, according to mtv, agence france-presse reported. ema segal, a spokeswoman for mtv lietuva, said the court rejected the request, ''saying it found no evidence to confirm any threat to the church.'' she added, ''we are happy that the court once again confirmed that media in lithuania are free.'' the ''popetown'' web site (popetown.com) says the cartoon takes the viewer into the ''surreal world of the vatican as the long-suffering and good-hearted father nicholas struggles to walk the narrow path of righteousness, whilst surrounded by money grabbing cardinals and a pogo-stick-riding infantile pope.''  footnotes  samy nacéri, below, the french actor who stars in the critically acclaimed film ''days of glory,'' was in police custody yesterday on a charge of attempted murder. mr. nacéri, 45, was arrested in aix-en-provence, where he was accused of pulling a knife on a nightclub doorman. in december, he was sentenced to six months in prison for racial abuse of a black police officer. mario lopez of ''dancing with the stars'' and ''nip/tuck,'' among other shows, has a new television gig: host of the 2007 miss america pageant. the show will be broadcast live on cmt from the planet hollywood resort & casino in las vegas on jan. 29 at 8 p.m.  