where up is still down, but the rest is changing   there were comparisons to ''alice in wonderland,'' ''star trek,'' ''the twilight zone,'' and all manner of clichés to convey the strangeness engulfing washington this week as the democrats prepared to assume control of congress after 12 years in the minority wilderness. but nothing distilled the new aura of things like this conceit: steny hoyer, rock star.  ''here he comes, here he comes,'' a member of the press throng effervesced when mr. hoyer of maryland, the incoming house majority leader, strode into the room as if he owned the place. which, in effect, he does -- at least the larger, plusher office he is inheriting, which used to belong to tom delay, mr. hoyer was compelled to point out. (not that anyone's keeping track.)  mr. hoyer surveyed the conference room and held his arms slightly apart, as if to frame the unusual site before him: a crush of 60 or so reporters, camera operators, tv types and assorted security people, staff members and hangers-on to befit the status of an emerging fuss magnet.  the fussers were present for mr. hoyer's ''pen and pad'' briefing, and in considerably greater numbers than during his days in the minority.  ''we're going to reserve some seats for those who came to these pen and pads when i was irrelevant,'' mr. hoyer said, a line he had deployed before, but which served the recurring purpose of marking the juxtaposition of fortunes that are on full display in the up-is-down realm of capitol hill. ''there are some who think i'm still irrelevant,'' he added, not proffering guesses.  mr. hoyer wore a shiny white dress shirt, a red power tie and an occasional look of stunned confusion. to his right, movers passed the window, carrying lamps and tables. mr. hoyer was hard to decipher at times, speaking in the mumble of someone accustomed to smaller audiences.  'it's not whining'  not so the republicans convened upstairs. waving his hands and stomping his feet, representative patrick t. mchenry of north carolina acted out on wednesday what the rest of the republican caucus must have felt. ''it is so hypocritical, just on its face,'' mr. mchenry fumed.  his complaint: that democrats, on the verge of taking control of congress, were planning to run the place their way, driving the legislative agenda themselves without input from the republican minority.  wasn't that, someone asked, how the republicans had run congress for more than a decade?  ''we didn't campaign on this openness,'' mr. mchenry argued, denying that he and his colleagues were just being sore losers. ''it's not whining,'' he said. ''it's a matter of calling them out on their rhetoric.''  democrats had not even taken over yet. but republicans, suddenly facing a minimum two-year sentence out of power, coalesced around a message of kvetching.  they held up reports that democrats would conduct their first 100 hours without allowing republican amendments. they held news conferences to deplore the new regime, citing letters from mrs. pelosi from when she was in the minority, requesting a piece of the legislative action.  ''there are lots of messages that came across in this november election, and one of the messages was change in doing things differently,'' said representative kay granger, republican of texas.  watch for falling marble  across town, representative rosa delauro of connecticut presided over an afternoon tea that brought together democratic women for what she described as ''our understated way of saying we've arrived.''  but as with much of the week's festivities, there was nothing understated about whom the celebration was for: a giant photograph of the incoming speaker, nancy pelosi, was on a screen at the front of the room, alongside one of ann richards, the first woman to be governor of texas, who died in september.  when mrs. pelosi takes the gavel, ms. delauro said, ''the sound you hear will be the glass ceiling in this country, and the marble ceiling in this institution, shattering.''  drop the pacifier and smile  ''who is that guy?'' a staffer asked, pointing to a big-shotty looking man with a small entourage in the cannon office building. must be a new member, he concluded.  nope, it was paul pelosi, the new speaker's husband, leading members of the first family of congress to get id card photographs.  this included paul michael vos, the 6-week-old grandson of the speaker and mr. pelosi and the son of the filmmaker alexandra pelosi, whose hbo documentary ''journeys with george'' chronicled george w. bush's first presidential campaign.  paul's birth nearly conflicted with grandma pelosi's last-minute campaign plans, but he had the good sense not to go off message and showed up after election day.  and yes, newborns require photo id's on capitol hill. his father, michiel vos, dutifully carried his son into the room marked ''id services.'' fifteen minutes later, he emerged crying (the baby, not the father), but with a shiny new photo id clipped to his adorable onesie.  hello, but first, this protest  down the hallway, representative rahm emanuel of illinois was starting to address another news media mob that had waited for him to emerge from a meeting of the house democratic caucus. mr. emanuel wished everyone a happy new year, apologized for being late and was promptly drowned out by a group of antiwar protesters, led by the ubiquitous cindy sheehan.  ''de-escalate, investigate,'' the group chanted. ''troops home now.''  mr. emanuel and mr. hoyer decided to leave their podium and return later. ''looks like we're taking a little break,'' mr. hoyer said as he and mr. emmanuel rushed away.  ms. sheehan was happy to take over the microphone, not to mention the lingering throng of reporters.  she called for a greater role for the peace movement in the democratic majority, which she said was ignoring the people who put them in power -- the peace movement. she called for an end to financing the war.  ''and these are not requests,'' said ms. sheehan, whose son casey was killed in iraq. ''these are demands.''  ms. sheehan vowed to stay around all week.  ''it looks like business as usual, and that's why we're here,'' ms. sheehan said in a brief interview. ''we want business as unusual.''  the 110th congress: reporter's notebook  correction:  january 5, 2007, friday  an article yesterday about the scene in congress as democrats prepared to assume control for the first time in 12 years, included an erroneous distinction for the late ann richards, whose photograph appeared prominently at a tea for democratic women. she was not the first woman to be texas governor; that was miriam ferguson, elected in 1924.  