the senate's task on warming   here are a few bulletins from planet earth:  dec. 12 -- exhaustive computer simulations carried out at the national center for atmospheric research in boulder, colo., suggest that the arctic ocean will be mostly open water in the summer of 2040 -- several decades earlier than expected. scientists attribute the loss of summer ice largely to the buildup of carbon dioxide and other man-made greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.  dec. 14 -- experts at nasa's goddard institute predict that 2006 will be the fifth-warmest year since modern record-keeping began, continuing a decades-long global warming trend caused, again, by the buildup of man-made carbon dioxide.  dec. 27 -- the interior department proposes adding polar bears to the list of threatened species because of the accelerating loss of the arctic ice that is the bears' habitat. the department does not take a position on why the ice is melting, but studies supporting the proposed listing identify greenhouse gases as the main culprit, adding that if left unchecked these gases will create ice-free arctic summers in three decades.  but we knew that.  one can only assume that the senate's new democratic leadership is paying attention. california's barbara boxer is the new chairwoman of the senate environment and public works committee, replacing james inhofe, the oklahoma republican who regards global warming as an elaborate hoax drummed up by environmentalists and scientists in search of money. ms. boxer has already scheduled hearings, and there will be no shortage of legislative remedies to consider. all share one objective, which is to attach a cost to carbon dioxide through a cap on emissions.  the underlying logic is that if people and industries are made to pay for the privilege of pumping these gases into the atmosphere, they will inevitably be driven to developer cleaner fuels, cleaner cars and cleaner factories.  this is the path most developed countries have chosen. europe has imposed caps on industrial emissions, and european companies have begun investing in new technologies and cleaner factories in places like china, partly as a way to meet their own obligations to cut emissions and partly as a way to lead china to a greener future.  these hearings need to be conducted in a thoughtful manner. there has been enough noise, from the inhofe right and from the doomsayers who see each hurricane as a sign the apocalypse is upon us. but it is also important that ms. boxer and her colleagues not lose sight of a fundamental reality: saturating the atmosphere with greenhouse gases is loading the dice in a dangerous game.  editorial  