stage mother   the theater group at my mother's seniors' community typically does a lot of editing -- removing expletives and cutting scenes so plays don't run too long. if they didn't, they could not do the plays at all. but what's worse, my mother recently changed a line in a play she is directing, neil simon's ''california suite,'' to improve it. isn't she wrong to do these things?  lane galloway, seattle  most playwrights license their work to be performed only as written -- no cuts, no ''improvements.'' fortunately for your mother, some authors offer condensed, cleaned-up editions of their plays for groups like hers. (i've been told that a. r. gurney has such a version of his ''sylvia'' in which the eponymous dog curses far less than in the original.) if no short-and-sweet simon is available, your mother should seek his permission for her changes; many writers are accommodating, particularly with small, nonprofit productions.  but if this approach fails, and you're willing to take your chances with the cops, let the cutting begin: copyright law might bar it, but ethics does not. people have done the same to ''hamlet'' for centuries, why not to ''mamma mia''? (shakespeare's works are in the public domain, obviating legal constraints, but ethical concerns remain about the plays' integrity.) why restrict theatrical thought? it is a fine thing to loose more ideas, even foolish ones, upon the world. if your mother read ''portnoy's complaint'' aloud to her cronies, trimming it to her standards of length and luridness, who would be hurt? what's fair for philip roth is fair for david mamet.  one objection to these unauthorized versions is that they can damage an author's reputation with the unwitting. but if a play is well known, no production, however nutty, can do its author much harm. (people's indelible memory of ''the king and i'' won't be effaced by my version featuring a drunken, bitter anna and some fabulous naked kick-boxing from tuptim.) your mother can defuse this danger by customizing only solidly established works and by alerting the audience that it's watching a play by neil simon as revised by your mom. the audience can decide which version it prefers -- an aesthetic judgment, not an ethical one.  i was injured in the line of duty and had to retire on a disability pension from a police force in the midwest. after years of rehabilitation, i want to resume my career. i cannot pass the physical to reclaim my original job, but i did qualify for a job in a police department in another state. is it o.k. to receive a disability pension from one force while doing similar work for another?  name withheld  it is not so much your proposed action as the word ''disability'' that causes consternation. there is something off-putting about a person collecting ''disability'' payments while roller-blading to his new job as a piano mover. if this money were called ''previous injury compensation'' or ''piano locomotion allotment'' or suchlike, you'd feel less conflicted, as well you should. if you act openly and honestly with both departments, there's no ethical bar to your donning a uniform in one state while collecting a disability pension from another if the law permits.  different departments have different pension practices. the original force is free to forbid the very thing you question, but may choose not to. similarly, many cities allow some former employees to draw a pension while continuing to work elsewhere. in such matters, your ethical obligation is expressed by the rules themselves.  the way we live now: 1-07-07: the ethicist  