urgent work for the new congress   to the editor:  re ''jubilant democrats assume control on capitol hill'' (front page, jan. 5):  it is well and good for the democrats to be momentarily joyous, but outside the doors of the capitol is a nation in deep trouble.  the partisan, self-serving, shortsighted and sometimes corrupt republicans left a large foul-smelling mound of dysfunctionality and divisiveness. i wouldn't have wanted to inherit any of it.  i think there is a need for a healthy dose of outrage on the part of the new (and very slight) majority. these representatives have much to do -- and undo.  the american people want action, and fast. legislators, this is not about you, it is about us.  get to work. and good luck!  colter rule  new york, jan. 5, 2007  to the editor:  never in more than 45 years of daily reading the new york times have i seen as striking a front-page photograph as the one that appeared jan. 5: a grandmother, surrounded by congress members' young children, assuming the office of speaker of the house of representatives.  the photograph suggests profound change and fresh hope for our nation.  emil b. rechsteiner  groton, mass., jan. 5, 2007  to the editor:  the giant photograph splashed across your jan. 5 front page -- are you sharing in the jubilation? -- seems more suited for a family photo album than the house of representatives.  parties and celebrations are for election night.  there is a war on. in fact, the democrats owe their victory to the people's desire for a resolution of the conflict. movie stars in the gallery, gala events, photo ops -- the democrats should begin on a more serious tone, and be wary of crowing triumphalism.  a little less show business, please. work on the people's business.  alexander goldstein  brooklyn, jan. 5, 2007  to the editor:  re ''senate feels heat as house cranks up ethics overhaul'' (news article, jan. 5):  democrats are doing the right thing morally and politically in pushing for far-reaching ethics reform. in addition to being good for our republic by returning at least some of the power back to the voters and away from special interests, reform will be good for the democratic party.  it takes courage to compete for the support of the voters on the merit of one's ideas and not by stacking the deck with incumbency. for candidates to resist a fair and open debate is to admit that their ideas can't stand up to public scrutiny on their own.  republicans showed themselves unable or unwilling to compete based on ideas alone.  while ethics reform will diminish the benefits of incumbency, and therefore put at risk the slim democratic majority, recent history suggests that when playing on a level or semi-level playing field, democratic ideas and priorities are supported by a majority of americans.  tal j. zlotnitsky  trinity, fla., jan. 5, 2007  to the editor:  re ''new congress, leftover challenges'' (editorial, jan. 4):  you say quite confidently that ''the voters are watching, and lawmakers dare not slip away from the promise to clean up their act.'' what is it that you think these lawmakers are trembling in fear of, when most house races are still not competitive because of gerrymandering?  what we really need -- even more desperately than ethics reform -- is an independent, nonpartisan panel to draw legislative districts, so that every race is competitive in every election. then and only then will the voters truly be able to hold their lawmakers accountable for their ethics.  daniel dickinson  stanford, calif., jan. 4, 2007  to the editor:  it is scandalous that the level of ethics in congress has sunk so low that there is a need for you to call for the 110th congress ''to clean up its own act.''  in opinion polls before the midterm elections last year, less than 40 percent of americans gave congress a high approval rating. but i don't think that those in congress really care what the public thinks once they are elected.  even your well-intentioned call for change does not go nearly far enough. i do not understand why instead of calling for a complete elimination of earmarks, you would merely require the ''full disclosure'' of their authorship, since the authors would ''be mocked by taxpayers.''  it is disappointing that you do not even put forth a reason earmarks are essential. i suggest that history shows that there would be little taxpayer mocking (in any event, being mocked is a very small price to pay for the value the authors receive for inserting billions of dollars of earmarks).  all expenditures of taxpayer money should be debated and voted on, not inserted into mammoth spending bills without debate -- even if the author's name and photograph are attached.  morton m. drosnes  barkhamsted, conn., jan. 4, 2007  to the editor:  the democrats' proposed ethics rules are a beginning, and following years of overbearing, high-rolling yet secretive republican control, we voters do expect this congress to work openly, and for us.  campaign contributions from lobbyists and corporations must be limited -- or, better, banned. the vast majority of americans have been ill served by the current system.  mary catherine wilheit  college station, tex., jan. 4, 2007  