at least the hero was on time   the year may be young, but it is not too early to nominate the no. 1 feel-good story of 2007. somebody is going to have to work awfully hard to outdo wesley autrey, a true hero in a city where the word ''hero'' is overworked to the point of losing all meaning.  unless you're just back from neptune, you will recognize mr. autrey as the construction worker who jumped from a subway platform to save a film student who had suffered a seizure and fallen to the tracks at 137th street and broadway. mr. autrey shoved the student into a trough between the rails and held him there as a no. 1 train rolled over them -- catastrophe mere inches away.  you can't make up stories this good, or come up with a more appealing hero than this 50-year-old workingman. he went to city hall yesterday, with his two young daughters, to be honored by the mayor. the word ''hero,'' even ''superhero,'' hung in the air, thick as a morning fog. mr. autrey was having none of it.  ''superhero, superhero,'' he said, almost mocking the word. ''i don't feel like a superhero.''  ''i just did it,'' he said, ''because i saw someone in distress.''  maybe so. it is safe to say, though, that precious few of us would dream of doing what he did. the odds are far greater that we would end up like the film student, cameron hollopeter, 20. not that we would necessarily tumble onto the tracks. but falling ill in the subway? it happens all the time.  in fact, ''sick customer,'' to use the official lingo, is a major reason for train delays, hundreds of them every month.  from january to october 2006, to cite the most recent statistics available from new york city transit, queasy riders needing medical attention were responsible for 3,969 delays. the figure for october alone was an unusually high 743. only track work (14,076 delays) and signal problems (7,567) caused more train backups during that period.  subway rules demand that conductors stay with ailing riders until help arrives, typically in the form of emergency medical technicians based at grand central, times square, queensboro plaza and other well-trafficked stations. given that requirement, train delays are inevitable.  what makes riders sick? the reasons are many.  an article this week in am new york, a free newspaper handed out at subway entrances, blamed poor nutrition, especially among dieting young women. it quoted a subway e.m.t. who spoke of appearance-obsessed women skipping meals, sometimes for days. in the subway, they become light-headed and faint.  that idea was not endorsed by paul j. fleuranges, a spokesman for new york city transit. then again, it was not dismissed, either. ''officially, we don't know why people are ill,'' mr. fleuranges said.  frankly, we can see why many new yorkers, men or women, might want to diet simply to fit into subway seats. some of the made-in-japan cars seem designed for made-in-japan rumps, not new yorkers' wider beams. you want to talk about trans fats? try transit fat.  on the no. 1 line, where mr. autrey performed his heroics, the contoured seats are 17 inches wide. your average new yorker is appreciably wider. as a result, you routinely see seven riders -- and often only six -- filling up space that in theory should seat eight. should this winter ever turn truly cold, the many michelin man jackets will make for an even tighter squeeze.  even if excessive dieting does not really explain why so many people fall ill, the fact remains that health problems keep trains from running as smoothly as everyone would like. sick customers account for appreciably more delays than either track fires or -- one of our favorites -- riders' holding train doors and keeping them from closing.  interestingly, the category of ''suspicious package'' is relatively low among the causes for delays: no. 22 on the list. it accounted for 860 delays in the first 10 months of 2006.  that number ''is nothing to sneeze at,'' mr. fleuranges said, but it is well below what it was a year or two earlier, soon after the terrorist bombings on commuter trains in madrid and london. rider wariness, mr. fleuranges said, ''really does change with the tenor of the times.''  naturally, transit officials still want people to stay on guard. ''if you see something, say something'' continues to be the slogan.  but mr. autrey kicked it up several notches, didn't he? by leaping to the tracks to save a life, he effectively told new yorkers: ''if you see something, do something.''  nyc e-mail: haberman@nytimes.com  