elections for 2 council seats will be on feb. 20   a special election will be held on feb. 20 to fill two city council seats left vacant in brooklyn and on staten island, the city's board of elections said yesterday.  mayor michael r. bloomberg set the date after the resignations of yvette d. clarke, a brooklyn democrat, and andrew j. lanza, a staten island republican.  the date gives candidates two weeks to file petitions proclaiming their intentions with the board of elections. the filing deadline is midnight jan. 16, said john ravitz, the board's executive director.  winning candidates will serve for the rest of the year and will automatically be put on the september primary ballot or the november general election ballot if a primary is not held, mr. ravitz said.  ms. clarke resigned her district 40 seat after winning the congressional seat for central brooklyn in november. mr. lanza left his district 51 seat for the state senate.  the city council held its 2007 inaugural meeting yesterday and passed one piece of legislation, which requires the city to look at 300 of its highest-energy-using buildings to see if clean-burning natural gas generators can be installed to ease electricity use, especially in the summer. the mayor is expected to sign the bill.  the special election comes as the bloomberg administration and the board of elections gird for problems in this year's elections. the state's board of elections has yet to certify voting machines that meet federal requirements to overhaul the system and replace aging machines.  the state has been under increasing pressure since the justice department sued it last year for failing to comply with guidelines enacted by congress in 2002. those guidelines were intended to spur states to modernize their systems to avoid an election debacle like the one in florida in 2000.  the state is not expected to make its selections until february, and election officials say that will not give them enough time to install software, train staff members and poll workers and advise the public on how to operate the new machines. the state risks losing $20 million in federal money if a new system is not in place by the fall election.  the special election will be held using the old lever-operated machines, mr. ravitz said. important dates and deadlines and other instructions for the special election can be found on the board of elections web site at vote.nyc.ny.us/index.html.  