two urban congregations to form one new suburban church   the greek orthodox churches st. nicholas in newark and ss. constantine and helen in nearby orange have deep urban roots that go back decades, but in the coming months they will merge to create a single new church in suburban roseland.  the rev. constantine makrinos, who leads the 106-year-old newark congregation, said he was sad to go but thought the merger was preordained. at the heart of st. nicholas is an immense wooden icon screen adorned with the images of saints. although there are scores of saints, designers at st. nicholas happened to put the patron saints of the two churches side by side on the screen many decades ago.  ''to me, seeing that was like a miracle,'' father makrinos said.  the churches' demise is a familiar story -- an immigrant population prospered and moved to the suburbs, and church membership and attendance began a long decline. the congregations also never recovered from the riots in newark in the 1960s, some parishioners said.  ''you have to remember the past, deal with the present, but you also have to protect your future,'' said harry pappas, a lifelong ss. constantine and helen parishioner.  the churches, symbols of another era, will stay open until they are sold, or until the new church opens in 2008.  in the 1930s and '40s, more than 1,000 people living in newark told the united states census they were born in greece; in the 2000 census, fewer than 200 claimed greek ancestry.  at ss. constantine and helen, which dates to 1910 and whose current church was built in 1957, there are about 400 members for a church that can accommodate 450, but only half attend services and fewer than 10 percent live in the oranges. about 200 members support st. nicholas, but about 40 attend services in a church built for 425.  ''when you go into our church, you see a lot of gray hair,'' said gus theodos, the president of st. nicholas.  one of those gray heads belongs to amelia kafalas, who said she had been there for 89 1/2 years. she turns 90 in april.  ''i'm very unhappy about it -- this is my church,'' said ms. kafalas, who lives in union. ''but what can you do?''  in the church's heyday, she recalled packed pews -- ''you couldn't get a seat!'' -- along with ''parties galore.''  ''we had more fun in this church hall,'' ms. kafalas said.  construction is expected to begin in march on the new $12 million church on laurel avenue in roseland, next to crestmont country club. it will seat about 500 and include a byzantine dome, a social hall, a gym and 10 classrooms. about $3 million has been raised by parishioners, and the sale of the two buildings is expected to bring in $8.3 million. church committee members hope donations will cover the balance.  george paras, whose real estate company, paras and paras, shares the listing for the old churches, said he had fielded calls from hundreds of interested buyers, mostly nonprofit organizations, schools and other churches. all want to keep the buildings, said mr. paras, a longtime st. nicholas member. if the buyer is a church, some religious items may remain but others, like the icon screens, will be moved.  merger talks began at least seven years ago, around the time the rev. peter souritzidis came to lead the church in orange.  ''then i was more excited about it,'' he said. ''now i can see the point of those who don't want to go. it becomes your home -- it's bittersweet, but that's our plan.''  the new church will be called ss. nicholas, constantine and helen, and the two pastors will serve the congregation. father souritzidis said he had no doubt the new church would carry the spirit of the past.  ''there is this thing that we call the ethos,'' he said. ''it means the makeup, the moral essence, the character, and that will remain the same.''  worship  