after blocking tower, neighbors recoil at void in hell's kitchen   community groups in hell's kitchen fought one of the city's most powerful developers to a standstill a year ago, blocking his attempt to build a 60-story tower over a new home for cirque du soleil.  since then, neighbors have complained that the rubble-strewn, 1.5-acre site on 42nd street, between dyer and 10th avenues, has become a breeding ground for mosquitoes in the summer and cockroaches, rats and other vermin year-round.  in the latest skirmish, fred papert, who built theater row nearby, filed a lawsuit yesterday against the developer, stephen m. ross, chief executive of related companies, saying the site had become an eyesore.  mr. ross appears to be considering a new plan for the site, possibly with a hotel, luxury apartments and shops. the plan also includes two small theaters that community groups and leaders want.  after meeting with elected officials in december to discuss complaints about the site, the developer installed floodlights along the blue construction fence on 42nd street and periodically picked up the wind-swept garbage around the parcel.  but the problem has gotten to the point where it is cutting into business, said glenn isaacs, the manager of the travel inn, west of related's site, and the owner of the theater row diner, at dyer avenue and 42nd street. ''our hotel guests are coming back to the hotel saying it's dangerous,'' mr. isaacs said. ''there's rats, mice, garbage all over the place.''  yesterday, a worker was pumping the stagnant rainwater that gathers in an eight-foot-deep hole on the site into a nearby sewer drain. the city's health and buildings departments found a series of violations last year relating to water that accumulates every time it rains. some residents call the site ''lake related.''  mr. papert's lawsuit, filed in state supreme court in manhattan, involves more than a dollop of revenge from a figure who was mr. ross's ally in acquiring the parcel. it seeks $500,000 in damages and says that the health and safety conditions at the related site, which sits ''at the epicenter of a renewed and thriving neighborhood,'' are hurting the whole community and undermining property values.  a new plan could be in the works for the site. according to a real estate executive who has been briefed on the developer's plans, related wants to form a joint venture with an unnamed hotel operator to build a 60-story, one-million-square-foot tower. the tower, with a hotel and luxury apartments at the top, would sit above shops, an equinox gym and a couple of small theaters.  but jeff t. blau, the president of related, said ''there's no deal at the moment.''  he added, ''we're exploring everything, given the cirque deal not happening.''  he said he had not seen the lawsuit and could not comment.  the city and the community wanted related to replace the two off broadway theaters it had demolished. ''nothing would make us happier than if related did what they originally promised us they would do,'' said mr. papert, president of the 42nd street development corporation. ''the minute we know it's going to happen, we'll withdraw the lawsuit.''  therein lies the story.  in 2004, related was one of two developers vying for the site. mr. papert, who owned a minority interest in the land, helped steer the deal to related. in the 1980s, mr. papert and his nonprofit group replaced several massage parlors on 42nd street between ninth and dyer avenues with theater row, a collection of small off broadway theaters. but they were unable to do the same thing on the next block.  mr. papert said he helped related buy the land for about $107 million, because he understood that the developer would find a new home for the theaters in his proposed tower. indeed, related talked to city officials about an apartment building that would house two small theaters and a performance space for classical musicians.  related, in turn, would have been able to take advantage of a city zoning regulation, a ''theater bonus,'' to build a taller tower than would have normally been allowed. but the company ultimately proposed to build an 1,800-seat theater for cirque du soleil, the human circus extravaganza. that plan was opposed by officials who argued that the bonus was intended to nurture struggling theater companies, not an economic blockbuster like cirque.  the city's planning department ruled last february that the project did not qualify for a bonus. related then put the parcel up for sale, asking about $350 million. but no one was willing to go that high.  marisa redanty, president of the tenants' association at manhattan plaza, which sits across 42nd street from the site, said yesterday that mr. papert's lawsuit was premature. but, she added, the company is trying to clean up the area.  ''if they do not continue to make the site more community-friendly, then all options are open,'' ms. redanty said. ''and if they give us the theaters, i'm happy as a clam.''  