childhood friends, partners in crime   the blade itself  by marcus sakey  307 pages. st. martin's press/minotaur. $22.95.  marcus sakey is a first-time author who successfully jump-starts his first book, ''the blade itself.'' he does this with a nod to dennis lehane's ''mystic river,'' which is never a bad gambit for a hard-charging thriller. so mr. sakey presents a group of young irish guys from the old neighborhood (in this case on the south side of chicago). he describes a crime committed in their shadowy past. and he guarantees that the crime will come back to bite them.  evan mcgann is the story's loose cannon. he's the one who turns a pawn-shop robbery into something worse. and he implicates danny carter, the book's basically clean-cut hero, in the process. thanks to evan's sadism, which will endure for 300 pages' worth of threats and mayhem, the robbery turns deadly. evan goes to prison, but danny goes free, and don't think evan isn't touchy about that.  years pass, but not enough of them. evan gets out early for (here's some irony) good behavior. this gives him license to stalk danny and to regale him with the kinds of ugly prison-life stories that do not bode well for the old friends' future dealings. sure enough, evan is in ''you owe me, danny'' mode and has hatched a revenge plot. ''i just thought of a way to get rich and even at the same time,'' he explains.  ''the blade itself'' is tight and propulsive in these early stages. but now mr. sakey must come up with an interesting plot device that can sustain the rest of the novel. so he exploits the facts that danny has prospered during evan's absence, and that both of them remain creatures of the old neighborhood through and through. this fills danny with self-doubt and troubling questions. ''was he just a thief with a better address?'' asks the book, now that danny embraced respectability and moved to the north side.  how much complexity can ''the blade itself'' attach to that question? not as much as mr. lehane could, but mr. sakey gives it some subtlety. to its credit this is not the kind of book in which straight-arrow, innocent danny is caught up in a web of lies and accusations. danny's not squeaky clean, and he's not stupid either.  but he has tried his best to change. and now he has a lot at stake: a good job with a construction company and a girlfriend who will ditch him if he relapses into crime. for these good reasons danny is quietly horrified when evan decides on a kidnapping scheme. the victim is to be the son of danny's boss.  as these pieces fall into place, ''the blade itself'' falls too: it begins lapsing into the familiar and turning overly cinematic. thus danny talks to the ghost of his decent, blue-collar father (who never would have wanted to see danny side with the construction company's owner against its employees). and we have a ''scream'' mask alert, because one of the book's suspense sequences takes place on halloween.  mr. sakey's background becomes more and more germane as his book unfolds. he has spent 10 years in advertising and marketing, learning how to use the kinds of bold strokes that become increasingly frequent here. and he's been reading some of the usual suspects: mr. lehane, george pelecanos, elmore leonard, james crumley and james ellroy are among the group of estimable writers he admires. like them he can construct a story that delivers a kick and leaves no loose ends. but his voice is a clever amalgam. it is rarely his own.  secondary characters in ''the blade itself'' are familiar but well used. there is sean, the childhood friend of danny and evan, a guy who is now a suspicious cop and is none too impressed with danny's newfound respectability. there's also patrick, the loyal buddy with the tough-guy attitude. (his answering machine greeting: ''this is patrick. give me one good reason to care that you called.'') patrick's function in the book, aside from being able to sense the truth about evan, is to convince danny that evan is even more horrible than he seems.  there's also karen, the girlfriend who will inevitably be stalked and threatened during the course of the story. karen brings out the best in mr. sakey, which is a streak of tenderness that gives the book some warmth. she can also bring out the worst, a penchant for one-sentence paragraphs signaling suspense:  ''what if he went home and told her the truth?''  ''would she understand?''  ''would she leave?''  fortunately, there aren't many of these.  but they are never any good.  unless someone like mr. leonard is writing them.  by the end of ''the blade itself,'' mr. sakey has also become reminiscent of joseph finder, another well-versed thriller writer who specializes in revealing cracks in the mcmansions of seemingly successful business types. as mr. sakey takes danny apart and looks to see what the man is really worth, the novel delivers some implicit social commentary about the shaky foundation on which danny's new life has been built.  ''the blade itself'' does keep this subject suspenseful: not until the very end of the story is it clear who danny is or where he stands. his ability to churn these questions so vigorously will bring mr. sakey attention and give him a toehold among the crime writers he admires.  books of the times  