high-tech gadgets in taxis will cut profits, cabbies say   a plan to provide high-tech enhancements to new york taxicabs -- including touch-screen monitors that will allow passengers to watch television, get game scores and track their ride on a global positioning system -- drew angry reactions from cabdrivers yesterday who say they will have to foot the bill.  more than a dozen drivers squeezed into a cramped city council hearing room yesterday to protest the high-tech amenities they will soon be required to install in their vehicles under new city guidelines. the taxi and limousine commission, which regulates city cabdrivers, says the cost of installing and operating the equipment will range from $2,900 to $7,200 per taxi over a three-year period.  the plan also requires drivers to accept credit and debit cards. drivers say the 3.5 percent transaction fee that they would pay would eat into their profits, and that if the card system is down, they could get stuck with the cab fare if the passenger is without cash.  ''we're independent contractors, we're like entrepreneurs, and we're forced to take credit cards,'' said william lindauer, 63, who said he had driven a cab in the city for 30 years. ''you can't force a restaurant to take credit cards. and entertainment, we're forced to provide entertainment?''  mr. lindauer was one of several drivers to testify before the council's transportation committee, which is evaluating the costs and benefits of the new technology.  commission officials defended the enhancements. the changes stem from a 2004 compromise in which medallion taxicabs -- the yellow cabs regulated by the city -- were allowed to raise fares by 26 percent in exchange for installing several technological improvements to improve customer service.  ''these customer service improvements are delivering on a promise that we made to taxi riders almost three years ago, and represent a leap ahead of anything currently being offered to passengers anywhere in the taxi world,'' matthew w. daus, chairman of the taxi and limousine commission, said in a statement after yesterday's hearing.  many of the drivers at the hearing were members of the new york taxi workers alliance, which represents about 7,000 drivers in the city. at least a few raised the possibility of a strike if the changes are fully instituted.  drivers say the required global positioning system and automated system that records a trip could lead to an invasion of their privacy. but commission officials say the only data they would collect would be a trip's beginning and end. the commission also said the 3.5 percent credit card fees negotiated with the credit card companies is substantially less than what cab owners pay to accept credit cards.  more than 3,000 cabs accept credit cards around the city, paying about 5 percent per transaction plus a weekly fee of $8 to $12, according to the commission. commission officials and vendors say allowing customers to pay with credit and debit cards will increase driver profits.  the city began rolling out the first of 200 taxis to be outfitted with the new equipment last month as part of a test. so far, though, only 28 cabs have been fully equipped, according to andrew salkin, the first deputy commissioner of the taxi and limousine commission.  the commission expects that all 13,000 medallion cabs in the city will have the equipment installed by the end of 2007.  the commission has signed deals with four vendors to provide the equipment and operate the services. each will provide different offerings for customers.  the system allows passengers to get information on dining and events around the city, get the latest news and scores, watch movie trailers and choose their own music. they can also get information on their driver and fares and, as is mandated for all the systems, watch as their ride is tracked by a global positioning system along a map. the system also includes advertisements, which the vendors say will eventually cut down on the monthly fees charged to the cab owners.  ed sloam, president of taxitech, one of the four vendors, said that 76 percent of customers who tested the system in a commission survey loved the system. those who do not like it can turn it off, he said.  ''taxis in the city are finally coming into the 21st century,'' mr. sloam told committee members yesterday.  city councilwoman gale a. brewer of manhattan, who opposes the enhancements, said passengers should not be subjected to a barrage of advertising.  ''i never want to see this, and i promise you no real west sider wants to see this,'' she said.  