highly paid chief is paid $210 million to go away   the new year began with a series of surprises, not all of them pleasant.  there was a blowup over excessive pay for corporate executives, worrying signs of a slowing economy, accelerating troubles for major manufacturers and new accusations of wrongdoing on wall street.  there was good news, too. boeing said its order book was bulging, and the number of securities fraud class-action lawsuits fell last year to the lowest level in a decade.  pay fight -- after enduring six years of mounting criticism over his pay package, an imperious management style and a listless stock price, robert l. nardelli, the chief executive of home depot, resigned abruptly. he left with a severance package worth $210 million. over six years as chief executive, he had taken home $64 million and was on track to earn hundreds of millions more.  in a statement, home depot said the former chief executive and the company's board ''mutually agreed that nardelli would leave his position.'' it added that frank blake, its vice chairman and one of mr. nardelli's lieutenants, would succeed him.  the $210 million in compensation for mr. nardelli will include deferred compensation, pensions and other benefits to which he was already entitled. it also included an extra $20 million cash payment that the company was not legally obliged to pay.  the developments reignited public debate about executive pay, just as the securities and exchange commission is moving to modify disclosure rules. the changes will mask the true value of what senior executives are paid, critics say.  representative barney frank of massachusetts, chairman of the house financial services committee in the democratic-controlled congress, has said he will pursue legislation to curb executive salaries.  weak economy -- federal reserve policy makers shed light on why they have held interest rates steady even though inflation is rising faster than their target rate: they are worried that the housing market slump may be a drag on the economy.  that came out when the fed released minutes of the december meeting of its open market committee.  the fed's wary outlook surfaced as retailers said sales in december were disappointing, even after many had scaled back their fourth-quarter profit expectations. some retailers also reduced forecasts for 2007.  retailers blamed mild weather that depressed winter clothing sales, but the flagging housing market and rising energy prices also had a big effect.  economists generally expect the fed to hold rates steady at its next meeting, at the end of the month, followed by possible reductions in rates later in the year.  hearing footsteps -- general motors and ford motor said they ended a year of slumping sales with an accelerating slide in december, when they sold about 13 percent fewer cars than in december 2005.  with consumers turning away from pickups and big sport utility vehicles, mainstays of both company's lineups, their share of the american market slid to just 53.7 percent for the year -- and just 51.5 percent for the month. both are their lowest collective shares ever.  toyota, meanwhile, set a sales record in 2006 and passed daimlerchrysler to take third place in the american car market. toyota is now bearing down on ford, which it is expected to unseat this year to take second place in the united states, and may overtake g.m. as the largest carmaker in the world.  toyota will soon decide whether to build two more plants in the united states, even as industry analysts forecast a slight decline in total sales for all makers in 2007. g.m. and ford are closing factories.  boeing's back -- strong demand for its workhorse 737 narrow-body jet and robust sales of its new fuel-efficient 787 dreamliner helped boeing report a record 1,044 orders for commercial airplanes at the end of last year. that should be more than enough to surpass airbus for the first time since 2000.  airbus, which has not yet reported december sales, said it had 687 firm orders as of the end of november.  measured by actual deliveries, however, airbus remains ahead. it was on pace to deliver about 425 commercial aircraft last year, while boeing delivered 398. airlines and leasing companies order planes years in advance, and sometimes increase, decrease or cancel those orders before the planes are delivered.  airbus is scheduled to announce its 2006 order total on jan. 17.  hedge inquiry -- william f. galvin, the secretary of the commonwealth of massachusetts, has asked ubs for information to determine whether it is using cheap office space to entice hedge funds to do business with the firm, possibly at the expense of the funds' investors.  ubs leases space to hedge funds and provides them with office help at a tower in boston, said brian mcniff, a spokesman for mr. galvin. investigators suspect that ubs expected the hedge funds to execute their trades through the bank, paying higher fees in return for the space.  other banks may also come in for scrutiny. bear stearns, for example, also offers space in so-called hedge fund hotels in new york, boston, san francisco and los angeles.  fewer suits -- just days after wall street began a campaign to curb what it said was a surge in shareholder lawsuits encouraged by a 2002 corporate-disclosure reform law, stanford university reported that securities fraud class-action lawsuits fell last year to the lowest number in a decade.  the study, from the stanford law school securities class action clearinghouse, said the number of class actions declined 38 percent, to just 110 filings, compared with 178 in 2005. last year's total was 43 percent below the 10-year historical average.  the clearinghouse is run jointly by the stanford law school and cornerstone research, which provides advice to lawyers in commercial lawsuits.  excluding suits over stock option backdating, which has embroiled 130 companies so far, the decline is even bigger, researchers said.  the number of suits is likely to fall further because regulations adopted after recent scandals have discouraged fraud, encouraged good practices and energized law enforcement, said joseph a. grundfest, the professor who runs the clearinghouse.  most popular -- following are the most-popular business news articles on nytimes.com from dec. 30 through jan. 5:  1. wal-mart puts some muscle behind power-sipping bulbs  2. google answer to filling jobs is an algorithm  3. young turn to web sites without rules  4. fewer excuses for not doing a pc backup  5. in silicon valley, the race is on to trump google  links are at nytimes.com/business.  five days  