in special election, another hurdle for g.o.p.   when republican leaders meeting in albany on nov. 30 named joseph n. mondello their state chairman on the heels of an election in which republicans took a historic drubbing, mr. mondello, in a flash of candor, said he was taking over a party that had hit rock bottom.  ''we've got almost no place further down that we can go,'' mr. mondello, the longtime nassau republican chairman, said in an interview that day.  now, a little more than a month but a political eternity later, it appears mr. mondello may have spoken too soon.  never mind that joseph l. bruno, the state senate leader and, with the end of the pataki era, the most powerful republican in the state, has since disclosed that he is under federal investigation for his outside consulting work.  with a new democratic governor, eliot spitzer, reaching across party lines in late december to name a republican, state senator michael a. l. balboni of east williston, to head up homeland security, mr. mondello is abruptly facing a bruising special election in his home base to fill mr. balboni's seat. mr. spitzer will set the date for the election, probably for early to mid-february.  if a democrat wins the northwestern nassau district, where democrats hold a slight registration edge, it would be a major embarrassment for mr. mondello, the first chipping away of the republican grip on all nine state senate seats for long island. it would also further narrow the slender majority republicans hold in the senate.  but if a republican wins, mr. mondello would gain luster. and if mr. bruno, who chose mr. mondello for state chairman, were forced out, mr. mondello has close ties to the heir apparent, state senator dean g. skelos, of rockville centre.  anthony santino, a spokesman for mr. mondello, said last week that no decision had been made on a candidate. but mr. mondello's widely expected choice is maureen o'connell, 56, of east williston, a former registered nurse and lawyer who served in the state assembly from 1999 to last january, when she took over as nassau county clerk.  ms. o'connell did not answer calls to her office. mr. santino said mr. mondello was unavailable. ''we're certainly going to wage a very aggressive campaign to keep the seat republican,'' mr. santino said.  jay s. jacobs, the nassau democratic chairman, said mr. spitzer's landslide election on a reform platform gave local democrats momentum. he said federal scrutiny of mr. bruno would be an issue. ''joe mondello was handpicked by joseph bruno, so you do the math,'' mr. jacobs said. ''their candidate would be critical of bruno at his or her peril.''  craig m. johnson, 33, of port washington, who is a third-term nassau county legislator and whose district is within the senatorial district, was seen as a front-runner for the democratic nomination.  mr. johnson, a lawyer with a practice in bankruptcy and commercial law, earned notice in march when he endorsed mr. spitzer for governor at a time when nassau's top democratic official, county executive thomas r. suozzi, was seeking the office. mr. johnson declined to comment last week on his candidacy.  other leading candidates are michelle schimel, the north hempstead town clerk, and matthew cuomo, a cousin of state attorney general andrew m. cuomo and nephew of former gov. mario m. cuomo. nassau county legislator roger h. corbin and rocco iannarelli, the north hempstead tax receiver, were also on the list. state assemblyman thomas p. dinapoli of great neck could also emerge as a candidate unless mr. spitzer names him to succeed state comptroller alan g. hevesi, who resigned last month in an ethics scandal involving misuse of state money to chauffeur his wife.  desmond ryan, a veteran political lobbyist, said mr. spitzer's reform initiatives and mr. bruno's legal situation played strongly to the advantage of the democrats. ''their candidate will be able to say, 'elect me and i will help you reform state government,' '' he said. he added that long island republicans ''never do well in special elections.''  on politics  