30 seconds of fame at super bowl xli will cost $2.6 million   a month before super bowl xli, it remains unclear which teams will face off on feb. 4 in miami. in the other big game that night -- the battle of the super bowl advertisers -- the lineup is becoming clearer.  more than a dozen marketers have agreed so far to pay an estimated average of $2.6 million -- a record amount -- for each 30-second commercial that will appear during the cbs broadcast of the game.  as of this week, cbs has sold about 80 percent of the available advertising time, which totals about 30 minutes. that is a typical commercial load for a super bowl.  advertisers will include super bowl stalwarts like anheuser-busch, fedex, general motors and the frito-lay and pepsi-cola divisions of pepsico. there will also be commercials from recent super bowl arrivals like careerbuilder, diamond foods and godaddy.  other advertisers, including several movie studios, have bought spots but do not want to identify themselves until closer to game time. these companies want to maximize the hoopla they can generate through public relations campaigns and other marketing techniques.  at a time when madison avenue is anxiously seeking alternatives to traditional selling tactics like tv commercials, it is surprising that demand for super bowl spots is as ardent as ever 30 days before kickoff.  however, those involved in making the decisions to spend so much money say they have many good reasons to remain in the game.  for one, as audiences split among a seemingly infinite number of media choices, the super bowl is almost always the most-watched tv event of the year -- and it is almost always watched live, commercials and all, rather than on a delayed playback using digital video recorders that can zip through the spots.  also, super bowl marketing has been rapidly evolving to add nontraditional methods to reach consumers. for example, computer users can watch the commercials online after the game on web sites like aol.com, video.google.com, video.yahoo.com and youtube.com.  and consumers are being invited to enter contests to create super bowl spots as part of a trend known as user-generated content. at least three advertisers are sponsoring such contests during super bowl xli: the chevrolet division of general motors, the doritos brand sold by frito-lay and the national football league.  ''there is no other platform quite like the super bowl,'' said robert lachky, executive vice president for global industry development and chief creative officer at the anheuser-busch beer division of anheuser-busch in st. louis.  for several years, anheuser-busch has bought the most commercial time of any super bowl advertiser, about five minutes in each game. the company will maintain that ranking again, planning to run 10 spots for three brands it brews -- budweiser, bud light and bud select -- and one it imports, probably grolsch from the netherlands.  ''it's worth it,'' mr. lachky said of the cost. ''when you can touch that many households, that many adults, in one sitting, it's actually efficient.''  being the game's biggest sponsor also works for anheuser-busch from a timing standpoint, mr. lachky said, because the next day the company intends to introduce a significant advertising initiative, an online entertainment network called bud.tv that will be on a web site with the bud.tv address.  bud.tv will feature all the anheuser-busch commercials seen during during the game, mr. lachky said, along with content like video clips, sports programs and talk shows.  ''we will definitely be 'popping' bud.tv via one of our billboards,'' mr. lachky said, referring to the moments during the game when brand logos are superimposed on screen as an announcer lists the sponsors.  anheuser-busch spends weeks each year testing batches of would-be super bowl spots before deciding on the final lineups. sometimes, decisions are not made until the day before the game.  the grolsch commercial being considered for the super bowl is being created by the st. louis office of momentum, owned by the interpublic group. the spots under consideration for the bud brands are being created, mr. lachky said, by cannonball in st. louis and three agencies that are part of the omnicom group: the chicago office of ddb worldwide, downtown partners in toronto and goodby, silverstein & partners in san francisco.  goodby, silverstein could be a super bowl double-dipper. a humorous 30-second spot it is producing for the emerald brand of snack nuts sold by diamond foods will run in the third quarter. this will be the third consecutive year for emerald as a super bowl advertiser.  ''the super bowl is an event, an event that lives on,'' said andrew burke, vice president for marketing at diamond in stockton, calif. ''it's about the next day, when people in their office say to each other, 'did you see that guy in that super bowl commercial?' ''  hoping to include emerald in that chatter, the commercial created by goodby, silverstein will be ''a little bit different, a little bit irreverent,'' mr. burke promised, featuring the singer and actor robert goulet in an offbeat performance.  to generate additional attention, mr. burke said, there will be video clips on a web site, promotions, signs in stores and coupons.  godaddy, which registers web site names, will be back for a third straight year. the company will run one or two commercials that will represent the first work from its new agency, the shine advertising company in madison, wis.  curt hanke, account director at shine, said yesterday that he would not be able to discuss the campaign for a week or two. in the 2005 and 2006 super bowls, godaddy ran risqué commercials that raised some eyebrows; the reactions to the spots were described in copious detail on a blog written by the godaddy president, bob parsons.  the estimated average price tag for each 30-second commercial in the game, at $2.6 million, is slightly ahead of the estimated average cost for each spot during super bowl xl, which was $2.5 million.  the sales activity is ''pacing very close to where we were at this time three years ago'' when cbs last broadcast a super bowl, said joann ross, president for network sales at cbs in new york, part of the cbs corporation.  ''we're getting there,'' she added, referring to the eventual goal of being sold out. ''we're not wringing our hands or gritting our teeth.''  the steps the network is taking to stir up super bowl excitement will include a special, ''super bowl's greatest commercials 2007,'' to be broadcast on feb. 2, ms. ross said. cbs is also exploring the idea of offering super bowl sponsors the opportunity to make their spots available online on the cbs sportsline web site (cbssportsline.com).  advertising  