style; rome the sequel   when a young millennium's fancy turns to empire, the fancy head for rome. thus i found myself one morning last october bumping along the old appian way on my way to cinecittà, the italian movie studio. an hbo production unit, installed for the past two years at federico fellini's old dream factory, was filming the concluding episodes in the second (and final) season of ''rome,'' a series on the history of the roman republic in the years before the imperial idea took hold. who could pass up the chance to witness the last days of ''rome''?  i don't watch much television, and i can't say that i was gripped by the first season of ''rome.'' i'm too old for sex and violence, in or out of period costume. but the distinctive look of the series drew me in. produced in cooperation with the bbc, ''rome'' was filmed on an immense set that harks back to the days before epic backdrops came packed on hard drives. an outdoor standing set, covering five acres, compressed the ancient city into a labyrinth of public buildings, narrow streets, grand villas and squalid tenements.  art directors have typically envisioned the city in imperial glory, festooning the backdrops with tiers of white marble temples. but earthiness pervades the ''rome'' take on rome. hbo's production wallows in the squalor of rome that preceded the augustan age. created by the production designer joseph bennett, with additional work for the current season by anthony pratt, this rome is recognizably descended from the individual settlements on the lazian hills that later merged in an early example of urban sprawl. this is a rome for the age of los angeles, a fabulous smoky mess.  in the glory days of the 1950s and '60s, when the cafes along via veneto epitomized the glamorous night life of postwar rome, spectaculars like ''ben-hur'' and ''cleopatra'' were made at cinecittà. fellini reconstructed via veneto for ''la dolce vita,'' his chronicle of the period when the paparazzi were born. that set no longer exists, and the street itself lost its glamour half a century ago. but by then, fellini's fictional version of it had taken its place in a stack of visual images that is as densely layered as the buried physical strata of rome itself. i'm here to inspect the latest addition to the stack.  pictures of rome have been piling up since the 18th century, when artists like piranesi and pannini embraced the city as a favorite subject, turning out canvases for northern travelers hungry for souvenirs of their grand tours. an archaeologist digging beneath the streets of this metaphysical rome would unearth wonders. in reverse order of discovery, they would include: the neo-classical history paintings of david, architectural fantasies by joseph gandy, romantic tableaux by gérôme and the high-victorian capers of sir lawrence alma-tadema. the top layer is the cinema stratum. embedded within it are epics by cecil b. de mille, steve reeves's muscle movies, fellini's ''satyricon,'' even the blockbuster ''gladiator.''  these works of the imagination reveal more about the epochs that produced them than they do about the vanished civilization they depict. fellini's version of the ''satyricon'' portrayed the director's fascination with the hedonistic youth culture of the late 1960s. stanley kubrick's ''spartacus'' portrayed the american struggles for civil rights. alma-tadema's paintings could pass as production designs for a gilbert and sullivan operetta set on the palatine hill. not least, elizabeth taylor's performance as cleopatra earned a permanent place in history as a poignant record of the polychrome eye shadow that weighed down the lids of women in the early 1960s.  so what do the designs for hbo's ''rome'' reveal about us? that we now find the accumulated modern perceptions of rome vastly more illuminating than the study of rome itself.  the cable network has trumpeted the production's period authenticity. jonathan stamp, an archaeologist, served as historical consultant for both seasons. yet as i watched a few episodes from the first year, my eye was struck by what seemed like unmistakable references to artworks of far more recent vintage. it turned out i was not imagining things. conversations with stamp, the costume designer april ferry and the set dresser cristina onori revealed that the designers of ''rome'' were not at all shy about confirming the historical license they'd granted themselves.  the design for the forum, stamp acknowledged, has been somewhat fudged. the curia, where the roman senate met, occupies the correct location, but its circular shape is historically dubious. and while the buildings could be marble or stuccoed brick, rome in republican days was notoriously filthy, and its ceremonial buildings were brightly painted. with all that dirt and color, it's possible that even the romans had no idea what their city was made of -- apart from iron will.  in interior scenes, the images are accurate but the locations are a stretch. villas in ''rome'' are handsomely decorated with paintings that many viewers will recognize as artifacts unearthed from the volcanic rubble of pompeii. never mind: this rome has been excavated from the labyrinth of modern subconsciousness. it is the capital not of an empire in the making but of a state of mind fused from feelings freely associated with power, sensual indulgence, paranoia and decline.  some of the art-historical references are more easily discerned in sketches for the sets than in the sets themselves. lines of laundry suspended over narrow streets, for example, echo piranesi's engravings of imaginary prisons. no doubt the romans did dry their linens in this manner; they do so today. but it was piranesi who indelibly imprinted the city with the claustrophobic atmosphere of incarceration.  the artist whose name pops up most frequently is alma-tadema, the great victorian painter of ancient mediterranean scenes. he has always appealed to americans, perhaps because he worked at a time when the imperial idea was passing from great britain to the united states. alma-tadema sought to depict affinities between the ancients and the british of his time. as the united states began to flex its global muscles in the late 1800s, americans glimpsed affinities between themselves and the british.  the series' designers have also turned for inspiration to sources outside western art. fabrics from india and baskets and other decorative objects from africa turn up on the set, items that reflect the persistence of ancient craft traditions in today's world. rome was a cosmopolitan city, but the designers' emphasis on these influences reflects a deepening awareness of cultural diffusion in our own time. this is a rome of multiple perspectives, not a uniform vision organized from the single, elevated vantage point of an almighty caesar's eagle eye.  when i take a final loop around the back lot, it strikes me that this splintering reflects a state of imperial fatigue. rome seems to be crumbling under the weight of all the fantasies that artists have projected on it. perhaps it's just as well for hbo to end the series at this point. the empire has barely begun, and the poor city already looks worn out. in years to come, rome will acquire lots of marble, but the sense of exhaustion will become ever more burdensome as more and more energy is required to hold the empire together. then comes the inevitable splitting of the whole. since that time, rome's most captivating fact has been its fall.  on the set, a corner of the forum has been turned into the entrance to cleopatra's palace in alexandria. there are sand dunes, palm trees, sphinxes, a camel. this egyptian intrusion into the heart of rome is inadvertently apt: cleopatra was the portal through which the roman imagination entered into an imperial frame of mind. hers was an eastern society whose rulers were deities and insisted upon divine surroundings. so why should a caesar settle for being a consul? why not a dictator? an emperor? a god? and what roman god would consent to dwell in a lowly downtown of brick after floating down the nile and beholding the colossal monuments rising along its banks? thus the augustan age was born.  big deal, i say. since we do live in an age of multiple perspectives, let me commend the outlook from alexandria as a topic for future cinematic spectacles. rome got bigness from egypt. but what about all the other good stuff the romans left behind? the books? the library? the pioneers in medicine, mathematics and philosophy who made alexandria the vibrant cultural center of the hellenistic age?  so lets say, arrivederci, roma. goodbye, goodbye, 'rome. we must say ta-ta to empires now and introduce ourselves to civilizations.  