giuliani leak: attention turns to florida   mischief in presidential politics in florida?  perhaps so, some circumstantial evidence suggests.  the mystery thus far: advisers to rudolph w. giuliani say that someone stole an aide's luggage during a political trip last fall, found a 140-page strategy notebook inside and photocopied it, then returned the luggage in some manner and gave the goods to a giuliani opponent.  the contents of the notebook ended up splashed across the daily news in new york on tuesday. not to be outdone, the new york post reported yesterday that political operatives believed that the theft happened on a campaign trip through florida.  while it does not prove anything per se, a spokeswoman for the governor of florida, charlie crist, a republican, confirmed yesterday that luggage from the giuliani entourage was indeed missing during a campaign trip last fall.  ''they were traveling with us, and we did find a piece of luggage, and we just worked as quickly as possible to get it back to the owner,'' said erin isaac, the spokeswoman.  ms. isaac said she had no information about allegations by mr. giuliani's office that someone, somewhere, stole and photocopied the notebook; she added that the governor's office was not conducting an inquiry into those allegations.  she said that the piece of luggage was left on a crist plane ''during the chaos of the campaign,'' and that nothing fishy happened with the bag when it was in their custody.  ''no copies were made. the bag was found and held until we were able to return it to the owner,'' ms. isaac said.  she said that mr. crist's campaign switched planes all the time last fall, and that she did not have specifics about the plane, luggage or trip involving the giuliani contingent.  sunny mindel, a spokeswoman for mr. giuliani, the former mayor of new york, issued a statement yesterday that underscored one certainty in this mystery: mr. giuliani, as a possible republican candidate for president, cannot afford to alienate the republican who is set to lead florida through the 2008 balloting.  ''we have no question that whatever happened had nothing to do with governor crist or his staff,'' said the statement from anthony carbonetti, a senior political adviser to mr. giuliani. ''the mayor has the highest regard for governor crist.''  