north, south, west and east of eden   middle east scholarship is almost as politically charged as the region itself. with critics denouncing middle east studies as anti-israel, universities have expanded jewish studies. but the disciplines extend well beyond the conflict, covering language, literature, sociology, religion -- and academic interest continues to grow. below are questions written by specialists, based on material from their coursework.  professors explain the answers, page 36.  elliott colla  associate professor of comparative literature, brown university  1. for 300 years, translations of ''alf layla wa-layla'' (''one thousand and one nights,'' a k a ''the arabian nights'') have enthralled western readers. which of these characters first appeared in the original arabic text?  a. aladdin  b. ali baba  c. scheherazade  d. all of the above  2. in which two countries is the south american drink maté avidly consumed?  a. morocco and algeria  b. egypt and sudan  c. syria and lebanon  d. saudi arabia and yemen  3. which group contains only words derived from arabic?  a. albumen, alcohol, alkaline  b. gauze, silk, muslin  c. olive, sherbet, artichoke  d. magazine, tariff, average  4. which country first gave women the right to vote?  a. kazakhstan  b. turkey  c. france  d. iran  5. for most of the ottoman empire's history (1299 to 1922), a majority of its subjects belonged to which of these groups?  a. christians  b. sunnis  c. jews  d. shiites  6. roughly what percentage of baghdad was jewish in 1950?  a. 0 percent  b. 5 percent  c. 15 percent  d. 25 percent  colonizing libya  recent italian and libyan scholarship has focused on the history and legacy of italy's colonization of libya, from 1911 to 1943. match the descriptions from this body of research with the correct numbers.  john voll  professor of islamic history and associate director, prince alwaleed bin talal center for muslim-christian understanding,  georgetown university  1. the great pyramid of egypt was built as a:  a. monument celebrat-ing the muslim conquest of egypt.  b. shrine for the egyptian president, anwar sadat, killed in 1981.  c. tomb for a ruler in ancient egypt.  d. memorial to the builder of the suez canal.  2. the population of which of the following middle eastern countries does not have an arab majority?  a. iraq  b. iran  c. syria  d. yemen+  3. which muslim country has not had a female prime minister?  a. pakistan  b. turkey  c. bangladesh  d. egypt  4. which of the following countries was not a monarchy when it became independent in the 20th century?  a. egypt  b. iraq  c. libya  d. syria  samuel heilmanprofessor of sociology, queens college; harold proshansky professor of jewish studies, graduate center, city university of new york  true or false?  1. orthodox jews of israel are traditionally zionists, or nationalists.  2. both religious zionists and islamists perceived israel's victory in the six-day war, and its near defeat and subsequent victory in the yom kippur war, as messages from god.  3. there are parallel movements among jews and muslims that demand modest dress.  russell a. stone  director, center for israel studies, and chairman, department of sociology, american university  1. who was not a prime minister of israel?  a. golda meir  b. david ben-gurion  c. chaim weizmann  d. menachem begin  2. all of the following are jewish ''pilgrimage festivals'' mentioned in the judaic old testament except:  a. shavuot (harvest festival)  b. sukkot (feast of tabernacles)  c. hanukkah (festival of lights)  d. pesach (passover)  3. which language does not appear on israeli stamps and currency?  a. arabic  b. french  c. english  d. hebrew  4. the old city of jerusalem has sites holy to all these major world religions except:  a. buddhism  b. christianity  c. islam  d. judaism  5. united nations resolution no. 181 (the partition plan for palestine), of nov. 29, 1947, specified the creation of:  a. a jewish state but no arab state in palestine.  b. an arab state but no  jewish state in palestine.  c. a jewish state and an arab state, with jerusalem divided between them.  d. an arab state and a jewish state, with special international status for jerusalem.  number of ...  1. italian settlers during colonial rule.  2. libyans incarcerated in concentration camps from 1929 to 1933.  3. libyans who survived the concentration camps.  4. libyan deaths caused by war, famine and disease during the colonization.  5. libyans with college degrees in 1950.  a. 500,000  b. 100,000  c. 40,000  d. 35,000  e. 10 to 14  pop quiz: middle east studies  