pomp and promises as rell begins full term   casting her first full term as governor as a chance to guide the state through a ''crossroads of needed economic, social, cultural and educational change,'' m. jodi rell was sworn in as connecticut's 87th governor on wednesday, promising to ''lead'' and ''inspire.''  in her eight-minute speech, mrs. rell, a republican who was elected in a landslide victory last fall, promised to work with democrats who control the state legislature to address a litany of issues including education reform, soaring property taxes and energy prices, and costly health care.  but while she offered an optimistic assessment of the future, mrs. rell did not say how she planned to address those problems.  ''as your governor, i will forcefully lend my voice, freely share my vision, and help to shape a connecticut that is yet to be,'' said mrs. rell, 60. ''i will guard the public's trust and continue to do honor to public service.''  mrs. rell assumed the governor's office two and half years ago after john g. rowland resigned amid a federal corruption investigation and an impeachment inquiry. at the time, mrs. rell took her oath in a somber ceremony in which she promised to restore trust.  the governor's message was much the same on wednesday, although with much more pomp. before taking the oath of office in the atrium of the legislative office building, mrs. rell marched in a parade with her husband, lou, their son, michael, and their daughter, meredith. they moved through the streets surrounding the capitol as dozens of state workers and supporters cheered her on.  ''you'll do anything to get out of work,'' mrs. rell said.  the parade, with a 19-gun salute and marching bands, and a black-tie ball wednesday evening, were the first elaborate inauguration events held here in nearly a decade. but ms. rell broke from tradition by not addressing state lawmakers in a joint session on their first day of the legislative calendar.  her aides indicated that she would present legislators with more concrete plans when she introduced her budget next month. the democrats hold a veto-proof majority in both legislative chambers and have indicated that they will push for instituting universal health care and reducing energy costs, which are among the highest in the nation.  while ms. rell said that the state would have to address such problems, she hinted that she would probably support small steps rather than dramatic proposals.  ''there is a great yearning in our state -- a yearning for change, for improvement and also for greater equality,'' she said. ''and there is also a yearning for stability, for preserving the history, the tradition and the uniqueness of connecticut-- a yearning, a conflict between change and constancy.''  in a day marked largely by ceremony rather than debates over policy, james a. amann, the house speaker, said that ms. rell had delivered a message most residents were eager to hear.  ''i actually liked the speech,'' said mr. amann, a democrat. ''she tried to tell people that the sun is rising on connecticut, not setting. people want to hear that.''  