the sky wasn't falling, just a tiny chunk of it   whatever it was, the object that fell from the sky was not part of an airplane. that was all anyone knew for sure.  it was dense with a rough metallic surface. the oblong object was only about two inches long -- fitting into the palm of a hand -- but weighed almost a pound. and it fell through the roof of a two-story house here tuesday afternoon, shattering the tile floor of the second-floor bathroom and embedding itself in a wall.  ''no one was injured,'' said lt. robert brightman of the freehold township police department at a press conference wednesday while discussing the possibly extraterrestrial event. his investigators had put the object, whatever it was, in a plastic cylinder, where it sat on a bed of aqua blue styrofoam inside the cylinder.  flanked by a detective and a representative from the local emergency management office, lieutenant brightman said that after the object entered the home in a housing development here (passing through shingles and sheathing and insulation), a test with a geiger counter indicated that at least it was not radioactive.  ''would you call that kidney-shaped?'' a reporter asked. the officer said he did not know.  specialists in the field were testing the small, dense object, the lieutenant said, although he declined to say who the specialists were. all he would say was that the specialists were expert in ''investigating unusual objects of this type.'' then the lieutenant threw out a tantalizing word: ''quadrantids'' -- meteor showers that peak in january when northern skies are cold and cloudy.  ''actually, you can see them around jan. 1 to the 6th,'' said gareth williams, an astronomer at the smithsonian astrophysical observatory, based in cambridge, mass. ''in a good year, there are 100 meteors an hour.''  it seemed like a solid clue, at least until mr. williams added, ''i am unaware of any case where a meteorite is proven to have fallen as a result of a meteor shower.''  many meteorites fall to earth every day, mr. williams said, most of them into the sea or the vast unpopulated parts of the earth. once or twice a year, they hit a house or a car, he added.  lieutenant brightman did not identify the family whose house was struck by the object, except to say that it was in the colt's pride development.  he said that a woman who lives there with her husband and son said that they heard a noise on tuesday afternoon, and that her son found the object in the bathroom later that night. but they waited until wednesday morning to notify the police.  until the tests are completed, perhaps in a few days, the officer said, the object would remain in the custody of an officer.  