paid notice: deaths   friedman, rodney michael   friedman--rodney michael, 59, died peacefully on january 1, 2007, at his home in redding, connecticut. he is survived by charlotte milholland and their son, rafer friedman, 6; his daughters jennesa calvo-friedman, 20, and alessandra calvo-friedman, 24; brother, kenneth weinberg; and mother, doris pepper. rodney was an extraordinary man of immense courage, loyalty, and compassion. founder of the university of california at berkeley wellness letter and johns hopkins health after 50 newsletter, rodney was an editor and publisher who believed in the power of knowledge to empower, particularly in the realm of consumer health. his intelligence, clarity of thought, sense of humor, strength of spirit and his love will be missed by his friends and family forever. in lieu of flowers, the family requests that donations be made in rodney's memory to the rodney m. friedman memorial scholarship fund at uc berkeley school of public health or the rodney m. friedman memorial fund at johns hopkins medicine. a memorial service will be held on sunday, january 21, at 3:00 pm at the unitarian church, 10 lyons plains road, westport, connecticut.  $(6$)friedman--rodney m. we mourn with great sadness the passing of our courageous brilliant leader, rodney friedman. he was an inspiration for all of us fortunate to have worked with him for so many years. his passion for excellence in the dissemination of health care information to people worldwide was reflected in his role in the creation and founding of the university of california, berkeley wellness letter and johns hopkins health after 50 newsletter, for which he was the publisher and editorial director. we shall miss his eternal optimism, his love of life, and his grace of living life to the fullest. our sincerest condolences to his dear charlotte, rafter, alessandra and jennesa. we are proud to have been a part of his life and his vision. the staff of university health publishing/new york and connecticut  