room to improve   q. my kitchen cabinets are scarred and scuffed. should i repair or replace them?  a. it's no small decision, given that kitchens are the most expensive rooms to renovate, and cabinetry is almost always the costliest item in the room.  not surprisingly, a cabinet's longevity depends on its composition. those made of plywood or high-quality particleboard covered in wood veneer typically last 30 to 40 years, according to steve kaufer, president of maple craft usa, a cabinet supplier based in albion, pa. (800-756-8077 or maplecraftusa.com).  solid wood cabinets tend to last longer and age more gracefully. ''they actually look better with a few nicks,'' said christopher march, a partner in lalire march architects, a manhattan-based firm with a long history of apartment renovations.  whatever the material, painted cabinets generally age poorly. it doesn't take long for scratches and peeling to reveal the wood or primer beneath. and if the cabinets have recessed panels, water and dirt can collect on the ledges around the panels, causing paint to disintegrate.  bill vandeventer, a partner in vandeventer + carlander architects, based in seattle, said he discourages clients with children from choosing painted wood cabinets. ''they don't do well if they aren't pampered by their owner,'' he said. ''they can get beat up pretty fast.''  of course, you don't have to wait for your cabinets to reach that point before you replace them. ''people often simply get tired of their cabinets, though they might blame it on nicks or stains,'' mr. march said. ''the same way you might find a way to justify buying a new coat every winter, you might justify buying new cabinets every 5 or 10 years.''  instead of spending, say, $30,000 to replace your cabinets, you could consider having them refaced. this process involves replacing the cabinet doors and drawer fronts, and covering cabinet frames with matching veneer. it also allows for smaller improvements, like new hardware and rollout shelves.  refacing costs about half as much as replacing the cabinets, according to marshall jacobowitz, sales manager for nu-facers kitchens by carra designs, a manhattan-based company that specializes in the technique (212-426-4160 or nufacers.com).  another advantage: refacing takes no more than three or four days, and you don't lose the use of your kitchen during that period, as you do with a conventional renovation.  on the other hand, refacing makes sense only if the cabinets are structurally sound, and if the proportions and position of your cabinets suit the space. are all the plates and pans inside within easy reach? do the cabinets stand in efficient relationship to the refrigerator, stove and sink? if not, then you may want to start over.  ''replacing cabinets is the most expensive way to go,'' said mr. vandeventer, who designed the new kitchen above, ''but it gives you the opportunity to move appliances, reconfigure cabinets and add features that weren't there before.''  if you're disposing of your old cabinets, you might consider giving them to build it green! nyc, a nonprofit group based in astoria, queens. the group will pick the cabinets up and resell them, along with other used building goods, to reduce waste and help fund the group's local environmental programs. donations are tax-deductible. (information: 718-777-0132 or bignyc.org.)  replace or reface -- either way the investment will at least pay for itself. according to a study released last month by the national association of realtors, a $20,400 kitchen renovation in the new york area increases a home's value by $20,885, or 102.4 percent of the cost.  