when a woman rattles a man's world of fraud   ''comedy of power'' is the name of claude chabrol's latest film to be released in the united states, but the phrase could describe much of this director's work. though his films tend to be witty and ironical rather than laugh-out-loud funny, they often concern themselves with the behavior and misbehavior -- both intimate and public -- of the french ruling classes.  criminality plays a large role in mr. chabrol's view of the world, but rather than moralize, he treats his characters with a wry mixture of sympathy and cynicism. his touch is characteristically light, as if in defiance of the gravity of the stories he has occasion to tell, and his sensibility is aphoristically summed up by one of the characters in ''comedy of power,'' who suggests that ''nothing is serious, and everything is tragic.''  this highly arguable observation gains a great deal by being said in french, with a smile, by a good-looking man (the actor is mr. chabrol's 43-year-old son, thomas) who has abandoned the possibility of an important administrative career to become a part-time maker of crossword puzzles.  ''comedy of power'' takes its inspiration from the elf aquitaine scandal of the 1990s, which exposed extensive corruption in france's giant gas company, then state owned. the judge who led the elf investigation, eva joly, is clearly the model for jeanne charmant killman. played by isabelle huppert, who has become something of a fixture in mr. chabrol's cinematic universe, jeanne is both admirable in her dedication and perhaps a little scary in her zeal.  her first target is michel humeau (françois berléand), the director of a large company who never quite recovers from the shock and humiliation of being handcuffed, locked in a cell and otherwise treated like an ordinary criminal. through his ordeal he repeats the plaintive rhetorical question that arises when influence turns into impotence: ''don't you know who i am?''  jeanne knows perfectly well, and in due course this unfortunate bigwig's cronies, connections and superiors arrive, one by one, in her office. like him, they try to flirt, flatter, threaten and condescend their way out of trouble. mr. chabrol's discreet, prying camera takes note of the red filaments threaded into the lapels of their flashy suits -- symbols of their membership in the legion of honor. jeanne has only a cherished pair of red gloves, a token of retail feminine vanity rather than state-sanctioned masculine self-importance.  these chévaliers of the republic act like made guys in a hollywood mafia picture, conspiring over brandy and cigars and resorting to thuggishness when their oily attempts at charm fall short. the nature of their crimes is of less interest to mr. chabrol than the forms and protocols that guide their exercise of power, and their attempts to defend their imperiled privileges.  there is some talk of kickbacks and financial schemes, but procedural boilerplate is not really the point. jeanne is sure that the targets of her investigation are guilty, and we are happy to accept her certainty as a warrant: how could they not be?  but public malfeasance is less the subject of the movie than its premise. it is not really a courtroom drama, or the stirring tale of a crusader against wrong, so much as it is the psychological portrait of an ambitious professional woman in a society still very much dominated by male prerogatives. jeanne's antagonists, used to pampering mistresses and deceiving wives, try to derail her with displays of chivalry and bald-faced lies as well as threats of violence, which they are too delicate to convey themselves.  the comedy arises in the confrontations between these fat cats and their sparrowlike tormentor, who is both punctilious with regard to legal procedure and capricious in the exercise of authority. ''no smoking in my office,'' she snaps, only to light up herself a few scenes later. at one point the bad guys arrange to have another female judge (maryline canto) assigned to the case, hoping for a bureaucratic catfight and forgetting the old feminist chestnut that sisterhood is powerful.  mr. chabrol's observations of modern french sexual politics extend beyond jeanne's office into her home. her husband (robin renucci), who is a doctor (and also the son of a wealthy and powerful family), complains that his colleagues call him ''monsieur jeanne charmant killman,'' and his wife's highly public, possibly dangerous job soon places their marriage under a heavy strain, which pumps a bit of melodrama into the film's otherwise dry air.  as ever, mr. chabrol's style is delicate and precise. ''comedy of power'' is not his deepest or most ambitious film, and its stance of knowing resignation in the face of corruption can feel a little glib. but ms. huppert's ferocity compensates for the director's detachment; no french actress is as riveting to watch once the gloves come off.  comedy of power  opens today in manhattan.  directed by claude chabrol; written (in french, with english subtitles) by odile barski and mr. chabrol; director of photography, eduardo serra; edited by monique fardoulis; music by matthieu chabrol; production designer, françoise benoit-fresco; produced by patrick godeau; released by koch lorber films. at the ifc center, 323 avenue of the americas at third street, greenwich village. running time: 110 minutes. this film is not rated.  with: isabelle huppert (jeanne), françois berléand (humeau), patrick bruel (sibaud), robin renucci (philippe), maryline canto (erika) and thomas chabrol (félix).  film review  