paid notice: deaths   schmertz, herman   schmertz--herman of roslyn, ny and tucson, az. died january 1, 2007 at age 71 after a long and remarkably courageous battle with prostate cancer. survived by his beloved wife of 48 years, judi, devoted and exceptionally proud children gail and bruce kerner and rob and debby schmertz and loving and cherished grandchildren daniel, scott, and ally schmertz and kate and perry kerner. caring brother of hope schmertz, the late david schmertz, and jerry grossman and the late barbara grossman. adoring uncle of susan and paul schmitt, nancy and jeff wollman, michael and anjanette grossman, gary and sherri schmertz, joan and jason flores and their children. loyal friend to countless people and ''extended family'' whose lives he touched in so many special ways by his kind heart, gentle and humble nature, compassionate spirit, unique sense of humor and brilliance. graduated with honors in 1957 from cornell university and in 1960 from new york university school of law, following which he had a distinguished legal career. retired as a partner and appellate counsel of the n.y.c. law firm of gair, gair, conason, steigman, and mackauf. past president of b'nai brith north hills lodge and longstanding member of shelter rock jewish center. past chairman of the n.y.s. trail lawyers association ''decisions'' lecture series. funeral services to be held on january 4th at 1:00pm at ''sinai chapels'' 162-05 horace harding expressway, fresh meadows, followed immediately by interment at union field cemetery, 8211 cypress avenue, ridgewood, ny. in lieu of flowers, the family requests that donations be made in herman's memory to genitourinary oncology research fund, c/o dr. daniel petrylak, herbert irving cancer center, room 919, 161 fort washington avenue, ny, ny 10032 or to your designated charity. $(6$)schmertz--herman. with deep sadness, we mourn the passing of our beloved friend, colleague, and mentor, herman schmertz. we send our heartfelt condolences to those he loved so deeply: his wife judi, his daughter gail and son-in-law bruce, his son robert and daughter-in-law debbie, and his five grandchildren. as our partner in charge of appeals for more than three decades, he had the primary responsibility for preparing as well as arguing the firm's appeals and for writing legal memoranda in all of our areas of practice. he was our in-house source of legal knowledge, a true scholar who loved the intricacies of the law, always available to share his advice and wisdom. his unique talent for researching, knowing, remembering, and analyzing the law earned him the respectful and affectionate title of ''the law man.'' as our friend, he was gentle, kind, humorous, and supportive. we will remember herman always, and we will miss him greatly. gair, gair, conason, steigman & mackauf $(6$)schmertz--herman. beloved brother - in - law, uncle, and dear friend to all of us. we will miss your good humor, sincerity, kindness, caring way and your dedication and devotion to family and friends. you will always be loved and missed by all whose lives you've touched. jerry grossman susan and paul schmitt nancy and jeff wollman michael and anjanette grossman grandnieces and grandnephews kaidy, erika, david, ross.  