city backs union wages in tax-break buildings   the bloomberg administration said this week that it planned to require many developers who construct apartment buildings under a popular tax break to pay the superintendents and janitors the prevailing wage, essentially a union-level wage of $18 an hour and health benefits.  during negotiations to overhaul the tax breaks, city council speaker christine c. quinn urged the administration to adopt the wage policy. the tax benefits are intended to induce developers to build tens of thousands of apartments for low- and moderate-income families.  the council voted last month to revise the tax breaks, expanding the number of places in the city where developers must provide at least one-fifth of the apartments for people who are not high-income earners.  the city's main union of janitors, doormen and superintendents, local 32bj of the service employees international union, had pressed the council and the mayor to adopt a prevailing-wage requirement.  mike fishman, local 32bj's president, praised the revised tax break and the wage requirement, saying the moves would create affordable housing and assure a living wage for apartment building workers.  shaun donovan, the city's commissioner of housing preservation and development, sent speaker quinn a letter on tuesday saying the bloomberg administration would require that the prevailing wage be paid to building-service workers in larger apartment buildings constructed under the tax-break program, known as 421-a.  ''we're primarily in the business of creating affordable housing, and we want to make sure the economics will work in terms of affordable housing,'' said neill coleman, a housing preservation and development department spokesman.  city officials predict that over the next decade 20,000 housing units will be built with the revised incentive.  officials of local 32bj, which has more than 70,000 members, estimate that the buildings developed under the break in the next decade will employ 2,000 service workers.  unions often push for wage provisions not just to raise wages for workers in the new buildings but also to make sure that union-level pay is not undercut. and once owners have to pay the prevailing wage they are often less likely to try to stop workers from joining the union.  mr. donovan said developers who used the tax breaks would have to pay prevailing wages only in buildings with at least 75 units in neighborhoods in manhattan, brooklyn and queens where real estate development is strong and in buildings with at least 150 units in the rest of the city. the local estimates that more than three-quarters of new buildings with full-time staffs will be covered by the wage provision.  steven spinola, the president of the real estate board of new york, said the prevailing-wage policy was quite likely to push up pay for building-service workers in the other four boroughs.  ''what it comes down to, you build a condo project and you sell those condos to purchasers, and the city has made a decision for those purchasers that they're going to have to pay a prevailing wage,'' mr. spinola said. ''i think the government should let owners of their condos decide how much they want to pay.''  paul sonn, a lawyer with the brennan center for justice at new york university school of law, praised the bloomberg administration's decision, saying, ''it's important to use economic development programs to promote living-wage jobs.''  