behind the berlin wall, listening to life   for years, at times almost obsessively, german cinema has been examining this country's nazi past and its troubled conscience. yet the 45 years that east germany spent under communist rule has remained largely unexplored.  the most popular post-cold-war movie about east germany, ''good bye lenin!,'' was a 2003 comedy that provoked a bizarre wave of nostalgia for life before the berlin wall was breached in november 1989. surely there was more to be said. surely those who suffered for decades under the stalinist dictatorship had stories worthy of the screen.  now this historical gap has been bridged by a young german director, florian henckel von donnersmarck, who has spent his whole life in the west, including long stretches in the united states and britain, and who was only 16 when east germany imploded. and for his first feature film he has plucked the drama from his imagination, not from real life.  still, the unexpected success of his $2 million film, ''the lives of others,'' starring stalwarts of german cinema like ulrich mühe, sebastian koch and ulrich tukur, suggests that the ghosts of communism -- and, above all, of the regime's secret police, the stasi -- are far from laid to rest.  since opening here in march, it has been seen by 1.6 million people, a huge audience for a german movie. it has also won seven lolas, the german equivalent of the oscar; european film awards for best movie, actor and screenplay; and a golden globe nomination; and it has been selected as germany's entry for a foreign-language oscar. it is set to open in new york and los angeles on feb. 9.  ''it's not a stasi film,'' mr. henckel von donnersmarck said, stretching his 6-foot-8-inch frame under the dining table of his roomy apartment here. ''that's just the setting.''  well, yes, up to a point. it is a movie about ideology, collaboration, opportunism, fear and courage, elements common to many a confrontation between human nature and authoritarian power. yet it has set off intense debate and soul-searching here because it spotlights a police state that, to this day, has not had to answer for its sins.  ''i think it still haunts people because we did not have a healthy purge as we had in 1945,'' mr. henckel von donnersmarck said. ''things were laundered after 1945 because the allies forced us to do it. that did not happen after 1989. i don't know the exact number, but i think only about six people were sentenced for crimes committed by the stasi, out of the 300,000 people who worked there.''  his film, then, while both a love story and a psychological thriller, is also undeniably political. set in east berlin in 1984, it revolves around the city's cultural elite, notably the playwright georg dreyman (mr. koch), his actress girlfriend christa-maria sieland (martina gedeck) and the blacklisted stage director albert jerska (volkmar kleinert).  to the regime, artists who were not informers were automatically suspect. so it was hardly unusual for the security minister, bruno hempf (thomas thieme), to order the lovers' apartment to be bugged. the man assigned to do so, gerd wiesler (mr. mühe), is an experienced interrogator. he also stands out among his cynical and corrupt stasi colleagues: he is a true believer.  from an attic packed with recording instruments, mr. wiesler monitors the lives of mr. dreyman, ms. sieland and their guests, even noting with teutonic efficiency when the only sound emanating from the apartment is lovemaking. but when one evening he hears mr. dreyman playing the piano (a piece composed for the film by gabriel yared), he is suddenly moved, even disturbed. and he begins to examine his own life.  and as it happens, it was also music, not the stasi, that inspired the 33-year-old director.  born in cologne, mr. henckel von donnersmarck had a peripatetic upbringing because of his father's job with lufthansa: when he was 2, the family moved to new york for six years; berlin, frankfurt and brussels followed. in 1991, at 18, mr. henckel von donnersmarck went to st. petersburg to learn russian. two years later he began studying politics, philosophy and economics at oxford university.  ''for a long time i wanted to be a novelist,'' he said, ''but then i felt that films were more the art of our time. the problem was that i didn't know anyone who worked in movies. i didn't even know anyone who knew anyone who worked in movies. i was very remote from that world.''  at oxford, however, where in 1993-94 the director richard attenborough held a rotating arts professorship created by the british theater producer cameron mackintosh, mr. henckel von donnersmarck won the chance of working with mr. attenborough on ''in love and war.'' and it was mr. attenborough who urged him to attend film school.  ''my god, i thought, i have just spent five years at university,'' he recalled. ''i cannot go to school for another four years. but i took his advice and went to film school in munich. and i made a few short films, which did well enough for me to think i might find the money to make a feature film.''  by then he also had an idea, born of a film school lecturer's demand that students come up with 14 original movie treatments in eight weeks.  ''i was lying on the floor feeling miserable and thinking, 'oh, i've picked the wrong profession,' '' he said. ''then i started listening to music and remembered maxim gorky, who quoted lenin as saying that beethoven's 'appassionata' was his favorite piece of music. but lenin said, 'i don't want to listen to it because it makes me want to stroke people's heads, and i have to smash those heads to bring the revolution to them.' ''  at that moment ''the lives of others'' was born.  ''i suddenly had this image in my mind of a person sitting in a depressing room with earphones on his head and listening into what he supposes is the enemy of the state and the enemy of his ideas, and what he is really hearing is beautiful music that touches him,'' mr. henckel von donnersmarck said. ''i sat down and in a couple of hours had written the treatment.''  after he left munich for berlin in 2001, though, much work lay ahead, including research in stasi archives, visits to stasi detention centers and interviews with east german artists and former stasi members. with one stasi veteran he raised the question of so-called ''odor samples'' that allowed dogs to establish if suspects attended meetings of dissidents. for this, detainees were required to wipe a cloth between their legs.  ''this elderly man, maybe 65, surrounded by pictures of his grandchildren, said: 'oh, yes, it really worked, except once when a woman we were interrogating had her period, and there was just one drop of blood on the cloth, and the dogs were completely confused,' '' mr. henckel von donnersmarck recounted. ''and the guy began laughing. suddenly you realized how close this seemingly respectable gentleman was to complete barbarism.''  no less disturbing, mr. henckel von donnersmarck concluded that few former stasi operatives have any regrets. and he said he believes they remain influential in blocking exposure of stasi crimes. he and mr. mühe were successfully sued for libel for a book containing his screenplay and mr. mühe's assertion that his former wife informed on him.  ''you could feel the kind of hatred poured on ulrich mühe for breaking this taboo,'' he said. ''it shows how tense germany still is about the facts.''  on the other hand, having struggled to find a german distributor for a film that was refused by the 2005 berlin film festival, mr. henckel von donnersmarck can feel vindicated both by its success and by the response of many intellectual figures of the former east germany, including the renowned poet-composer wolf biermann.  yet in the end mr. henckel von donnersmarck sees his movie as a tribute to the power of music.  ''it can bring feelings into your life whether you want it to or not,'' he said. ''there is no way you can defend yourself against it. you can't build a wall of principle or ideology against it. it will go through it like an x-ray. it just has that power.''  the oscars  