helping make the shift from combat to commerce   coming home from their respective tours of duty in iraq, john reid and alina gutierrez had never met but they had a lot in common. both were sergeants in the 42nd infantry division of the army and were deployed in iraq from autumn 2004 to autumn 2005. and both had a strong interest in running their own businesses when they got home.  ms. gutierrez is an owner of a glass doctor franchise, and next month, mr. reid will open his own glass doctor in a neighboring new jersey county. they are the beneficiaries of an innovative private-sector business plan aimed at encouraging and supporting military veterans.  the veterans transition franchise initiative, or vetfran, a program sponsored by the international franchise association, offers veterans a discount on financing prospective franchises as a way of thanking them for serving the country.  nearly 200 participating franchise companies provide qualified veterans ''the best deal'' in acquiring a new franchise, a deal not available to other franchise investors, according to dina dwyer-owens, president of the dwyer group, a franchise organization in waco, tex.  franchises have become an increasingly appealing route for many would-be entrepreneurs. according to a 2004 study by pricewaterhousecoopers, franchise businesses employ more than 18 million americans and generate more than $1.5 trillion, or nearly 10 percent of private-sector economic output. the study noted that there were more than 760,000 franchise businesses in the united states and franchising continues to be a fast-growing business opportunity.  vetfran was conceived by don dwyer sr., ms. dwyer-owens' father, after the persian gulf war. when mr. dwyer died suddenly in 1994, the vetfran program foundered. after 9/11 and the invasion of afghanistan, ms. dwyer-owens decided that the program ought to be revived and, in 2002, she turned it over to the franchise association.  vetfran is open to all veterans, not just those returning from afghanistan and iraq. since the program began, more than 600 veterans have received discounts in starting franchise businesses. among the participating franchise companies are dunkin' donuts, midas, the ups store, gold's gym and aamco transmissions.  ms. gutierrez, 26, said she received a 10 percent discount on her glass doctor franchise fee, which saved her several thousand dollars in much-needed capital for her outlet in mercer county. but as with mr. reid and other veterans who have participated in the vetfran program, the money was not as significant as the meaning of the gesture.  ''i was very excited when i heard about the program,'' ms. gutierrez said. ''when you come home from your deployment, you are not sure if everyone appreciated what you had done. i thought it was very cool that they recognized that we risked our lives in iraq and they appreciated our sacrifice.''  mr. reid, who views ms. gutierrez as a colleague, not a competitor, said that the vetfran discount was a big influence on his decision to pursue a glass doctor franchise. ''the less capital you have to lay out, the better,'' he said. ''you need as much start-up money as you can get.''  he was also impressed that glass doctor, one of eight franchise businesses owned and operated by the dwyer group, was willing to be flexible with his deal, offering him an additional four months before he has to start repayments.  because of their military training, returning veterans are highly regarded as prospective franchise operators by franchise companies. as with the military, successful franchises operate within a specific system and a set of guidelines, created by the franchiser.  ''someone coming back from the military is a great fit for a franchise business,'' said jim blasingame, a small-business consultant and host of the ''the small business advocate show'' on radio. ''they not only know what it's like to work hard but they know how to operate within a system. with a franchise, you can't think outside the box. you have to color inside the lines.''  the military is apparently good training for all types of entrepreneurs. according to william d. elmore, associate administrator for veterans business development at the small business administration, there are 25 million veterans in the united states and one in seven of them is successfully self-employed.  ''veterans have the highest rate of successful self-employment of any group of americans,'' mr. elmore said, noting the 14 percent success rate in self-employment. he attributes this success to the discipline and training every soldier acquires during their service. ''there is an enormous resource going into the training and deployment of soldiers and out of that comes a skill set, discipline and worldliness that most citizens don't have at a young age.''  mr. reid, 40, says that iraq gave him an opportunity to save $60,000 while he was deployed and he was intent on using that money to set up his own business. ''as a noncommissioned officer in charge of a logistics section, i was responsible for 45 people,'' he said. all 45 came back. ''so i thought, 'let's see how i do in business.' ''  his glass doctor franchise in somerset, n.j., which is set to open feb. 5, gives him exclusive rights to all of somerset county. ''they told me, 'we have a system. if you follow it, you'll be successful.' that sounded like the business for me,'' he said.  the vetfran program is allowing brett cooper to start a lawn doctor franchise in boonville, mo., while keeping his full-time job as a sales representative for graybar electric. as an 18-year member of the missouri army national guard, mr. cooper was called up for a tour of duty in afghanistan in 2004 and spent a year deployed in and around kabul.  ''i looked into a lawn doctor franchise six years ago, but i wasn't financially able to do it,'' mr. cooper said. ''while i was in afghanistan, i saved my salary. i'm a major so the pay was very good. and it gave me a cushion. i e-mailed lawn doctor from afghanistan and was made aware of the vetfran program.''  he received a 5 percent discount on his start-up costs for the franchises, which is significant given that lawn doctor franchises cost $90,000.  as with other veterans starting franchises, mr. cooper does not hesitate to let customers know he is a veteran. ''i've absolutely used my veteran status,'' he said. ''people are very grateful that you have served your country, especially in the current conflict. doing that kind of service for your country builds trust and respect.''  ms. dwyer-owens is pleased by the response to the vetfran program thus far. ''the veterans are so grateful that we are there to say thanks,'' she said. ''i'm proud of it. there's no government funding. it's all done by private businesses.''  mr. elmore praised the vetfran program as a strong private-sector initiative that opened doors for veterans seeking small-business opportunities. he also cautioned that veterans should seek expert advice available through s.b.a. business development centers before signing any agreements (www.sba.gov/vets).  jerry pyle, a retired marine sergeant in mineola, fla., is among those who appreciate the vetfran gesture. after a 22-year career in the marines ended in 1999, mr. pyle tried his hand in corporate retail and found himself ill suited to that atmosphere. he began his own business as a handyman and home remodeler and when he moved from south carolina to central florida, he heard about the dream maker bath and kitchen worldwide franchise, another dwyer group company.  ''it resonated with me that a corporation would actually take my service to the country into consideration,'' he said. ''it felt like a belated payback for 22 years of service.''  the vetfran program emphasizes that veterans not only make excellent franchisers but employees as well. mr. pyle said that he gravitated toward the qualities and values of veterans and all of his five full-time employees are either veterans or wives of veterans. ''their qualities of teamwork, ethics and enthusiasm make us a better company,'' he said.  small business  