bush is expected to shift u.s. ambassador in iraq to u.n.   president bush intends to name zalmay khalilzad, the afghan-born diplomat who has been ambassador to iraq for the past 21 months, to be the new envoy to the united nations, part of a diplomatic shakeup as mr. bush prepares to announce a new strategy for the war.  a senior administration official, who had been briefed on the decision but had to discuss it anonymously because the change had not been formally announced, confirmed thursday that the president had decided to nominate mr. khalilzad to the united nations post.  the official said mr. bush intended to name ryan c. crocker, the ambassador to pakistan, to replace mr. khalilzad in baghdad.  if confirmed by the senate, the appointments would put seasoned, respected diplomats into two of the state department's most challenging posts. mr. khalilzad would replace john r. bolton, who served temporarily as united nations ambassador but resigned late last year after concluding he could not win senate confirmation.  mr. bush's decision to transfer mr. khalilzad, among the most visible americans working in iraq, would effectively accomplish two goals for the administration. as a sunni muslim, mr. khalilzad has been perceived by some iraqi shiites as not sympathetic enough to their views; removing him from baghdad would help mr. bush make a fresh start there. and mr. khalilzad had told colleagues that he was ready to leave.  the change also would give the united states the strong voice it needs at the united nations, particularly after the storm surrounding mr. bolton.  the senior administration official said the white house believed that mr. khalilzad, as a muslim who had extensive experience overseas including a stint as ambassador to his native afghanistan, would bring an important understanding of the muslim world to his work at the united nations.  daniel p. serwer, the executive director of the bipartisan iraq study group, which recently issued a report recommending a new strategy for iraq, said a khalilzad nomination would send a message ''that we are taking the u.n. seriously and sending somebody who has real weight with this administration, and who has served in our toughest post.''  but leon e. panetta, a former chief of staff to president bill clinton who was one of five democrats on the study group, said he feared removing mr. khalilzad from baghdad would leave ''a vacuum'' there at a critical time.  ''the problem we've had in iraq is that the people who finally get to understand how that country works suddenly leave,'' mr. panetta said. ''he's probably a pretty good appointment for the u.n., but you do have to be nervous about who is going to speak for us in iraq.''  but some in the administration have suggested that perhaps mr. khalilzad has been too prominent a figure in iraq.  in a classified memorandum written nov. 8 after visiting prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki in baghdad, president bush's national security adviser, stephen j. hadley, said that the president might urge mr. khalilzad, who goes by the nickname zal, to take a lower profile as one way to buttress the maliki government.  under the heading ''what we can do to help maliki,'' mr. hadley ticked off a list of suggestions, among them: ''encourage zal to move into the background and let maliki take more credit for positive developments. (we want maliki to exert his authority -- and demonstrate to iraqis that he is a strong leader -- by taking action against extremists, not by pushing back on the united states and the coalition.)''  unlike the other changes to mr. bush's foreign policy team in the last 24 hours, which caught much of washington off guard, the moves involving mr. khalilzad and mr. crocker have been the subject of speculation here for weeks, since mr. bolton resigned on dec. 5.  by that time mr. khalilzad had already told colleagues that he was ready to for a change of assignment. abc news first reported the decision about mr. khalilzad on its web site on thursday afternoon.  educated in beirut and the united states (he holds a doctorate from the university of chicago), the blunt-spoken mr. khalilzad, 55, has been a prominent figure in american foreign policy circles since the reagan administration, when he advised the state department on the iran-iraq war and the soviet war in afghanistan.  he later joined the administration of the first president bush, where he earned a reputation as a hawk who called for the ouster of saddam hussein, advice that administration did not take. more recently, senior administration officials say, he was considered for the no. 2 state department job that john d. negroponte is expected to take.  mr. crocker, 57, has been a foreign service officer since 1971 and is among the state department's most respected voices in the middle east. he has been ambassador to pakistan since 2004, and has served as ambassador to syria, kuwait and lebanon.  