knicks take lead early and keep adding to it   eddy curry found perfection friday night, jamal crawford had a happy homecoming and the knicks transformed a once-miserable trip into a modest sign of hope for the coming months.  they closed their five-game trip through the west with a 111-93 rout of the seattle supersonics at keyarena, turning an 0-3 start into a 2-3 finish. beating portland and seattle will not catapult the knicks to the top of any power rankings, but it salvaged the trip and allowed them to keep hovering near the top of the atlantic division.  it is the way the knicks finished that carried the most promise. curry had 27 points in 30 minutes friday, converting all nine of his field-goal attempts and 9 of 12 free throws. crawford had 22 points in his hometown and stephon marbury scored 28 points.  by the knicks' modest standards, the trip was a success.  ''if you win three, it's a great trip. if you win two, it's a good trip,'' coach isiah thomas said before the game, adding, ''you definitely want to do better. you want to get close to .500 on the road.''  playing against an undersized and largely inexperienced front line, curry was at his dominating best. he had 15 points in the first quarter, scoring on reverse layups, dunks and at the foul line. his thunderous putback of a channing frye miss in the second quarter gave the knicks a 48-37 lead, and his putback late in the second quarter gave them a 63-49 edge.  seattle shrank from the challenge and the margin stayed in double digits the rest of the night, climbing as high as 24 points. the locals amused themselves in the final minutes by chanting ''we want jerome,'' a reference to the knicks backup jerome james, who played here before joining the knicks. the fans had booed him earlier in the evening.  last season, this was the site of one of crawford's most memorable performances -- 31 points, all in the second half of a 104-101 victory in his hometown. but thomas had no expectations of a sequel. in fact, he anticipated the opposite.  ''i never think guys will play well when they come home,'' thomas said. ''i always think that they'll go a little bit too far. i was no different. whenever i went back to chicago, sometimes i went a little bit too far. sometimes it worked, sometimes it didn't.''  crawford had 50 friends and family members in the stands, and thomas's worst fears materialized in the first half. crawford fired early and often and without much conscience, missing 7 of his first 10 attempts. but he made his next three shots, including a 3-pointer that gave the knicks a 61-46 lead.  they reached halftime with 68 points, the most they have scored in any half this season, and a 17-point lead.  seattle was already having a miserable season, having lost the star forward rashard lewis to a hand injury dec. 20. he is not expected back until late february. his absence leaves a heavy burden on ray allen, the sonics sharpshooter, and when he struggles, seattle cannot compete.  stephon marbury drew the initial assignment of guarding allen, who never found his groove. allen missed four of his first five shots and scored just 8 points in the first half.  watching the game on television, with conflicting emotions, was nate robinson, the knicks guard and seattle native. his 10-game suspension for fighting ended at the final buzzer friday, but any relief or joy was surely offset by the pain of missing the lone chance to play in his hometown.  but robinson will be back in uniform when the knicks play wednesday night at madison square garden. they will be as close to full strength as they have been all season, having survived the lengthy suspensions of robinson, jared jeffries and mardy collins and recent injuries to quentin richardson, steve francis and channing frye.  with friday's victory, the knicks improved to 6-4 since the denver brawl -- a far better winning rate than their 15-21 overall record.  ''when we get our whole team back, it's going to be trouble for people, period, in the n.b.a.,'' robinson said. ''seeing how they're playing and what they did in the triple-overtime game, it shows how much heart they have. and then with the energy that i'm going to bring back, hopefully that can put a spark in each guy.''  rebounds  coach isiah thomas will soon have a full roster and some tough decisions to make about the starting lineup and rotation. ''i look forward to having those decisions to make,'' thomas said. the once-crowded rotation was simplified by a series of injuries and suspensions, but thomas said, ''i'd rather have the weapons and the guns.''  thomas seemed confident that nate robinson had learned a great life lesson during his 10-game suspension. ''i think it's given him a lot of time to reflect on his behavior, his attitude. in a funny kind of way, i think this may turn out to be a good thing for him,'' he said. asked if robinson would be a changed person, thomas said: ''i think he'll try to be as best he can, but he's got a lot of energy that goes through that little body of his that makes him great. there are a lot of things that he can't help. there's a lot of things that that's just him. i keep emphasizing, when you're that small and you have that amount of energy flowing through your body, it's not like you can just sit down and be quiet.''  quentin richardson was held out of friday's game but was expected to play wednesday night against the philadelphia 76ers. richardson missed his 11th consecutive game, though he has recovered from back spasms. the knicks decided to give richardson four more days of rest, and a chance to practice.  pro basketball  