a sun tzu of oscar warfare resurfaces   it wasn't so many years ago that the suspense and psychodrama of the oscar campaign season could pretty much be boiled down to a few questions: what will harvey have in the hunt? what will harvey try next? is there anything harvey won't do? and, as his pile of statues invariably grew on oscar night: how does harvey do it?  the sun tzu of oscar warfare, harvey weinstein practically invented the modern awards campaign when he ran miramax with his brother bob and pioneered the use of awards hype as a movie's main marketing vehicle. some of his cannier moves were outlawed, like setting up political-style phone banks for his young aides to badger motion picture academy voters at home. others were simply copied by his rivals.  miramax's unparalleled 11-year string of best-picture nominations was broken in 2003 (when ''cold mountain'' was spurned by the academy). but mr. weinstein made up for it with two in 2004, ''the aviator'' and ''finding neverland.'' then he and his brother left miramax and its owner, the walt disney company, in 2005 to reinvent themselves as the very model of modern media moguls. the fledgling weinstein company scraped together four nominations last year, including felicity huffman for best actress in ''transamerica,'' but went home empty-handed on oscar night.  now, with 16 releases under his company's belt and for-your-consideration ads running in the hollywood trades for seven of his films, including ''breaking and entering'' and ''miss potter,'' the question might seem to be whether harvey weinstein can regain his magic touch this year. but in a recent interview about the oscar season, the question turned out to be something more fundamental: how much does he even care anymore?  ''you leave when you're ahead,'' mr. weinstein said by telephone, likening himself to a football great like jim brown or, this season, tiki barber, getting out of the game while still at the top. ''i created a streak that was -- i hope somebody tops it, and i'll be the first person to reward them, but it was not easy to get there. and it took a lot of time and concentration. i find myself interested in other things.''  for the last year he and his brother have been announcing deals almost as often as they have released films, arranging for theatrical, cable television, pay-per-view, video on demand and video-store distribution of their movies. they've invested in a myspace-style social networking site for the rich and famous called asmallworld.net, made a new publishing deal with hachette book group, bought the tiny arts channel ovation, set up a latin american film distribution fund and partnered with robert johnson, the founder of black entertainment television, to make movies under a new urban label, our stories films.  ''i'm building a business where movies are only a part of it,'' mr. weinstein said. ''so understand, my financial responsibilities have grown. i don't have the time to do the impossible.''  realizing what that might seem to imply about his slate of movies, he quickly corrected himself: ''i don't mean 'do the impossible,' '' he said. ''i care deeply about these films. it's just not as important as it used to be when it was just miramax, because the company has so many different branches.''  what's more, he argued, oscars are less important not only to his overall business but to the financial success of each individual film, because the weinstein company is making or acquiring them for less than at the height of miramax's ambition. anthony minghella's ''cold mountain'' cost miramax more than $80 million to make and millions more to market, for example. but for ''factory girl,'' the film about the warhol muse edie sedgwick, which opened in los angeles on dec. 29 to qualify for oscar consideration, mr. weinstein says he bought the distribution rights in english-speaking countries for just $2.5 million.  that discipline, bob weinstein's box-office bonanza with ''scary movie 4,'' and the animated comedy ''hoodwinked!'' all helped the company report a $115 million profit on its first 16 features, despite a continuing exodus of top executives, including the departure of agnès mentre, the acquisitions chief, and the abrupt resignation of charles layton, harvey weinstein's longtime right-hand man.  mr. weinstein said he was happy with the team he has. ''some of the seasoned ones have gone,'' he acknowledged, before adding a consummate backhanded compliment: ''you know what the amazing thing is? they fall into obscurity at all these other places -- maybe with a better paycheck. and it's a shame, because they should all be running these other places.''  still, a dozen years ago, his admirers say, miramax would have been the first stop for someone pitching a movie like ''little miss sunshine,'' ''babel'' or ''the queen.'' now, fox searchlight, paramount vantage and, yes, miramax under the weinsteins' successor, daniel battsek, are all running splashier oscar campaigns for films that made a bigger impact than anything from the weinsteins last year.  mr. weinstein professes to be cheering his rivals on -- as only he can. brad grey, the chairman of paramount pictures, ''used to work for me, and when i saw the amount of nominations he got at the golden globes, i was the first guy to send him an e-mail,'' he said. he's full of praise for mr. battsek too.  but isn't it bittersweet to see ''the queen,'' released by the post-weinstein miramax, being talked about as a front-runner for best picture? ''not at all,'' he said. ''remember, i started a latin american fund, and we bought 'the queen' for latin america, so i'm distributing it as well. so 'the queen' is my movie in latin america.''  if oscar night leaves him shut out again, mr. weinstein insists he won't be despondent, won't take it out on his staff. ''i don't do that anymore,'' he insisted. he learned from ''cold mountain,'' he added, ''that i could live without all of this.''  besides, this whole ''harvey and the oscars'' thing is blown far out of proportion, he said: ''it's a myth.''  yet when mr. weinstein tried to mount a campaign for ''factory girl'' late last year -- even before the movie was finished shooting -- some suggested he might have bought into his own oscar mythology.  wrong again, he said. he acknowledged that it was a risky move for the film, but he said he was merely trying to do a favor for sienna miller, its star, who had been battered in the british tabloids.  ''you know what i don't miss? being second-guessed on decisions like that,'' mr. weinstein said. ''we will turn a fierce profit on the movie. and to accommodate an actress who worked for nothing, i thought that was an admirable thing to do.'' it got more publicity than the movie might have on its own, he added, and ''the want-to-see is huge.''  ''there were a million reasons, but my ego, or 'trying to pull one out,' had nothing to do with that decision,'' he added.  anyway, mr. weinstein said, he was looking well past february to his plans for an initial public offering, and enjoying his other creative pursuits, like producing stage versions of pink floyd's ''wall'' and a musical ''cinema paradiso.'' he's also planning a rival of leonard bernstein's young people's concerts. ''that to me is as worthy,'' he said. ''you'll never write this in your article, but that to me is as worthy as any oscar campaign.''  his movie publicists meanwhile have their work cut out for them. in every category there are stronger contenders, a point mr. weinstein conceded without argument.  his best hope for best picture is ''bobby,'' the star-studded elegy for robert f. kennedy directed by emilio estevez, which received notices that were polite at best and quickly fizzled at the box office. the film managed two golden globe nominations, including one for best picture, but the recognition was seen as a sign more of mr. weinstein's stature in the eyes of the hollywood foreign press association than of the film's strengths.  but, mr. weinstein said, he had overcome long odds before. ''not only was 'chocolat' not on anybody's lists, it was derided,'' he said, referring to lasse hallstrom's 2000 film, which received five oscar nominations. ''it doesn't bother me, because the last half-hour of 'bobby' is probably the strongest 30 minutes of any movie this year. i've seen populist movies like this come out of nowhere.''  he vowed that his team of publicists would fight as fiercely as ever. ''but i'm not being as vocal,'' he said. ''it's not about me, or the company. it's about the individual movies. we're not leading with our chests, we're just leading with the movies, and doing the same work like other studios.  ''just don't count us out of anything.''  the oscars  