school spirit; rah, rah, rah (it's protected)   there's something about school colors -- that signature combination of greens, oranges, blues not to be found in nature -- that makes an alumnus tingle. universities earn millions marketing school spirit, and they have become more vigilant, and litigious, about protecting what inspires it. that includes what is known in legal circles as ''trade dress,'' the distinctive combination of colors, abstract symbols and significant numbers -- founding years or even well-known win-loss records -- affiliated with a brand.  consider a shirt in scarlet and gray, the colors of ohio state university, with the phrase ''got seven?'' on the front and, on the back, ''we do! 7 time national champs.'' last summer, a federal court found the shirt's maker, smack apparel, responsible for trademark infringement and unfair competition. smack was also held liable for co-opting lettering, phrases and color schemes associated with louisiana state university, the university of oklahoma and the university of southern california.  ''i think this is the first case of its kind where a court actually said school color combinations were protectable as trade dress,'' says michael drucker, vice president and associate general counsel at the collegiate licensing company, which filed the case with the universities.  in one pending case, the university of alabama shocked alumni by suing daniel a. moore, an artist who captures alabama's storied gridiron greatness on canvas and reproduces the images on souvenirs. alabama claims he violates the university's trademarks, including its famous color scheme.  steven j. wadyka jr., an intellectual property lawyer at greenberg traurig in virginia, expects more suits like this. ''schools are becoming more proactive at protecting rights that are broader and more abstract than what was enforceable before,'' he says. decades of promotion, marketing and television exposure, he notes, have made school colors an instantly recognizable trademark. school colors may be as varied as the rainbow, but to university marketing reps and lawyers, they all look the same: like the color of money.  jeremy kahn  blackboard  