pursuing writers, but letting them lead the chase   the paris review interviews, i  introduction by philip gourevitch  510 pages. picador (paperback). $15.  opinions at length grow ugly, and so does talking about yourself: two traps the journalistic interview can fall into. one way out is to arm it with a needle of challenge. the subject, instead of standing to pronounce from a podium, is led to scurry, dodge and perhaps fight back, displaying paces and not just poundage.  rarer is the interview that intends to produce a portrait and actually succeeds. for this you need an interviewer more disposed to follow than to capture. you need sufficient time and space, since too brief a chase reveals more about the aims of the pursuer than about the character of the pursued. and finally, in the procession of answers, you need alertness to the answer that hints at a life half-hidden and stimulates a question that gets it to emerge, shake itself and look around.  all this may sound like prescriptive theory. in fact, it is a descriptive conclusion, suggested by 16 pieces taken from the most remarkable and extensive interviewing project we possess. for 50 years the paris review has been talking to writers, in one long session, or several sessions, or recurring sessions spaced years apart. the first talk in this collection -- there are to be two other volumes -- is with dorothy parker, from 1956; the last, from 2006, is with joan didion. in between we get ernest hemingway, t. s. eliot, jorge luis borges, rebecca west and elizabeth bishop, among others.  it would give a poor idea of their quality to call them ''in depth,'' with its suggestion of a reader being interred as a writer is being dug up. no doubt the phrase applies to a couple: a meticulous self-examination delivered (and carefully revised) by saul bellow; robert stone's protracted chewing of his writer's cud.  for the most part, though, ''the paris review interviews, i'' is a series of excursions, alternately purposeful and capricious, with side trips, stops for tea and mystifications (borges providing an extensive mystification, in the course of which he disappears gravely and drolly into one of his fictions, and emerges with perfect clarity). we end up knowing them not as subjects but as fellow day-trippers, and it is they, not the interviewer, who lead the trip.  parker, decades past her scintillating round table fame, is seen in her shabby hotel apartment, strewn with lamb bones tossed to her poodle. (each interview is preceded by its setting; a set, rather, on which a brief theater unfolds.) no self-pity, but an acid look back. she was the celebrity as wit; people would start to laugh even before she spoke. ''i should have had more sense.'' it wasn't real wit, anyway. ''wit has truth in it; wisecracking is simply calisthenics with words.''  the young truman capote floats faunlike around a house strewn with kicky oddities that ''somehow remind you of the contents of a very astute little boy's pockets.'' writing is style, according to capote: rhythm, paragraphing, punctuation. (''henry james is the maestro of the semicolon.'') it is important to have an emotion but to write only after it's gone: coldly. the reader, 50 years later, thinks of a bloated capote, style gone the way of emotion.  hemingway in 1958 is a jangle of attitudes. ''the best writing is certainly when you are in love.'' best advice for a would-be writer: ''he should go out and hang himself because he finds that writing well is impossibly difficult. then he should be cut down without mercy and forced by his own self to write as well as he can for the rest of his life.''  gertrude stein's influence on his style? she learned to write dialogue from ''the sun also rises.'' the influence of max perkins, his editor? ''i liked the way he wore his hat.'' and, wearily: ''ask old, tired questions and you'll get old, tired answers.'' the interviewer struggles to get past the pre-set buttons, but perhaps no longer is there anywhere past them. (william blake: ''ah sunflower weary of time.'')  other interviews are fresher. robert gottlieb, the editor of a whole galaxy of writers, chose to embroider upon comments (admiring) they sent in. the result is a wittily perceptive account of inciting, encouraging and sometimes curbing a menagerie of sensitivities, doubts and arrogances, to wring from them the best writing they could do. he virtually became the manuscript:  ''you have to surrender to a book. if you do, when something in it seems to be going askew, you are wounded.'' the editor as the canary in the mine, whose job is to expire when the air goes bad.  the most entrancing pieces are the most unexpected. elizabeth bishop, platinum-keen in her poetry and irremediably diffident, speaks of hesitating to identify herself: ''there's nothing more embarrassing than being a poet, really.''  the ostensibly dry and austere t. s. eliot responds with clarity and warmth. he discusses his poetry as if it were written by someone else, a someone of whom he is rather fond. some of his earlier writing was obscure, he admits, and suggests that young poets can be difficult to make out just because they want to express more than they know how: ''in 'the waste land' i wasn't even bothering whether i understood what i was saying.''  he is solicitous with his young interviewer, donald hall, now poet laureate of the united states. does he have any advice for studying literature at cambridge? woolly underwear. how pleasant -- and quite counter to his celebrated line -- to know mr. eliot.  books of the times  