inside art   a pair of new owners for an old president  the new york collectors judy and michael steinhardt have bought a full-length portrait of george washington by gilbert stuart that failed to sell in an auction at sotheby's on behalf of the new york public library in november 2004.  the painting, the first of four identical full-length paintings by stuart, shows washington standing with his right hand on a table and his left hand holding a sword. it is nearly nine feet tall.  ''it's a great american icon,'' said richard l. feigen, the manhattan dealer. ''it was unfortunate that it ever went to auction, because it's too big for a private home.''  mr. feigen is so enamored of the painting that he suggested that the steinhardts buy it, even though their world-class collection is predominantly antiquities and modern art. he said they agreed ''to help out the library,'' with a view, perhaps, to giving the stuart to an american museum.  dating from around 1800, the portrait is known as the munro-lenox portrait, after two of its 19th-century owners: peter jay munro, a lawyer and a nephew of john jay, and james lenox, the new york bibliophile and philanthropist.  the painting is on view at the grand palais in paris as part of the exhibition ''citizens and kings: portraits in the age of revolution, 1760-1830,'' which moves to the royal academy in london in february and then to an american institution yet to be determined.  ''since it's tied up for the next 10 months, the steinhardts have plenty of time to decide where it will go,'' mr. feigen said. ''they haven't made any commitments. they may put it on extended loan somewhere.''  neither he nor library officials would say how much the steinhardts had paid. sotheby's had estimated the portrait at $6 million to $8 million. the officials would say only that it sold for above its reserve, the secret minimum price agreed upon by the library and sotheby's, which experts say was around $5 million.  the stuart is the last of a major group of paintings the library has sold to build its endowment.  ''we've now raised $52.8 million,'' said paul leclerc, president of the library. at sotheby's it sold 16 works, including a stuart portrait of washington seated, for $8.1 million. in may 2005 it sold its star painting -- ''kindred spirits,'' an 1849 hudson river school landscape by asher b. durand -- to the wal-mart heiress alice l. walton in a sealed-bid auction for about $35 million.  mr. leclerc said the stuart was the end of a major selling initiative for the library. but, he added, a dozen or so smaller works in storage may go to auction this year.  a gift to the hammer  dean valentine, a los angeles-based television executive, and his wife, amy adelson, a television producer, have given the hammer museum in los angeles 42 contemporary artworks by 24 artists, most from the los angeles area. the gift, worth more than $1 million, consists primarily of sculpture and multimedia pieces. it will help to form the core of the hammer's new contemporary-art collection.  ''we see ourselves as an artist-centered museum,'' said gary garrels, the hammer's chief curator and deputy director for exhibitions, who emphasized that he wanted local artists well represented in its collections.  ''los angeles is one of the primary creative centers,'' he added. ''and we're ringside.''  the gift includes works by many artists who have recently emerged from the master of fine arts program at the university of california, los angeles, among them xavier cha, liz craft, hannah greely, pentti monkkonen and paul sietsema.  public performance art  the nonprofit public art fund may be best known for organizing outdoor projects in places like rockefeller center or the doris c. freedman plaza on fifth avenue and 60th street, but it is becoming more involved in performance. on march 30 it will present ''martin creed's variety show,'' part music, theater, talk and dance.  mr. creed, the british artist who won the prestigious turner prize in 2001, has been juggling conceptual art with his love of music. he is a songwriter and plays guitar in a band. the show will be at the abrons arts center on the lower east side. tickets may be purchased at the door or on the public art fund web site, www.publicartfund.org.  that's not to say that the public art fund has abandoned its efforts to show the work of younger artists. for the 12th year, as part of its program ''in the public realm,'' it has announced an open call to emerging artists living in new york state who want to create temporary works in a public space. artists are asked to submit slides or other documentation of recent work and a statement of interest by feb. 9. arts professionals will select about 10 artists to develop formal proposals, toward which they will receive $1,000. the committee will then select three to do projects for 2008.  acquisitions in detroit  as a result of examining its collections with an eye to a major reinstallation after its $158 million expansion and renovation is completed next year, the detroit institute of arts has acquired more than 900 works. they range from an 1893 whistler seascape to a 16th-century turkish charger and a 17th-century royal nigerian ivory arm bracelet.  graham w. j. beal, the museum's director, said several new curators were responsible for rethinking its collections. kenneth myers, who became the museum's curator of american art in 2005, found the whistler, ''violet and blue: among the rollers,'' while flipping through a catalog for cottone's auctions in mount morris, n.y. the museum bought it for $1 million.  inside art  