a director decides to override a friendship   everyone who knows him says it: in a tough fight, kenneth g. langone is a guy you want in your corner.  but when robert l. nardelli, the former chief executive of home depot, refused to bend to the will of an exasperated board and accept a pay cut, he lost the crucial support of a friend who as lead director not only recruited him but presided over his compensation contract that would later draw so much fire.  for mr. langone, a voluble man whose passions include italian meatballs, golf and the roman catholic church, it was a surprising reversal. mr. langone prides himself on his loyalty to his friends and, as a director who has served on the compensation committees of general electric, yum brands and the new york stock exchange, he has never been shy about paying his chief executives well.  now, people who have spoken with him in recent days say, he is angry with mr. nardelli over his unwillingness to have his pay reduced.  in an era of escalating pay, with chief executives on wall street taking in $50 million a year and former general electric executives like david calhoun getting $100 million compensation deals from private equity investors, being paid well was a way for mr. nardelli, a scrappy former football player, to keep score.  in light of mr. langone's vocal and unyielding support for the $190 million pay package that was awarded to richard a. grasso, the former chief executive of the new york stock exchange, he might have been expected to fight to the bitter end to save mr. nardelli.  but as friends who have served on boards with him say, beneath the bluster and occasional histrionics lies a more pragmatic man well aware of his fiduciary duties as a director -- especially at home depot, a company that he helped found and that has made him a billionaire.  ''ken does not back down, but he also has a strong sense of propriety,'' said gary e. earlbaum, a real estate executive who introduced mr. langone to bernard marcus, a founder of home depot, more than 30 years ago. ''his loyalty is to the enterprise.''  mr. langone declined to comment. mr. nardelli did not return messages left for him.  at age 71, when many corporate executives start slowing down a bit, mr. langone continues to manage a full schedule of corporate, political, legal and philanthropic activities. he is a top financial supporter of rudolph w. giuliani, who is weighing a possible run for the white house, and he is the chairman of new york university medical center. mr. langone also still devotes considerable time and energy to contesting the lawsuit brought against him and mr. grasso by eliot spitzer, the former attorney general for new york who is now the state's governor.  that's all in addition to his day job, running invemed associates, the small investment bank he founded.  but it has been his passionate and unstinting defense of mr. grasso's pay, much of which was set during his time on the exchange's compensation committee, that has come to define mr. langone's public image.  his detractors see him as a living symbol of the excesses of runaway executive compensation, a bullying old-school titan whose tendency to befriend his chief executives blinds any objective ability he might have had to keep a ceiling over their pay.  mr. grasso's huge compensation package, and, according to the lawsuit brought by mr. spitzer, his efforts to keep other directors in the dark about it, are perfect examples of this, they say.  ''ken langone is the root of the problem; his philosophy is that you can never pay a c.e.o. too much money,'' said richard ferlauto, the director of pension investment policy at the a.f.l.-c.i.o. ''that was revealed in his defense of grasso. now we are focusing on the role of langone'' at home depot, he said. ''we blame him and his cronies for the original contract.''  his defenders, on the other hand, point to his long experience as a director and his acute knowledge of a director's responsibilities, honed from more than 30 years' experience as an independent investor. yes, he has a big heart and an inclination to overpay at times, they say, but his ethics are beyond dispute.  ''i don't care what kind of a battle i'm in but i would want ken langone on my side, because he is on the side of honor and righteousness,'' said frank borman, a former director at home depot.  mr. langone's pursuit of mr. nardelli, whom he met in 1999, when he became a g.e. director, was infused with a sense of glee at the prospect of landing such a corporate star. mr. nardelli, well aware of the value of the g.e. pedigree, drove a hard bargain. a result was the 2000 contract, which, with its guarantees and perks, may well be an anachronism today as rich pay packages come under increasing scrutiny.  at home depot, mr. langone is a particularly involved director. he is chairman of the nominating committee and has played a significant role in shaping the current board. he is also a member of the executive and audit committees. he would frequently start his mornings with a call to mr. nardelli, and he thrilled in digesting the latest sales data as well as updates about lowe's, the retailer's main competitor. and, while walking the floors at store outlets was a responsibility for directors, mr. langone did more than his share, as well as inspiring the home depot sales force at the frequent pep rallies he attended.  still, when it became clear that a combination of the poor performance of home depot's stock and mr. nardelli's obstinate demeanor had made his position untenable, mr. langone threw his support with the rest of the board.  in a 2004 interview for an article about mr. langone and his role in the grasso controversy, mr. nardelli said: ''change is difficult. but it is the only constant in today's environment. it takes courage and leadership.''  ''i think ken stands by good business judgment.''  