to sleep, perchance to succeed   for those who have failed in a decade or three's worth of new year's resolutions to become better workers, spouses, parents, athletes or lovers, there is a new frontier in personal growth -- or at least a proliferation of products, mostly hawked over the internet, that promise to help turn the last bit of untrammeled downtime (sleep) into an opportunity for improvement.  new health products have emerged, often from the margins of commerce. old self-help approaches like subliminal ''sleep learning'' have evolved and found new life on the web.  ''while you sleep!'' has become an internet marketing catchphrase. the idea plays on two classic, if contradictory, american impulses: the desire to get ahead, and the compulsion to avoid the slightest expenditure of effort.  there are diet pills sold under names like lose and snooze and sleep 'n slim, which contain collagen and which the makers say can help maximize the body's metabolism. there are foot pads from japan that look like tea bags and promise to drain toxins and restore energy while you sleep.  on one web site, hypnotictapes.com, besides recordings designed to improve public speaking or break addiction to alcohol or heroin, there are programs promising to help you, at least partly while sleeping, ''overcome fear of clowns'' and ''master the bagpipes.''  ''the grow-yourself revolution started in the '50s,'' said david allen, a productivity consultant who wrote ''getting things done: the art of stress-free productivity'' (viking, 2001), and it ''is the one industry that has never faltered in the last 40 years. all they have done is give you more clever ways of getting it without having to give anything.''  products marketed for nocturnal self-transformation often target outward appearance. ortho-k contact lenses, which reshape the cornea to correct vision and are typically worn only at night, have been approved by the food and drug administration. but the claims of many other products are more nebulous.  nancy clark, a registered dietician and the author of the best-selling ''nancy clark's sports nutrition guidebook'' (human kinetics, 2003), said that she had never heard of collagen -- the supposed magic bullet in some nocturnal diet pills -- used as a weight-loss aid. ''if it were true,'' she said, ''it would be front-page news.''  the products with perhaps the broadest potential market, and often the most extravagant promises, are designed for so-called sleep learning. professionals who think the boss has been a little slow with that promotion -- and who have left their skepticism in their other briefcase -- can try to kick-start their careers with the wealth & success power affirmations subliminal program (''start advertising to your own mind''). sold through sleeplearning.com, it can be played through stereo pillow speakers available on the same web site for $29.95.  not everyone selling self-improvement while sleeping promises overnight miracles. james schmelter, a certified hypnotherapist who runs hypnotictapes.com out of san francisco, said sleep learning on its own is often of only marginal benefit, which is why it is only one of four elements in his hypnosis-at-home programs, many of which he records individually for customers and sells for $98. the other three parts of the program are to be listened to awake.  hypnosis is generally accepted as a legitimate technique to facilitate other forms of treatment, like cognitive behavior therapy, said guy h. montgomery, a clinical psychologist at mount sinai school of medicine in manhattan.  but unlike the hypnotized brain, which is receptive to spoken suggestions, the sleeping brain is not so suggestible, said dr. michael j. sateia, the head of the sleep disorders program at dartmouth-hitchcock medical center in lebanon, n.h. ''generally,'' he explained, ''sleep is considered to be a state of being relatively 'offline,' as it were, with respect to extrasensory input.''  sleep learning is a self-empowerment concept that dates back at least to aldous huxley's ''brave new world,'' published in 1932, but for most of the intervening years it could be found mainly on cassette programs tucked away on self-help shelves in bookstores alongside volumes on astral projection. that all changed with the internet.  marc vandekeere, for example, is one seller of sleep-learning self-improvement products who said he has noted a spike in business in recent years. mr. vandekeere, a hypnotherapist who operates the web site brainwave-entrainment.com, said he had seen sales of subliminal problem-solving and meditation products, which he recommends that customers use while sleeping, increase by a third in the last few years. and he proudly points to 17,000 positive feedback responses for his products on ebay. ''fifteen years ago,'' he said, ''nobody would be able to find these products.''  eldon taylor, the founder of progressive awareness research, a company in medical lake, wash., that has marketed a line of hypnosis cds to be used awake and asleep under the innertalk brand since 1984, said demand has grown noticeably in the last five years. he attributes that growth in part to economic anxieties that have increased people's desire to wring productivity out of the wee hours.  ''how many times do people change jobs?'' asked mr. taylor, whose web site, innertalk.com, offers cds titled ''excel in exams'' and ''natural breast enlargement.''  ''we live in a society full of more information than we can absorb,'' he said, ''but we're required to absorb it, because if we don't absorb it, we fall out'' of the race.  this apparent renewed interest in learning while snoozing comes at a time of increased academic research into the topic. last year, for example, researchers at the university of lübeck in germany found that gently stimulating the brain during sleep with an electrical current at a certain frequency improved the ability of test subjects to remember a string of words they had learned before a nap.  still, dr. jerome m. siegel, a professor of psychiatry at the center for sleep research at the university of california, los angeles, said that most research he has seen indicates that subliminal sleep learning is of little or no value because ''the sound had to actually wake you before you would benefit.'' dr. siegel recalled rigging a speaker system under his own pillow in junior high school in a failed effort to learn french. ''even when you're sleepy, but not asleep,'' he added, ''you don't learn very well.''  a study in 1992 by the british psychological society dismissed the concept of sleep learning, finding that it can ''only occur if the sleeping person is partly awakened by the message.'' but such findings did not kill off interest in the concept and its seductive, something-for-nothing allure.  for candace kinsella, a retired nurse in largo, fla., who wanted to reduce by a few sizes, diet pills were not enough, so she turned to a weight-loss sleep program that is not subliminal, but consists of spoken messages like ''eat more vegetables,'' she said. despite the potential distraction of someone talking while you're trying to sleep, she said the program, which is sold on the web site robert-egby.com, is relaxing. ''it's like going to sleep with the tv on,'' she said.  she credits it with helping her lose 50 pounds over one year, starting from a weight of 345, simply by providing constant reminders to go to the gym, drink water instead of soda and eat better. ''all of this augments'' a commitment during waking hours to healthy living, she explained.  then again, the typical middle-aged american gets as little as 6.1 hours of sleep a night, according to a recent university of chicago study, instead of the commonly accepted optimum of eight. so people who fail to transform themselves suitably during the wee hours can always fall back on using their sleep to obtain one thing that doctors believe is crucial to a life of happiness and productivity: rest.  