jerusalem syndrome   vicious circle  a novel of complicity.  by robert littell.  300 pp. overlook press. $24.95.  seven years ago, the movie ''any given sunday'' told the not-so-inspirational tale of a young quarterback struggling to make good. directed by oliver stone, starring jamie foxx, the film was forgettable but for the quarterback's name: willie beamen.  yes, willie beamen. as in, will he be a man? no points for guessing yes.  the lesson here is as germane to authors as to screenwriters. if the central conflict of your novel can be captured by the names of the main characters, you probably will not end up impressing readers with the subtlety of your creations or the artfulness of your plotting. consider using different names -- or writing a different book.  in ''vicious circle,'' his new thriller, the veteran spy novelist robert littell has failed to heed the lesson of willie beamen. littell, whose previous novels have focused mainly on the central intelligence agency and the cold war, here turns his attention to a hotter theater, israel.  ''vicious circle'' has an audacious premise. early on, dr. isma'il al-saath, a legendary muslim terrorist, kidnaps isaac apfulbaum, an ultra-orthodox rabbi, threatening to kill apfulbaum unless israel releases more than 100 prisoners. al-saath does not expect the israelis to meet his demand. his goal is to disrupt a peace agreement between israel and the palestinian authority that is scheduled to be signed in washington in a matter of days.  the kidnapping sets off a frantic israeli effort to rescue apfulbaum, who is being held hostage in an abandoned bathhouse in the christian quarter of jerusalem. but as the deadline for apfulbaum's execution ticks close, kidnapper and hostage grow surprisingly fond of each other, recognizing they are both men of god.  and that's not all they have in common. for the story of isma'il in the koran is an exact analogue to that of isaac in the old testament. like isaac, isma'il is a son of abraham (called ibrahim in the koran) who is about to be sacrificed when god intervenes.  for the especially dense reader, littell helpfully spells out the connection in a comment from apfulbaum: ''for god's sake, do i have to write it on the wall in capital letters? you have to be blind to not see it. we're both children of abraham.'' and yes, isaac and isma'il are both nearly blind. they believe they can see god, and yet they can't even see the world before their eyes. get it? get it?  if nothing else, littell deserves credit for daring to believe he can convince readers that the rabbi and the doctor, who have been enemies almost from birth, can fall in something like love over the course of a week.  ''so what about you -- have you ever been smitten?'' apfulbaum asks al-saath, after several days in captivity. ''come clean: have you ever ached to caress the female body with all its perfections and imperfections? are you blind or indifferent to all those young ladies with brassiere straps slipping off their bronzed shoulders or bare navels with earrings in their belly buttons? i'm not talking platonic friendship, i'm talking permanent erection, i'm talking coitus un-interruptus.''  one does not have to be a fundamentalist -- of any stripe -- to believe that the second coming will occur before an ultra-orthodox rabbi utters that particular speech. even at the end of ''vicious circle,'' littell cannot seem to decide whether he means the rabbi and the doctor to be real human beings, emblems of the broader conflict between israelis and palestinians, or simply caricatures of religious extremism. he settles instead on an awkward mix of the three, as ''vicious circle'' lurches between tragedy and satire.  littell fills the space between the dialogues of hostage and captor with the israeli efforts to find apfulbaum before al-saath's deadline closes in. but despite some strong set pieces, like the torture of a palestinian militant by palestinian security agents, ''vicious circle'' never gains momentum as a thriller. elihu, the mossad agent leading the hunt for apfulbaum, has little to do but mope around an office in the israeli city of jaffa waiting for the phone to ring -- while making speeches that are less profound than littell hopes.  ''the russians have a proverb,'' elihu tells another agent, in the wake of a deal gone bad with the palestinian security forces. ''to dine with the devil use a long spoon. you'll notice the proverb doesn't suggest you shouldn't dine with the devil. on the contrary, it assumes you will one day be obliged to and merely advises you to take a sensible precaution. if you sleep with the devil, use a condom; if you dine with him, use a long spoon.''  and don't forget -- if you kiss the devil, brush your teeth; if you drive with him, buckle up. on the implausibility meter, if apfulbaum's paean to navel rings is a 10, elihu's speech comes in at 9.5.  so will isaac and isma'il meet a common fate as ''vicious circle'' comes to a close? will they sacrifice themselves for their beliefs, or will god himself reach down to save them?  no points for guessing the answer.  alex berenson, a reporter for the times, is the author of ''the faithful spy.''  