more rhode island schools closed in disease outbreak   more than 20,000 rhode island students were told thursday to stay home from school at least until monday as officials investigate the case of a student hospitalized wednesday with meningitis.  the officials are trying to determine whether that case is related to an encephalitis outbreak last month in which a second grader from warwick died.  schools in coventry, warwick and west warwick were closed early thursday after officials learned that a student at hopkins hill elementary school here had meningitis. the child is recovering and was expected to be released from the hospital quickly, officials said.  the roman catholic diocese of providence closed eight schools in those communities, and warwick canceled youth activities for thursday and friday.  ''due to similarities with the three other children who had encephalitis, we wanted to take an abundance of caution and recommend the closing of schools while we collect additional information,'' said dr. david r. gifford, the state's director of health.  officials are investigating whether the illness was caused by mycoplasma, a common bacteria known as walking pneumonia.  officials said three prior cases of encephalitis, which causes brain swelling and is usually caused by a virus, were rare because they were set off by mycoplasma. one of the three students also had meningitis, officials said.  coventry, warwick and west warwick are the rhode island communities affected. officials said they have had high rates of children with pneumonia since october. investigators are looking at links between increased absenteeism and the encephalitis cases in warwick and west warwick.  ''we had 20 to 24 cases in one school and 30 in another,'' said the coventry school superintendent, kenneth dipietro.  the centers for disease control and prevention is looking into a number of causes, including whether a new or virulent strain of mycoplasma has developed, said dr. gifford of the state health department.  connecticut and massachusetts have sent epidemiologists to assist in the investigation. neither state has reported similar cases.  school districts throughout rhode island are sending letters and e-mail messages home to parents, urging parents and custodians to keep sick children home and listing preventative measures like hand washing and coughing into the elbow, not the hand.  the health department is asking school nurses to report students with pneumonia immediately, and custodians are washing desks and telephones.  pediatricians' offices are swamped with calls.  ''we're asking parents to report students who have had strep or pneumonia, to better know if there are any patterns or clusters,'' said rosemarie k. kraeger, school superintendent in middletown.  that district surveyed its nurses this week for such cases, ms. kraeger said.  gov. donald l. carcieri said he planned an executive order requiring all elementary schools to distribute gel hand sanitizers. the order will include broader measures that are being formulated, mr. carcieri said.  the governor and dr. gifford sought to allay fears at a news conference on thursday afternoon, assuring the parents that the virus is spread just through coughing and saliva and did not survive well outside the body.  ''being with someone for a short period of time in an elevator, sporting event, dinner party or playing after school is not how it's transmitted,'' dr. gifford said. ''it doesn't live in air-conditioning ducts.''  parents in coventry said they were glad that the state was taking extra precautions and closing school.  ''i'm glad they're closed down, so it doesn't spread around,'' said beverly baron, whose son robert is in the eighth grade at knotty oak middle school.  ms. baron said she learned of the closing by e-mail.  ''it's enough to scare you,'' she said.  cindy naro, 41, who lives next door to ms. baron with her sons christopher, 12, and nicholas, 9, stayed home from her job-training program to care for her children.  ms. naro said she did not know that school was closed until christopher's bus did not arrive. ms. naro said she was worried because nicholas attends hopkins hill and tends to become sick easily, although he has been feeling fine.  ''i told him, 'i don't care if your baby toe hurts, i need to know,' '' ms. naro said. ''i have two kids in two different schools. how far is it going to go?''  