jubilant democrats assume control on capitol hill   in a day of transition and pageantry, exultant democrats on thursday took control of both houses of congress for the first time in a dozen years and elected the first woman to be speaker of the house.  representative nancy pelosi of california took the speaker's gavel at 2:08 p.m. from representative john a. boehner of ohio, the republican leader, whom she defeated by a vote of 233 to 202, the 31-seat margin of the new democratic majority. the floor and the packed galleries erupted in cheers when the vote was announced.  even republicans grudgingly acknowledged the unprecedented nature of the day on which a woman ascended to power on capitol hill by rising as one to applaud her.  ''this is an historic moment,'' mrs. pelosi said in her first remarks as speaker of the 110th congress. ''it's an historic moment for the congress. it's an historic moment for the women of america. it is a moment for which we have waited for over 200 years.''  earlier in the day, on the other side of the capitol dome, senator harry reid, democrat of nevada, became majority leader, a result of his party's one-seat victory margin in the november elections.  both senator reid and speaker pelosi promised a new era of cooperation after years of partisan passion and gridlock. ''guided by the spirit of bipartisanship,'' mr. reid said, ''democrats are ready to take this country in a new direction.''  the house opened the session by passing, by a large bipartisan margin, new ethics rules. [page a13.]  but there were signs, too, of division among democrats over how hard to push to undo the fruits of years of republican rule. many democrats say those years moved the nation too far right, but others argue that the big tax cuts and regulatory relaxations are part of the permanent legislative framework that should be accepted. [news analysis, page a12.]  in her remarks, mrs. pelosi delivered the obligatory promise of partnership with republicans. but she immediately added a blunt warning to mr. bush on the war in iraq.  ''the american people rejected an open-ended obligation to a war without end,'' she said, bringing democrats to their feet.  she signaled to mr. bush that any plan to increase the american military presence in iraq would meet stiff opposition in the new congress.  ''it is the responsibility of the president to articulate a new plan for iraq that makes it clear to the iraqis that they must defend their own streets and their own security,'' she said, ''a plan that promotes stability in the region and a plan that allows us to responsibly redeploy our troops.''  mrs. pelosi's triumphal 20-minute remarks were frequently interrupted by applause, much like a presidential state of the union address, which is delivered annually from the same rostrum in the house chamber. cheering her on from the gallery were members of her family, dozens of california supporters and celebrities including tony bennett, carole king and richard gere.  mr. boehner sat glum and unmoving in his seat for much of the hour it took to record the vote that put mrs. pelosi in the speaker's chair. the former speaker, j. dennis hastert, now just a republican member of congress from illinois, stood hunched and hulking by the back rail of the chamber.  mrs. pelosi sat on the house floor with several of her grandchildren as her democratic colleagues rose to record their votes, many adding footnotes. representative loretta sanchez, democrat of california, said she voted ''for the empowerment of all women in the world.'' seventy-one women will be in the house, a record.  the jubilant democratic takeover of the house was an echo of the republican ''revolution'' of 1994 in which republicans took control of the house after 40 uninterrupted years of democratic dominance.  in the senate, vice president dick cheney, in his constitutional role as president of the chamber, swore in the members, including 10 new senators, only one a republican, bob corker of tennessee. a beaming bill clinton, accompanied by his daughter, chelsea, and his mother-in-law, dorothy rodham, looked from the gallery as senator hillary rodham clinton of new york took the oath at the outset of her second term, perhaps dreaming of another oath-taking that might be two years hence.  the first order of business for the new democratic-led house was passage of a measure to limit gifts to lawmakers from lobbyists and to restrict subsidized flights on private aircraft. the bill is part of a larger package of ethics changes that democrats are pushing as part of a promise to voters to end what they called a ''culture of corruption'' in congress that led to several indictments and resignations of members last year.  next week, the democrats plan a 100-hour blitz to raise the minimum wage, lift restrictions on federal financing of embryonic stem cell research and allow the government to negotiate price cuts with pharmaceutical companies for the medicare prescription drug program, among other matters. by the time they have clocked the 100 hours of legislative debate, house democrats also plan to have passed bills to cut interest rates on student loans and roll back subsidies for oil and gas producers, seeking to make a statement of priorities, pressure the senate to act and put an active agenda before the country before mr. bush's state of the union address on jan. 23.  in an early sign of bipartisanship, senators max baucus, democrat of montana, and charles e. grassley, republican of iowa, introduced a bill to repeal the individual alternative minimum tax, which is imposing an increasingly heavy burden on middle-income taxpayers.  but before much real business was conducted, democratic lawmakers adjourned for a round of festivities to celebrate their victories and to lubricate their donors in what resembled nothing so much as a scaled-down presidential inaugural.  representative rahm emanuel of illinois, who engineered the election of 42 new democrats to the house as leader of the party's congressional campaign committee, threw a huge reception at johnny's half shell across the street from the capitol. mrs. pelosi was the host of a gala at the national building museum at which mr. bennett and ms. king were scheduled to perform.  senator claire mccaskill, the newly elected democrat from missouri and one of 16 women in the senate, seemed a bit in awe after taking the oath of office on thursday afternoon.  ''anybody who would go through that and not feel overwhelmed with the enormity of the institution and the men and women who have served there would have to be in a coma,'' ms. mccaskill said in the lobby outside the senate chamber. ''i'm sure there will be tough times ahead, but it's thrilling to be part of one of this country's enduring institutions.''  the 110th congress  