iraq defends hanging, but holds hussein guard   the iraqi prime minister's office on wednesday mounted its first public defense of the way the government carried out the execution of saddam hussein, and said that iraqi authorities had detained a guard who they believed was involved in recording the moment in a macabre and unauthorized video that has generated revulsion around the world.  iraqi officials, in their effort to dampen the video's impact, tried to challenge the impression it conveyed that mr. hussein, for all his brutal crimes, had behaved with far more dignity in his final minutes than his seemingly thuggish executioners.  ''the execution operation has been mischaracterized for political purposes,'' said sadiq al-rikabi, an adviser to prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki, who was present at the execution. mr. rikabi asserted that it had been carried out properly. ''what has happened is not an insult or degradation,'' he said.  but even as mr. maliki's government tried to defend its actions, the united states military, which had held mr. hussein in custody until it transferred him to iraqi authorities about an hour before he was hanged, sought to distance itself from any responsibility for the scenes revealed in the video.  ''you know, if you're asking me, 'would we have done things differently,' yes, we would have,'' said maj. gen. william b. caldwell iv, an american military spokesman in baghdad, at a news briefing on wednesday.  ''but that's not our decision,'' he added. ''that's an iraqi government decision.''  the reaction from the american military seemed to widen a rift that has been opening recently between the shiite-led government of mr. maliki and its american supporters on a range of issues. they include the government's tolerance of militias, the recent discovery of the unofficial presence of iranian military officers in baghdad and the swiftness with which the iraqis put mr. hussein to death after his appeals had been exhausted.  mr. maliki's office confirmed wednesday that until mr. hussein's final hours, the american embassy had sought to delay the execution long enough to avoid having it on a muslim holiday and to resolve some remaining legal issues.  ''the americans wanted to postpone it,'' said maryam al-rayas, a legal adviser to the prime minister. the decision to go ahead, ms. rayas said, was ''a victory for the iraqi government.''  the prime minister had decided that beginning the new year with mr. hussein dead trumped all other considerations, including the advice of the embassy, said ms. rayas, who also characterized the time frame as reasonable.  ''there was no rush,'' she said.  the iraqi government's detention of one of the guards generated some skepticism, with some iraqi officials suggesting that iraq was seeking a low-level scapegoat to blame for the almost gothic display of intimidation and death that the images depict.  mr. rikabi refused to name or otherwise characterize the guard who had been arrested other than to say that he was being held in baghdad after an investigation had determined that he had shot the video with a cellphone camera.  but munkith al-faroun, who was the prosecutor at mr. hussein's trial and was present at the execution, has said publicly that 2 of the 14 iraqi officials and court representatives flown in by american helicopters to witness it were openly videotaping the event with cellphones.  when asked about mr. faroun's statements, mr. rikabi said, ''i do not have this information.''  on wednesday, the new york times erroneously quoted mr. faroun as saying that one of the officials he had seen holding up a cellphone during the execution was mowaffak al-rubaie, mr. maliki's national security adviser. mr. rubaie, in a telephone interview from london, said that along with all the iraqi officials who were flown to the execution block by american helicopter, he had been searched at the green zone helipad and that his cellphone and even his keys were taken from him.  ''i did not have a cellphone in the execution chamber,'' he said.  but, further undermining the assertion that only a single guard had videotaped the execution, mr. rubaie said he had seen ''two or three'' others in the official contingent who did have cellphones. he suggested that they might have been among officials who arrived at camp justice, the american camp in northern baghdad where the hanging took place, by car.  the failure to call more senior officials to account raised suspicions among some iraqis. ''they want to blame it on a guard,'' one senior iraqi official said.  mr. rubaie told cnn that there could have been as many as two others in the guard contingent who were associated with that scheme.  in the wake of the video's release, there were continuing condemnations of the way justice was meted out to mr. hussein after he lost his case in a court specially set up to judge crimes committed during his rule. on wednesday, the united nations high commissioner for human rights, louise arbour, renewed a previous call for restraint in carrying out the executions of two of mr. hussein's co-defendants who were also sentenced to death.  the manner of mr. hussein's execution appeared to give a boost to the remnants of his outlawed baath party. in the town of huwaish, north of baghdad, hundreds of people led by gunmen calling themselves the ''mujahedeen of the baath party'' marched in protest, and in the once prosperous baghdad neighborhood of monsour, a large black banner proclaimed that mr. hussein's death would set off fighting against ''the americans and their followers.''  the banner was signed, in nicely printed lettering, ''baath party.''  at the same time, one of mr. hussein's most ruthless enforcers, izzat ibrahim al-douri, who has eluded his american pursuers for nearly four years, was named the baath party leader on one of its web sites. although the claim could not be independently verified, mr. douri has long been considered a leader of the baathist insurgency.  asked repeatedly to describe how the american military would have carried out the execution differently, general caldwell declined to elaborate, saying that the question was hypothetical, since the iraqis were in control once they received custody of mr. hussein outside the execution block.  ''it was not our decision as to what occurred at that point, but we would have done it differently,'' general caldwell said.  still, mr. rikabi, the prime minister's political adviser, said that the government rejected all criticism of the execution, including the point at which one of the guards shouted, ''moktada! moktada! moktada!'' as mr. hussein stood on the trapdoor of the gallows -- a reference to moktada al-sadr, the radical shiite cleric who leads the militia called the mahdi army.  the exclamation came at the end of a standard muslim prayer that both the guards and mr. hussein were saying aloud, mr. rikabi said. but the guards were from the shiite south, where mr. sadr is popular, and the prayer there typically ends with the reference to him, mr. rikabi said.  ''if you go to any mosque in karbala or najaf you will hear them shouting like that,'' he said. ''this is their habit.''  seemingly contradicting his own government, mr. rubaie said he was ashamed of what had happened during the execution, which he described as ''unacceptable'' and ''disgusting.''  ''it is not professional, it's the wrong thing to do, and it should not have happened,'' he said. ''but it shouldn't divert the mind of the people from the crimes that saddam has been condemned to death for.''  the struggle for iraq  