the fifth down   veteran softie  sentimental would probably be the last word anyone would use to describe bill belichick, but for the second season in a row he gave one of his veteran players a very public farewell gift.  last season it was allowing the retiring doug flutie to convert an extra point with a drop kick in the season finale. on sunday against the titans, he inserted vinny testaverde, above, the patriots' third-string quarterback, with less than three minutes remaining so that he could try to throw a touchdown pass for a 20th consecutive season. testaverde, who had previously played for belichick with the browns and the jets, found troy brown for a 6-yard touchdown with 1 minutes 45 seconds left.  testaverde, 43, and brown, 35, have the oldest combined ages for players connecting on an n.f.l. touchdown pass, according to the elias sports bureau.  while belichick pumped his fists and the patriots ran to congratulate testaverde, some of the titans were fuming. the score increased the patriots' lead to 40-23. titans defensive tackle albert haynesworth told reporters: ''to bring in a 50-year-old guy to throw a little pass, probably the last pass of his career or of his life, i don't know. whatever.''  nice job, kid  while vinny testaverde was striking a blow for the older generation sunday, jets coach eric mangini was joining a different elite subset.  according to the elias sports bureau, since the 1970 a.f.l.-n.f.l. merger, only two coaches younger than mangini, 35, have led a team to the playoffs: john madden (twice, at 33 and 34) and bill cowher (35).  mangini and testaverde may renew acquaintances when the jets face the patriots on sunday. when testaverde was the starting quarterback for cleveland in 1984, mangini, then 13, was breaking into the league as a browns ball boy.  thinking big  lost amid the record-breaking seasons of ladainian tomlinson and larry johnson, san francisco running back frank gore broke the 49ers' franchise record with 1,695 rushing yards. he finished third in the n.f.l. and was named to his first pro bowl. but he has bigger plans for next season.  ''i'm going for 2,200 next year,'' gore told reporters as he cleared out his locker monday. ''that's the record, isn't it? yeah, i'll get that.''  that would be eric dickerson's single-season record of 2,105 yards, set in 15 games in 1984.  early checkout  the consolation for tom walsh when he was dismissed as the raiders' offensive coordinator in november was that he could return to the bed-and-breakfast he had run in idaho. oakland players like randy moss and jerry porter remained stuck in their own version of ''hotel california'' -- they could check out but never leave.  walsh had been out of the league since 1994, when he was art shell's offensive coordinator in shell's first stint as raiders coach. when walsh rejoined shell this season and installed his old-school offense of long-developing pass plays, the criticism began mounting.  a few days before the season, moss said, ''things are so fishy and question mark around here.'' in september, the former raiders receiver tim brown said walsh's offense was outdated even in the 1990s, calling it horrible and one-dimensional.  in november, quarterback andrew walter said the playbook lacked depth. he was promptly benched.  the result was the league's worst offense, which scored 12 touchdowns, or 72 points, in 16 games. by comparison, the chargers' ladainian tomlinson scored 186 points.  a.f.c. has its way  a.f.c. teams had a 40-24 record against n.f.c. teams during the regular season. three were 4-0, all of them playoff teams -- new england, san diego and kansas city. over all, a.f.c. playoff teams were 21-3 against the n.f.c. in the regular season. more specifically, a.f.c playoff teams were 6-2 against n.f.c playoff teams. n.f.c. playoff teams were 10-14 against a.f.c. teams, with the giants faring the best at 3-1.  it wasn't luck, he says  coach herman edwards bristled when reporters suggested that the chiefs were lucky to qualify for the playoffs. ''we didn't luck our way into it,'' edwards told the associated press on monday. ''we won our way into it, just like those other teams had to win their way into it. and they didn't do it, to be quite honest.''  the chiefs (9-7) were the beneficiaries of an unlikely series of events. as edwards famously said when he was jets coach, ''you play to win the game.''  but it sure helps when everyone else that matters loses theirs.  the chiefs first had to hand the jaguars, who were also contending for a playoff spot, their third straight loss, which they did, 35-30.  next, they needed the broncos, the titans and the bengals to lose at home. the broncos lost with less than two minutes left in overtime on a 36-yard field goal. the titans lost after trailing by 3 points going into the fourth quarter. and the bengals, who also lost in overtime, missed a game-winning field goal at the end of regulation.  long-armed lion  jon kitna had 4,208 passing yards this season for the 3-13 lions, the 30th time in the past 10 seasons that a quarterback has topped 4,000 yards. but kitna is only the fifth player in that span to do it for a losing team.  the others are jeff garcia (4,278 for the 6-10 49ers in 2000), elvis grbac (4,164 for the 7-9 chiefs in 2000), peyton manning (4,131 for the 6-10 colts in 2001) and trent green (4,594 for the 7-9 chiefs in 2004).  the 306-yard performance by kitna against dallas on sunday could have, at least temporarily, saved his job. the win put the lions behind the raiders for the top pick in the 2007 draft and may have put notre dame quarterback brady quinn out of reach.  extra points  with the eagles, the cowboys and the giants in the playoffs, this is the first time since realignment in 2002 that three teams from the same division have reached the postseason. the last time that happened was 2001, when three teams from the a.f.c. east (new england, miami and the jets) and the n.f.c. central (chicago, tampa bay and green bay) made the playoffs.  shaun alexander extended his league record for games with at least one 10-yard run to 64, a span of more than four full seasons.  pro football  correction:  january 9, 2007, tuesday  a report in the fifth down football roundup on thursday about the american football conference's dominance over the national football conference during the regular season misstated the n.f.c. playoff team that had the best record (3-1) against a.f.c. teams. it is the dallas cowboys -- not the giants, who were 1-3.  