resisting the big contract and the quick fix   this being the fourth day of january, it is not too early to talk about baseball -- even in new york, with our two local pro football teams in the playoffs.  because new york is the center of the universe -- it is always about us -- new york fans are convinced they are owed more front-line pitching.  instead of going after 44-year-old roger clemens for six innings a week, starting in june, the yankees should take a lesson from omar minaya, on the other side of the triborough bridge, and seek out relatively obscure pitchers on their way up.  in one of the great performances by a general manager, minaya stocked and restocked his pitching staff with amazing consistency last year. he was able to do it partially because he could evaluate one of the great sources of baseball talent in the world today -- latinos who may have gotten caught up in psychological quotas or language barriers or cultural divides.  but minaya was hardly locked into signing hispanic players. he just went out and found talent -- middle-inning, moderate-priced, been-around talent -- and willie randolph, the manager, and rick peterson, the pitching coach, made the most of it. that's the model -- not barry zito for seven years and $126 million, which minaya and the wilpon family wisely avoided.  the yankees have traditionally gone the other route, looking for quick fixes with older stars. look how that worked out, with randy johnson winning 17 games in each of two seasons but generally giving the impression that his lanky, rickety body and his testy psyche were breaking down and acting up, respectively.  now there is evidence the yankees are looking to send johnson back to play for arizona, a move that would surely make joe torre's day, and night. torre sometimes seemed spooked by having a 6-foot-10 pitcher glide past him in the narrow confines of the clubhouse without even acknowledging him. it wasn't disrespect, necessarily -- just distance, as vast as the sonora desert.  ''randy nodded at me,'' torre would relate with great relief, once in a while, when asked about johnson's various ailments.  it was galling to yankee fans to watch the enthusiastic young tigers defeat their team in a division series last october. the yankees have been victims of their history of acquiring pitchers on the downward slope -- johnson, carl pavano, jaret wright, david wells redux, and so on.  now it appears the yankees are trying to persuade roger clemens to do them a favor and start up those flashes in the stands all over again. clemens may still need the buzz, but the yankees don't, even with the batman-and-robin friendship clemens has with andy pettitte. but at least clemens is a good teammate who shares pitching tips and training regimens, unlike johnson, who just wants to be alone.  the prodigal son pettitte is not the yankees' answer, either, even if there are older women all over the new york area who consider him their long-lost son or grandson. andy is modest, decent and courageous, and an icon of the championship days, but he doesn't figure to have much left in his arm.  now that george steinbrenner does not rock the yankees' world with hourly bombast, the yankees should build with younger players, the way gene michael did while steinbrenner was temporarily suspended, an exile that led directly to four world championships.  brian cashman, the general manager, seems to have more power and confidence than in the past. he was steadfast after the final hideous loss in detroit, reassuring waves of reporters that torre would be back next season, and, by the way, so would alex rodriguez. we saw apocalypse; cashman saw continuity. now cashman may have some leeway to reconstruct the yankees. young arms are the way to go. whether ron guidry is a good pitching coach, even two-thirds of mel stottlemyre, is still not clear.  the mets, at this stage, have their act together, although not necessarily their pitching staff. the fans, who were so upbeat about 2007 after the called third strike to carlos beltrán that ended the 2006 season, are now coming to the realization that pedro martínez may never be dominant again, that orlando hernández may not pitch a full season, and that tom glavine will be 41 on opening day.  some mets fans feel deprived because minaya would not lobby the wilpons to pay zito for seven years. the fans should recall the way minaya went out and found pitchers named mota and sánchez and feliciano, and how, in the desperate final days of the league championship series, the mets received stunning starts from one john maine and one oliver pérez. they almost won the pennant with two fringe pitchers.  even as we speak, minaya is probably at some estadio in a warmer clime, inspecting a pitcher who has appeared in 20 or 30 major league games for one of the lower-budget teams and needs the right place to reinvigorate his career. this may sound simplistic, but i have faith in minaya, wherever he may be. there. now we can get back to football.  sports of the times e-mail: geovec@nytimes.com  