cuomo to review spending on state lawmakers' pet projects   attorney general andrew m. cuomo said thursday that his office would review thousands of individual grants known as ''member items,'' the spending albany lawmakers doled out for pet projects last year, staking out a potentially vast new front in efforts to reform the ways of the state capital.  and moving to confront corruption in the upper echelons of state government, mr. cuomo also said he would promote the chief of his office's public integrity unit to special deputy attorney general, and promised a significant increase in the unit's staffing and resources.  in a brief but pointed speech here thursday at the nelson a. rockefeller institute of government, mr. cuomo assailed the member-item spending as ''a visible, graphic illustration'' of the profligacy, secrecy and dysfunction that have characterized state government and dismayed voters in recent years.  last month, federal prosecutors accused state senator efrain gonzález jr., a bronx democrat, of stealing more than $400,000 in state money appropriated for charities in his district and using it for personal expenses. joseph l. bruno, the republican majority leader of the state senate, is facing a federal investigation into some $500,000 in state grants he directed to evident technologies, a profit-making technology company in which a close friend of his was an investor.  mr. cuomo said that his office would review more than 6,000 member items that were approved last year to ensure that they met legal requirements for the spending of taxpayer money, and move to recover any state funds that were spent inappropriately. all future member items will face the same review, he said.  taking a cue from gov. eliot spitzer, who has also made ethics reform the top priority for his term, mr. cuomo cast his effort as the statehouse version of the financial-services prosecutions that made mr. spitzer famous when he served as attorney general.  ''as attorney general, eliot spitzer was successful in changing the way we did business on wall street,'' mr. cuomo said. ''now our challenge is to change the way we do business on state street,'' he said, referring to the thoroughfare that runs alongside the capitol.  dick dadey, the executive director of citizens union, a government watchdog group, said he and others would welcome the review.  ''cuomo's push to ensure that there is merit and accountability behind the doling out of member items is a nice way to end a reform-filled week in albany,'' mr. dadey said.  called member items because many are proposed by individual members of the legislature, the grants have a long but not always illustrious history in new york. the grants are distributed by both the legislature and the governor, and many have been directed to the kinds of programs that traditionally attract government aid, such as legal services for the poor or aids education efforts.  other grants, however, have gone to fix up private hunting clubs and to the clubhouses used by ethnic fraternal organizations, like an italian-american war veterans post that got money to make improvements to its kitchen.  the grants were once listed individually in the state's budget, where they could be examined by other legislators and the public. but in 1999, when then-gov. george e. pataki used his line-item veto to eliminate many items requested by democratic lawmakers, the items were gathered into a lump sum, making them impossible to review and difficult to control. the more than 6,000 items in the last budget totaled about $200 million.  in his state of the state address on wednesday, governor spitzer proposed that member items once again be listed in the budget individually, a step that both mr. bruno and sheldon silver, the speaker of the state assembly, say they support.  a spokeswoman for mr. silver said thursday that the speaker welcomed mr. cuomo's plans.  under the state's constitution, any program that receives state money must have a public purpose. the exact definition of ''public purpose,'' however, is the product of a multitude of legal decisions stretching back decades, and is relatively broad.  ''it would turn on what the actual use of the money is, but the presumption, if it went to a not-for-profit or a government, is that it's basically for a public purpose,'' mr. cuomo said. he also said that he thought a majority of member items served worthwhile purposes, and that he could not think of a member item that has in the past been found by courts or the attorney general's office not to have a public purpose.  mr. cuomo did not say whether he thought mr. bruno's grants to evident technologies would merit any action by his office, citing the federal investigation. ''at the conclusion of the criminal investigation, we will make our determination,'' he said.  