classic gets a face-lift, but no nose job   ''the adventures of pinocchio,'' by carlo collodi, first appeared in installments in an italian magazine and was published as a book in 1883. but like many children in 20th-century america, the artist jim dine was introduced to the character by disney when he saw the animated film version in the early 1940s at the age of 6. even though he'd seen plenty of movies before, ''this one really got me,'' he recalled, ''particularly if you're a little boy and a liar.''  neckties, bathrobes, hearts, household tools and now pinocchio: mr. dine has long infused his work with personal symbols as part of the pop art movement and far beyond in his prolific career as a painter, printmaker, sculptor and poet. for a book recently released by steidl, mr. dine took a fresh look at the willful wooden puppet turned boy. thirty-nine lithographs that he created for the story are on display at the new york public library through feb. 18. (the book was designed by mr. dine, gerhard steidl and claas möller.)  the film led mr. dine to collodi's original story and eventually to his own visual interpretations. collodi's ''pinocchio'' is much darker than the sugary disney adaptation. there are no jiminy cricket power-ballads: collodi's wise cricket is smushed by a hammer early on.  during the three-and-a-half-year lithograph process, mr. dine made multiple passes on the plates, adding text and other elements and refining the images. roberta waddell, the curator of prints at the new york public library, said that for this artist, ''the creative process is something he likes to show in his prints.''  in mr. dine's vision, a complex pinocchio emerges in a fusion of words, colors and textures that pepper the book's 36 chapters. on one page, pinocchio's nose spirals grotesquely out of control when he lies. on another, the toothy dogfish that swallows him looms ominously against a bright blue background.  his interest in pinocchio continues: mr. dine is working on carvings of the puppet.  ''it's a metaphor for art,'' he said of collodi's story. the alchemy involved in giving life to an inanimate object ''is exactly what artists do.''  j. d. biersdorfer  'jim dine's pinocchio'  new york public library  fifth avenue at 42nd street  north gallery, third floor  words  the language becomes part of the art, starting with the text that comes from collodi's original introductions, which sets the scene for each chapter. mr. dine said he simply ''took the words of the synopsis and cut them up.''  typography  he also played with the small text, sprinkling large, colored words throughout the book. the letters are often linked to the images to create a dynamic relationship between type and art. here and on the following page ''breakfast'' comes up a lot, understandably: the wooden brat takes his benefactor's breakfast and then has the nerve to complain that his pears aren't peeled.  pinocchio  with his distinctive hat, plump cheeks and dark hair, mr. dine's puppet bears a slight resemblance to the disney version that first inspired him. he varied the puppet's look and representation in other lithographs, but the dark hair and pointy nose are constants, even when pinocchio becomes a donkey.  self-portrait  mr. dine casts himself as geppetto, the craftsman who carved pinocchio. he appears as the puppetmaker in at least three images in the book. ''i became geppetto,'' he said. ''i was once pinocchio.''  feather  the only splash of color in the image, the red feather in pinocchio's cap, draws the eye to the place where the creator (in the background) and his creation overlap.  art  