arts, briefly   screen actors nominees are unveiled  leonardo dicaprio and helen mirren came away with two nominations each when candidates for the 13th annual screen actors guild awards were announced yesterday in los angeles. mr. dicaprio was nominated in the lead-actor category for his performance in ''blood diamond'' and for his supporting role in ''the departed.'' ms. mirren, right, was nominated for her depiction of queen elizabeth ii in ''the queen'' and of queen elizabeth i in ''elizabeth i,'' an hbo prime-time production. as a leading man, mr. dicaprio will compete against ryan gosling in ''half nelson,'' peter o'toole in ''venus,'' will smith in ''the pursuit of happyness'' and forest whitaker in ''the last king of scotland.'' ms. mirren's competitors in the best actress category in feature films are penélope cruz in ''volver,'' judi dench in ''notes on a scandal,'' meryl streep in ''the devil wears prada'' and kate winslet in ''little children.'' supporting actor nominees, besides mr. dicaprio, were alan arkin, jackie earle haley, djimon hounsou and eddie murphy; supporting actress nominees were adriana barraza, cate blanchett, abigail breslin, jennifer hudson and rinko kikuchi. the winners will be announced at a ceremony to be broadcast from los angeles on tnt and tbs on jan. 28.  omarion starting the new year on top  the new album by omarion, below, ''21'' (epic), captured the no. 1 spots on the billboard post-christmas 200 and r&b/hip-hop album charts, with sales of 119,000 copies, according to nielsen soundscan estimates. akon's ''konvicted'' (src/universal) climbed from 10th place to second even though sales declined more than 50 percent, to 112,000. the ''dreamgirls'' (sony) soundtrack vaulted from 31st to third place, despite a sales decline of 16.6 percent, to 104,000 albums; and last week's chart-topper, nas's ''hip-hop is dead'' (def jam), fell to fourth place, with a 71 percent slump in sales, to 101,000. the young jeezy album ''the inspiration'' (def jam) re-entered the top five, moving from 18th place to 5th.  dead but not quite buried  ''zyzzyx rd.'' has earned a place in the record book, variety reported yesterday, for ''the lowest tally for any pic since modern record-keeping began in the 1980s.'' while films like ''pirates of the caribbean: dead man's chest,'' ''cars'' and ''x-men: the last stand'' were pulling in hundreds of millions of dollars last year, ''zyzzyx rd.'' (pronounced zy-zix) amassed a total of $30. the film, starring tom sizemore, katherine heigl and leo grillo, opened its six-day run in february in dallas, making $20 in its debut showing, followed by an additional $10. the plot of the 90-minute thriller, written and directed by john penney, involves a philandering accountant (mr. grillo) who goes to las vegas on a business trip. there he encounters the seductive marissa (ms. heigl) and her jealous ex-boyfriend, joey (mr. sizemore), whom they kill and bury in the mojave desert, the site of zzyzx road in zzyzx, calif. a summary written by the producer (mr. penney again) says, ''in the 'death of a salesman' meets 'lolita' ending, 'zyzzyx rd.' reveals a shocking, tragic twist.''  