black tie optional   in the unforgiving fluorescent light of rosenfeld hall, a dormitory on the periphery of yale's campus, students crouched in a hallway and quickly stuffed their clothes into plastic grocery bags. shirts were left inside out, socks balled in pant legs. giggling, they hurried into a basement storage room, where some 40 people stood around, under stone arches and gargoyles, wearing nothing but shoes.  lighted only by tea candles, the party had the afterglow of a literary reading: students chatted in small groups, drifting toward the darkest parts of the room. arms held tight to the body, eyes unwavering from face level, they drank and smoked and talked about the fact that they were naked: ''i'm so pale.'' ''you look radiant.'' ''the air feels weird without clothes -- skin is this big sense organ.''  this was no bacchanal. a few students danced, with less body contact than normal, and the men seemed more self-conscious than the women. when a couple started making out in the back of the room, a barefoot member of the pundits, the student society that threw the party, asked them to leave.  ''person-to-space ratio is very, very important,'' he explained dispassionately. (he would not give his name because the pundits don't want the yale administration to know who they are.) he had spent part of the night shuttling people from a meeting place in the center of campus to the party at rosenfeld hall. ''we want to make sure throngs of people aren't streaming in at once,'' he said. ''also, part of it is just the mystique of not knowing where you're going. it's become sort of a hip thing to do around here.''  the pundits, founded in 1884 as a society of ''campus wits,'' have a history of rebelling against yale tradition, often through elaborate pranks. they organize six to eight covert naked parties a year, which attract anywhere from 30 to 300 people to off-campus houses, neglected rooms in classroom buildings and even small libraries on campus.  ''it's one of those things people feel they need to do before they graduate,'' says megan crandell, a senior who estimates that she has been to a half-dozen naked parties during her time at yale. ''the dynamic is completely different from a clothed party. people are so conscious of how they're coming across that conversations end up being more sophisticated. you can't talk about how hot that chick was the other night.''  the pundits have been throwing naked parties since 1995. students who throw them at brown say naked partying began there back in the 1980s. since then, the idea has caught on. wesleyan, wellesley, columbia, the massachusetts institute of technology, bowdoin and amherst have all been host to parties with similar rules: before entering, take off your clothes. the parties are rarely associated with fraternities or sororities; more often, they're thrown by campus organizations or groups of friends.  students invited to a party at columbia last year got this e-mail message: ''compadres, join us in refusing to comply with a culture that tells us to hide our body, to be ashamed of its scents, secretions, curves, and hair, to conceal those parts that have been dealt sexual connotations.''  at brown, too, the nudity is described as more of an experiment in social interaction than a sexual experience, though people begin to loosen up as the parties progress. one year, students formed a back rub chain that sprawled up a flight of stairs.  watermyn house, a living cooperative near the brown campus that houses about 15 students, throws a naked party every fall. typically, about 100 people show up, most of them having received printed invitations (in 2004, the note featured a sketch of adam and eve being banished from eden). sheets are hung in front of the windows, and students deposit their clothes in garbage bags. many don creative accessories: scarves, leg warmers, hats, belts, sashes, bunny ears. last year, a diabetic student stripped everything off but his insulin pouch, which he carried around throughout the night.  ''with this whole 20-something party culture, getting dressed to go out is such a big deal,'' says kate horning, a senior who went to the party. ''but that whole part of the evening is purposely absent. my friends who didn't go were like, 'oh, my god, were people just staring at each other's bodies all night?' and i said, 'no, people were just kind of chatting and playing pool and playing piano.' ''  katherine worteck, another senior, says the party changed her idea of what an attractive body looks like. ''we're used to the naked bodies we see on movie screens,'' she says, ''not natural, typical bodies. i found that people who would have been considered heavy with their clothes on actually looked better naked. i'm not sure why. and definitely the gaunt look was a lot less attractive. visible hip bones looked alarming. it was a nice reality check.''  the brown administration is aware of the party. ''it's not something anyone has raised concerns about,'' says russell carey, interim vice president for campus life and student services. if the party were thrown on university property, he says, the administration would feel differently. ''i'm not sure there's anything formally written, but certainly our expectation is that in public spaces, people will keep their clothes on.''  at wellesley, administrators not only know that there's a naked party every spring, they provide police security outside. a small feminist living cooperative named instead is host of the party, a charity event; the money goes to organizations that promote healthy body image for women. students are charged a dollar for every item of clothing they wear -- a small proportion strip completely and enter free.  wesleyan's naked parties are so well known that student tour guides sometimes mention them as they escort high school students and their parents around campus. but administrators frown. last year, a naked party was thrown at earth house, a university-owned off-campus residence, and a resident assistant formally warned students not to throw it again.  ''when we get wind of them, we try to discourage them, because it creates a condition too ripe for sexual harassment,'' says david pesci, a university spokesman. ''do we catch them all? obviously not.''  lauren pellegrino, a wesleyan junior who threw a naked party two years ago in her dorm, says there are clear but unstated rules for behavior at these gatherings. ''touching is an extreme no-no,'' ms. pellegrino says. ''it's in very bad taste. people look each other in the eyes more than you've ever seen. it's not a place to pick people up.''  even if the atmosphere in the party room isn't threatening, it can lead to more explicitly sexual encounters. in the spring of 2002, a yale freshman accused a senior of following her home after a naked party and making unwanted advances. he pleaded no contest to a fourth-degree sexual assault charge and in 2004 was sentenced to two years of probation.  betty trachtenberg, dean of student affairs at yale, would not comment on the incident or whether it was the only such charge related to naked parties. at the campus police department, a lieutenant said he had heard about naked parties but had never actually come across one.  yale has no rules expressly forbidding the parties. ''we have an atmosphere of trust,'' says gila reinstein, a spokeswoman. ''as you can imagine, we don't do bed checks.''  still, the combination of alcohol and nudity brings up inevitable risks. ''let's face it, for some people these parties are not about body acceptance,'' says alexandra robbins, a yale graduate who has written books on sororities, secret societies and, most recently, overachievers. instead, she says, students expect something highly sexual. ''it can be a rude awakening. i think it really comes down to the idea that if i shed my clothes, i will lose my inhibitions. but it doesn't always work that way.''  birk oxholm, who graduated from columbia in 2006 and attended a small naked party last year for a few minutes -- before retreating outside -- says he had a hard time believing everyone was feeling ''liberated.'' the party was thrown by a group of his friends in a dorm room. ''to pretend you're feeling really great and happy to be overcoming the oppressiveness of clothing, or whatever, overlooks the more authentic feeling, which is, 'i feel kind of weird right now.' ''  he describes the parties as an overload of the ''liberal college environment where everyone's talking about unfair conventions, post-structuralism, 'boxes.' i don't know.''  to many students, the parties are simply a chance to do something out of the ordinary. they provide fodder for conversation long after the event. the yale pundits, in particular, try to give each naked party its own gimmick or theme. at their first party of the year, they invite unaware freshmen and surprise them at midnight; when a designated song comes on, everyone takes off their clothes. the society has also thrown naked sushi parties, cocktail parties and ''god bless america'' parties -- students wore patriotic body paint or draped american flags over their bare shoulders. the pundits even claim that president bush's daughter, barbara, attended a naked party during her sophomore year, in 2002 (the white house declines to shed light on this).  typically the parties attract a crowd of ''pundits, their friends, comedy kids, theater kids, off-campus kids, many hipsters, mostly liberals,'' according to a recent article in the yale herald, a student publication.  occasionally the pundits bring in live music as well; the performers are naked, of course. ms. crandell says she went to one event where the members of the band hitched their guitars up to their chests instead of slinging them over their hips. ''everyone had to be equally exposed,'' she says. ''you find yourself accepting people in a completely different light. for me, there's something totally captivating about it. it reinforces in a really profound way this common thread of humanity. everyone is bared in all their glory, but it turns out no one is actually that glorious.''  as for the rest of the outfit, just leave it at the door -- this party's naked.  rachel aviv is a freelance writer in brooklyn.  