togas? they are so last century   partying can quickly become repetitive on a college campus -- same old faces, same old places. but instead of staying home, students get creative. here are some party themes that have caught on across the country.  rachel aviv  heaven and hell party  guests wander among three rooms or three floors -- each representing hell, purgatory or heaven -- sporting afterlife regalia like halos, angel's wings, pitchforks and diabolical horns. (wearing as little as possible usually qualifies as dressing for hell.)  at the college of william and mary, in virginia, students begin the evening in purgatory and then choose which room to head toward. heaven is a bedroom, covered in white toilet paper, where the bartender is dressed as god. in hell, students drink flaming rum shots -- lighted and served by someone in a devil costume. the party, which is thrown every spring by the fraternity delta phi, attracts nearly 800 people.  also popular at: the university of chicago, michigan state university and the university of georgia.  foam party  each spring, residents of mather house at harvard set up a rented foam machine in the dining hall (above). guests show up in beachwear and dance in six feet of suds. (in 2003, more than 1,000 attended; campus police had to shut it down because the slippery room was filled beyond capacity and students were falling over one another.) alcohol is not served, since navigating through foam clouds takes concentration. ''you can pick to what degree you want to be in it,'' says max chalfin, who helped organize last year's party. ''on the outskirts, ankle deep and dancing, or in the center, unable to see and breathe.''  also popular at: stanford, harvey mudd college, the university of minnesota.  stoplight party  students wear green, yellow or red, depending on their relationship status. green means ''single,'' red means ''taken,'' and yellow is somewhere in between.  ''yellow to me is if you've been on a couple dates and you haven't had the big talk to settle everything,'' says patrick bowen, a junior at the university of arkansas. his fraternity, lambda chi alpha, throws a stoplight party (above) every september attended by about 750 people. three-quarters of the guests show up in green.  ''guys in green don't waste much time,'' he says, ''talking to a lady in red.''  also popular at: scripps college, wake forest university and the university of arizona.  