thinking in colors and textures, then writing in music   the trouble with hollywood film scores these days is that so many sound as if you have heard them before. that's less the fault of composers than of directors, who commonly prescore their films with temporary music during editing, then frequently expect the final score to emulate that ''temp track.'' so originality, when it occurs, can be startling, as when american audiences first heard the enchanting waltzes of ''girl with a pearl earring'' in 2003, or the fairy-tale flutes and surging orchestral drama of ''birth'' in 2004.  both scores were the work of alexandre desplat, a 45-year-old paris composer who also scored ''syriana'' in 2005. his music for ''the queen'' and ''the painted veil'' has raised his name as a potential oscar nominee this season.  he wrote and recorded the score for ''the queen'' in just three weeks, after stephen frears, the film's director, decided another composer's score wouldn't work. ''the first thing i said to stephen was, 'it's very tricky,' '' mr. desplat said on a recent visit to los angeles. ''you can't go too dark, too suspenseful, too funny or too sweet. what i felt was necessary was music with some grandeur and elegance, but still wit. it's a witty movie.''  the resulting music is unexpectedly buoyant, even mischievous, as mr. desplat charts the delicate relationship between queen elizabeth ii (helen mirren) and prime minister tony blair (michael sheen) in the days after the death of diana, princess of wales.  ''in the end,'' mr. frears said, ''composers are good when they read the films well. his reading was very, very clever.''  in the case of ''the painted veil,'' the adaptation of a w. somerset maugham novel set in 1920s china, mr. desplat keeps the setting vague and instead traces the emotional journey of kitty (naomi watts), whose affair alters the course of her life and marriage to a scientist (edward norton). the score's surprises involve the use of an electric cello and numerous solos by lang lang, the gifted chinese pianist.  ''the movie is rather dark and restrained, even though there's a big love story,'' said mr. desplat, a tall, friendly man who manages to be both warm and slyly witty in english and french. ''we knew we didn't want to play the period. we wanted the score to be away from that. i thought about maurice jarre'' -- who composed the scores for epics like ''lawrence of arabia'' and ''doctor zhivago'' -- ''something wide and warm and lush, but i also wanted to add electronics and some ethnic instruments.''  mr. desplat thinks of himself as an international composer, he said. his greek mother and french father met in the united states while both were attending the university of california, berkeley. they were married in san francisco before moving back to paris, where mr. desplat was born in 1961. he started playing the piano at 5, later switching to trumpet and finally to flute.  ''when i was a child, i was raised almost as a little american,'' he said. ''i've been listening to american composers and watching american films since i was 14 or 15. coppola, scorsese, hitchcock, spielberg, all these masters. so writing for american movies is part of the dream.''  he underwent the traditional conservatory training in france, then, at 20, took a job traveling with a theatrical troupe, writing and playing music. when one of the actors made a short film, mr. desplat scored it. over time he developed a career in france that included work in theater, television, commercials and nearly 70 feature films.  his distinctive sounds may stem in part from the differences in filmmaking practices between europe and the united states. in europe scores are often written on much smaller budgets but less stringent time constraints, allowing film composers to orchestrate their music, which is rare in the united states.  ''the first moment i see a movie, i don't think melodies, i think colors,'' mr. desplat said. ''before i find a structure and the way i would write a motif or character moments, i think about what the orchestra will play. what texture does this movie need?''  conversations with the composer are peppered with references to music of every genre. the names of toru takemitsu, the japanese classical composer; bill evans, the jazz pianist; antonio carlos jobim, the bossa nova great; and john adams, the american composer, are most frequently mentioned. if the subject turns to film music, it's equally likely you'll hear the names bernard herrmann and georges delerue, best known for their hitchcock and truffaut scores.  ''desplat lives his music without any partitions or barriers,'' the music historian and producer stéphane lerouge said recently by e-mail from paris. ''he has no bias. he's as much a son of jobim as herrmann, as much mancini as delerue.''  directors who have worked with mr. desplat invariably mention his music for the films of jacques audiard as one reason they chose him. the composer has scored all four of mr. audiard's features, winning a césar award last year for ''de battre mon coeur s'est arrêté'' (''the beat that my heart skipped'') and nominations for two others.  peter webber, the director of ''girl with a pearl earring'' -- a film that imagines the story behind johannes vermeer's 17th-century painting -- saw an audiard film and knew he had found his composer. ''he had a sense of restraint and a sense of lyricism that i liked,'' mr. webber said. ''i remember the first time i saw the cue where griet opens the shutters. he was really describing what the light was doing, articulating that in a musical sphere.''  on ''birth,'' ''alexandre was tacitly able to tune into the pictures,'' jonathan glazer, the film's director, said, writing from london. ''he managed to transform the film's undertones into music. he knew how to get the inside on the outside. he's a witch doctor.''  it was the music of ''birth'' that attracted john curran, the director of ''the painted veil.'' ''i hired alexandre before i hired anybody else, including the cinematographer and the designer,'' he said. ''that's how badly i wanted to work with him.''  the ''girl with a pearl earring'' music received a golden globe nomination, as did mr. desplat's middle eastern-flavored score for ''syriana.'' oscar attention has thus far eluded him, but that seems destined to change. he has already won los angeles film critics association honors for best music, given jointly for ''the queen'' and ''the painted veil,'' and a golden globe nomination for ''the painted veil.''  mr. desplat's next project is ''mr. magorium's wonder emporium,'' the directorial debut of zach helm, who wrote ''stranger than fiction.'' the film is a fantasy starring dustin hoffman and natalie portman, who plays a pianist. mr. desplat, whose has worked on the score for a year, has composed the music that ms. portman's character performs.  one of his refreshing traits -- and one reason his work is so effective -- is his lack of interest in musically underlining the action on the screen, unlike many of his american counterparts.  ''the main goal is to be able to write music which is dedicated to the movie but still stands by itself,'' he said. ''i don't want to be a machine that writes notes. when i go to a concert, i don't like a soloist who playsnotes, i want to hear a soloist who plays music. it's about moving you, about making your emotions tremble. if i can achieve that, then i have succeeded.''  the oscars  