6 ohio cities rush to file suits against makers of lead paint   racing against a proposed state law that would limit paint manufacturers' liability for lead poisoning in aging neighborhoods, cincinnati has joined five other ohio cities in filing suits that seek millions of dollars from the companies to clean up lead paint.  ohio is the latest front in a battle that pits paint companies against cities and states struggling to overcome problems associated with lead poisoning.  the problems include learning impairment in children, high blood pressure in adults and, at high levels of exposure, seizures, comas and deaths.  municipal and county governments in california, mississippi, missouri, new jersey and texas have also sued major manufacturers seeking what would amount to billions of dollars in damages.  whether responsibility rests primarily with paint companies, landlords who let paint deteriorate or cities that fail to enforce housing codes remains an open question.  rhode island broke new ground in february by winning a jury trial that found that three paint companies had created a public nuisance and had to clean up lead-paint contamination throughout the state at an estimated cost of $1.37 billion to $3.74 billion.  the companies are seeking a new trial there and trying to fend off litigation throughout the country. they are sherwin-williams, based in cleveland; nl industries, part of valhi of dallas and whose predecessor national lead made dutch boy paint; and millennium holdings of hunt valley, md., a successor to a company that owned glidden paint, originally based in cleveland.  ''the movement is gaining steam,'' jack mcconnell, the lead lawyer in the ohio lawsuits and a participant in the rhode island trial, said. ''we've seen it both in the rhode island trial and in three or four appellate court decisions, all of which have ruled against the lead-paint industry.''  lawyers for paint companies say such suits unjustifiably shift responsibility from the cities that failed to enforce housing codes that would have kept lead paint from deteriorating and affecting residents.  ''did the companies know that lead was toxic?'' asked bonnie campbell, who represents several paint manufacturers. ''sure, everybody knew that. what wasn't known was that property owners wouldn't take care of their property.''  ms. campbell noted that most manufacturers voluntarily began removing lead from their products in 1955, when problems became apparent.  in ohio, gov. bob taft decided on friday to allow a bill to become law without his signature that will ban future suits like those filed by the cities that are based on public nuisance grounds. plaintiffs will instead have to rely on product liability law, which requires proof linking lead paint in a given home to a specific manufacturer. noneconomic damages, including punitive damages, will be capped at $5,000 a consumer, instead of being unlimited.  mr. taft said that provision prevented him from signing the bill because the cap was too low.  