nets keep composure and pull off comeback   jason kidd hit a shot friday night that had his teammate hassan adams running in place and screaming on the sideline like a child in a schoolyard. the shot left many in continental arena with ear-to-ear grins, wide-eyed looks and hanging jaws.  yet that may not have been the most spectacular thing they witnessed.  that distinction might belong to the nets' shaking off an 18-0 deficit and defeating the chicago bulls, 91-86, in their first game of the new year.  the nets (14-18) showed the type of resiliency they could only have dreamed of through their disappointing first 31 games of the season.  ''to me, the most impressive thing is, compared to some prior games that we've had, we kept our composure, we kept our poise,'' nets coach lawrence frank said. ''we didn't break.''  chicago got out to that 18-0 lead by hitting 7 of its first 10 shots and forcing the nets into four turnovers. the nets missed their first nine shots and did not score until richard jefferson hit a free throw 6 minutes 34 seconds into the game.  that start was a distant memory by the beginning of the fourth quarter, when the bulls led by only 2 points. the nets executed in those final 12 minutes, yet another quality they have lacked for much of the season. nine times this season, the nets have squandered leads in the final six minutes.  but friday night, their execution was punctuated by several timely shots late in the game.  vince carter, who led the nets with 21 points, hit a long jumper over kirk hinrich with 1:05 to play that gave the nets an 85-84 lead they did not relinquish.  on the bulls' next possession, kidd (17 points, 10 rebounds, 7 assists, 5 steals) slapped the ball from ben gordon's hands. he raced the other way for an uncontested layup that gave the nets an 87-84 lead with 53 seconds left.  that play provided a prelude to his circus shot.  kidd drove past adrian griffin along the baseline and into the middle of the lane. with wallace in his way, kidd turned his back to the basket and flicked the ball over his head with his left hand. the shot banked in to give the nets an 89-84 advantage with 15 seconds to play.  ''i was a little stuck,'' kidd said, ''and i just threw it up, hoping that it would just hit the rim and kind of kill time.''  small forward richard jefferson, who scored 18 points, called it ''one of the craziest on-purpose shots i have ever seen at the end of the game.''  adams said: ''it was crazy that he did that. it felt like it was in rhythm, like he'd been doing that, like a go-to move.''  in the fourth quarter, forward bostjan nachbar made two 3-pointers for the nets. he was making his first start of the season, and he tied a season high with 16 points.  the nets have won three games in a row for the first time this season and may finally be able to speak with some confidence, having beaten the bulls (19-14), one of the eastern conference's best teams.  the nets won the game without jason collins, their starting power forward, who missed the game with a strained lower back.  the nets will have little time to celebrate. they travel to cleveland on saturday for a game against the cavaliers and lebron james.  at this time a year ago, the nets were in the midst of a 10-game winning streak. later in the season, the nets had a 14-game winning streak that created a bravado they relied on for the rest of their schedule.  on thursday, carter reflected on those winning streaks by saying, ''we just felt unbeatable.''  he added: ''it's just not the case right now. we feel like we have to win by any means necessary. last year, we kind of felt, especially during those two win streaks, even when we were losing, we still felt like we could walk on the floor and beat anybody.''  slowly but surely, the nets are trying to regain that swagger, one trick shot at a time.  rebounds  nets center nenad krstic, who sustained a season-ending tear of his anterior cruciate ligament two weeks ago, spoke with reporters for the first time since then before friday night's game against the bulls. krstic, wearing jeans and a sweater and lounging on a leather sofa, said that he was over the initial shock and that he felt good mentally and physically. krstic is to have surgery wednesday, and he said that doctors told him he could be playing basketball again by june or july.  the swingman bernard robinson, who was acquired from the charlotte bobcats for point guard jeff mcinnis on wednesday, joined the nets on friday. he was inactive for the game against the bulls.  pro basketball  