day after killings, a hamas leader calls for a truce   the palestinian prime minister, ismail haniya, called friday for an end to the internal violence in the gaza strip, a day after members of his own hamas militia surrounded the house of a fatah commander, killed him and his bodyguards and seriously wounded his wife and brother.  before his death, the commander, col. muhammad gharib, begged for help on a live telephone call to palestinian television, saying his home near jabaliya was being attacked by the executive force, a parallel security force under the command of the hamas-run interior ministry, but that fatah leaders and fighters did not respond.  ''they are killers,'' he said of the gunmen. ''they are targeting the house. children are dying, they are bleeding. for god's sake, send an ambulance! we want an ambulance -- somebody move!''  on friday, fatah issued a statement suggesting another round of retaliation. ''all killers are legitimate targets,'' the statement said, adding, ''what is called the executive force is an enemy.''  the statement, confirmed by a fatah official, abdel-hakim awad, also said negotiations with hamas on a unity government were impossible in the present atmosphere.  ''there will be no dialogue in the midst of this series of killings and organized terrorism practiced by hamas,'' the statement said, calling on the palestinian authority president, mahmoud abbas, to fire interior minister said siam and disband the executive force.  ''said siam is responsible for the execution and the cold-blooded murder to which our martyrs in jabaliya were subjected,'' the statement said.  mr. abbas, who met with mr. haniya early friday in an attempt to restore calm, tried to disband the executive force when it was established, but failed. now it has about 6,000 men, including several hundred drawn from factions usually loyal to mr. abbas's fatah movement.  hamas officials said colonel gharib had been responsible for the deaths of two of their fighters.  mr. abbas has called for early parliamentary and presidential elections, a challenge to the hamas government, which won parliamentary elections a year ago. hamas has said it will not allow early elections, which it says are illegal, and has moved to enforce its hold over gaza while calling for renewed talks on a unity government that mr. haniya would lead.  the new tensions have set off a series of battles between hamas and fatah forces that show no sign of ending, despite various efforts to restore calm.  there were emotional funerals on friday for some of the dead from the attack on thursday on colonel gharib's home. two more people who had been wounded died friday, bringing the total to eight. as a funeral cortege passed the colonel's blackened, shrapnel-riddled house, masked men fired guns into the air and shouted for revenge.  in palestinian violence on thursday, more than 60 people were wounded, including 10 children, palestinian medics said. on wednesday, five people died from violence.  on friday a local cleric and frequent critic of hamas, adel nasar, was murdered as he left his mosque, witnesses told the associated press.  there was no claim of responsibility in the death of mr. nasar, who was not openly affiliated with any political party, though he often spoke against hamas in his sermons. in his sermon on friday, mr. nasar warned that god would punish the killers of colonel gharib and his bodyguards, as well as the palestinian rulers for not putting the rule of god into effect, witnesses said.  speaking in another mosque on friday, mr. haniya called for palestinian guns to be aimed at israelis, not other palestinians. ''our fight is not an internal one, it's against the occupation,'' he said. but it is increasingly clear that mr. haniya, although prime minister, does not have operational control over many of the hamas gunmen, just as mr. abbas cannot control fatah-affiliated militias.  as in iraq, the division of power created by democratic elections, in the absence of a traditional powerful state or after the disappearance of one, has meant the continuation of party politics through armed militias affiliated with factions but not always controlled by them.  in the west bank on friday, fatah supporters celebrated an anniversary by attending the weekly demonstration against israel's separation barrier in the town of bilin, where the barrier cuts off the village from much of its farmland.  the demonstrators are a mixture of palestinians, israelis and foreigners, and as usual, what was supposed to be a nonviolent protest turned into exchanges of rocks, rubber-coated bullets and tear gas with the israeli army and the border police.  ten demonstrators were wounded, and two were hospitalized. jibril rajoub, a fatah member and former security chief, said, ''our battle with hamas is not a battle of assassination, kidnapping or revenge.''  ''our battle is with the occupation, not with each other,'' he added.  according to reuters, the bush administration is asking congress for $86 million in aid, not including weapons and ammunition, to bolster mr. abbas and his presidential guard. the aid, mostly training and supplies, according to an american document obtained by reuters, is intended ''to dismantle the infrastructure of terrorism and establish law and order in the west bank and gaza.'' officials said previously that they expected to ask for nearly $100 million for the effort, which has itself been widely reported.  in israel, there were recriminations over a failed army arrest raid in the center of the west bank city of ramallah on thursday, hours before prime minister ehud olmert was to meet president hosni mubarak of egypt. the wanted man, though wounded, escaped, and four palestinians were killed as israeli forces exchanged fire with palestinians in violent scenes that were televised live on al jazeera.  mr. olmert's aides said he had not been informed of the raid in advance and was angry about what had happened. the violence overshadowed the summit meeting, which olmert aides said had gone well.  benjamin ben-eliezer, an israeli cabinet member and former defense minister, criticized the timing of the raid. ''i don't think this operation should have been carried out on the day of a visit by the israeli prime minister to a country in which we have a supreme strategic interest,'' he told israel radio. ''our relations with egypt are more important to us than anything else.''  