a poolside idyll, an unwelcome visitor, an explosion of fear   on a hot summer afternoon in an affluent boston suburb, the town swimming pool is swarming with watchful mothers and their noisy young children at play. the pool is where sarah pierce (kate winslet), the mother of a little girl, lucy (sadie goldstein), and brad adamson (patrick wilson), a stay-at-home father, whose son, aaron (ty simpkins), is lucy's age, have chosen to carry on a discreet flirtation under the guise of neighborly parenting in todd field's ''little children.''  both sarah and brad are married. brad is so movie-star handsome that the young mothers who admire him from a distance at the playground have nicknamed him the prom king. sarah, the only one in the group to have introduced herself to him, did so on a dare. now they are friends, struggling to conceal their intensifying mutual desire.  on this particular muggy afternoon both are wrung out by the sweltering heat.  ''hot enough for you?'' sarah mumbles, sprawled on the grass in her new red bathing suit with a piece of clothing tossed over her eyes against the sun.  ''yeah, it's so humid,'' he replies. ''i got football practice tonight. be like playing in a sauna.''  ''watch out for that italian guy, what's his name? corrente?'' she asks.  ''yeah.''  ''remember what happened to your knee last week,'' she cautions. ''you should be careful, brad.''  ''i'll be careful.''  ''honest?''  ''yeah i promise. '' squinting, he looks toward the sky. ''weatherman said scattered showers. i don't see scattered showers.''  the camera notices a group of women playing cards and another woman reading vanity fair.  two brats pester their mother for food, and are rebuffed. ''no, sweetheart, you guys just had snacks. no.'' exasperated, she turns to a neighbor. ''all they want is sugar. constantly.''  suddenly a man in his late 40s, with a cadaverous face, thinning hair and dead white skin, appears, padding purposefully toward the pool in black flippers, carrying a snorkel. it is the movie's first appearance of ronnie j. mcgorvey (jackie earle haley), the town pariah, whose face was glimpsed earlier in the film on posters distributed by a group of townspeople calling itself the committee of concerned parents. ronnie, we have already learned, was recently released from prison after serving two years for exposing himself to a minor, and has moved back to town.  unnoticed at first, he puts on the equipment and plunks into the water with a loud splash, as the camera follows him into the pool below the water line, where the sounds from above are muffled. after he takes a second dunk, sarah notices him and frowns.  ''oh, no,'' she says pulling herself up and sighing. ''it's him.''  ''oh, jesus,'' brad mutters.  two other mothers catch sight of ronnie.  ''oh, my god, it's him! he's in the pool.''  the word of ronnie's presence spreads like electricity.  ''why is everyone running to the pool?'' one woman wonders aloud, as frantic mothers start calling out the names of their children and shouting, ''you'd better get over here!''  sarah and brad, standing and holding their newly retrieved children, observe the spreading alarm that the children have begun to sense, and several begin to cry.  as they scramble out of the pool, scooped up by their parents, ronnie bobs back under the water. within two minutes the crowded pool has emptied, and the raucousness subsides. the mothers, their faces knotted in hostility, now ring the pool, clutching their children and glaring silently at ronnie, who descends underwater one more time and propels himself across the pool.  from a distance two policemen advance. lucy, turning to sarah, asks in a plaintive voice, ''why the police is here?''  her mother replies, ''there's a man over there that doesn't have a ticket to get in, so they're asking him to go home.''  one of the policemen calls out: ''mr. mcgorvey! mr. mcgorvey! would you mind getting out of the pool at this time?''  still in the water and wearing goggles, looking like a monster that has fallen from outer space onto the wrong planet, ronnie, expressionless, blinks behind his mask, then slowly swims to the side.  ''step out of the pool, sir,'' one officer demands.  he emerges from the water and removes his flippers and goggles. then a policeman takes him gently by the arm and begins to shepherd him away. just as ronnie appears to be meekly acquiescing, he turns back toward the accusing crowd and shouts, ''i was only trying to cool off!''  ''all right, let's go, come on,'' the officer says firmly.  after a split second of silence, the children erupt in tumultuous chatter. higher pitched than before, it is a collective exhalation of relief, as the children, released by their mothers, tumble pell-mell back into the water.  the sky is darkening, and there is a rumble of thunder.  this disturbing, acutely observed scene bares the state of anxiety that seethes just below the idyllic surface of upscale suburban america. the wave of panic sweeping over the parents reveals a pervasive fortress mentality. the communal loathing of this pathetic middle-aged flasher borders perilously close to mob fury. to the assembled parents the fishlike ronnie is nothing less than a ravenous carp let loose in a goldfish bowl. for these grown-up ''little children,'' he is the bogeyman incarnate.  the scene's brilliance lies in the microscopically perfect eye for detail shared by mr. field and his collaborator on the screenplay, tom perrotta, who wrote the novel from which ''little children'' was adapted. in a ferociously complex ensemble scene involving several dozen actors, not an inflection or beat rings false.  the oscars  