leaked notes on '08 show giuliani without the spin   the country sure has been enjoying itself reading about the rudy caper, feasting on the inside dish gleaned from rudolph w. giuliani's presidential playbook.  the purloined or lost document gives outsiders a glimpse behind the curtain, a rare look at political calculations that, if predictable in their revelations, are decidedly surprising in their candor. irresistible. the unexpected -- the macaca tidbit, it might be called today -- is always irresistible in the game of control that is politics.  consider the alternative: mr. giuliani's own site on the internet joinrudy2008.com, which went up last month when he formed his presidential exploratory committee. anyone with a computer can access the cheerful red, white and blue site to learn how the former mayor wants the public to see him, how he would like to be portrayed in a presidential campaign.  the rudy giuliani portrayed on joinrudy2008.com is a dragon slayer with a record of unmitigated success. he is a man with an open smile, replacing the fearsome city hall scowl that he used so often to great effect.  while the site is shiny and superspun, the campaign document -- whether it was stolen and leaked by a giuliani political opponent as the former mayor contends, or provided to the daily news by someone sympathetic to a rival, as the newspaper contends -- is dark and forthright.  and so the leaked campaign notebook has created a stir, and surely not for its contents. what else should giuliani advisers do but plan to raise a lot of money from the superrich, and worry about their man's political vulnerabilities?  the giuliani campaign document is anti-spin. meant for insider eyes, it concedes that mr. giuliani as a presidential candidate may have to contend with such trouble as questions about his former wife, donna hanover, and his former associate, the controversial bernard b. kerik. it cites concerns about mr. giuliani's relatively liberal positions on social issues -- stances not likely to find favor with the republican party's conservative wing.  this is all surely true.  the other way to look at these matters is: don't look at them. that is the joinrudy2008.com web site's way.  for instance, the web site liberally features judith nathan, mr. giuliani's current wife, providing a polished version of her career, accompanied by two flattering photographs.  nowhere on the site is there even a mention of ms. hanover, married to mr. giuliani for 18 years and the mother of his two children. they divorced in 2002 after mr. giuliani announced to a stunned press corps, without, ms. hanover later said, telling her first, that the couple was splitting up.  the web site doesn't mention mr. giuliani's first wife either, regina peruggi.  it does not mention the former mayor's two children, andrew and caroline.  it does not mention mr. kerik, the disgraced former police commissioner who would have been the secretary of homeland security today if his messy past hadn't caught up with him.  it does not mention amadou diallo, the unarmed west african immigrant whose death in 1999 in a fusillade of 41 police bullets was one of the most wrenching episodes of the giuliani mayoralty.  the web site does not cite the social issues referred to in the leaked document either -- his support for abortion rights, civil rights for gay people, and gun control, for instance -- positions that are not popular with many conservative republicans.  as many political analysts have frequently pointed out, his record and conduct before the sept. 11 attack are not well known to those beyond the borders of new york city, and as a private citizen for the last five years, he has often been able to stay above the political infighting on issues like iraq or global warming, unless he has chosen to get involved.  the web site won't fill in the blanks, focusing as it naturally does on mr. giuliani's strongest and best-known accomplishments, from presiding over a significant reduction in crime to becoming ''america's mayor'' after sept. 11.  his record is portrayed only in a successful light.  missing is any reference to the famous giuliani combativeness, which he and many (not all) new yorkers seemed to relish; that crime had actually begun to go down before he took office; that the city, which improved in many areas during his mayoralty, was still not a utopia after two terms of his leadership; that polls showed that many new yorkers, including some who had voted for him, had grown weary of his pugnacious style.  asked about the site's contents yesterday, a spokeswoman for mr. giuliani, sunny mindel, said she would not comment.  the web sites of other prospective candidates are just as relentlessly positive because, political strategists note, they are no more than the cyberspace version of campaign brochures.  most voters recognize the limitations of today's managed politics, those same strategists say -- from the sound bite to the carefully modulated speech -- and so relish the unscripted moments. almost as much as reporters do.  political memo  