for this broadway musical, the casting agents are tv viewers   in almost every way, ''you're the one that i want,'' the ''american idol''-like reality show in which viewers pick actors to play sandy dumbrowski and danny zuko in a broadway production of ''grease,'' was inevitable.  first, the show's british relative -- ''how do you solve a problem like maria?'' which was aimed at finding a maria for a west end production of ''the sound of music'' -- definitely did something good. ''maria,'' the brainchild of andrew lloyd webber, drew millions of viewers; the winner, connie fisher, was welcomed by the critics; and the west end production is making a mint.  ''you're the one,'' which has its premiere tomorrow night on nbc, is set up in the standard format for talent competitions. contestants audition in front of three judges: david ian, a producer of the revival (and a producer of ''the sound of music''); kathleen marshall, who will direct and choreograph the revival; and jim jacobs, one of the creators of ''grease.'' the judges are shown narrowing the group down to 12 in the first few episodes; after that, the episodes are live, and the folks at home vote. billy bush narrates.  but ''you're the one'' was not simply a reaction to the success of ''maria.'' in fact, bbc worldwide pitched ''maria'' to several american networks before it began broadcasting the show in britain, said craig plestis, the senior vice president for alternative programming for nbc.  unlike ''the sound of music,'' though, a production of ''grease'' was already lined up for broadway. mr. ian, who produced a long-running revival of ''grease'' in london, had been trying to bring a production of ''grease'' to broadway for years. (a revival produced by fran and barry weissler closed in 1998.) nederlander presentations and mr. ian -- along with mr. ian's partner paul nicholas and phoenix productions -- eventually worked out a deal to put it on in 2008.  mr. ian had also been trying, like many others, to persuade ron taft, a lawyer who manages the rights for ''grease,'' to make the audition process into a reality show.  ''right after 'american idol,' i get calls from everyone saying, 'let's do an ''american idol'' to cast ''grease.'' ' every time i just say no,'' mr. taft said.  last spring mr. taft and mr. jacobs finally agreed to the idea. bbc worldwide and nbc went forward with the television show, and the nederlander organization and mr. ian moved up the broadway production to the summer of 2007. the current plan is for ''grease'' to open, with its already famous stars, in august at the brooks atkinson theater.  unlike ''idol,'' ''you're the one'' is not supposed to be exclusively an amateur night. the rules of ''idol'' require that contestants not have any current contracts or talent representation; ''you're the one,'' on the other hand, is simply an open casting call, for novices as well as active broadway performers. a prospective danny in the first episode, for example, has several national tours under his belt.  but that is part of the show's tricky balancing act. reality television producers and viewers still love the nobody from nowhere who wins it all; the first episode puts heavy (and at times, teary) emphasis on the contestants' personal stories. but the winners also have to hold up a $10 million musical eight times a week for at least a year, a demanding feat for a total greenhorn.  ''we absolutely would love for a carpenter from idaho to be danny,'' said al edgington, the executive producer of the television show. ''but the reality is, they have to be able to perform. if the carpenter from idaho does end up being danny, kathleen may be in trouble.''  if ''you're the one'' has any of the success that ''maria'' has, there will be a lot of happy producers, in both theater and tv land. but the question will then become: what next?  though it may not be in every avid theater fan's top 10 list, ''grease'' fits the project in ways few other musicals do. the lead characters are young, and there is flexibility in the race of the actors portraying them. the soundtrack is rock 'n' roll, and the characters drive fast cars and look sexy in leather jackets. most important, ''grease'' was made into a movie that has become part of the popular culture, featuring two stars who made it big (for a while, at least).  executives involved with the television show said there were discussions about what to do next, but no one was quick with a suggestion.  ''i don't know what the obvious one is,'' mr. edgington said. ''maybe there's a way of recasting 'grease' every year.''  there is always ''the sound of music,'' which also has a movie going for it. in britain mr. lloyd webber is working on another television show that will cast the leads of a revival of ''joseph and the amazing technicolor dreamcoat.'' (there is also going to be a show, from simon cowell's production company, that will cast danny and sandy in a london production of ''grease.'' david ian will be a judge on that show as well.)  mr. plestis said that there had been talks with mr. lloyd webber but that, for now, nbc was focusing on making ''grease'' work.  