ethics overhaul tops the agenda as the democrats take over   on the brink of regaining power after 12 years, house democrats said wednesday that they would move immediately to try to sever ties between lawmakers and lobbyists who figured into scandals that helped democrats win control of congress.  democrats, who campaigned relentlessly last year on the theme of a republican culture of corruption, introduced the proposed ethics rules as part of a week of choreography designed to deliver the message that they did not intend to do business as usual in washington. in some cases, like restrictions on the use of corporate jets, the rules on gifts and travel by lobbyists go further than what democrats had pledged earlier.  another part of the democrats' package called for detailed disclosure of pet projects or special-interest tax benefits that individual lawmakers insert into major bills. on wednesday, president bush jumped into the debate on such spending projects, called earmarks, urging that their number and cost be cut in half this year, a proposal that democrats immediately rejected.  the ethics issue continued to reverberate wednesday, officially the last day of republican control. two house republicans, representative curt weldon of pennsylvania and tom feeney of florida, agreed to pay for trips that the ethics committee determined had been improperly paid for by outside interests.  mr. feeney's case involved a $5,640 trip to scotland originally paid for by jack abramoff, the now-imprisoned lobbyist who was at the center of the congressional corruption scandals. mr. weldon, who was defeated for re-election, will pay $23,000 for an undisclosed trip.  the rules changes would also take aim at the so-called k street project, the effort associated with the hardball tactics of the former republican leader tom delay, to pressure trade groups and lobbying firms to hire republicans or face the legislative consequences. the proposal would prohibit lawmakers and staff members from trying to exert partisan influence on hiring decisions.  ''i think this package is more than a good-faith effort,'' said meredith mcgehee, policy director of the campaign legal center, an ethics group. referring to the incoming house speaker, nancy pelosi, ms. mcgehee said, ''if these rule changes are any indication, she is serious.''  but the ethics rules do not address the most valuable gifts that come from lobbyists and others interested in legislation: campaign donations. and the democratic party's fund-raising machine -- revved up by the advantages of being in the majority -- continued apace this week with individual members inviting lobbyists and other contributors to a host of events.  on thursday night, mrs. pelosi is having a $1,000-a-head fund-raiser with performances by tony bennett, carole king, wyclef jean and the surviving members of the grateful dead. ''ms. pelosi is a huge dead fan,'' her spokeswoman said.  senator richard j. durbin was among those who stopped by a reception wednesday evening for a fellow illinois democrat, representative melissa bean, who won a close and expensive re-election race in november. the reception, at johnny's half shell, a restaurant on capitol hill popular with lobbyists and lawmakers, drew lobbyists from both parties.  as they prepared for the pomp and festivities that will mark the capitol hill power switch, democrats got a taste of the potential difficulties of governing with thin majorities in the house and senate as well as a republican white house and a presidential election two years off.  while democrats sought to introduce their ethics legislation at a news conference, the antiwar activist cindy sheehan and others interrupted with chants of ''troops home now; de-escalate, investigate.'' the scene vividly illustrated the pressure that democrats will face from the left wing of their party to challenge president bush more aggressively on iraq. ms. sheehan and other antiwar advocates felt they contributed to the democrats' takeover of congress.  at the same time, republicans made clear they intend to hold democrats accountable for their pledge to allow more minority party participation in legislation. they assailed democrats' plans to push through major legislation right away without allowing republican alternatives. though the republicans severely limited democrats' input when they were in charge, they rejected accusations that they were hypocritical.  ''the important point here is that the american people were promised a new way of doing business in the united states congress,'' said representative adam h. putnam of florida, chairman of the house republican conference.  representative steny h. hoyer of maryland, the new majority leader, said republicans would get their chance after democrats disposed of legislation on national security, minimum wage, prescription drug costs, stem cell research, student loan costs and energy.  ''we said to the american people, 'if you elect us, if you put us in charge, this is what we are going to do and we are going to do it in the first 100 hours,' '' mr. hoyer told reporters.  democrats were dogged by technical difficulties when a changeover in house web sites delayed the formal posting of their ethics proposal.  the senate will convene thursday as well, with democrats and republicans meeting first in an unofficial closed-door session in the old senate chambers to try to find some common ground. aides said the senate was going to take up its own ethics package next week, allowing a week or more of floor debate to shape legislation.  besides the rules barring lawmakers from accepting gifts, meals or trips from lobbyists or the organizations that employ them, the house democratic plan would also require preapproval from the ethics committee for any trips paid for by other outside groups aside from educational institutions.  on the subject of corporate jets, democrats had previously discussed raising the rate at which lawmakers reimburse corporations or other sponsors for flights, but still allowing use of the jets. but the rules proposed wednesday would bar lawmakers from any use of corporate jets.  previous democratic and republican proposals about shedding light on earmarks, the pet projects lawmakers insert into major spending bills, left large loopholes, particularly in regard to military contracts.  in contrast, the new rules appear to apply to all spending earmarks as well as tax or tariff provisions that benefit fewer than 10 companies or people. they would also require disclosure of such items in each bill as well as the individual sponsors.  the rules would further require each house member requesting an earmark or limited tax provision to certify that he or she would not profit from the provision.  democratic leaders also said that in february they would take up potential new restrictions on members of congress and staff members becoming lobbyists, and that in march they would consider creating an outside panel to enforce the ethics rules -- a step that lawmakers of both parties have resisted.  president bush called for the democrats to adopt even more drastic restrictions on earmarks, a perennial bane to executive branch officials who resent congressional meddling in their budgets.  ''one important message we all should take from the elections is that people want to end the secretive process by which washington insiders are able to get billions of dollars directed to projects, many of them pork barrel projects that have never been reviewed or voted on by the congress,'' mr. bush said. he called on democrats to require ''full disclosure'' of ''the costs, the recipients, and the justifications for every earmark'' as well as sponsors.  the 110th congress  