toy trains and real pizza, discovered by chance   i had never paid much attention to pizzaworks, at the old saybrook train station, until the night my daughter called to say that her train was running a few hours late. we were already at the station, so the restaurant there, its roof adorned with the funky ''pie and suds'' sign, emerged as an unexpected ally.  inside, i was surprised to find that it also displayed an unexpected charm. we were led past the open kitchen, to one of several tables down half a flight of stairs. the aesthetic of the place, with its dark wood, rustic décor and red-checked tablecloths, was perfectly reminiscent of the italo-american pizza restaurants of the 1960s; all it needed was some wax-encrusted chianti bottles doubling as candlestick holders.  families appeared to dominate the floor above the kitchen, and with good reason. at one end of the narrow space, a knot of youngsters seemed mesmerized by the restaurant's model train as it chugged its way across a shelf from one side of the room to the other. the adults, liberated for the moment from parenting responsibilities, were serenaded by the occasional clatter of the ''big'' trains rumbling by on the real tracks just behind the restaurant.  the menu is comprehensive, ranging from plain pizza topped with red sauce and cheese to more complicated, strictly american inventions like the hawaiian ( with pineapple and bacon). or you may choose from a long list of other toppings to create your own. a small selection of pastas and salads is also available.  i am a purist; we ordered a mozzarella pie and a large blacksmith salad -- greens, sliced mushrooms, tomatoes, onion, grated parmesan and a balsamic vinaigrette -- to share, along with a $16 bottle of chianti.  and that, to my mind, is the best way to eat here.  the salad was fresh, crunchy and well seasoned, and the vinaigrette only a little too sweet for my taste.  the tomato sauce tasted appropriately of tomato and herbs (and not too sweet), and the pizza was not overloaded with cheese. the crust was remarkably good, crisp without being hard or crackerlike, yet pleasantly chewy, with a nice, yeasty taste. i was so impressed with it that i later dragged a friend who is a professional baker to dinner one night to inspect it. pressing it gently between thumb and forefinger, he eventually announced appreciatively that it had ''very good structure'' but could have been cooked somewhat longer for color.  the chianti, perfectly adequate for the occasion, made for a fine, inexpensive table wine.  since that first night, i've tried a number of the nontraditional pizzas, as well as the few pastas and several of the salads. the margarita and the broccoli-bacon pizzas were good choices, even with winter tomatoes. the three-cheese and five-cheese pizzas were pleasantly salty and cheesy. but protein-heavy toppings like shrimp and chicken were usually overcooked (the shrimp were on the edge of freshness when i tried them) and the clams have been tough. a pesto mushroom pizza, smeared with a well-made rendition of the classic basil sauce, scattered with mushrooms, had very nice flavor, though the total effect was rather dry.  i prefer the pizzas to the pastas, which are a notch overcooked, and the blacksmith remains my favorite salad, with the gargantuan mozzarella salad a close second. (the chutney dressing on another salad, dubbed sheila's favorite, is very sweet, and the gorgonzola cheese doesn't have much taste).  if you choose well, you can eat well at pizzaworks for very little money, even if you splurge on a kentucky derby pie (it tastes like a big, soft, warm chocolate chip cookie) for dessert. the restaurant also serves children's pasta portions, making it a small slice of heaven for parents with little ones who are likely to find the model train as appealing as the pizza.  pizzaworks pie & suds  455 boston post road  old saybrook  (860) 388-2218  good  the space -- a large two-story building with open kitchen. lots of light during daylight hours. model trains upstairs. wheelchair ramp.  the crowd -- casual; mostly couples and families. youthful, friendly service.  the bar -- restaurant serves beer and wine.  the bill -- pizzas, $7.50 to $14.95, extra toppings $2 to $3, $8 for shrimp. main-course salads, $7.95 to $10.45. lunch pastas, $6.50 to $9.45; dinner, $9.95 to $12.95. mastercard and visa, no checks.  what we like -- several pizzas (plain, mozzarella, fresh margarita, three-cheese special, five-cheese special and broccoli, bacon and tomato); blacksmith salad; kentucky derby pie.  if you go -- monday and tuesday, 4 to 9 p.m.; wednesday, thursday and sunday, 11:30 a.m. to 9 p.m.; friday and saturday, 11:30 a.m. to 10 p.m. slices (cheese and pepperoni only) available from 11:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.; whole pizzas and lunch portions available all day.  dining/old saybrook  