eastwood confounds expectations, and schedules   when the hollywood studios did early academy awards planning this year, they assumed that ''flags of our fathers'' and its director, clint eastwood, would be in the thick of things. an industry favorite, he and his films have been nominated three times for best director and best picture and won each twice. with mr. eastwood as director and steven spielberg as a producer, ''flags of our fathers'' had pedigree, a portentous topic and ferocious backing from paramount and dreamworks.  but something funny happened on the way to the podium: hardly anybody went to see the movie, and critics, who generally swoon when mr. eastwood is near, were respectful at best.  this being hollywood, no one wishes ill of anyone of course -- at least not aloud -- but other parties with big oscar bets on the table could not be blamed for breathing a collective sigh of relief.  then in november word came that ''letters from iwo jima,'' the much smaller sibling of ''flags of our fathers,'' would be released in december, and consequently be eligible for academy consideration. while filming ''flags of our fathers,'' about the men who raised the american flag on iwo jima, mr. eastwood became fascinated by the tenaciousness of the japanese in a losing battle and conceived, then separately shot, ''letters from iwo jima,'' essentially documenting one of world war ii's most vicious engagements from both sides. (there are some crisscrossing interests at work: paramount/dreamworks own the domestic release for ''flags'' while warner brothers have the foreign rights for that film and both domestic and foreign rights for ''letters.'')  the original plan -- rendered moot by the underperformance of ''flags of our fathers'' -- had been to release ''letters from iwo jima'' on feb. 9, 2007, into what was hoped would be another round of post-oscar nomination buzz. but emboldened by the ecstatic reception when ''letters from iwo jima'' opened in japan, mr. eastwood asked warner brothers to move up the release date, effectively reversing the polarity on the films in the long-shot hope that the little film would help the big one.  warner brothers has a storied history with mr. eastwood that includes a few recent bumps -- he had to drag out the tin cup and use every bit of star power to get both ''mystic river'' and ''million dollar baby'' made at the studio -- but this time it quickly said yes.  ''there was no long dialogue,'' alan f. horn, warner's chief executive, said. ''we have a long-running, important relationship with clint. he asked and we said, 'fine, let's do it.' ''  the scheduling shift did not seem like that big a deal -- after all, it was a small-budget film, in japanese no less -- but the critics started putting it on their 10 best lists, the national board of review named it best film, and the hollywood foreign press association, the keepers of the golden globes and longtime supporters of mr. eastwood, nominated him for not one but two director awards. (under the association's rules ''letters from iwo jima'' was not eligible for best drama because it is in a foreign language. instead it received a nomination for best foreign film.) and at the end of last month the american film institute named mr. eastwood a ''national treasure'' for his two-pronged cinematic assault on iwo jima. in essence mr. eastwood re-entered the oscar battle by switching to the losing side.  mr. eastwood is an industry favorite because of his ability not only to make first-rate films but to do so with the kind of grace and decency seldom seen in hollywood. this is not the first time he came swinging out of the trees late in the year and altered the landscape. the release date for ''million dollar baby'' was moved up in 2004, and it took the honors as best picture, passing ''the aviator,'' directed by martin scorsese, late in the season.  for mr. scorsese, director of ''the departed,'' a serious contender this year, it must seem like a bit of unwanted déjà vu. and it creates a logjam of egos and marketing for warner brothers, which not only has ''letters from iwo jima'' and ''the departed,'' but ''blood diamond,'' a big budget, big-deal production that was known as a pet project of its star, leonardo dicaprio. edward zwick, its director, has been down this road before as well. he had a shot at one of the best picture nominations in 2003 with ''the last samurai,'' but ''mystic river'' and mr. eastwood both took slots that year.  ''blood diamond'' received mixed reviews and underperformed at the box office, but still has very significant support at warner brothers, in part because mr. horn loves the film. mr. zwick said that he feels his movie has received plenty of attention and regards the awards as beyond anyone's control.  ''every filmmaker feels uneasy about his work being lined up with or compared to another filmmaker's,'' he said. ''warner brothers has been nothing but remarkable in their continued support for this movie. they have carried through on every promise.''  warner brothers executives say they are happy to find themselves in the midst of what is, after all, a problem of opportunity.  ''ultimately we try to figure out what is right for each movie and then find a way to make it work,'' said dawn taubin, president of domestic marketing at the studio. ''yes, we had a busy schedule, but this seemed to be in the interest of both films,'' she said, referring to ''flags of our fathers,'' and ''letters from iwo jima.''  studios generally schedule films with a mix of business metrics and from-the-gut mysticism, jockeying their way around behemoths and putting themselves in a position to crush smaller, weaker opposition. in a very crowded release schedule, especially at the end of the year, marketing must be prepared, trailers must be in place and the hype machine must be engaged. so once an opening date is set, it is switched only with great reluctance.  unless it's clint eastwood who wants it switched. mr. eastwood is generally thought to be above a lot of hollywood nonsense, but he has been both an actor and a politician. he knows how to campaign and is willing to weigh in on behalf of a project he cares about, which, at this stage of his career, includes all of them. another oscar is hardly the point, but it is materially significant.  robert lorenz, a longtime associate and a producer at mr. eastwood's production company, malpaso productions, said that awards were not a factor in the change of opening date. (mr. eastwood declined an interview request.)  ''i don't think it was calculated on clint's part,'' mr. lorenz said. ''his instincts told him that this was best for the film, not in terms of awards, but you want people to see the movie that you made. the people who had seen 'letters from iwo jima' were blown away by it, and that obviously stuck with clint.''  there are those who suggest that in seeing to the needs of mr. eastwood, warner brothers gave a multiple-oscar winner another bite at the apple in what was already a competitive year.  it is not just warner brothers that needs to manage around mr. eastwood's remarkable second wind. paramount, which has both ''dreamgirls'' and ''flags of our fathers,'' is in the somewhat awkward position of both competing with and supporting him. that studio would be happy if ''flags'' received more attention, but it would come at the expense of other projects and directors it holds dear, including bill condon, who was shut out in globe nominations for ''dreamgirls.'' (mr. eastwood received two.)  while there is enormous regard for mr. eastwood's storied career, there are significant resentments as well, as long as no names are involved. an executive who has several competing projects, fatigued at another year of going head-to-head with mr. eastwood, sniped about ''letters from iwo jima'': ''of course all the critics loved it. the movie takes place in caves and all of the critics live in them.''  others can't help but be charmed by mr. eastwood's resurgence in the race. anne thompson, deputy film editor of the hollywood reporter, noted that mr. eastwood is formidable any year.  ''sure, he's very low key, but he takes his films to cannes and has courted critics over the long haul,'' she said. ''he cares deeply about how his films are received. everyone adores him because, in the face of the inflated formulaic excesses of the studio system, he is still doing it the old way -- with an aesthetic and a sense of storytelling that people can't help but admire -- and continuing to do it over and over again.''  ''letters from iwo jima'' puts a historic tilt on the current race. other directors have been nominated twice in the same year -- steven soderbergh was nominated for both ''erin brockovich'' and ''traffic'' in 2000. (he won for ''traffic.'') but no other big-name director has split the same subject into two films. ''letters from iwo jima'' belongs in the race, some say, because it is much more an eastwood film, while ''flags of our fathers,'' with its divergent plotlines and abundant flashbacks, seems to reflect his collaboration with mr. spielberg.  regardless of how the awards shake out, the emergence of ''letters'' does have the benefit of changing the subject for mr. eastwood. rather than dwelling on why ''flags'' failed to connect with audiences and awards in the same way his last two films had, the topic is once again mr. eastwood's ability to confound expectations.  it is neither a parlor trick nor a gambit. ''letters from iwo jima'' is in the hunt because it is classic american filmmaking, give or take the subtitles. and whether it takes mr. eastwood back to the podium on feb. 25, it represents the kind of innovation that the academy is not in the habit of ignoring.  the oscars  