federal funds may now pay police salaries in terror fight   new york city will be able for the first time to use federal grant dollars to pay basic salaries of police officers assigned to counterterrorism tasks, like guarding city bridges and subway tunnels, the secretary of homeland security, michael chertoff, said on friday.  the rules change will apply to six metropolitan areas considered at highest risk for attack: new york, chicago, houston, los angeles, washington and san francisco.  these six urban areas will share $411 million in antiterrorism grants this year, while 39 other areas from atlanta to tucson will compete for the remaining $336 million in available grants, or 45 percent of the total, mr. chertoff said.  new york city officials welcomed the rule change, for which they had lobbied over several years. previously, while some use of grant dollars was allowed for overtime, federal officials pushed cities to use the money to buy antiterrorism equipment like gas masks or surveillance systems rather than for salaries.  in new york, nearly 1,000 officers, at a cost of about $200 million a year, are assigned to antiterrorism tasks, and city officials have argued that the federal government should foot a bigger chunk of the bill. under the new rules, the city will be able to use up to 25 percent of its federal grant to cover these salaries.  ''our police department is essentially a first line of defense again terrorist attacks; that is serving the nation as well as the city,'' deputy mayor edward skyler said. ''these are the boots on the ground.''  but there is still a good chance that when the actual urban-area grant awards come out later this year, city officials will be disappointed.  that is because with an overall pool of just $441 million for these six urban areas, it remains unlikely that the new york city area will get anywhere close to the nearly $230 million it received two years ago -- before a cut in the grant last year outraged new york city politicians.  the problem, mr. skyler and senator charles e. schumer of new york said, is that too much of the overall $1.7 billion in antiterrorism grants -- only a piece of which is set aside for cities, with much of the rest going directly to states -- is still being distributed based on politically driven formulas that ensure that every state gets a cut.  legislation that democrats have introduced in the house would change the way these grants are awarded -- to comply with a 9/11 commission recommendation that they be based on risk.  ''you should make it all threat-based,'' senator schumer said. mr. chertoff said that regardless of any action by congress, he hoped to steer as much of the money as he could to those cities with the greatest needs.  homeland security is also trying to simplify the evaluation process, to avoid the same criticism as last year that its complicated formula -- which includes considering potential targets as obscure as a popcorn factory, a flea market and a petting zoo -- was irrational if not comical.  ''speaking for myself, i don't believe that i'm infallible or that i have nothing to learn from anybody,'' mr. chertoff said, admitting that last year's grant process was flawed.  