empty seat on giants' bus to philadelphia   roy posner wasn't on the giants' masthead, but he was their unofficial financial consultant. when bob tisch bought 50 percent of the giants early in 1991, posner, who was tisch's chief financial officer at the loews corporation from 1973 to 1997, helped negotiate the numbers. when tisch completed his ownership agreement with wellington mara, posner checked the commas.  ''roy became part of the family,'' john mara, the giants' president, said.  the giants were not posner's original pro football family. growing up in chicago, he had been a lifelong bears fan, going back to their famous 1940 team that routed the redskins, 73-0, for the n.f.l. championship. he remembered his father taking him to bears games on sunday afternoons and to blackhawks games those evenings. until this year, he had bears season tickets.  but after tisch became the giants' co-owner, posner was always around to do whatever anybody in the giants family asked him to do.  in sports, there are always good people like this around a team, people in the background, people whom fans have no reason to know.  sturdy and white-haired, posner stood on the sideline during games with a towel around his neck. on his visits to the front office, he answered questions from ernie accorsi, the giants' general manager, about the salary cap or a player's contract. for years, accorsi preferred to stay in his hotel room the night before a road game, but posner persuaded him to join him for dinner.  when giants players gathered for an away game, posner handed out the envelopes with their per diem meal money.  when the game officials knocked on the giants' locker room door for a random inspection of offensive linemen's jerseys for slippery substances that could foil a pass rusher, posner would gather the designated linemen. some of the offensive linemen didn't even know his last name. roy was always enough.  ''roy always had a smile,'' guard rich seubert said.  after saturday night's 34-28 victory over the redskins, his smile was wider than ever. as he waited outside fedex field next to one of the four buses that would take the giants to the new carrollton, md., station for their chartered train home, he was assuring john mara that the giants would surely qualify for super bowl xli when they were struck by lemons thrown by disgruntled redskins fans. the lemons didn't hurt, but the juice splattered them.  ''there's nothing more gratifying than having the opposing team's fans throwing things at you,'' mara told him, ''but we better get inside the bus.''  with a laugh, posner, 73, hurried into his usual seat, in the front row on the right, across the aisle from accorsi, who was sitting behind the driver. with lemons splattering against the windows, the giants' caravan soon moved out of the parking lot for the short trip to the station, where the players, coaches and front-office people gathered on a platform.  instead of taking the escalator to the platform, posner, carrying two bags, used the elevator. he was standing with the others on the platform when he collapsed.  he was quickly surrounded by ronnie barnes, the giants' chief trainer, and his assistant, byron hansen (who had rushed to him with a defibrillator), along with mara, accorsi, team doctors, coaches, several players and front-office people.  ''you've got to fight, roy,'' center shaun o'hara could be heard telling him. ''you've got to fight.''  moments later, posner, revived, appeared to have won his fight, and when an ambulance arrived, hansen accompanied him to nearby prince george's hospital center as the giants' train rumbled north.  ''half an hour later,'' accorsi said, ''we heard that roy was talking about the game and about tiki barber's 234 yards.''  another call to barnes soon silenced the giants' train ride. roy posner had died of cardiac arrest.  when the train arrived in newark about 3:30 a.m., most of the giants' family quietly boarded buses to giants stadium, where their cars had been parked and where roy posner had parked his car after driving from his home in hawthorne, n.j. he is survived by two daughters and four grandchildren.  ''for decades, roy posner was a trusted adviser, co-worker and dear friend of my late father, bob,'' said jonathan tisch, giants treasurer and co-chairman of loews. ''roy's numerous contributions helped create the loews corporation of today, and his advice and counsel to senior management of the giants has been invaluable.''  on saturday, four buses will take the giants down the new jersey turnpike for sunday's playoff game in philadelphia.  ''but on the front-office bus,'' ernie accorsi said, ''nobody will be sitting there in roy's seat in the front row on the right.''  sports of the times  