antiques   a trove of americana, filled with heart, goes on the block  there are many ways to collect american antiques, and those ways come into focus every january as collectors, curators and dealers flood into new york for the winter antiques show, the american antiques show, the stella americana at the piers show and auctions at sotheby's and christie's.  there is the slow and meticulous collecting model, exemplified by bertram k. and nina fletcher little, a massachusetts couple who researched every piece of americana they bought over a 60-year period, beginning in 1928. they published more than 150 scholarly articles and several exhibition catalogs before they both died in 1993.  and then there is the relatively quick and intense collecting model, which mark and susan laracy, a connecticut couple, followed as they formed a collection in 25 years. they are selling 225 pieces of american antique furniture and folk art at sotheby's on jan. 20.  after buying their first antique in 1982 from the veteran stonington, conn., dealer marguerite riordan at the winter antiques show, the laracys plunged into the americana world with unfettered enthusiasm. every year they attended the americana auctions in portsmouth, n.h., visited the skinner sales in boston and scoured the antiques fairs and auction houses in new york.  now they are selling everything in a single-owner sale that is expected to bring $3 million to $6 million. it includes folk art portraits by john brewster jr., sheldon peck, sturtevant j. hamblen and ammi phillips, as well as new england highboys, chairs, chests and desks. one standout is a queen anne mahogany desk and bookcase with original finials, brass hardware and pad feet that was made in the connecticut river valley in the late 1700s.  why was americana so appealing to the laracys? ''when you are 40, you want to convey an image of stability and having had ancestors, even if you come from nowhere,'' mr. laracy said. ''americana provides that.'' a former perfume executive, mr. laracy established his company, parfums de coeur, when he was 40; sales of its inexpensive versions of popular designer fragrances are now $100 million a year.  after that first purchase at the winter antiques show, the laracys began collecting americana seriously under the guidance of mrs. riordan. ''she controlled our brains for 10 years,'' mr. laracy said. ''if we were attracted to a piece for aesthetic reasons, she made sure there were no condition issues, that the piece was unique and retained its original color.''  several important works came through mrs. riordan, from small sculptures to needlepoint samplers to major queen anne connecticut case pieces: a cherry bonnet-top high chest, a small cherry dressing table, a cherry blanket chest and a maple tavern table.  equally important are four portraits by brewster, the itinerant deaf painter. mrs. riordan negotiated the acquisition of a pair of large brewster portraits depicting maj. daniel coffin and his wife, elizabeth stone coffin, of newburyport, mass. she persuaded eddy g. nicholson, a new hampshire investor and part owner of the congoleum corporation, to sell them to the laracys.  ''we never did meet eddy nicholson, but i can tell you it took two years to agree on a price with him,'' mr. laracy said. sotheby's estimate for the pair is $150,000 to $300,000.  mrs. riordan also sold the laracys a smaller-scale pair of brewster portraits, of a brother and sister. they show a sensitivity to children and are similar in feeling to the children's portraits in the current brewster show at the american folk art museum, which closes on sunday.  the sale is also noteworthy for its wealth of little objects: a whalebone knitting basket, a carved slate plaque with a couple dressed in indian attire, an engraved and scrimshawed whale ivory watch stand and a windsor cradle.  ''i love smalls,'' mr. laracy said. ''they have a tactile quality.''  elisabeth donaghy garrett, an americana expert, author and educator, noted another characteristic of the collection: charm.  ''it is an exceptional collection in terms of provenance, outstanding form, condition, outline and color,'' she said, ''but the theme that popped out at me is love, or affection, which comes through pictorially. there are pieces with hearts and courting couples on textiles and plaques. there's a playfulness that carries through.''  one hooked rug shows 34 children jumping rope, skating, fishing and dancing around a maypole, with a banner reading ''children will play, four seasons round.''  collectors of americana typically focus on either furniture or folk art, but the laracys collected both. the sale includes a group of 19 blue-decorated salt-glazed stoneware vessels, a weather vane, whimsical andirons and a bird cage in addition to all the antique furniture.  ''our approach was to focus on the finest examples we could find across a number of categories,'' mr. laracy said.  provenance seems to have been particularly important to the laracys, who organized the lots in the catalog by provenance.  apart from eddy nicholson's portraits, there are several pieces formerly owned by the littles, including a magnificent hamblen folk art portrait of a girl in a white dress that is estimated at $100,000 to $300,000. other pieces were once owned by such serious collectors as mrs. john hay whitney, paul and margaret weld, virginia ramsey-pope cave, burton and helaine fendelman and john howland ricketson iii.  the laracys are selling their georgian colonial house in new canaan, conn., and moving into manhattan. they now plan to collect contemporary art and 20th-century modern furniture: ''a mix of american, italian and french,'' mr. laracy said.  ''we are changing our lives,'' he added.  the presale viewing begins next weekend, on jan. 13. on the morning of jan. 18 sotheby's institute of art is to hold a private tour of the collection and a symposium with ms. garrett; paul s. d'ambrosio, director of the fenimore art museum in cooperstown, n.y.; and thomas p. and alice k. kugelman, authors of a definitive study on connecticut river valley furniture. registration: (212) 517-2873.  antiques  