stepping back from the ledge of the overly appointed life   dan ho is right. something is wrong when scraping honeycomb candle wax off the bathtub is a justifiable household chore, and (what's worse) evidence that one is living well, since everyone knows that ''me time'' is nothing without bathroom atmospherics.  who is dan ho to blind us with such wisdom? he's the latest, coolest avatar of lifestyle bliss. you haven't heard of him? he's revolutionary. on ''the dan ho show,'' which starts tonight on discovery health channel, he's making war on our cluttered, overdecorated, unspontaneous lives. those that are governed by bed ruffles, ipod accessories, closet systems from the container store and wall-mounted bronze ampersands from pottery barn.  he styles himself the antiguru, the anti-martha stewart, the anti-rachael ray. and his is the war to end all wars.  mr. ho's wisdom about the wax comes not from his uneven but winning show, but from the accompanying book, ''rescue from domestic perfection,'' in which he chronicles his own descent into wax-scraping slavery and perfectionism -- he owned a restaurant and a showpiece house and garden in chicago -- and his eventual liberation from it.  of course, like so many reformers in politics and religion, mr. ho looks an awful lot like the next despot. sure, his style isn't peonies and mango coulis (or it's not anymore), but he's hardly less doctrinaire. mr. ho, who is originally from guam, hates middlebrow stuff and loves antiques and anything one-of-a-kind.  he likes incongruities too, like big plastic roses in fancy vases and afghans on chic sofas. this shtick, the more you think about it, seems even more daunting than the by-the-numbers pedantry of ms. ray and ms. stewart, since mr. ho is all about je ne sais quoi, which he calls by a chamorro verb, ''gai.''  gai, pronounced guy, isn't easy to come by. it's not a product of money or elbow grease. it's one of those savoir-faire things. if you're uptight or uncool or conformist, you can't get there from here.  and yet hoism exerts a powerful allure. on his hourlong how-to show mr. ho takes his message of lifestyle freedom to the people. be yourself, he says helpfully. no more makeovers, fussy dinners, clattery storage boxes, ad-hoc cooking devices or time-obliterating estates. you have nothing to lose but your $3,000 cedar trees and sushi plates.  or so he tells the styleless souls who appeal to him for counsel. he doesn't want them to be cowed by the notion that keeping house is a 24-hour-a-day siege, or that entertaining requires the doting staff, ativan stash and capacity for risk of a broadway producer.  alas, typically, his flock don't come to him with balenciaga bags, mammoth cars and a schedule overfull with yoga and reupholstering. that would have been cool. he might have undone them, turned them into tatterdemalion antiques-and-kitsch types in studio apartments; that's his current ideal. (mr. ho now lives in a small space in manhattan, colorfully, but with very few possessions.)  disappointingly, his clients are square. they're also short on funds and personality. he tells them to loosen up and use their tables as benches. he also tells them it's o.k. to serve big sandwiches at parties, or trim hedges for exercise. they seem plenty grateful, but what they get is hardly a revelation, and there's not enough conflict.  in the end it might be more exciting to see him wrest scented candles from the hands of vanilla addicts. or deface sisal rugs and ansel adams prints with a sharpie. or perhaps his show could just be called ''arson with dan ho.'' i'd watch that.  the dan ho show  discovery health, tonight at 9, eastern and pacific times; 8, central time.  produced by the discovery health channel.  television review  