a status quo secretary general   the big powers in the united nations security council chose ban ki-moon as secretary general because they wanted a low-key bureaucrat who wouldn't rock the boat. judging by mr. ban's early moves, the world has gotten exactly that.  expect no kofi annan-style exhortations to live up to the values of the u.n. charter. in commenting on the sordid execution of saddam hussein, mr. ban even managed to forget that the u.n. opposes the death penalty on principle. expect no shift from patronage to selection based on merit for key staff positions. the top jobs in peacekeeping, political affairs and humanitarian relief are already being doled out to the favored candidates of london, paris and washington (three of mr. ban's backers).  and expect no serious drive for much-needed administrative reform. the top management job, previously held by a reform-minded american, has now been given to a long-serving insider, alicia bárcena ibarra of mexico.  mr. ban takes over at a difficult time. the secretariat's reputation for integrity has been battered by the oil-for-food scandal, and the security council's claim to influence has been battered by its failure to halt the genocide in darfur or the nuclear ambitions of iran and north korea.  on one crucial front, though, the outlook may be brightening. under president bush, relations between washington and the u.n. were driven to their lowest point ever, following the twin blows of the iraq war and the destructive presence of the former ambassador, john bolton. the white house reportedly plans to nominate a new ambassador, zalmay khalilzad, who actually believes in diplomacy.  mr. khalilzad is currently the ambassador in baghdad, where he is one of the few american officials to try to reach out to sunni muslims and curb the divisively sectarian policies of prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki. unfortunately, the white house -- desperate to make mr. maliki look like a leader -- decided it did not want such an activist ambassador. we hope that choosing mr. khalilzad for the united nations is at least a sign that mr. bush is learning the importance of diplomacy and cooperation, if not the importance of a powerful u.n. leader or a strong-minded ambassador in baghdad.  editorial  