pondering six diamonds and contemplating the other table   the premier event at the edgar kaplan winter regional in midtown manhattan, which finished last saturday, was the truscott board-a-match teams.  igor milman, oleg rubinchik, albert shekhter and yuri yurachkivsky of new york; victor melman of scarsdale, n.y.; and michael prahin of irvington, n.y., won the event. they finished just over three points (three boards) ahead of robert heitzman jr. of suffern, n.y.; walter lee of framingham, mass.; aviv shahaf of new york; and jonathan weinstein of evanston, ill. third were jeff aker of briarcliff, n.y.; barry rigal of new york; bruce rogoff of upper grandview, n.y.; and michael rosenberg of new rochelle, n.y.  the winners gained one point on the diagramed deal from the final session.  both wests made a disciplined pass on the first round, not wishing to open two spades when holding four cards in the other major. but after south opened one diamond in the fourth position, each west overcalled two spades. both norths responded three diamonds.  note that you are permitted to ''overbid'' a tad when an opponent makes a weak jump overcall. the basic rule is that you may bid one level higher than you would have in an uncontested auction. here, north's three-diamond response promised the values only for a respectable single raise.  in the given auction, when east passed, shekhter (south) cue-bid three spades. yurachkivsky (north) assumed that this was asking for a spade stopper, so he bid three no-trump. but when south continued with four clubs, it changed the meaning of three spades from a western cue-bid (partner, i want to be in three no-trump if you have a stopper in the opposition's spade suit) to an advance cue-bid (partner, i am interested in a diamond slam and have first-round controls in spades and in clubs). after north showed his first-round heart control, south jumped to six diamonds.  west led the spade queen, promising the king as well, which declarer ruffed.  this is an interesting declarer-play problem. in a knockout team match scored by international match points, when overtricks are unimportant, the best line would be to cash the diamond ace, then, if the king did not drop, to play on clubs, planning to discard two hearts from the board and eventually to ruff south's second heart in the dummy. and declarer has the heart finesse available should the clubs break 5-1.  but in board-a-match, overtricks can be vital. you receive one point for scoring more total points on a board than your opponents (and half a point for a tie). if at the other table south was in six diamonds making seven, shekhter's team would score nothing if he made the contract exactly. but shekhter realized that trying to get into the dummy to take the diamond finesse was not without risk.  it was also possible his opponents would not reach slam. and west might have a singleton diamond king. so shekhter adopted the best line for his contract, cashing the diamond ace at trick 2. he played off his three top clubs, discarding one heart from the dummy, ruffed a club on the board, trumped a spade in his hand and threw dummy's heart queen on his last club. east took the diamond king, but that was all.  what happened at the other table? after north raised to three diamonds, rubinchik (east) bid three hearts. this was fit-showing, promising spade support and four or more hearts with at least one of the top three heart honors. (normally east would have longer and stronger hearts, but he had not opened one heart in the third position.)  now south was worried that he had two fast heart losers and that perhaps the opponents could do very well in a major. (note that six spades doubled costs only 1,100, a good save against six diamonds.) so south jumped to five diamonds. this was passed out, milman (west) deciding not to bid five hearts. declarer took all 13 tricks for plus 640, but the winning team scored the point on the board for plus 1,370.  the district 3 winter regional takes place tuesday through jan. 15 at the hilton rye town, rye brook, n.y. details are at bridge-district3.org.  bridge  