who is best at r&d?   today's quiz: what do apple, caterpillar, google, kellogg and toyota have in common?  answer: they are among the smartest companies when it comes to what they reap for their research and development dollars.  that was the conclusion of three booz allen hamilton consultants -- barry jaruzelski, kevin dehoff and rakesh bordia -- after they reviewed the performances of the 1,000 publicly held companies worldwide that spent the most on r&d in 2005. they published the results in strategy and business.  over all, companies are becoming better at r&d, considering that spending increased $20 billion and revenue climbed even more. but the consultants classified only 94 concerns, including the 5 mentioned above, as ''high-leverage innovators.'' those companies did better than their peers in seven performance measures, including sales growth, operating-income growth and total shareholder returns, over a five-year period, while spending ''less on r&d as a percentage of sales than their industry medians over the same five-year period.''  while the best companies took different routes to maximizing r&d spending, the consultants said, one thing they shared was ''building multifunctional, companywide capabilities that can provide them with sustainable competitive advantage.''  this is the second year booz allen has conducted the study. ''analysis of the 2005 global innovation 1,000 confirms the major finding from our initial study last year,'' the authors wrote. ''money simply cannot buy effective innovation.''  in other words, spending a lot does not help you. spending intelligently does.  new tech -- with breakthroughs seemingly coming every day, it is hard to keep up with all the developments in technology, even for those who earn a living with it.  to make your life easier, alex hutchinson in popular mechanics has created a cheat sheet titled ''10 tech concepts you need to know for 2007.'' among them:  pram. phase-change random access memory is set to overtake flash memory in consumer electronics, the magazine contends, pointing out that it is 30 times as fast as flash memory ''with more than 10 times the life span.''  von. ''the first video on the net conference was in 1998, but the concept of watching videos on your pc is only now reaching maturity.'' apple is expected to introduce an ''itv video-streaming box'' later this year.  smart pills. when swallowed, these vitamin-size sensors will transmit ''data about pressure, acidity and temperature to a 5-by-4-inch receiver that patients carry around with them during the pill's trip through their gastrointestinal tract.''  data clouds. the term given to the ability to gain access to every one of your files, ''from skimpy documents to gigabyte-hogging music,'' from any internet connection. versions of data clouds are available and the magazine expects the phenomenon will be widespread relatively soon.  happy new year -- it looks as if it will be a good year -- at least in the market for yachts and business aircraft.  showboats international reports the ''2007 global order book for luxury yachts shows a total of 777 yachts 90 feet and larger under contract, totaling 94,404 linear feet.''  ''this represents a 15.3 percent increase in footage from 2006.''  things are equally good for the makers of business aircraft.  reporting on a survey conducted by honeywell of 1,400 flight departments, aircraft manufacturers and other sources, flying writes record worldwide deliveries are projected for 2006 and 2007, ''and the bull market for business jets is going to keep rolling along.'' during the survey period, 2006 to 2016, honeywell expects some 12,000 aircraft worth $195 billion to be added.  final take -- if six days into the new year you have already given up on that resolution to lose weight, here is something to ponder, courtesy of mikhail sedov in fortune small business.  ''vacuuming fat from more than 455,000 patients -- and some $1.2 billion out of their wallets -- made liposuction the no. 1 cosmetic-surgery procedure in the u.s. in 2005.''  that is certainly one way to meet your goal.  paul b. brown  what's offline  