travails of adolescence? he's been there   what makes ninth grade funny? having your mom beat you in basketball? figuring out why girls like bad boys? learning to be a team player only after not making the basketball team? james lewis, popularly known as lil' j j, a 16-year-old stand-up comedian from little rock, ark., is plying those examples of teenage angst as the character jordan lewis, on ''just jordan,'' a new nickelodeon series about jordan, his friends and family in los angeles that begins sunday.  the series is big news for fans of lil' j j, whose real-life story is a sort of a fairy tale. mr. lewis, a slight, unassuming guy with corn-rowed hair and earrings, won national fame after beating comedians twice his age in a 2003 bet comedy competition.  the oldest of four children of a single mother who works as a cosmetologist, mr. lewis' cinderella victory landed him on nbc's ''tonight show'' and the series ''showtime at the apollo,'' and a place last year in bet's teens of comedy, a 20-city tour with other young comedians.  mr. lewis could also be seen in 2005 and early last year as a host of nickelodeon's ''friday night slimetime'' and on the channel's sketch comedy series ''all that.'' mr. lewis's charisma has translated to film as well. he made his feature film debut in 2005 in ''beauty shop,'' and also appeared in ''yours, mine and ours'' and ''crossover'' last year.  ''i don't know why i am funny,'' he said during a recent visit to new york to promote his new series. ''i just like making people happy, and i like making people laugh.'' based in los angeles, mr. lewis said that visiting little rock twice a month ''keeps me grounded.'' he has neither a car nor a girlfriend, he said, and has kept his old friends from little rock.  in ''just jordan'' mr. lewis plays a transplant from little rock to los angeles with a divorced mother (shania accius as pam lewis), a younger sister, monica (kristen combs), and his maternal grandfather, grant lewis (beau billingslea). grandpa owns a diner where the whole family pitches in.  jordan's two constant companions are tony lee (justin chon), a good-looking basketball player, and the tie-wearing, somewhat nerdy joaquin montez (eddy martin). periodically the show uses a device of freezing the action and having jordan literally step out of his body to comment on the situation.  ''it's a way for a kid to talk back, to say all the things about your mom and life that you can't say to their face,'' mr. lewis said. ''or you're trying to talk to a girl, and it's not happening, and you can ask, 'why is it that girls say they like nice guys but they always go for the thugs?' ''  a few years ago mr. lewis was just another class clown at mitchell elementary school in little rock (which his hometown newspaper, the arkansas democrat-gazette noted, is exactly 1,675 miles from hollywood). but his gym teacher ken bright -- who now helps manage mr. lewis's career -- thought the young boy had a real shot at professional comedy. in exchange for mr. lewis's quieting down in class, mr. bright helped him polish his act and get his start at a place called juanita's bar and grill.  ''sometimes i would tell places about him, and then he would show up, and they would be shocked by his age,'' mr. bright recalled with a laugh, as he as mr. lewis were interviewed in the nickelodeon office in times square. ''then they'd ask, 'but is he clean?' ''  his comedy is. and he said he received a standing ovation after his first performance at juanita's. ''i was shocked,'' he said. ''that feeling, i was anxious to keep doing it. and my mom was happy i was doing something. she was happy that someone was seeing the talent in me.''  ''she was like, 'i don't want my son doing dirty comedy,' '' mr. lewis said. ''i always look at it like family stuff, so i'm going to keep it clean. i wouldn't do anything that my little brothers and sister couldn't see because they look up to me.''  most of the people in his audiences on the stand-up circuit have been adults, mr. lewis said, but they were all teenagers once too, so they relate to a universe of jokes about curfews, parents, school. ''a lot of the things i went through, they went through,'' mr. lewis said of his adult audiences. ''comedy is comedy.''  ''the main advice i get is, 'don't get the big head,' '' he continued. ''i hear that. i feel blessed. it's not often that someone in my shoes gets to do what i have done.''  the series creator, alison taylor, (''the cheetah girls,'' ''lizzie mcguire'') said ''just jordan'' is not preachy but finds the lessons in everyday experiences, the contradictions between what life should be but often is not. future episodes, for example, show jordan meeting a series of challenges: fighting to spend his allowance the way he wants, being left in charge of the diner, trying to pass his piano test to stay on the basketball team.  ''j j and the show dovetail so nicely,'' ms. taylor said. ''j j is the most average kid you've ever met, to the extent that he's a stand-up comedian who travels the country. we're not doing some high-concept, over-the-top idea where he runs a toy company. the premise of the show is the idea that when you're an adolescent, you think, 'i know how life works if my parents would just stay out of the way.' ''  