a crop of azure, scarlet and gold   a few years ago, when i first glimpsed the azure wing of a bluebird in the hedgerow that borders my meadow, i could hardly believe my eyes.  eastern bluebirds all but disappeared from my farm in central maryland decades ago, their numbers reduced by pesticides and habitat loss. but now that farmers are cutting back their use of poisons and, thanks to government subsidies, turning some of their cropland into native grasses and trees, the bluebirds are coming back.  so are other birds. just the other day, i was startled to see a pileated woodpecker drilling for insects in my old pear tree. another day, a fat cinnamon-colored carolina wren alighted on the railing outside my kitchen, chirping furiously.  and the bluebirds are no longer the shy denizens of the trees that edge the meadow. one pair, and then another, took up residence in the cavities of two old black locust trees that line the lane that passes by our loft, which was built out of an old haymow in the barn.  i was standing in the kitchen, looking out the window, when i noticed one of these birds flying down from the tree and across the field, with that curious dipping motion i've grown to recognize as that of a bluebird in flight. but there was something else that made me certain it must be a bluebird: it was one of those gestalt moments that birders talk about -- like that indefinable something that tells you that a figure walking on the beach in the distance is your brother, even though he is much too far away to see his face.  i thought i saw a flash of blue, too, but then again, i told myself, maybe that was wishful thinking. so i grabbed my binoculars, which i keep handy on the counter, and waited.  two birds flew back up the field soon enough with that same dipping rhythm, and one of them landed on the broken branch of a locust tree about 30 feet from my kitchen window.  ''please, please, don't go away,'' i chanted as i clumsily tried to find the bird with the binoculars.  after several tries, i spotted him: a male bluebird with a satiny round head of the most sapphire blue and a rusty red breast, so close my heart was pounding.  i don't consider myself religious in any conventional sense. but that bluebird brought me closer to the sacred than i've ever been. maybe it has something to do with loss and return.  at any rate, the male and his mate made their nest that spring in a cavity in one of the old trees. another pair set up house in a different tree, about 50 feet away. those black locusts, planted by my grandfather more than a hundred years ago, are full of hollows, perfect for bluebirds.  i watched the birds coming and going all spring, pecking insects out of the vegetable garden, as i turned over the cover crop and planted greens, sweet corn and huge patches of sunflowers and zinnias. by late summer, i was watching fuzzy fledglings teetering on the tall weeds growing up beneath the trees.  i realized that my various plantings over the years -- the roses, now laden with rose hips, the alpine strawberries nestled in a nearby garden, the elderberry bushes next to the wild cedar and mulberry trees, the blackberry canes i let ramble, for their delicious fruit, in the old barnyard -- were beginning to accumulate into a bona fide bird habitat.  just as important, the things i had never gotten around to doing -- cleaning up the brush pile, pruning the overgrown forsythia, pulling the wild grape out of the gold flame lonicera -- were enhancing that habitat.  all this mess was providing the wildlife with cover, insects, fruit and seeds. i kept meaning to cut back the poison ivy that scrambled up the locust trees again this summer, but it got away from me -- and produced a bumper crop of fruit for the birds.  when i decided not to mow the weeds beneath the locust trees, the birds feasted on the purple berries of the pokeweed, the seeds of the asters, foxtail, goldenrod, chickweed and indian grass.  and thank goodness i didn't cut down the old pear tree.  ''it's blocking your view of the curving fields,'' a landscape architect friend had pointed out last summer. ''and you never eat the fruit.''  it was true. it hadn't been pruned in years. the pears were full of worms.  ''but the cardinals love to perch in the branches,'' i said.  and then, when this magnificent woodpecker showed up to feast on the insects in our neglected tree, i felt right with the world.  i looked up pileated woodpecker on my new favorite web site, the cornell lab of ornithology (www.birds.cornell.edu) by clicking on ''all about birds'' and then ''bird guide,'' and selecting the name from the drop-down list.  there he was, my goliath: a 16- to 19-inch bird with a red crest and a white stripe extending beneath his eye and down his neck and black shoulders. he was probably eating ants, i learned from this site. and he and his mate would probably stay around all winter.  then, i clicked on ''listen to the song of this species'' and was treated to a series of high-pitched squeaks that built to a crescendo, followed by the thunk-thunk-thunk sound of the drumming of his beak.  when i looked up eastern bluebird, i was able to see that the juvenile's blue feathers are speckled with white. i had thought so, from my own observations last summer, but the little ones never sat still for long.  the eastern bluebird's song is a series of musical whistles and ''dry chatter,'' as the guide puts it, and i played it over and over again, staring at the various pictures of male, female and juvenile. next spring, when i hear that chatter, i may recognize it as a sign that the bluebirds have returned.  the carolina wren, i was happy to find out, is here to stay.  it is possible to spend days on this web site, not only learning the calls of birds and what they look like, but also watching videos -- of a robin eating berries in a cedar tree, for instance -- and surfing through cover-girl images of must-have shrubs for birds (bayberry, staghorn sumac, winterberry and viburnum).  what can i say? i'm in love with birds. i want to be able to recognize them by their calls when i'm walking through the woods. i want to plant everything they like, for food and shelter.  so be careful if you pick up a pair of binoculars and focus them clumsily on some blurry thing you think you see on a branch. you may lose yourself in a very different kind of garden from the one you thought you were making.  in the garden  