impressed by threepeats? how about a 23-peat?   when lisa lally was in high school in connecticut in the 1970s, she conducted fund-raisers for a service club called the leaders. once, the club sponsored an all-comers badminton tournament, and a woman -- ''tiny, but fierce-looking, with a big smile'' -- came along and entered, said ms. lally, now the athletic director at miller place high school in eastern long island.  ''all of us knew immediately that we were going to root for her,'' she said. ''five years later, i go for a job interview at miller, and there is this same woman, fierce and competitive as ever. no wonder she never lost.''  that woman was pat mccarrick, the coach of the badminton team at miller place high, which won every match in the 25 years she coached it. since she retired in 1997, miller place has lost only once, making the overall record for miller place badminton an incredible 530-1.  while movies like ''hoosiers'' and ''remember the titans'' glorify what are widely considered the major scholastic sports, there are places, many of them small towns, where high schools routinely have extraordinary teams in nonmarquee sports, like wrestling, field hockey or even badminton. in these towns, civic pride makes a takedown, a penalty corner or a hairpin net shot as important as a game-turning interception.  small-sports dynasties can be quirky, even arcane. cheshire high school in connecticut won 23 consecutive girls' state swimming championships before being beaten in 2005. the delbarton school, a private high school in morris county, n.j., and mountain lakes high, a public school about five miles away, routinely lose only to each other while winning or coming in second in the state boys' lacrosse championship.  some towns, like moorestown in south jersey, have a history of excellence by young athletes in a variety of the smaller sports.  ''the rec department here in town has always been creative, looking to give them all opportunities,'' said neil f. rosa, the athletic director at moorestown high school. ''so if they can't excel at one thing, there is always something else.''  moorestown has won the new jersey girls' lacrosse championship the last seven years and has routinely ranked among the top five teams in the nation in polls. the boys' swimming team has won 19 state championships and the field hockey team 15 state titles going back to the 1930s.  ''success begets success, and the expectations get high in every competition,'' mr. rosa said. ''they all feed off of each other. it's not the glory of the 'friday night lights' syndrome, but each program builds a legacy.''  west essex high school in north caldwell and eastern high school in voorhees have routinely faced each other in either the new jersey state field hockey championship or during the season in special matchups so the best two teams in the state can meet. west essex had a string of championships in the 1990s, but in recent years eastern has invariably been no. 1, having defeated every new jersey opponent in the last eight years and at one point winning 153 straight matches, a national record for the sport.  such dynasties can have mundane beginnings.  a generation ago, while teaching physical education at berlin community school, a grade school in camden county, n.j., ed kirkwood was looking for something new to teach his younger students. he remembered a student from his days at eastern high school, which berlin students go on to attend, demanding extra one-on-one drills to help her improve at field hockey.  ''i didn't know much about the game, but i thought it would be good for the little ones, too,'' said mr. kirkwood, who started a local field hockey program. ''we started having success, and that attracts kids to go out. then we had a lot of families with a lot of sisters.''  meghan dawson, chosen as the new jersey player of the year this past season by the star-ledger, the state's largest newspaper, is the fourth of six sisters to play at eastern; her three older sisters made the national team after graduation. the walls triplets -- lauren, ashley and missy -- were all-state players before graduating in 2005. their cousin meghan bain joined them this year at james madison university in virginia, and ms. bain's younger sister bryn still plays at eastern.  the eastern coach, danyle heilig, went to moorestown high and so was part of the previous state field hockey dynasty.  a coach at west essex high in the 1970s, linda alimi, was the key to getting girls in north caldwell to pick up field hockey sticks practically out of the cradle, said the current athletic director, bob storm.  ''it was the beginning of title ix, and she was willing to take on a new girls' sport and do it right,'' mr. storm said. ''she got kids interested early and kept with it.''  ''it became a tradition to play for her and win,'' he added.  the current coach, jill cosse, did the same thing after replacing ms. alimi. ''there is nothing in geography or in the water that should make these kids win more,'' mr. storm said. ''it was just caring coaches and parents wanting them to win.''  keeping miller place at the top in badminton has been hard, ms. lally said, but every time it seems the team might lose, the spirit of ms. mccarrick, now retired in pennsylvania, comes to the fore.  ''she was so focused and so insistent that every kid could play,'' said ms. lally, who also said that title ix, the federal law requiring equal treatment of girls and boys in the schools, was a factor in ms. mccarrick's success. ''she had the opportunity to start something new here, but on the other hand she also kept it going with unbelievable energy and charisma, which has a lot to do with how a sport takes on a life in a town.''  sometimes, the dynastic sport says something about a town's character. paul morina, the wrestling coach at paulsboro high school in new jersey since 1985, said paulsboro had long been known as a tough blue-collar town.  it has become a wrestling power, winning 425 matches and losing 18 under mr. morina going into 2007, and continuing a streak in which it has won 24 consecutive state titles at the group i level, made up of the state's smallest public high schools.  ''outsiders look at paulsboro and it's not the prettiest place,'' he said. ''it's a tough place to grow up, and maybe wrestling fits in with that.''  cross-country apparently does, too. paul vi high school, in nearby haddon township, has not lost a dual meet since 1979, more than 240 races ago. joe puleo, a former paul vi coach who is now coach of the rutgers-camden college track team, said the high school's conference was not always strong, but the tradition of striving for victory was.  ''in my final year, 2002, i didn't have a talented team at all,'' he said.  ''but they refused to accept that they were not good runners,'' he added. ''so we won. sometimes it's just a magical thing.''  in moorestown, a wealthy, well-educated community about 25 miles northeast, the motivations for success are different. in 2005, money magazine proclaimed moorestown the best place to live in america.  ''the kids here are used to seeing successful people around them, and that translates into success on the playing field,'' said mr. rosa, the athletic director. ''the board of education's mission statement says we are trying to be the best in academics, the arts and athletics, and that they all bring character to the school. no one wants to be the person to break that long chain of success.''  