editor's e-mail may be used in suit against the times   a lawyer for a former government scientist who is suing the new york times for defamation over a series of columns about the deadly anthrax mailings of 2001 said friday in court that he was prepared to introduce an internal e-mail message from a senior times editor that raised questions about one of the columns.  the lawyer, mark a. grannis, said the columns written by nicholas d. kristof about the federal investigation of the mailings unfairly damaged the reputation of his client, dr. stephen a. hatfill, a former germ warfare scientist.  dr. hatfill's lawyers have said the columns wrongfully suggested that he was responsible for the attacks.  mr. grannis told judge claude m. hilton of federal district court here that if the trial proceeded he would introduce evidence including a may 23, 2002, message from philip taubman, then deputy editor of the editorial page, raising questions about a draft of a column by mr. kristof.  beginning that spring, mr. kristof wrote a series of columns about a government scientist whom he initially referred to as mr. z., saying the scientist had become the overwhelming focus of the investigation. that august, mr. kristof wrote that dr. hatfill had acknowledged that he was mr. z. at a news conference in which he said the news media had mistreated him.  mr. grannis said he would introduce evidence of questions about the column posed by mr. taubman and others. the evidence from mr. taubman, the lawyer said, was a message saying the as-yet-unpublished column ''pointed pretty much at the guy'' and encouraging mr. kristof to take out some of the material that did that.  mr. grannis made his disclosure of the information that he has obtained in the discovery phase of the suit in a hearing on a times motion to seek dismissal of the complaint.  the trial is scheduled to start jan. 29. judge hilton did not say when he would rule.  the times has argued that the columns were aimed at prodding the federal bureau of investigation to pursue the anthrax case more vigorously and did not accuse dr. hatfill of being the person responsible for the mailings.  in writing about the investigation, mr. kristof's ire was directed against federal officials for not moving swiftly to decide whether the scientist was guilty or innocent, the paper's lawyers have said.  ''his intent was to focus on the f.b.i.,'' a lawyer for the times, lee levine, told judge hilton.  mr. levine, of levine sullivan koch & schulz, told judge hilton that mr. hatfill was a public figure, or as someone recognized in libel and defamation law as a limited-purpose public figure, because of his involvement in the public debate about preparedness for a bioterrorist attack.  mr. levine said dr. hatfill had ''voluntarily thrust himself into the vortex of that controversy'' through his writings and speeches, confirmed by dr. hatfill's complaints that he was easily identified as mr. z by many people in the field.  as a public figure dr. hatfill would have a far greater burden in his effort to win a defamation suit. to prevail, a public figure has to prove that the material was published with ''actual malice,'' that is with the knowledge that the statements were false or with reckless disregard as to whether they were false.  lawyers for the times also argued that neither mr. taubman's message nor any other evidence put forward by mr. hatfill's lawyers was proof that mr. kristof had acted with reckless disregard for the truth, the standard that mr. hatfill must meet if he is found to be a public figure.  the times said that even if all of mr. hatfill's assertions were true, he would not prevail and that therefore the judge should dismiss the case before trial. the message from mr. taubman, now washington bureau chief for the times, was released friday afternoon by the lawyers for the times. it read: ''nick, you're still pointing pretty much at the guy. i think you need to lose the material i've marked in boldface.''  mr. taubman had marked two paragraphs referring to a middle-age american scientist with experience in producing bioweapons. the column, which appeared may 24, included the first of those two paragraphs but dropped the second, the messages showed. although the essence of that message was pretty much as mr. grannis represented it in court, two other e-mail messages he cited were more ambiguous.  he said messages from nicholas wade, a former science editor at the paper and then a special projects writer, and gail collins, the editorial page editor, were critical of a column prepared for publication in july. those messages, as disclosed by lawyers for the times, raised more generalized suggestions.  mr. grannis said mr. wade's message had said the column made it plausible to a reader that mr. kristof was pointing at mr. z as the culprit. but the message said it was plausible that dr. hatfill might have been involved in an earlier anthrax scare that was a hoax.  in her message, ms. collins said the column ''looked fine to me'' and asked how an anthrax mailing to the national enquirer in florida fit in.  five people died in the attacks. although federal authorities identified dr. hatfill as a ''person of interest'' in the case, he was not charged with any crimes. no one has been charged in the attacks.  