irish look for answers after another bowl loss   it is a predictable crowd taunt whenever a highly anticipated matchup disintegrates into a blowout. so, in the closing moments of louisiana state's 41-14 thumping of notre dame in the sugar bowl wednesday night, the tigers' gold-and-purple-clad fans chanted, ''over-rated,'' in full throat at a broken fighting irish team.  in the bowels of the superdome early thursday morning, notre dame coach charlie weis dared not dispute them. his team had looked downright puny in giving up 577 yards to l.s.u. and setting a record in futility that is not exactly welcomed in the hallowed halls beneath notre dame's golden dome.  the irish had just surpassed south carolina (1945 to 1988) and west virginia (1987 to 1998) in the n.c.a.a. record books by losing their ninth bowl game in a row. what weis and his star senior quarterback, brady quinn, had hoped would be another milestone in the renaissance of a storied football program was instead a stark reminder of how far notre dame has to go.  on paper, weis's 19-6 record and back-to-back appearances in bowl championship series games may look like a promising start. but he knows better.  four elite teams have taken turns thumping his irish: ohio state in last year's fiesta bowl, michigan and southern california this season, and l.s.u. here. those teams averaged 41.5 points and 484.5 offensive yards against notre dame.  ''i think the first thing that's got to happen is that everyone is thinking the same way i'm thinking,'' an obviously disappointed weis said. ''they can't be content to be 10-3 and going to a bowl game and getting your clocks cleaned. that's my responsibility. it would be really easy for me to sit here and blame the players, but i would be at fault.  ''we've got to turn the corner because right now we've got a nice, solid team. you want to be an upper-echelon team, not a nice, solid team, and a team competing for national championships. that just won't cut it with how this ended.''  how the sugar bowl ended was especially cruel to quinn, who was harassed into a subpar performance by the tigers' big and fast defense: 15-of-35 passing for 148 yards, with two touchdowns and two interceptions. he will leave notre dame with 36 team passing records after starting for most of his four years, a turbulent time in which the coach who recruited him, tyrone willingham, was fired and replaced by the blunt and hard-nosed weis.  quinn, who finished third in the heisman trophy voting this season, was on the sideline in the closing moments wednesday night, when his l.s.u. counterpart, jamarcus russell, left the field to a thunderous standing ovation.  russell, a rock-solid 6-foot-6, 260-pound junior who may have played his last collegiate game, dissected notre dame's outmanned defense with laser-like bombs and pinpoint touch passes to wide-open receivers. he completed 21 of 34 passes for 332 yards, threw for two touchdowns and ran for another score.  ''russell's a hard man to bring down on those sprint draws,'' the notre dame senior safety tom zbikowski said. ''they had a lot of weapons and used them all.''  l.s.u. coach les miles, who has led the tigers to consecutive 11-2 seasons, was puzzled by the way russell seemed to fly under the public's radar despite being the nation's third-most efficient passer. heisman voters may have missed him, but n.f.l. executives have not. some project him to be a first-round pick, perhaps the no. 1 selection.  regarding russell's immediate future, miles said: ''he's got to make a very difficult decision. if he returns, he'll certainly be a heisman trophy candidate.''  while weis must replace quinn, he also knows he has to do a lot more, particularly in recruiting. willingham did not leave him much, according to recruiting analysts who said he struggled to attract blue-chip prospects to south bend, ind.  last year, in weis's first focused period for finding players, he brought in a recruiting class ranked in the top 10 in the nation, according to several recruiting services. if notre dame's current verbal commitments hold up, including one from the nation's top quarterback prospect, jimmy clausen from california, the incoming recruiting class may crack the top 5.  before the sugar bowl, weis acknowledged that no amount of coaching acumen could make up for bigger, faster and more skilled players.  ''if we're going to get to the top and stay there,'' he said, ''recruiting is the constant.''  but after his team was shellacked by another superior opponent, weis cautioned that returning notre dame to the top level of college football, and banishing the ''over-rated'' chants for good, may take some time.  ''we came here the first year and made some good strides,'' he said. ''but i don't think we made enough strides for me to be content. we need to make some more steps if you want to play for it all.''  football  