the year that made deal makers giddy   for deal makers, does it get any better than this?  a heady cocktail of rapidly growing emerging markets, floods of private equity and hedge fund money, buoyant chief executive confidence and a hungry debt market that seems willing to snap up nearly everything that banks can dish out has created an environment so fertile that mergers in 2006 surpassed all records.  globally, there were $3.79 trillion worth of deals last year, up 38 percent from 2005, according to data from thomson financial.  deals were even up 11 percent from the heights of 2000, the year of the aol-time warner merger that has come to symbolize the dangers of a mergers and acquisitions bubble. many of the deals of that year left a hangover of bad debt and broken companies.  records were also broken last year for hostile deals and european deals. dealogic, a competing statistics firm, says that 2006 deal flow was even higher, at $3.98 trillion.  gavin macdonald, head of european mergers and acquisitions at morgan stanley, acknowledged that he had ''seen a few cycles'' in more than 20 years as a banker, but never one like this.  ''we thought in 2000 we might not see its like again, but we've surpassed even that,'' he said.  no one can agree on what happens next.  steven a. baronoff, the global head of mergers and acquisitions at merrill lynch, said, ''the question a lot of people are asking themselves is, 'last time it ended relatively badly, so will we see the same kind of problems in the future?' ''  many bankers, perhaps not surprisingly, insist the answer is no. after all, deals during this boom have been happening throughout many industries, not concentrated in just telecommunications and new media as they were in 2000. they are being financed by fast-growing cash flows and forgiving capital markets, not overpriced stock.  ''this time around it is a very different environment,'' mr. baronoff said. ''it's a much more balanced boom.''  and although deal volume is up, the prices that companies are paying are still well below what they were in 2000, said david kirshenbaum, chief operating officer for global mergers and acquisitions at citigroup.  ''we're seeing lower premiums and much higher identifiable synergies, and a positive reaction from the stock market,'' he said.  others, however, see a slowdown in deals coming this year.  phil isherwood, an equity strategist with dresdner kleinwort, said to ''prepare for a peak in 2007.'' one of the symptoms, he said, is the prevalence of cash deals. through mid-december, some 70 percent of announced mergers were cash instead of stock, he said, compared with a 10-year average of 40 percent.  ''this use of cash is a symbol and symptom of a bubble, not an argument against it,'' he said.  too much money is chasing too few deals, driving up prices, mr. isherwood said. ''bigger deals, bigger borrowing and bigger prices equals bigger risk, not bigger fun.''  indeed, the ever-bigger buyouts of 2006 have raised concerns about the amount of debt used to do the deal.  ''given current leverage levels and recent developments in the economic/credit cycle, the default of a large private equity backed company or a cluster of smaller private equity backed companies seems inevitable.'' the financial services authority, the british markets regulator, said in a november report.  private equity buyers accounted for nearly a fifth of all deals in 2006, according to thomson. the volume of these deals doubled in the united states in 2006, as they aggressively outbid corporate buyers.  for example, a group including blackstone and the texas pacific group bought the medical device company biomet for $10.9 billion last month, snatching it from the jaws of a larger rival, smith & nephew of britain, which had courted the company for months.  to win the day, they are taking out larger and larger loans. over all, $183.3 billion in high-yield debt was issued in 2006, according to thomson, up 52 percent from a year before.  the key to keeping the merger mania going is liquidity -- or the willingness of banks to lend money. so far, the door has been wide open for most borrowers, thanks in part to the exponential growth of new products like credit derivatives and credit default swaps, which allow lenders lay off some of the risk to other buyers. that door, of course, could slam shut if a deal goes sour, predict bankers and investors.  but so far, there is no sign the party is ending: private equity funds raised about $400 billion in 2006, and as of december had about $700 billion available to do deals. morgan stanley predicts that 2007 will bring even more large leveraged buyouts, including some huge european deals in the $25 billion to $35 billion range.  if there is a slowdown on the horizon, many bankers predict it will not happen until at least the second half of the year.  ''you've seen a lot of activity in the fourth quarter, and that is a good harbinger for the first half of 2007,'' mr. kirshenbaum of citigroup said.  there will continue to be a lot of activity in buyouts, emerging markets, and in japan and the middle east, he added.  new market participants are adding to the trend, helping to smooth the way for hostile deal makers.  ''hedge funds have become the kingmakers,'' deciding at what price they will sell out, mr. macdonald of morgan stanley said.  chief executives can no longer rebuff takeover offers easily, because once one is made, their stock is often snapped up by hedge funds looking for a quick buck. this impact has been keenly felt in europe, where such investors helped mittal steel take over a reluctant arcelor, and may be pushing the london stock exchange into the hands of nasdaq.  that may not be the case in 2007, though. ''the hedge funds have a lot of money, but it is yet unclear that they are getting great returns out of this,'' mr. baronoff of merrill lynch said. ''if they find other higher return activities, maybe they will focus a little less on activism,'' he said.  yet as michael tory, head of british investment banking at lehman brothers, said: ''as long as the liquidity is there and the sources of liquidity remain healthy, there is no reason this can't continue.''  street scene  correction:  january 11, 2007, thursday  a chart on the street scene page of business day last thursday that listed the leading merger and acquisition advisers misstated the value of the deals in 2006. for goldman, sachs, the sector leader, it was $1.088 trillion, not $108.8 trillion. for the industry as a whole, the value of the deals was $3.805 trillion, not $380.5 trillion. a corrected chart can be found at nytimes.com/business.  