the democrats' cautious tiptoe around the president's tax cuts   president bush is all but daring democratic leaders to attack his signature tax cuts as they take over congress. but democrats, perhaps to his frustration, are having none of it.  in an opening salvo on wednesday, mr. bush proclaimed that he would present a budget next month that manages to project a balanced budget by 2012 while permanently extending more than $1 trillion in tax cuts.  ''it is also a fact that our tax cuts have fueled robust economic growth and record revenues,'' mr. bush wrote in an op-ed article for the wall street journal. ''we met our goal of cutting the deficit in half three years ahead of schedule.''  the implicit message, which republican lawmakers reinforced later, was that their tax cuts were popular with voters, that republicans had proven the economic benefits of tax cuts and that democrats would court disaster if they even hinted at rolling them back or repealing them.  but even as democratic leaders continue to accuse mr. bush of having a reckless fiscal policy, they have refused to discuss dismantling his tax cuts or even to engage in a debate with him about the best way to stimulate economic growth.  ''it's always the same old tired line with them -- 'tax and spend, tax and spend, tax and spend,' '' said senator kent conrad, the north dakota democrat who is chairman of the senate budget committee. ''we're not going there.''  at least not now. democratic leaders say they see no need to revisit mr. bush's tax cuts for several years because they are not set to expire until the end of 2010. and they contend that the government could increase revenues as much as $100 billion a year simply by closing the ''tax gap,'' taxes that are owed but not paid.  when asked about their tax plans, as they have been again and again since nov. 7, democratic leaders insist they want to preserve many of the middle-class tax cuts like the child tax credit and a reduction in the so-called ''marriage penalty'' for two-income households.  the democrats' coyness is less than candid. although it is true that mr. bush's tax cuts have four more years of life, it is also true that congress faces serious fiscal headaches that cannot be postponed for even a full year.  one of those challenges is the iraq war. the conflict is likely to cost far more than $100 billion this year, even if the united states began reducing troop levels.  so far, mr. bush has kept war spending out of the regular budget request that he sends to congress each february, instead seeking the money on an expedited as-needed basis.  democrats say, however, that they will not accede to such requests, as their republican predecessors did, because they sidestep the process by which congress normally debates spending priorities.  perhaps the bigger and more enduring problem is the alternative minimum tax, a tax that was originally intended for the richest households but that has been not adjusted for inflation and is rapidly engulfing tens of millions of middle-class families every year.  to prevent the alternative tax from becoming a de facto tax increase, congress has been passing temporary fixes for the last several years. those fixes now cost more than $50 billion a year, and the cost is expected to climb sharply for the rest of the decade.  repealing the alternative minimum tax, a goal shared by democrats and republicans, would reduce government revenues by about $1 trillion over the next 10 years and would be a huge drain on the treasury that nobody in either party has figured out how to finance.  democrats, meanwhile, have a wish list of their own. house democrats plan to reduce interest rates on student loans by half as part of their plan to pass measures that they have long favored in the first 100 legislative hours.  democrats also want to funnel more money to develop alternative energy sources, domestic security and the children's health insurance program.  house democrats plan to reintroduce tough new ''pay-go'' budget rules as early as this friday. under ''pay-go,'' which governed spending measures in the 1990s but expired in 2002, new entitlement programs or new tax cuts have to be matched by comparable spending cuts or tax increases.  politicians in both parties may be feeling a temporary reprieve from fiscal pressures because the budget deficit has indeed declined sharply in the last two years.  largely because of big back-to-back increases in tax revenue for the last two years, the deficit shrank to $248 billion in 2006 from a peak of $412 billion in 2004.  measured as a share of the total economy, the approach economists view as more meaningful than the deficit size in dollars, the shortfall is 1.9 percent of the gross domestic product, modest by historical standards.  but many budget analysts remain highly skeptical about mr. bush's promise to eliminate the deficit, noting that the balanced budget would not occur until four years after he had left office.  one reason for the skepticism is that the government would be renewing all of mr. bush's tax cuts at precisely the time that the 76 million baby boomers have begun pouring into retirement and claiming government benefits from social security and medicare.  white house budget forecasts have also proven wildly wrong in both good years and bad, as tax revenue plunged far more than officials predicted from 2001 through 2004 and climbed faster than predicted in 2005 and 2006.  despite the recent jump in tax receipts, moreover, federal tax collections are still low as a share of the total economy. spending, on the other hand, climbed sharply as a share of the economy and remains high by historical standards.  mr. conrad of the budget committee acknowledged on tuesday that higher taxes, especially on wealthier families, would eventually have to be part of a comprehensive plan that included tough spending restraint and an overhaul of entitlement programs like social security and medicare.  ''i believe that if americans are told the truth they will support actions necessary to address the budget,'' he said. ''if we're going to be honest about this, it's going to require both sides' giving up some of their fundamental positions.''  but other democratic lawmakers say it would be almost pointless to lead an unpopular fight over raising taxes until republicans are willing to share some of the political pain.  with mr. bush almost certain to fight almost any effort to revisit his tax cuts, and republicans in congress unlikely to rebel against the president, democrats are inclined to wait until after mr. bush is gone.  the 110th congress: news analysis  