remain silent? some in custody spell it all out   the ''beast of broadway,'' as the tabloids call him, a successful actor, has been accused of sexually abusing a 15-year-old girl. but his grade-school teacher would be proud of him in at least one respect: he is a good speller.  that much was clear in the two and-a-half page written statement he gave the police after he was arrested, a statement that recounted a behind-the-scenes theater tour for the girl. he wrote these words voluntarily despite a constitutional right to remain silent that is ingrained not only in criminal law, but also in popular culture. but he was hardly the only person arrested in new york in recent years who opened up once the cuffs went on.  a former women's wear daily writer, accused of disguising himself in a firefighter's costume and sexually assaulting a former colleague on halloween, kept detectives spellbound with his disquisitions on chinese menus and book rights.  a homeless man accused of stabbing a tourist as he rode with his girlfriend on the subway found that words weren't enough. asked to sign his confession, he instead sketched a cartoon version of his crime: a pair of lovers' faces -- one happy and one sad -- and a stormy black cloud floating over a subway train.  such statements -- and occasional illustrations -- by defendants in new york city courts are one element of what prosecutors call the v.d.f., more formally known as the people's voluntary disclosure form. to read them is to experience a kind of poetry of everyday criminal life in new york city.  by turns raw, ugly, poignant, defiant, rarely remorseful and almost always damaging, the statements are a window into the criminal process, part of the common language between detectives and suspects.  ''it's kind of like the literature of the criminal defendant,'' said gerald l. shargel, a criminal defense lawyer. ''the information contained on the v.d.f. is much more rich and colorful than anything the defense lawyer provides.''  because they can be so revealing, the v.d.f.'s are a bane of defense lawyers' existence, and they often try to suppress them so they cannot be used in court.  more technically, the voluntary disclosure form is a rough, preliminary summary of the evidence, which the prosecution is required to give to the defense. there is space for prosecutors to type out information like the date, place and time of the ''occurrence.''  and there is space for detectives to provide statements made by defendants at the time of arrest, either as summarized by the police, or in the defendant's own writing.  for many people, the urge to explain, if not to confess, is as urgent as it was for raskolnikov in ''crime and punishment.''  ''my name is paul cortez,'' is the melvillian first sentence of the v.d.f. statement handwritten by mr. cortez, a yoga teacher who is awaiting trial as the suspect in the fatal stabbing of a dancer in her upper east side apartment.  what follows is a three-page roller coaster ride of love, sex and betrayal, culminating in an alibi. on the day of the victim's death, mr. cortez wrote, ''i knew something was wrong, so i called back several times.'' when she didn't answer, he called clients, watched a football game with a friend, ''then read a little and went to bed. the next morning about 10:30 i found out from my mom catherine was dead.''  the last word, ''dead,'' is capitalized for emphasis.  prosecutors love to have defendants volunteer an alibi because it shows what they call ''consciousness of guilt.''  stacey richman, a criminal defense lawyer, summed up her advice to any accused who may feel the urge to chat: ''you have a right to remain silent. exercise that right.''  when peter braunstein, the former women's wear daily writer, was arrested in memphis in december 2005, he seemed, in one of many hamlet-like moments, torn about talking. ''i really don't think i should talk to you,'' mr. braunstein began, according to his v.d.f. ''i think i should do the whole lawyer thing.''  and then he kept talking.  ''everybody talks,'' said daniel j. castleman, chief of investigations for the manhattan district attorney. ''almost nobody doesn't talk. and the reason for that is that people think they can either talk their way out of it or mitigate the crime. it's human nature.''  mr. braunstein, who is in a mental hospital awaiting trial on charges of kidnapping and sexual abuse, seemed to delight in his celebrity. ''defendant referred to book and movie deals using the name of the complainant several times,'' the v.d.f. says.  he fantasized about ordering chinese food. ''defendant stated that after seeing news reports, if he went to a chinese restaurant, he should order something other than beef with extra mustard because that is what the wanted poster says he orders, but if he did that, it would be too obvious, so he would order beef with extra mustard, but he had not eaten chinese food for a while.''  mr. braunstein did not sign anything, unlike james barbour, the actor called the ''beast of broadway,'' who once played the beast in ''beauty and the beast.'' mr. barbour wrote his statement in block letters, correctly spelled, indented and punctuated it, and signed it with a flourish.  accused of having a sexual relationship with a 15-year-old girl, he wrote, ''she told me that she was 16.''  unfortunately for mr. barbour, the age of consent in new york is 17.  ''that evening we went to a broadway show, 'george gershwin alone,' '' wrote mr. barbour, who is free on $10,000 bail. ''i introduced her to the star of the show, gave her a backstage tour. the relationship stopped suddenly because i thought it was inappropriate and could get dangerous.''  defendants may try to talk their way out of a charge, but do they succeed?  ''never,'' said gerald b. lefcourt, who has defended clients from the black panthers to harry b. helmsley. ''which is why if it's up to me, every client i have should know they should never, ever, under any circumstances speak to law enforcement unless i'm there.''  what joseph weir, accused of groping feet on the subway, lacked in spelling skills, he made up for with an almost gallic appreciation for women. ''i complyment woman, i bow down to them, sometime i kiss there feet and grab legs.'' mr. weir, charged with sex abuse, coercion and other less than gallant acts, is due back in court on jan. 19.  alexis quinlin, a swindler posing as a french photographer, actually wrote his statement in french, perhaps casting doubt on those who would contend that the police put words in the mouths of criminals.  ''je m'appelle alexis quinlin,'' wrote mr. quinlin, who was convicted of grand larceny and sentenced to up to seven and a half years in prison, but was not lying about being french. he described how he signed a contract under the assumed name of jean baptiste mondino, which was, he admitted, ''une grave erreur.''  robert de niro's housekeeper, lucyna turyk-wawrynowicz, accused of stealing clothes and jewelry from her wealthy employers, made the mistake of giving the police shopping tips. ''anybody can buy a jacket like this at century 21,'' ms. turyk-wawrynowicz said after she was taken into custody in june 2005, according to a transcript typed by the police.  an hour later, she was insulting mr. de niro's wife, grace hightower, saying, ''she is mean.''  after about three hours, she announced, ''the diamonds are in the bathroom.''  after requesting a starbucks skim latte from the detectives questioning her, she threw in the towel.  ''i am evil and guilty, but my husband did nothing,'' she said. ''you can cut my hands and head off, but i can tell you he did nothing wrong.'' she pleaded guilty to grand larceny and last february was sentenced to up to three years in prison.  others get right to the point.  ''i hate sammy,'' kristina caban said of the man she was accused of branding with an ''r,'' as if he were a bull, according to the police transcript. ''he raped me two years ago.'' ms. caban, charged with assault with intent to disfigure permanently, is due back in court on jan. 11.  civil libertarians have called for police interrogations to be videotaped. ''we've had reports from clients who say they wrote something, but the police officers were dictating it,'' said seymour w. james jr., the lawyer in charge of the criminal practice at the legal aid society. ''they're intimidated by the police after hours of questioning.''  sometimes, it takes very little prompting for a defendant to put her foot in her mouth. in her v.d.f., andrea schwartz, whom the tabloids have termed ''the brazilian madam,'' is quoted telling the police as she was arrested: ''i'm not a prostitute. i just hook guys up with girls if they want them.''  that did not stop prosecutors from indicting her on prostitution charges last june. she is awaiting trial.  editors' note:  january 25, 2007, thursday  a front-page article on jan. 5 about the tendency of criminal suspects in new york city to give revealing and usually damaging statements to the police, despite their right to remain silent, included excerpts from the statement of james barbour, a broadway actor accused of sexually abusing a 15-year-old girl. according to his statement, mr. barbour told the police that he had lain on a bed with the girl and that they had kissed.  but the article should have made it clear that in the statement, mr. barbour does not admit or confess to having sexually assaulted the girl, and that he has pleaded not guilty.  