grief and many questions after a pediatrician's killing   dr. leandro lozada was the kind of pediatrician parents adored. five days a week, he would leave his comfortable neighborhood here and travel to his private medical practice in a poor section of the bronx, where he sometimes treated people who had no insurance and occasionally handed out free medication.  ''if i had an emergency at 3 a.m., i would call him and he would meet me in the emergency room,'' said jacqueline caceres, whose two children were patients of dr. lozada's.  on thursday, ms. caceres was one of dozens of parents who stopped by dr. lozada's practice to set up a memorial and to grieve.  after he failed to show up at his office on wednesday, dr. lozada, 46, was found dead in his ranch-style home here on the border of scarsdale a few miles from his practice. the police said they found him lying on the bedroom floor, shot at point-blank range several times, including at least once in the face and once in the back of his head. no murder weapon was found.  edmund hartnett, the yonkers police commissioner, said on thursday that there were no signs of a forced entry or of a struggle, leading him to believe that dr. lozada knew his killer. mr. hartnett said that detectives were also investigating the possibility that a roll of cash had been taken and reports that a sport utility vehicle had been parked in his driveway on wednesday.  but no clear motive has surfaced.  ''we are looking at his business dealings, his financial records and anyone who might benefit from his death,'' mr. hartnett said. ''this was not a random act. this individual appeared to be targeted for this crime.''  according to the police, dr. lozada spent much of his time at his practice, hispanic pediatrics, where he treated poor patients. he had a former wife and two children, a son and a daughter, who lived nearby and a companion who stayed with him occasionally. so far, the police said they had no primary suspect.  dr. lozada, a native of the dominican republic, earned his medical degree at the university of santo domingo about 20 years ago and came to the united states a short time later. about a decade ago, he set up a practice in the fordham section of the bronx in a small brick building on a blighted block. hoping to brighten the street and the building, at 229 east kingsbridge road, he painted the facade of the building blue. parents said he was known for his skill with children and for his commitment to the neighborhood.  ''he was not only a medical doctor, he was a kind-hearted person who cared about where he worked,'' said christine reeves, whose grandchildren were patients of dr. lozada's.  in a personal statement he wrote for his state department of health profile, dr. lozada said that his goal was to ''give something back to society by serving my community, which is in need of good and culturally sensitive medical care.''  but residents of the affluent neighborhood in yonkers where dr. lozada had lived in a rented three-bedroom house for the past year said that he made far less of an impression on them. steven seligman, whose house backs up to dr. lozada's, said he had met his neighbor only when he moved in.  ''he was neither friendly nor unfriendly,'' mr. seligman said.  dr. lozada had a daily schedule that he stuck to closely, mr. hartnett said. on wednesday morning, the police said his day began like most others: he awoke early, picked up his daughter at her mother's home, dropped her off at school and then went to his gym.  when he did not show up at work by 10 a.m., his colleagues grew concerned and called his companion. she told the police that she went to the house just before 3 p.m. and found his body.  on thursday, a stream of parents and children paused in front of dr. lozada's practice. mourners cried, lighted white prayer candles, wrote messages in spanish and english on two posters taped to the brick building, and remembered a doctor they called a caregiver and friend.  hilaria pena signed the name of her 4-year-old son, joshua, on a poster that pictured dr. lozada as many patients remembered him: smiling, in white shirtsleeves with a stethoscope slung around his neck and a child in his arms.  ''he was just a good doctor,'' ms. pena said.  