news summary   international a2-8  conduct at gallows raises arab admiration of hussein  in the week since saddam hussein was hanged in an execution steeped in sectarian overtones, his public image in the arab world, formerly that of a convicted dictator, has undergone a resurgence of admiration.  a1  the new democratic leaders of the senate and house warned president bush against sending additional troops to iraq, setting the stage for a confrontation between congress and the white house.  a7  a call for palestinian calm  the palestinian prime minister called for an end to the internal violence in the gaza strip a day after members of his own hamas militia killed a fatah commander.  a6  bishop linked to secret police  warsaw's new archbishop, caught in eastern europe's widening witch hunt for former communist secret police informers, admitted he had collaborated in the 1980s with the sluzba bezpieczenstwa, or security service, known as s.b.  a3  u.s. envoy to visit somalia  the state department's top diplomat for africa is planning a trip to mogadishu, somalia's capital, american officials said. it would be the first time in more than a decade that a high-ranking american official has set foot in the battle-scarred city.  a6  new u.n. leader picks deputy  ban ki-moon, secretary general of the united nations, chose asha-rose mtengeti-migiro, the foreign minister of tanzania, to be the deputy secretary general, fulfilling a pledge to choose a woman from a developing country.  a4  national a9-13  house tightens rules on earmark spending  the house voted to pull the tradition of congressional earmarking into the daylight, requiring lawmakers to attach their names to the pet items they slip into spending or tax bills and certify that they have no financial interest in the provisions.  a1  modular houses in mississippi  since hurricane katrina, modular houses, which range from shotgun-style cottages to fancy minimansions, are starting to appear across the gulf coast, as public officials and residents search for ways to speed the slow pace of recovery.  a1  'parking rage' in san francisco  burdened with one of the densest downtowns in the country and a californian love for moving vehicles, san franciscans have been shocked in recent months by crimes related to finding places to park.  a1  colorado hit by another storm  another winter storm bore down on snow-weary colorado, complicating the recovery from back-to-back blizzards in december and raising fears that livestock losses would continue to mount.  a9  schwarzenegger is sworn in  nursing a broken leg but armed with an electoral mandate, arnold schwarzenegger was sworn in to his second term as governor of california.  a9  diet drug for dogs is approved  the food and drug administration approved the first prescription drug treatment for dog obesity.  a9  beliefs  a13  new york/region b1-5  first-baby sweepstakes fuels immigration debate  a $25,000 prize for the first american baby born in 2007, sponsored by toys ''r'' us, will not go to a chinese-american girl born in new york city at the stroke of midnight on new year's eve because her mother is not a legal resident. the decision has thrust toys ''r'' us into the immigration debate.  b1  field of flags for fallen soldiers  a woman from saratoga county, in upstate new york, has planted small flags, each one representing an american soldier killed in iraq, on a field next to her farmhouse.  b1  mild, weird winter in new york  not even a flurry is in the immediate forecast for new york city, even though parts of the nation are shivering. temperatures are expected to reach record highs this weekend, with 71 degrees expected today.  b1  neediest cases  b5  business day c1-10  heavy cost of convention  the annual consumer electronics show is one of the prime opportunities for technology companies looking for potential customers, partners and press, but the price of participation can also be daunting.  a1  restrictions for thin models  the fashion industry has decided to issue educational guidelines to american designers aimed at promoting healthier behavior among its dangerously thin models.  c1  business digest c2  obituaries a16  c. harry falk  the chief executive and president of the new york board of trade, he was 66. a16  editorial a14-15  editorials: making no small plans; the senate's task on warming; a status quo secretary general; safe as milk?  columns: maureen dowd, orlando patterson.  bridge b20  crossword b18  tv listings b21  weather b22  