neighbors protest flea market's move to belmont park   jeans, scarves, jewelry, perfumes, socks, toy trucks, cough medicine, handbags, pots and pans -- all these and more may become available this spring at an outdoor market at belmont park. crowds of shoppers, rivaling those at the races, could be coming, too.  but not if residents, school personnel and municipal leaders in the neighboring villages of floral park and bellerose have their way.  the open-air market, which would operate in the racetrack's northernmost parking lot on tuesdays, saturdays and sundays from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. from march to december, has been operating for the last nine years at aqueduct raceway in queens. the new york racing association closed the market to make more room for parking and offered its operator a lease at belmont park.  ''we don't object to the market itself, only the location, which would abut one of our elementary schools,'' said lynn pombonyo, the superintendent of the floral park-bellerose school district. ''all there is between the school grounds and the proposed market is a chain-link fence. that looks far too risky to us.''  jenell horan, the school pta's co-president and parent of four children ranging in age from 7 to 12, agreed. ''it's a very bad setup for the safety of our kids,'' she said. ''predators and pedophiles are a reality in our society, and they could have access to our kids through the fence.''  another parent at the school and a trustee of bellerose village, rosaleen shea, said: ''how do we know there won't be pornography and drug paraphernalia at the market? or that our children wouldn't be lured away by offers of ipods or candy?''  nonsense, said carol desanto, who has managed the aqueduct flea market for nine years and was astonished at the idea that it could be perceived as a threat.  ''our vendors are good, honest, working people, and we don't attract a rowdy crowd,'' she said. ''not everyone can afford to shop at nordstrom or bloomingdale's, you know. there's a place for an off-price market in today's economy, a very important place.''  ms. desanto has applied for a special permit from the town of hempstead, which includes bellerose and floral park, to locate the market at belmont park. even though floral park is adjacent to the track, it has no jurisdiction over it, as belmont park sits outside the village in an unincorporated part of the town. joseph pellegrini, the secretary for the town board of zoning appeals, said a decision on the permit would be made by the end of january.  felice rubin, who has lived in floral park for 25 years and reared two children there, said she would object to any activity that brought a number of people into the neighborhood, regardless of the reason. ''it wouldn't help the quality of life in the village,'' she said, ''and it would certainly raise concerns about our safety.''  to help soothe concerned residents, ms. desanto said she would be willing to reduce the number of vendors to 400 at belmont park from the 600 she had at aqueduct.  even with the reduction in vendors, said david fowler, president of the floral park-bellerose school board, noise from the 2,000 to 3,000 people he estimated would attend the market would disturb children in the classroom and at play outdoors.  ms. desanto said the market would draw 8,000 to 10,000 shoppers on a busy day and 1,500 at a time. belmont park averaged 4,629 racing patrons a day last fall.  the floral park mayor, phil guarnieri, said that the ball fields were used seven days a week for soccer, baseball and lacrosse. ''the market could bring in as many as 1,400 cars,'' he said. ''that's not good for the school or the children.''  but frank formato, who lives in elmont, which borders belmont park to the south, said he would welcome the market at a parking lot near him. ''i'd be happy to shop there,'' he said. ''everybody likes a bargain.''  relocation  