years in review, and new-year surprises   shaggy  it's easy to underrate a reggae star known for novelty hits, but don't count shaggy out. despite a recent slump (does anybody remember ''wild 2nite''?) this desert storm veteran turned pop sensation hasn't gone away. his new single, ''church heathen'' (big yard), is his best in years. there's a tense beat and a faux gregorian chant, setting the scene for shaggy's story, which concerns a man in church against his will: ''me woman she a pressure me fi go confession.'' so why not spend the service getting caught up on ecclesiastical gossip? as shaggy puts it:  me sit down round beside sister pam  who a tell me everything 'bout di congregation  'bout sister paulette and her gay husband  and how she still a sleep wit' di minibus man.  from the club-loving worshiper to the embezzling deacon to the men who are there only to look for women (''me couldn't say nothing because me know me a one''), everyone has a story. and the music video ups the ante with a bit of stunt casting: the pugnacious dancehall reggae veteran ninjaman plays the preacher. with any luck this wicked little song will get a chance to amuse (or offend) american listeners too.  skillz  around this time every year the virginia rapper (and, he loves to remind people, ghostwriter for other rappers) skillz releases his annual ''rap up,'' a track that summarizes the best and worse in hip-hop. for his 2006 rap-up (hear it at myspace.com/yourghostwriter), he borrows the beat from jay-z's ''lost one'' and spends five minutes fast-forwarding through the year's news and trivia. rick ross gets mixed reviews ('' 'everyday i'm hustlin'? yeah, that track was nice/but it's not rap if you just saying the same thing twice''), an r&b legend gets a harsh but factual appraisal (''janet jackson flopped hard/her album did so bad that jermaine had to quit his day job''), a heartthrob's hairstyle gets explained (''your boy ne-yo? he went with the baldie, of course/but if you seen his hairline, he ain't have no choice''). by the time he's done, you may feel an unexpected sensation: nostalgia.  laura gibson  late last year this oregon singer-songwriter released ''if you come to greet me'' (hush), a short, quiet, tantalizing debut. the best songs, like ''hands in pockets,'' unspool slowly but not tentatively, nudged forward by ms. gibson's smoky voice and not-quite-hopeless lyrics. catch her on a western tour this month (see lauragibson.net for dates) or seek out this cd, if only so you can start anticipating the next one.  lil' chris  in the first season of the british reality tv show ''rock star'' (which was broadcast in america on vh1), gene simmons of kiss tried to turn a bunch of boarding-school preteenagers into a rock band. in the second season, shown in britain last year, he tried again, this time at a scruffy comprehensive school (a public school, in the american sense) in suffolk. and that's how chris hardiman, a short and scrappy 16-year-old, became one of britain's most entertaining teen pop stars. his self-titled debut album has been a success, thanks to a pair of addictive singles, ''checking it out'' and ''gettin' enough''; he has perfected a cheerfully imperfect form of computer-enhanced boy-punk, indebted to everyone from the buzzcocks to kelly clarkson. from this side of the ocean the whole thing seems like a weird dream, or maybe a hoax; visit his site, lilchris.co.uk, for proof that it's not.  'pop ambient 2007'  another gratifying annual tradition: every year since 2001, the electronic-music label kompakt, in cologne, germany, has released a new ''pop ambient'' compilation, devoted to hazy tracks on which the beats are subtle or nonexistent. this installment (available from forcedexposure.com) includes thomas fehlmann's ''next to the field,'' which hides a steady but insistent pulse between mutating clouds of sound, and ''nach 1912,'' an old track by gas (the ambient alter ego of the great minimalist producer wolfgang voigt) that makes its first appearance on cd. even listeners who don't know their burger (that's jörg burger, also known as the modernist or, here, as triola) from their guentner (that's markus guentner, whose ''altocomulus opacus'' hints at glacial grandeur) might enjoy the warm, narcotic feeling these tracks inspire.  avril lavigne  her most famous release of 2006 consisted of nothing but saliva: in september ms. lavigne gave the paparazzi some valuable footage when she aimed biological weapons (albeit rather innocuous ones) in their direction. luckily her new song is less messy and just as memorable. it's called ''keep holding on,'' and you can find it hiding in plain sight, on the soundtrack to the family-friendly dragon epic ''eragon.'' (a dragon-movie soundtrack? you were probably planning on buying it anyway, right?) ms. lavigne was once known for bratty pop-punk, but this song is yet more proof that she excels at belting out power ballads, too. there's something marvelously blank about her voice; she sounds stoic (or indifferent), even though she's pledging eternal devotion. strings soar (the song was produced by the pop mastermind known as dr. luke), drums pound, and ms. lavigne proves that an impressive balladeer has something in common with a computer-generated dragon and an irritable tabloid star: when they open their mouths, stand back.  music: playlist  