school is shut after outbreak of encephalitis kills a pupil   state and federal health officials are investigating an extremely rare outbreak of encephalitis here that killed a second-grader last month and led officials to close his elementary school this week.  health officials said the cases of encephalitis, which is usually brought on by a virus and causes the brain to swell, are unusual because they appear to be caused by a common bacteria, mycoplasma pneumoniae, or walking pneumonia.  ''it's very rare for someone to be hospitalized with mycoplasma, and it's even more rare to see such a severe complication as encephalitis,'' said cynthia whitney, acting branch chief for the respiratory diseases branch of the centers for disease control and prevention. ''what makes this so unusual is that more than one case has been linked to this outbreak of mycoplasma.''  the second-grader, dylan gleavey of warwick, died of encephalitis on dec. 21. a classmate of dylan's at greenwood elementary school became ill with meningitis that progressed to a mild form of encephalitis, said dr. david r. gifford, rhode island's director of health.  the classmate and a west warwick middle school student who had encephalitis and walking pneumonia were recovering at home, dr. gifford said.  health officials also are investigating higher-than-normal absentee rates among students in two coventry schools who were reported to have had symptoms of walking pneumonia.  over the weekend, warwick officials turned greenwood elementary school into a makeshift clinic, swabbing throats and drawing blood from all but 3 of the 275 students, their families, teachers and staff members. antibiotics were given to everyone who showed up.  the school was closed after five students tested positive for walking pneumonia. mayor scott avedisian said officials were keeping it closed for an extra week after christmas break so the students would be apart for two weeks, well into the incubation time of one to three weeks.  state officials said it was the first time a school had been closed for such an outbreak, and federal officials said they rarely intervened in cases of walking pneumonia.  ''i've been here for 13 years, and we have not shut down a school due to mycoplasma,'' ms. whitney said.  mayor avedisian said more than 1,400 rounds of antibiotics were dispensed and nine informational sessions were held for concerned parents. parents were notified of the illness by computerized phone calls.  parents were upset, mr. avedisian said, but he said he believed they had been given enough information and the chance to ask questions.  rather than close additional schools, officials were stressing the importance of hand washing and advising people to sneeze into their arms rather than their hands. lisa freeman, 41, whose three children attend greenwood elementary, said her entire family was taking antibiotics. her son, stone, was in the same class as dylan's brother.  ''it was scary, definitely scary,'' she said. ''but i feel it was handled in a very professional way.''  ms. freeman, her husband and children spent new year's day getting throat cultures, and came back the next day for blood work. doctors discovered that stone had an ear infection, causing neighbors and concerned parents to call and see if he was feeling all right.  ''it's very close-knit here,'' ms. freeman said as a gaggle of neighborhood children played in her backyard. ''i think it was the right decision to close school and put us all on antibiotics.''  