with mientkiewicz at first, giambi likely to shift to d.h.   when doug mientkiewicz was a rookie, struggling to stick with the minnesota twins, jason giambi pulled him aside for a pep talk. giambi was a star for the oakland athletics at the time, and mientkiewicz did not know him. but the encouragement helped.  ''that went a long way in my career, that there was someone out there willing to help me,'' mientkiewicz said yesterday.  now, in a different way, mientkiewicz can help giambi. though giambi enjoys playing first base, the wear of doing so aggravated a wrist injury late last season. with mientkiewicz officially joining the yankees yesterday on a one-year, $1.5 million contract, giambi can shift exclusively to designated hitter.  mientkiewicz has been on the periphery of the yankees for a few years. with the red sox in 2004, he caught the final out of the american league championship series that sealed the yankees' epic collapse. the next year, he played for the mets.  after a season in kansas city, mientkiewicz, 32, said he was thrilled to be with the yankees. ''once i heard the yankees and mr. cashman were interested, i pretty much shut down everything else,'' said mientkiewicz, who was a high school teammate of alex rodriguez. ''i was watching the playoffs in my living room saying, 'that's the perfect fit for me.' i felt what i do best can be a huge help to those guys.''  what he does best is play first base, having won a gold glove in 2001. brian cashman, the yankees' general manager, said it was important to help the pitching staff by strengthening the defense.  ''offensively, doug is a contact guy, a line-drive hitter who doesn't hit into many double plays,'' cashman said. ''i just felt, at the back of our lineup, he could fit in nicely, and his real strength is the defensive side. i'm not sure there's anybody better, defensively, than him.''  cashman said the left-handed mientkiewicz could platoon at first base with a right-hander, andy phillips or josh phelps. his addition leaves no spot on the roster for bernie williams, whose 16-year tenure with the yankees could be over.  ''we're still filling our club out; i'd rather not say more than that,'' cashman said.  cashman did not directly address the trade the yankees made thursday with the diamondbacks, in which they sent the left-hander randy johnson and $2 million to arizona for reliever luis vizcaíno and three prospects. johnson must approve the deal, and the diamondbacks have until tomorrow to arrange a contract extension and possibly rework their deferred payments to him.  johnson wants to return to arizona, where he lives, and it seems certain the trade will go through. ''we've had discussions already and negotiations are ongoing,'' said barry meister, who represents johnson. ''i don't want to speculate, but we're making progress and working on it.''  without speaking directly about the trade, cashman emphasized the importance of adding pitching depth. two of the prospects the yankees would receive are pitchers.  ''i'm very comfortable with our position players,'' cashman said. ''we've got superior coverage at so many spots on an everyday basis that my focus has to continue to be on the pitching, and finding as many choices as you possibly can.''  positive signs for murcer -- bobby murcer, the former yankees outfielder and a longtime broadcaster, was released from a texas hospital sunday, the team said. murcer, 60, had a brain tumor removed dec. 28 and is at home in oklahoma city. ''he's up and around and doing a lot of everyday activities,'' said jason zillo, a yankees spokesman.  change in hall of fame game -- the toronto blue jays will replace the mets as baltimore's opponent in this year's hall of fame game may 21. the mets and the orioles earlier were announced as opponents, but the change was made yesterday after espn moved the starting time for the mets' game against the yankees the previous day to 8:05 p.m. (ap)  baseball  