transactions   baseball  american league  baltimore orioles--agreed to terms with of aubrey huff on a three-year contract and rhp daniel cabrera on a one-year contract.  detroit tigers--named rob matwick vice president of communications.  seattle mariners--agreed to terms with inf sean burroughs on a minor league contract.  minnesota twins--agreed to terms with rhp sidney ponson and rhp brad voyleson on minor league contracts.  national league  chicago cubs--agreed to terms with lhp neal cotts on a one-year contract.  colorado rockies--agreed to terms with inf jamey carroll on a two-year contract. named bill schmidt vice president of scouting, mike hamilton scout and brian jones video coach.  pittsburgh pirates--agreed to terms with inf jose hernandez on a minor league contract.  california league  modesto nuts--named jerry weinsteinmanager.  new york-penn league  lowell spinners--promoted tim bawmannto vice president and general manager and jon good to vice president of corporate communications.  basketball  national basketball association  atlanta hawks--waived g credic bozeman.  miami heat--announced pat riley, coach, is taking an indefinite leave of absence because of ongoing hip and knee problems. named ron rothstein interim coach.  new jersey nets--traded g jeff mcinnis to charlotte for g-f bernard robinson.  women's national basketball association  wnba--announced the charlotte sting folded.  houston comets--announced the resignation of van chancellor, coach.  nba development league  arkansas rimrockers--signed f matt haryasz. waived c chad bell.  continental basketball association  butte daredevils--announced the resignation of scott carlson, coach. named assistant coach patrick o'herron coach. fired george polich, assistant general manager. released c keith closs jr.  football  national football league  detroit lions--named joe barry defensive coordinator.  miami dolphins--announced the resignation of nick saban, coach, to become coach at alabama.  new england patriots signed rb quadtrine hill to the practice squad.  new york jets--released s andre maddox from the practice squad. signed ol ed blanton from the practice squad and cb alfonso hodge and ol charles missant to the practice squad. placed db jamie thompsonon injured reserve.  philadelphia eagles--signed s erick harris to the practice squad. released qb omar jacobs from the practice squad.  san francisco 49ers--fired billy davis, defensive coordinator, and gary emanuel, defensive line coach.  canadian football league  edmonton eskimos--signed rb josh ranek.  hamilton tiger-cats--re-signed ol kyler jukes. released de james cotton.  arena football league  austin wranglers--signed qb chris redman.  grand rapids rampage--re-signed dl chukie nwokorie.  las vegas gladiators--signed wr reggie harrell. waived wr-db ivory mccann.  nashville kats--signed db reggie myles. waived ol-dl michael madrazo.  orlando predators--signed wr micah ross.  hockey  national hockey league  anaheim ducks--acquired d ric jackman from florida for a conditional pick in the 2007 nhl draft.  colorado avalanche--recalled f ben guite from albany of the ahl. assigned c brad richardson to albany.  ottawa senators--acquired c mike comrie from phoenix for c alexei kaigorodov.  american hockey league  chicago wolves--announced the atlanta thrashers have assigned c derek mackenzie to the team.  manitoba moose--assigned f marc-andre bernier to victoria of the echl.  omaha ak-sar-ben knights--assigned lw ryan donally and c aki seitsonen to las vegas of the echl.  echl  echl--fined johnstown d adam henrich an undisclosed amount and suspended wheeling d curtiss patrick for one game and fined him an undisclosed amount for their actions in a dec. 30 game. fined wheeling d paul bissonnette an undisclosed amount for his actions in a dec. 29 game against reading.  toledo storm--announced f jamie tardif has been assigned to the team by iowa of the ahl. announced d mitch maunu has been recalled to norfolk of the ahl.  central hockey league  chl--granted memphis rw darrell stoddard a leave of absence.  corpus christi rays--traded lw connor hughes to wichita for future considerations.  lubbock cotton kings--traded lw trevor weisgerber to rocky mountain for lw anders strome.  memphis riverkings--signed lw brad wanchulak.  college  canisius--named jody tassone volunteer assistant softball coach.  indiana--named sarah gustin and david jack assistant volleyball coaches.  north carolina a&t--announced the resignation of millicent sylvan, volleyball coach.  st. bonaventure--declared senior men's basketball c david fox academically ineligible.  san diego state--named don oberhelman senior associate athletic director and chief operating officer, effective feb. 1.  san jose state--announced the contract of craig choate, women's volleyball coach, will not be renewed.  widener--announced the resignation of brian sheridan and chris ostrowsky, assistant football coaches.  