city takes aim at illegal ads on sidewalk sheds   since $2,500 fines against building owners have done little in the past to stop the proliferation of illegal advertising on sidewalk construction sheds in manhattan, the bloomberg administration is getting ready this month to battle the signs themselves.  ''we'll cover them up,'' said patricia j. lancaster, commissioner of the buildings department.  the city already has a contractor, van wagner communications, that will place solid-colored vinyl sheets over offending ads if they are not removed by the owners after a 10-day warning period.  word of the impending crackdown has circulated for months, with ms. lancaster reminding building owners in a letter last year that ''advertising signs on sidewalk sheds are always illegal.'' as a result, the effort is already showing results.  where buildings department inspectors found 62 illegal signs in october, only 3 remained as of yesterday, the agency said.  (so if you had a sense that many of those long plywood construction shed parapets have recently regained their blank appearance after serving as billboards, it was not your imagination.)  ''the industry has voluntarily removed all the advertising on the sidewalk sheds -- i can't say without threat from the city, don't get me wrong,'' said richard m. schaps, the chairman and chief executive of van wagner, a leading outdoor advertising company. he said van wagner had already taken down sidewalk shed advertising that it controlled.  ms. lancaster said she was encouraged by the voluntary compliance, but was prepared to go further. besides covering up advertising, the agency may post pictures of illegal signs on its web site in what the commissioner called a ''shame campaign.''  among the offenders cited last year by the agency was a blocklong shed at the base of the new new york times building on eighth avenue, between 40th and 41st streets, which carried advertising for at&t. the parapets are now painted solid blue and gray.  ''our ad came down as soon as it was clear there was a violation,'' said michele de milly, a spokeswoman for forest city ratner companies, which is developing the building with the new york times company.  another enormous sign removed recently was an advertisement for sovereign bank that wrapped 300 feet around the 500 fifth avenue tower at 42nd street, where there is no branch of the bank. the shed is now blank.  ''obviously, we weren't aware of the ordinance,'' said edward j. shultz, the director of corporate communications at sovereign. ''had we been, we wouldn't have placed the advertising. we take ordinances very seriously.''  the city defines an advertising sign as one that ''directs attention to goods and services at a location other than where the sign is located.'' that is different from a sign related to a business on the site or a noncommercial sign.  borough president scott m. stringer of manhattan, who has battled illegal signs for years, welcomed the crackdown. ''to have a forceful response from the buildings department means a lot to communities, especially in manhattan,'' he said.  this month, inspectors will issue notices of violation where they find signs they deem to be illegal, the agency said, like the ad for the new abc family series ''lincoln heights'' that wraps around 1095 avenue of the americas, between 41st and 42nd streets, and the ad for ''the color purple,'' at broadway and 46th street. they will give owners 10 days to take down the signs themselves.  owners will be liable for all costs.  van wagner will serve as the city's contractor if enforcement reaches the point of actually covering up ads. ''i'm hoping that doesn't have to take place,'' mr. schaps said.  mr. schaps said van wagner had a strong interest in enforcement, feeling that it is unfair to have to compete with illegal operators. ''if there are rules, we comply,'' he said. ''the thing that's difficult for us is when outdoor advertising companies do not comply with regulations.''  commissioner lancaster said there was ''enough culpability'' to go around. ''outdoor ad companies that hire sign hangers are one party,'' she said, ''and the owners of buildings that derive tremendous income are another party, and the advertisers themselves.''  she traced the city's new enforcement efforts to a moment last spring. ''the signs had become more and more egregious,'' she recalled, ''and they proliferated almost as though they were breeding at night.''  if the sidewalk shed initiative is successful, she said, ''we'll do scaffolds next.''  