studies find harm in 2 parkinson's drugs   two drugs used to treat parkinson's disease and other disorders can seriously damage heart valves, researchers are reporting.  the drugs are pergolide, sold as permax, and cabergoline, sold as dostinex. permax is approved in the united states and overseas for parkinson's. dostinex is used for parkinson's in other countries but is approved in this country only for a hormonal disorder, hyperprolactinemia.  new findings on the drugs are described in two studies being published today in the new england journal of medicine.  permax already carries a black-box warning label -- the strongest warning required by the food and drug administration -- about an increased risk of heart-valve problems. such warnings, bordered in black, appear at the top of prescribing information to get doctors' attention. the permax warning was added in 2003, based on a small number of reported cases. it includes this statement: ''some patients have required valve replacement, and deaths have been reported.''  a milder warning about valve problems was added to dostinex just last month. it is identified as a ''precaution,'' which means there is no black box, and the advice is in a less obvious part of the prescribing information for doctors.  a spokeswoman for the drug agency said that it had worked with the makers of both drugs on the labeling changes, but that she did not know whether the new findings would lead to further changes.  dr. michael s. okun, the medical director for the national parkinson foundation, said people taking permax or dostinex for parkinson's should be told about the new information and given a chance to switch to other drugs. he added that patients who were just starting treatment should be given other drugs. safer, equally effective drugs are available, he said.  dr. okun, who was not involved in the two studies, is also co-director of the parkinson disease and movement disorders center at the university of florida in gainesville.  he said doctors in poorer countries might favor permax and dostinex because they are cheaper than some other parkinson's drugs. but dr. okun said it would cost no more to switch patients to the old parkinson's standby drug, l-dopa or levodopa, which has side effects of its own, but has never been known to damage heart valves.  ''patients should be given the choice of what to do,'' dr. okun said. ''there are lots of people worldwide who have used these drugs successfully. some patients, after being educated, may decide they want to accept the potential risk. others may want to switch.''  another researcher took a far different view.  ''i would just recommend not prescribing these drugs,'' said that researcher, dr. bryan l. roth, who wrote an analysis of the research that accompanied the articles in the journal. dr. roth is a professor of pharmacology and medicinal chemistry at the university of north carolina school of medicine and director of the psychoactive drug screening program at the national institute of mental health.  dr. roth called the risk of valve disease ''extraordinarily high'' and asked: ''why would you want to subject your patient to this kind of risk? i wouldn't.''  valeant pharmaceuticals, which makes permax, issued a statement by e-mail calling the drug safe and effective for parkinson's. but valeant added that it no longer promoted the drug, which was originally made by eli lilly.  dr. michael berelowitz, senior vice president of pfizer, which makes dostinex, said the company had received fewer than 100 reports of valve problems from the drug, mostly in people with parkinson's.  the two new reports involve only parkinson's. the results should not be applied to patients who take dostinex for the hormone disorder because they take far smaller doses of the drug than do patients with parkinson's, said dr. david l. kleinberg, a professor of medicine and director of the neuroendocrine unit at new york university's medical school.  the hormone disorder affects tens of thousands of people in the united states, mostly women, said dr. shlomo melmed, an endocrinologist and a senior vice president of cedars-sinai medical center in los angeles. men can develop the disorder, and some need higher doses of dostinex than do women, dr. melmed said, so those men should be monitored for heart valve problems.  neither drug is a big seller. about 73,000 prescriptions were written for permax last year, representing $10.5 million in the billion-dollar market for parkinson's drugs in the united states, according to ims health, which tracks drug sales.  about 1.5 million americans have parkinson's, according to the national parkinson foundation. dostinex sales in the united states totaled about $88 million in 2005, and about 87,000 prescriptions were written, according to wolters kluwer health, an information company in the netherlands.  the two new studies are larger than previous ones, and they confirm the higher risk of valve damage in people taking either drug for parkinson's. the studies also find that the valve problem is more common than initially thought, and that people who took the highest doses for the longest time had the greatest risk.  one study, from the istituti clinici di perfezionamento in milan, included 155 patients with parkinson's and found that 23 percent of those taking permax and 29 percent of those taking dostinex had damaged heart valves, compared with only almost 6 percent of control subjects not taking the drugs.  the other study, based on the records of more than 11,000 patients with parkinson's in britain, found that valve problems were seven times as likely in people taking permax as in control subjects and five times as likely in those taking dostinex.  dr. roth said the drugs produced the same kind of valve damage caused by the weight loss combination fen-phen, which led to the withdrawal of two drugs, pondimin and redux, in 1997. the drugs cause cells to multiply in the heart valves, which causes the valves to thicken so much that they can no longer open and close normally.  correction:  january 19, 2007, friday  an article on jan. 4 about heart-valve problems linked to two drugs for parkinson's disease misstated the year that one of them, permax, added a black-box warning label, the strongest warning required by the food and drug administration. it was 2006, not 2003.  