meals cooked and eaten   wrestling with gravy  a life, with food.  by jonathan reynolds.  335 pp. random house. $25.95.  a cookbook is generally understood to be a collection of recipes amplified by short illustrative or explanatory narratives. nora ephron set the modern standard for the inverse with her 1983 novel ''heartburn,'' a retelling of her marriage's dissolution punctuated by instructions for dishes like butter-drenched bread pudding.  in ''wrestling with gravy,'' jonathan reynolds employs the form to sketch a nonfiction picaresque. a playwright by vocation, reynolds is a contrarian by inclination and the author of ''stonewall jackson's house,'' a play in which a black docent leads a wealthy white couple through the home of a confederate general before halting the tour and asking if they will adopt her as their slave. in other words, he is a bit of a crank, which, in the often ooey-gooey world of food writing, earns him a status approaching singular.  reynolds -- who made his name among the food-obsessed while writing a biweekly column for the new york times magazine -- uses recollections of meals cooked and eaten to explain himself and indulge various dalliances. along the way he lays waste to the hot dogs served at shea stadium and descriptions of monkfish as ''the poor man's lobster.'' the latter, he argues, is tantamount to the ''chicken liver council claiming its product is foie gras for the homeless.''  he's expert at the confessional. ''i began cooking to ward off uncertainty and depression, and it worked,'' he writes of planning and executing dinner parties. but, he adds, ''there was always a junkie's letdown the following day, when the euphoria evaporated and there was nothing tangible to show for it except garbage bags.''  and he knows the value of an epiphanic feed. as a young adult on a voyage to london aboard the s.s. france, reynolds devours a chocolate éclair ''bulging with crème chantilly front and back like a parade inflatable'' and a nesselrode pudding with chestnuts, before pushing back from the table and giving in to a college reverie, convinced that ''this was the loveliest way of spending an evening since the night outside the denison field house with diane x in the back of the hearse.''  reynolds is at his best when purposefully entangling libido and linguine. he relishes a paris dinner during which his father makes a move on his girlfriend. (ditto his time in the philippines, working on a book about the filming of ''apocalypse now'' while rooming with a former playboy playmate of the year.) and he preens when recounting the response of his first wife to a dish of truffles poached in champagne and sherry, describing her response as ''so appreciative and sexual that the afternoon was gone completely, and i knew this match would work.'' he even manages to declare his unrequited love for dolly parton in the midst of a discursive exploration of malted milk.  in 2002 reynolds was asked to adapt his food writing for a one-man show. ''dinner with demons'' enjoyed a successful run during which reynolds cooked a nightly five-course entertainment of, among other dishes, deep-fried turkey and braised cardoon, while delivering much of the same material that populates this book.  ''this should only include autobiographical stories,'' the theater's artistic director told reynolds during the back-and-forth of pre-production. her read was true. reynolds could have used similar advice here, for the vignettes that crackle and singe are the more personal.  when reynolds veers into the world of reportage, he loses his libidinal tack. thankfully, that doesn't happen often. ''the perfectly bound, coquettishly trussed bird reminds me of a '50s debutante at a cotillion, not a hair out of place,'' he writes of a thanksgiving turkey; ''untrussed, it looks like a ravished slut, disheveled and eager for more.''  john t. edge is director of the southern foodways alliance at the university of mississippi.  