dry as ever, shrugging at hollywood   although alan arkin has appeared in dozens of movies since 1957, playing everything from heartbreakingly serious (''the heart is a lonely hunter'') to hilariously harried (''the in-laws''), he said he actually felt good about being turned down for a role in the independent comedy ''little miss sunshine.'' the character, edwin hoover, was a foulmouthed 80-year-old, frail and shaky from years of drug abuse and bad behavior. ''it's the best rejection i ever got in my life -- they thought i was too virile,'' said mr. arkin, 72, flexing his biceps and striking a muscleman pose during lunch at a chinese restaurant here.  even today valerie faris and jonathan dayton, the husband-and-wife team who directed ''little miss sunshine,'' sound a bit sheepish when explaining why they passed him over at first. ''we thought alan was too young for it, in such good health,'' ms. faris said by telephone recently. then, she recalled, after speaking with mr. arkin and reflecting on his body of work, she and her husband thought, ''are we crazy?''  certainly no crazier than the middle-class clan at the center of the movie, in which an aspiring motivational speaker (greg kinnear) and his frazzled wife (toni collette) embark on a breakneck trip from albuquerque to redondo beach, calif., to deliver their shiny-eyed young daughter, olive (abigail breslin), to a kiddie beauty pageant. along for the ride in their sputtering volkswagen van is the rest of her family: her suicidal uncle (steve carell), her nietzsche-loving teenage brother (paul dano) and her leather-vested grandpa (mr. arkin), a retirement home refugee who enlivens the long hours between pit stops by dishing out inappropriate advice and bragging about his sexual conquests. yet when he gazes at his tiny granddaughter, mr. arkin somehow conveys a desire to blanket her with unconditional love and protect her from the ugliness of the world.  last january at the sundance film festival, when mr. arkin saw the 1,200-seat auditorium where ''little miss sunshine'' would be screened, he wondered if he needed to figure out how to protect himself, in this case from exaggerated expectations. ''i was nervous,'' he said. ''it's a little movie. i thought it was going to tank.''  instead, the distribution rights were snatched up by fox searchlight for a record $10.5 million. the film also prompted an unusual response during the postscreening question-and-answer session. ''nobody had questions,'' mr. arkin said. ''people would raise their hands and say, 'we just want to come up there and hug everybody.' the reaction was unbelievable. i've never experienced anything like that.''  six months later, when ''little miss sunshine'' was released, critics praised mr. arkin not just for his comic timing but for his lively representation of the over-70 crowd. ''a raunchy antidote to all those sweet codgers in the movies who go gently into that good night,'' is how peter rainier of the christian science monitor put it.  these days mr. arkin is seen as an oscar contender for best supporting actor. (he has been nominated twice before -- for best actor in 1967 for his turn as a soviet lieutenant in ''the russians are coming, the russians are coming'' and two years later as a deaf-mute in the adaptation of carson mccullers's novel ''the heart is a lonely hunter.'')  when asked what edge he might have in the oscar race, he shrugged and said: ''i don't feel like i spent a lot of time trying to figure out anything about hollywood. i've never felt comfortable in this arena.''  in other words, don't expect to see mr. arkin seeking the attention of academy voters by popping up on ''entertainment tonight'' or taking red-carpet strolls. instead, fox searchlight has arranged a gentle campaign fashioned around what mr. arkin is willing to do: talk-show appearances, a few interviews and a special evening sponsored by the film society of lincoln center last month.  ''they contacted us, but we really pounced on it,'' said kent jones, the society's associate director of programming and a lifelong fan of mr. arkin's. for $50 ticketholders were invited to see ''little miss sunshine'' and clips from past arkin films, and to attend a question-and-answer session.  in november mr. arkin was in los angeles for a week to film the part of a senator in the political thriller ''rendition,'' starring jake gyllenhaal and reese witherspoon. the oscar-centric capital of the world may not be mr. arkin's favorite destination, but he could probably give a good guided tour of the city anyway. though he was born in brooklyn, at age 11 he moved with his family to highland park, a section of east los angeles where his father, an artist, hoped to land a job as a scene painter at a film studio.  mr. arkin's description of what happened next sounds not unlike one of the more luckless moments in ''little miss sunshine'': the carful of arkins hit town just in time for the acrimonious set decorators' strike of 1945. ''my father's career went right out the window before it started, but we were here,'' mr. arkin said. ''i hated it.'' he spent a couple of years after high school in the drama departments of los angeles city college and los angeles state college, figuring out what kind of actor he did not want to be. ''i couldn't stand the yelling and posturing in the hallways, so i quit,'' he said.  eventually he continued his theatrical training at bennington college and, later, as an original member of the second city, chicago's influential improvisational comedy troupe, where he created a series of characters that struck a chord with audiences. after that came broadway and finally, when he was 30, his big break with ''the russians are coming, the russians are coming,'' norman jewison's cold war comedy.  in conversation mr. arkin is the picture of unwasted energy. during lunch here the transporting of food by chopsticks was his only movement. occasionally, when asked, he offered an anecdote about his life. he perked up, for example, when discussing his three actor sons, adam, matthew and anthony, as well as a couple of achievements worthy of note in a wikipedia profile: he has written 10 well-received children's books and was a co-writer of a version of ''the banana boat song'' back in the mid-'50s, while playing guitar and singing baritone for a folk group called the tarriers.  just as often, though, he deflected questions with a dry joke, a three-sentence response or a simple ''i don't remember,'' then returned to his scallion pancakes and snow peas. during his silences, one was reminded that although his signature is his deep, almost monotone voice, he also has a gift for injecting emotion -- sadness, tension, danger -- in wordless moments.  for robert ellis miller, who directed mr. arkin in ''the heart is a lonely hunter,'' it was this knack that gave such poignancy to his portrayal of a bachelor isolated by his inability to speak or hear. ''his facial expressions, his eyes, told you so much, his body language,'' mr. miller said. ''you could read his thoughts.''  mr. arkin, who lives in santa fe, n.m., with his third wife, suzanne, seems more comfortable talking about his freedom to pick and choose his roles. ''i don't climb matterhorns anymore,'' he said. ''i'm liking life too much to knock my brains out. there was a time where i'd be: 'hitler, yeah! mussolini? sign me up!' then, as the temperature started rising on my happiness thermometer, i lost interest in being in a state of pain on anybody's behalf.''  a couple of hours after lunch it was hard to tell exactly what mr. arkin was feeling when a tall, skinny starbucks barrista grew excited as she filled his order of hot chocolate. in past interviews mr. arkin has maintained that the only place he gets recognized is at bloomingdale's, of all places. when it was noted that his young coffee server clearly knew who he was, mr. arkin said nothing for a few seconds, then suggested an alternative explanation.  ''maybe she loves me,'' he said, with a high laugh. ''is that so hard to believe?''  the oscars  