tanzanian woman is chosen for u.n.'s 2nd highest post   secretary general ban ki-moon on friday appointed asha-rose mtengeti-migiro, the foreign minister of tanzania, to be deputy secretary general and said he intended to give her responsibility for day-to-day management of the world organization.  in choosing ms. migiro, 50, a professor who has served for six years in tanzania's cabinet, mr. ban fulfilled a pledge to place a woman from a developing country in the second most powerful post at the united nations. in a statement, he praised her ''outstanding management skills'' and said he intended to delegate to her ''much of the administrative and management work of the secretariat.''  on wednesday mr. ban, who took over as secretary general on jan. 1, appointed alicia bárcena ibarra, 54, a mexican diplomat, to be the under secretary general for management, the top post focused exclusively on administration.  while some united states officials were unenthusiastic about ms. bárcena because of her lack of experience in financial management, they praised the choice of ms. migiro.  ''her experience indicates she will do a fantastic job,'' said richard a. grenell, the spokesman for the united states mission. american officials said secretary of state condoleezza rice was personally acquainted with ms. migiro and was pleased when she heard of the appointment on friday.  ms. migiro has been tanzania's foreign minister since january 2006, and before that she served for five years as minister for community development, gender and children. over the past year she has played a leading role in efforts to resolve conflicts in central africa.  as mr. ban started to build his team this week, african diplomats said they were pleased to hold on to one of the most influential posts after kofi annan, the former secretary general, who was from ghana, stepped down.  ''women are multitasking people,'' said dumisani s. kumalo, the south african ambassador, who is a major player on behalf of developing nations. ''and african women are even better. watch out!''  african diplomats said ms. migiro had carried out a management overhaul in the foreign ministry, requiring new standards of efficiency.  some united nations officials noted that mr. ban's choices signaled a step back from the corporate-style management reforms that washington has pushed since the early 1990s. neither ms. migiro nor ms. bárcena had substantial business experience. mr. ban made it clear that he would focus on diplomacy and did not intend to play the chief executive role, as some americans had hoped.  but ms. migiro may help mr. ban to win new support for reform. ''the developing countries have seen the united states reforms as a way of taking control of the united nations away from them,'' said princeton n. lyman, a senior fellow at the council on foreign relations. he said ms. migiro might be able to propose reforms ''in a way that does not seem threatening to them.''  