the neediest cases; for girl, 3, every move poses risk of injury   ''i'm o.k.! i'm o.k.,'' shenay acheampong, 3, insisted, her little voice slightly croaky from a cold.  shenay was born with osteogenesis imperfecta type iii, a genetic condition commonly called brittle bone disease.  ''she's very fragile,'' said her mother, dorcas acheampong, 28. ''she break easily.'' shenay is small, with short arms and legs. for her, the most mundane movement is risky; pulling off a snug shirt can snap a bone. shenay has spent much of her young life in hospitals, where blood pressure cuffs, x-ray procedures and intravenous insertions have all caused breaks and fractures.  ''any time she goes to the hospital, we have to put a note in her crib,'' said ms. acheampong, who estimates that shenay has worn 50 casts in her 3 years.  shenay's delicate bones impose a severe limitation on her lively mind. she spends most of her days lying down, too weak to sit up for more than an hour. she looks up at the world with big, bright eyes. "mentally, everything is o.k., her head, brain and everything," her mother said, and shenay emphatically agreed.  ''she always needs somebody to talk with because she likes to talk,'' ms. acheampong said.  ''she has lots of opinions,'' added keiko aizawa, a social worker at new alternatives for children inc. a preventive program that serves families with medically fragile children, including ms. acheampong and shenay. the program is run by the federation of protestant welfare agencies, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund.  mother and daughter have spent a lot of time in hospitals. treating shenay's disease requires calcium infusions every three months. as an infant, it took her a month or more to recover from the infusions. now it requires a three-day stay at the hospital for special surgery in manhattan.  when shenay was 7 months old, in october 2003, she had brain surgery, and a shunt was inserted to allow fluid to drain. after the surgery, she had difficulty swallowing and was fed through a tube in her nose for two years, until last october, when a feeding tube was inserted in her stomach, which she prefers.  ''it's hiding, so it's o.k.,'' her mother said. ''she didn't want people to ask questions about the tube.''  ms. acheampong was unable to work while caring for shenay during her preparation for surgery to insert the new feeding tube and then her recovery from it. she fell behind on rent. neediest cases was able to help. ms. acheampong's monthly rent is $648 for her one-bedroom apartment in the bronx. she receives $606 in supplemental security income for shenay each month, and $140 in food stamps. shenay's medical costs are covered by medicaid. ms. aizawa put $300 of neediest cases money toward ms. acheampong's rent for december.  ms. acheampong had worked as a home health aide and is eager to return to work when her daughter's health allows. ''i had more experience taking care of her. so i can take any case they give me,'' she said.  shenay is busy learning new things. she practices eating. ''she's trying to feed herself, but she can't do it like a normal baby,'' ms. acheampong said. ''she's weak.'' twice a week shenay has therapy: speech, physical, occupational and feeding.  at the end of november shenay got a back and leg brace, which ms. acheampong and the doctors hope will give her the strength to stand and perhaps someday to walk. ''right now they just want to start standing her up,'' ms. acheampong said.  shenay started school in the fall at st. mary's hospital for children in queens, which provides grade level work and access to medical care. she gets there on a school bus three days a week. even school at a hospital can be hurtful. ''they want me to bring big clothes if i'm bringing her to st. mary,'' ms. acheampong said, so the staff can change shenay without injuring her.  ms. aizawa said that, at new alternatives, shenay and her mother have found help and a role model: a 20-year-old woman with the same disease who grew up in the program. ''she goes to hunter college,'' ms. acheampong said. ''she lives in her own apartment. she's in a wheelchair, and she needs lots of help, but she is a very bright woman with a great talent for art.''  ms. acheampong said that she and the hunter college student talk on the phone ''all the time.'' ms. acheampong is hopeful that shenay will be independent. ''i'm hoping that she will be a bright person, a big person,'' she said.  but mostly, they focus on today.  ''mama, i'm itchy,'' shenay piped.  ''this is the big job we do every day: scratch her hair 24 hours,'' ms. acheampong said as she pulled her daughter close and gently scratched the back of her head. shenay's arms are too short to do it.  previously recorded: $4,647,966.83  recorded wednesday: 49,151.00  total: $4,697,117.83  last year to date: $5,367,663.05  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  correction:  january 18, 2007, thursday  an article on jan. 4 about delores pryce, a queens woman whose youngest daughter has health problems and who received help from the new york times neediest cases fund to help pay an electricity bill, referred incorrectly to new alternatives for children, a program that helps families with medically fragile children. (the error was repeated in an article on jan. 5 about dorcas acheampong, a bronx woman who received help from the fund to help pay her rent.) although it is a member agency of the federation of protestant welfare agencies, it is not run by the federation.  