motor stadt (psst! this isn't michigan)   the taxi driver, a middle-aged man from india, wasted no time as he barreled away from the stuttgart airport, his scrappy citroën whizzing past audis, bmws and an unusually high number of mercedes-benzes at over 140 kilometers (85 miles) an hour.  ''first time in stuttgart?'' he asked. ''yes,'' i replied, nervously eyeing the speedometer as it gunned toward 160 kilometers and showed no signs of easing. so this, i thought, is what it's like to take a spin on germany's legendary, freewheeling autobahn. except we weren't on the autobahn. we were simply speeding.  call it a shotgun introduction to stuttgart, the prosperous city in southwest germany where car worship, like one's taxi driver, seems to know no limits.  if devotion is measured in monuments, then there's no greater tribute to the city's automotive love affair than the gleaming new mercedes-benz museum, a 150 million euro cyclone of aluminum, steel and glass designed by the vanguard dutch firm unstudio. unveiled last may, it erupts like an engine backfiring, near the junction of the b10 and b14 highways on the banks of the neckar river. it is a nine-story leviathan of muscular ambition that spirals like a warped wedding cake on a podium of gray granite.  and it is attracting car buffs worldwide to this city where the automobile reigns supreme.  practically speaking, after all, stuttgart is where the automobile industry was invented (though nearby mannheim shares bragging rights). not only are mercedes, maybach and their parent company, daimler chrysler, based there, but it is also the corporate home of porsche, which has its own museum across town, and the automotive parts giants bosch (spark plugs) and mahle (pistons). the number of auto-enthusiast magazines published in stuttgart could pave a racetrack. and car shows like the annual retro classics, a vintage automobile fair, bring tens of thousands of gear heads to the city, whose population is 600,000, every year.  but to truly appreciate stuttgart's automotive devotion, one need only gaze at its skyline. in most european cities, you might see church spires. in stuttgart, you'll find the three-pointed mercedes-benz logo, spinning atop the main train station and illuminated at night like a guiding star.  ''we're a car city,'' said bernd ostmann, the editor in chief of the stuttgart-based magazine auto motor und sport.  still, stuttgart's automotive strength is not immediately obvious. coddled within a picturesque valley laced with green belts and parklands, it is where unpretentious low-rises creep up leafy hillsides, as locals talk leisurely over plates of spaetzle and steins of beer. stuttgarters indulge in their pints as much as their cars -- though, presumably, not at once -- and, on some days, the pungent fragrance of the city's breweries descends pleasantly on the manicured squares, museums and restored 18th-century palaces of a historic district reshaped 60 years after world war ii.  indeed, modern stuttgart may be built on engines and grease, but the casual observer senses only tidiness and order in its well-scrubbed buildings of stucco, glass, concrete and stone. in fact, sightseers might struggle to find any s-classes or 911s -- cars are banished from much of the city's historic center.  at the same time, stuttgart is in some ways playing catch-up with other auto-crazed cities in germany. consider wolfsburg where, in 2000, volkswagen unveiled its glittering autostadt, a kind of epcot center for the automobile. or dresden, where visitors to vw's glass-encased transparent factory are treated to an assembly line peep show worthy of a jacques tati film.  there's also ingolstadt, where audi has its audi forum, an automotive cultural center. and leipzig, where bmw has built a dazzling assembly plant designed by zaha hadid. not to be left behind, munich is getting the bmw world complex later this year, an entertainment and vehicle delivery complex designed by the radical architecture firm coop himmelblau.  but as germany's carmakers each try to outpolish the competition with these brand-driven monuments, only stuttgart can claim a high-octane mix of automotive bravado and seminal tradition. ''we start at day 1,'' said enrico müller, a spokesman for mercedes-benz. ''it's only here that you can see the entire 120 years of automotive history.''  the story begins just up the hill from the new mercedes museum, in a modest little greenhouse. this is where in the 1880s gottlieb daimler and wilhelm maybach tinkered on what would become their first automobile. (karl benz, working independently in mannheim, built his own gasoline-powered vehicle around the same time. the companies founded by the two teams eventually joined forces as mercedes-benz.)  the hallowed shed, like much of stuttgart, was largely destroyed in the war but has been rebuilt as the gottlieb daimler memorial. visitors to the recreated workshop today see models of daimler and maybach's first horseless carriage and the groundbreaking ''grandfather clock'' engine.  nearby is the eight-month-old mercedes-benz museum, an architectural time capsule that showcases 160 of the carmaker's greatest hits. like a wheel and spokes, its nine levels of automotive galleries spin off a stunning 136-foot-tall atrium equipped with video projections, experimental prototypes and engineering milestones.  start by taking the bullet-shaped elevators to the top of the museum, and descend down a system of double helix-inspired ramps. displayed like constructivist and pop sculptures are antique jalopies, futuristic concept cars and everything in between: the record-breaking silver arrows speedsters of the 1930s; the regal 770 grand mercedeses owned by kaiser wilhelm ii and emperor hirohito of japan; and, of course, that famous popemobile. they culminate in a cavalcade of racecars, mounted on a steep-bank curve, that form a testament to mercedes engineering.  after the trip down memory lane, join other rubberneckers and tire kickers at the company's flagship dealership, a soaring crystal palace where you can check out the new cl-class coupes and models not sold in the united states. or take a tour of the sprawling untertürkheim plant, where some 4,600 precision-machined engines are assembled every day -- in a churning machine-age ballet of crankshafts, pistons and silvery crankcases destined for the automaker's coveted prows. the entire complex is ''bigger than monaco,'' a guide recently boasted.  to see how an entire sports car comes together, head to porsche's zuffenhausen factory and headquarters on the other side of town. engines, fenders and dashboards come in; caymans, 911s and boxsters come out. amid an opera of clatter, clanging and whirs, watch as giant robotic claws lower sleek, finished bodies onto pristine drivetrains and chassis in a ritual called marriage. just stay on your toes. on a recent tour, a group of distracted italians was nearly steamrolled by one of the automated trolleys that dart around.  this site is where porsche (and, curiously enough, the vw beetle) was born. today, it also houses the porsche museum, which highlights more than 75 years of porsche engineering and memorabilia, from the first porsche-branded car -- a boxster precursor from 1948 -- to the formula 1 champions of the mid-1980s and the 911 gt1 that won the 1998 le mans, clinching the automaker's record 16th victory in the storied race.  but with just 20 cars on display and a disappointingly nondescript interior, the museum feels more like a hospital waiting room than a temple to sports cars. that will change late next year, when the museum moves into a new building nearby, a spectacular aerodynamic-looking shard of concrete and glass that will quadruple the number of turbocharged vehicles on display.  in the meantime, proud new porsche owners can still flock to stuttgart to pick up their hot-off-the-assembly-line wheels. they might admire the iconic porsche shield that adorns the hood, burnishing it with a huff of breath and a wipe of the sleeve. and perhaps they will notice the black silhouette of a horse at the shield's center. it was derived from the city seal of stuttgart -- a subtle yet enduring reminder of where their car, perhaps even all cars, originate.  a city that worships its automobiles and has the shrines to prove it  how to get there  most flights from new york to stuttgart require one connection. an internet search for late january found round-trip fares on united and lufthansa, through frankfurt, starting at $389.  where to see cars  mercedes-benz museum (mercedes-strasse 100; 49-711-17-30000; www.mercedes-benz.com/museum; admission 8 euros or about $10.70 at $1.34 to the euro). it's open tuesday to sunday from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. factory tours in english are at 1:40 p.m. tuesday to friday. advance booking is recommended..  gottlieb daimler memorial (taubenheimstrasse 13; 49-711-17-30000; free). it's open tuesday to sunday from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.  porsche museum (porschestrasse 1; 49-711-911-25685; free). open monday to friday from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. and to 5 p.m. on weekends. factory tours in english are at 10 a.m. monday to friday. advance booking recommended.  where to stay  a stuttgart classic, the 191-room steigenberger graf zeppelin (arnulf-klett-platz 7; 49-711-20480; www.stuttgart.steigenberger.de) occupies a modernist stone-clad building across from the main train station. elegant, though not especially stylish (a lot of patterned carpet), it also has a shiseido spa. rooms start at 150 euros.  another high-end standby is the hotel am schlossgarten (schillerstrasse 23; 49-711-20260; www.hotelschlossgarten.com). in this modern midrise, which is also home to the michelin-starred gourmet restaurant zirbelstube, the 116 laura ashley-like rooms offer city and park views. starting at 218 euros.  at the intimate zauberlehring (rosenstrasse 38; 49-711-23-77770; www.zauberlehrling.de) -- or sorcerer's apprentice -- the 17 individually designed rooms conjure up fantasylands, both in name (1001 nights, seventh heaven) and décor (bohemian surrealism and antler chandeliers in minimalist settings). starting at 140 euros.  aric chen  journeys | stuttgart, germany  