lieberman's party now has critic as its chief   senator joseph i. lieberman of connecticut was able to beat back a fierce challenge last fall, but now his critics are joining the very party he created to win his way back to washington for a fourth term.  shortly after the november election, john m. orman, a professor of politics at fairfield university who ran briefly against mr. lieberman, filed paperwork with state election officials to become the chairman of the connecticut for lieberman party.  if you can't beat him, mr. orman reasoned, join his party to argue with him.  and this week, the secretary of state's office said that was just fine.  mr. lieberman created the party line last summer when it became clear he might lose the democratic primary to ned lamont. by creating a minor party, mr. lieberman was assured a higher ballot position than if he had run as an individual, but neither he nor his supporters said that they planned to keep the party active or join it themselves. instead, mr. lieberman pledged to remain a democrat if re-elected.  as it turned out, mr. lieberman, who lost the primary but won the general election handily, later said that his party identification was not that simple, and asked to be called an ''independent democrat'' -- something that agitated his already vocal band of opponents.  ''it was a joke,'' mr. orman said of mr. lieberman's political party. ''there was a mockery of the system. i expected the secretary of state to say this was a mockery. but none of that happened.''  mr. orman is the lone member of the party. but after an article about his move appeared in the stamford advocate on wednesday, he said he received dozens of calls and e-mail messages from people asking to join. under the rules, mr. orman said, any critic of mr. lieberman, or even someone who shares mr. lieberman's last name would be eligible.  under state law, control of the party can be challenged in court. but mr. lieberman, who was at the capitol on wednesday for the inauguration of gov. m. jodi rell, said he had no plans to take legal action.  ''we haven't thought about the party,'' he said. ''that party won't have anything to do until six years from now.''  not if mr. orman has his way. he plans to hold regular meetings to critique mr. lieberman. and if the past is any guide, such meetings are not likely to be quiet affairs.  