retired bull rider scouts biggest stars on four hooves   after a rough career in bull riding, maybe all a cowboy needs is some rest and relaxation. but after retiring from the circuit in 1996, cody lambert decided to devote his free time to making the sport tougher for riders.  lambert, 45, is the livestock director for professional bull riders, an organization that did away with more tame events like calf roping and devoted itself solely to the top draw: bull riding. he spends his days searching for the meanest -- or as the riders call them, rankest -- bulls to keep the tour's riders challenged and its audience entertained.  ''he knows more bulls than anybody,'' said adriano moraes of brazil, the defending and three-time world champion.  when lambert is not out scouting new talent, he is at home doing research. lambert has information on thousands of bulls stored on his computer and on videotapes and dvds that breeders send him in hopes of landing a coveted spot with the organization. but competition is tough.  ''i'd say 9 out of 10 times they don't have anything i can use,'' lambert said.  this weekend, p.b.r. is hoping to capitalize on lambert's eye for bulls when it rolls into madison square garden for the season opener of its top circuit, the built ford tough series. it is the arena's first top-tier professional bull-riding event and part of p.b.r.'s effort to popularize bull riding east of the mississippi.  immediately after the rangers hockey game thursday night, workers began the process of converting the arena floor from ice to dirt. the ice was melted and the floor was dried, with trucks full of jersey city dirt arriving by 3 a.m. about six tons' worth was packed 8 inches deep into the arena and the expo center, where the 105 competing bulls, all handpicked by lambert, would be housed.  ''he's got the second-toughest job in the p.b.r. aside from the judges,'' moraes said.  it is arguably the most important job in a sport where the bulls are often more popular than the men riding them. their statistics appear alongside those of the riders on p.b.r.'s web site, and their likenesses are recreated on hats, key chains and bobblehead figures, which sell more than the riders' merchandise.  with the colorful names and violent behavior of professional wrestlers, bulls like scene of the crash and big bucks command a growing audience.  their brashness is also important for riders because a bull's performance accounts for half of a rider's total points; a relatively tame bull can keep a good rider out of contention.  lambert's job is to make sure the bulls consistently earn high marks. ''in other places, you'll see low scores,'' he said. ''in the p.b.r., that's not acceptable.''  he observes bulls during competitions, and those that cannot score at least 39 points out of 50 are quickly culled. ''if there's not a legitimate reason, we might never see him again,'' lambert said.  his efforts have earned p.b.r. a reputation for high quality bulls. ''it's never the bull's fault if you get a low score,'' moraes said. ''if you ride your bull, you're going to end up winning.''  with the talent becoming more ferocious year after year, even the best riders manage to last eight seconds only about half of the time. bulls are now bred for a tendency to buck, and the size of the pool has increased markedly.  ''the tough part of my job is no longer picking which bulls to use; it's deciding which ones i'm not going to use,'' lambert said.  experience is also important. bulls have to make the rounds in p.b.r.'s lower circuits before lambert will allow them into the built ford tough series. ''they have to be proven at a lower level,'' he said.  bulls generally reach peak riding age at 5 or 6.  nearly all of lambert's picks are met with approval by the riders. ''in 12 years lambert has been doing this, there's been maybe two complaints,'' moraes said. when a rider does complain, lambert is usually accommodating.  ''he never persisted with an animal we didn't like,'' moraes said.  for that reason, the riders generally trust his decisions.  ''i don't think about one bull,'' said rocky mcdonald, a rider from mexico. ''it's too quick to think about it like that.''  by yesterday morning, moraes had not yet bothered to see which bulls he had drawn. when he was informed by a reporter that his first bull was hollow point, moraes became excited. ''that's a good, good bull,'' he said.  lambert said he would be busy for the next month and a half observing bulls on the tour.  ''i'll probably just be looking at video,'' he said.  then he will head to oklahoma to scout potential recruits.  at times, he admits, the job feels repetitive.  ''sometimes i'd like to talk about something other than bulls,'' he said. ''but i'll do it as long as i feel like i'm needed.''  bull riding  