catch the next chapter on your ipod (it's even cheaper)   on a recent afternoon laura wilson was speaking through a microphone to oliver wyman, who was on the other side of a pane of glass. ''just hit samaritan a little harder,'' she said.  the two were in a recording studio near times square, producing the audio version of ''the intellectual devotional,'' a book of daily readings by david kidder and noah oppenheim. ms. wilson, a producer with the audio renaissance publishing company, wanted mr. wyman, the reader, to give the word more stress in a sentence that began, ''ethnic samaritans, now living in northern israel ''  that same afternoon, in a studio a few blocks away, another reader, julie fain lawrence, was recording ''simply sexy,'' a steamy harlequin title by carly phillips.  mr. kidder and mr. oppenheim's philosophical musings might, at first blush, appear to have little in common with ms. phillips's bodice-ripper. but the two audiobooks share something that was unheard of a decade ago: they are both being released exclusively in a downloadable format.  when finished next month, they will not exist in cd form but will be available only to mouse-clickers on audible.com, one of several internet sites featuring digital audio versions of books, periodicals and spoken-word content.  unlike onscreen e-books, which never quite caught on, downloadable audiobooks have taken off, driven by the explosive popularity of the ipod.  according to the audio publishers association, downloads have grown sharply, rising to 9 percent of audio book sales in 2005; that is a 50 percent increase over the previous year. audible .com, which pioneered downloadable audio books nine years ago, also sells them through itunes and amazon and has a membership model similar to that of netflix; its membership has grown 54 percent over the last year, to 345,200. going exclusively to a downloadable format saves publishers the expense of duplication, packaging and distribution. and the savings are often passed along. audible's full-price version of ''the audacity of hope'' by barack obama costs $20.97 (although various discounts are available), while the cd version retails for $29.95; undiscounted, unabridged versions of michael crichton's ''next'' are $34.97 by download and $49.95 on cd.  because of lower production costs, titles that a few years ago would not have had audio versions at all are now being recorded; the decision is based largely on projected hardcover sales. and if they prove popular enough as downloads, some of those productions will eventually be made into three-dimensional audiobooks.  the audio versions of anthony bourdain's ''kitchen confidential'' and the new yorker writer susan orlean's ''orchid thief'' were both first available only to downloaders. only after both hardcovers performed well -- ms. orlean's book was made into a movie (''adaptation''), and mr. bourdain's inspired ''a cook's tour,'' his celebrity chef show on the food network -- were both books rolled onto cds.  in 2002, when ''three junes'' by julia glass was published, ''we hadn't originally bought audio rights and we didn't plan to,'' said madeline mcintosh, publisher of random house audio group. ''then in the 11th hour, word came through that the book had been selected for the ''today'' show book club and was going to get a lot of visibility.''  the publisher scrambled to record the book and put it on audible. it sold on the site exclusively until a year later, when random house released a physical version of the audiobook concurrent with the paperback.  with virtually no promotional budgets, audiobook publishers rely on riding the coattails of the print version's publicity, marketing and advertising. (book ads increasingly include ''also available as an audiobook,'' which audio publishers, protractedly battling the belief that listeners are readers' intellectual inferiors, consider a breakthrough.) so while the success of a download-only title on audible.com is a factor in determining whether to release a cd, publishers still link that decision more closely to hardcover sales.  two penthouse magazine books, ''between the sheets: a collection of erotic bedtime stories'' and ''26 nights: a sexual adventure,'' were released in download-only audio versions in 2002, but like the books' temptresses, they have had long legs. sales remained so brisk that in 2006 ''between the sheets'' was the bestselling download-only title on audible. so in august, four years after they were first recorded, random house audio released both titles on cd. with 7 of the top 10 download-only sellers on audible in the erotica genre, the company has been a trailblazer in the category, albeit a conflicted one.  ''we can tell our children that we helped to spawn the audio erotica industry,'' beth anderson, the publisher of audible, said with a laugh. ''we started it not necessarily because we wanted to be in the erotica business, but because it seemed like a niche that wasn't being filled.''  when audible started nine years ago, ''porn'' and ''sex'' were popular web search terms, even more so than now. so as an internet company, audible chose to offer racy titles. it now has hundreds of briskly selling erotica offerings, most available only as downloads, and increasingly geared toward women, including the ''herotica'' series edited by the sex guru susie bright.  such titles can be procured online discreetly and can be listened to discreetly as well. ''one of the things that makes erotica sell better for us than other places is that when you're on the subway listening to your ipod, no one knows whether you're listening to the wall street journal or a penthouse book,'' ms. anderson said. (this is perhaps alarming, given that a recent survey in audiofile magazine found that 53 percent of listeners played audiobooks while driving their cars.)  ms. mcintosh, the random house audio publisher, said that while the company was beginning to roll penthouse titles onto cds, based on their download success, ''we don't expect much in terms of bricks-and-mortar sales.''  rather, she expects them to sell well on amazon and through adult catalogs, where they can be bought by listeners who, as she put it, ''might be embarrassed to bring them up to the register.'' an added advantage: with a book on an ipod, there is nothing to hide under the mattress.  