lack of rules on protective gear brings suit against labor dept.   the a.f.l.-c.i.o. and the united food and commercial workers sued the department of labor yesterday, asserting that it broke the law by failing to issue regulations requiring employers to pay for protective equipment for their workers.  the two labor organizations said it was wrong for the labor department to require employers to provide protective equipment like helmets, face shields and gloves, while often letting employers charge workers for that equipment.  the groups complained that the labor department under president bush had not issued final rules based on those the clinton labor department proposed in 1999. those proposals would have required companies to pay for all employee protective equipment required by the occupational safety and health administration, part of the labor department.  in an unusual move, the a.f.l.-c.i.o and the food workers' union asked the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit to order secretary of labor elaine l. chao to issue final rules.  the a.f.l.-c.i.o.'s president, john j. sweeney, said, ''the bush administration's failure to implement even this most basic safety rule spotlights how it has turned its back on workers in this country.''  david james, a labor department spokesman, said officials were studying the lawsuit. he said the case ''deals with complicated issues that will affect different employers and employees in different ways.''  mr. james said the department had reason to hesitate to turn the 1999 proposal into a final, enforceable rule. ''the department takes pride in its excellent safety and enforcement records,'' he said. ''but on this issue, a number of public comments we received take issue with the factual assumptions'' in the rule proposed in 1999.  the lawsuit notes that by osha's own estimates 400,000 workers have been injured and 50 have died because of the absence of a rule.  a.f.l.-c.i.o. officials said the labor department was violating laws on administrative procedures and occupational safety by failing to issue final rules.  in 2004, richard e. fairfax, osha's director for enforcement, wrote a letter to a corporate safety director saying that while federal regulations required employers to provide personal protective equipment to ensure its use, ''osha does not view this section as imposing an enforceable obligation on employers to pay for the p.p.e.,'' a reference to such equipment.  peg seminario, the a.f.l.-c.i.o.'s director of occupational safety and health, said that some meat and poultry companies required employees to pay for gloves and that some welding companies required them to pay for visors even though federal rules said employers must provide them.she said that 20 million workers used required protective equipment and that most employers did pay for it.  joseph hansen, president of the united food and commercial workers said, ''nothing is standing in the way of osha issuing a final rule to protect worker safety and health except the will to do so.''  