the week ahead: jan. 7 - 13; theater   desperation, quiet and otherwise, has always been a specialty of the director robert falls. his revivals of ''death of a salesman'' and ''long day's journey into night'' as well as the more recent ''shining city'' have captured the aching loneliness that enveloped the characters. now he is turning his skills to ''frank's home,'' a new play by richard nelson at playwrights horizons that had its premiere this fall to mixed reviews at mr. falls's home base, the goodman theater in chicago. frank in this case is frank lloyd wright, the visionary architect who has been a continual source of fascination for other artists. peter weller plays wright, just back from a trip to japan in 1923 and frustrated that enthusiasm for his work seems to have waned in the united states. also on hand is wright's mentor louis sullivan (played by the eminently watchable harris yulin), who has already gone out of fashion and is now nearly destitute.  mr. nelson, who said he first had the idea for the play 10 years ago, has written, ''it took me all that time to discover what this story meant to me, why a 55-year-old writer wanted to write a story about a 55-year-old architect who looked at his country and found it confused, unable to respond to its inherent virtues and sense of self.'' previews start saturday; the play runs through feb. 18, 416 west 42nd street, manhattan, (212) 279-4200, playwrightshorizons.org; $65.  performances of ''the merchant of venice'' on stage and film are easy to find, but its predecessor ''the jew of malta,'' written by christopher marlowe, is rarely in production. now, theater for a new city is performing both in repertory starring f. murray abraham as shylock in ''merchant'' and barabas in ''malta.'' later in the season this company will present ''oliver twist.'' detect a theme here? ''william shakespeare, christopher marlowe and charles dickens,'' said jeffrey horowitz, the company's artistic director, ''have alternately been attacked as slanderers of the jewish people and lauded for granting their jewish characters so much sympathy and humanity.'' these productions are likely to prove no exception. in previews; the play runs through march 10, the duke on 42nd street, 229 west 42nd street, manhattan, (212) 239-6200 or (800) 432-7250, telecharge.com; $65 to $69, $10 for ages 25 and younger.  correction:  january 14, 2007, sunday  a theater entry last sunday in the week ahead report misstated the company presenting ''the merchant of venice'' and ''the jew of malta'' in repertory. it is theater for a new audience, not theater for a new city.  