paid notice: deaths   falk, c. harry   falk--c. harry, the greater new york chapter of the crohn's & colitis foundation of america (ccfa) mourns the passing of our benefactor and dear friend, c. harry falk. his generosity and devotion to the medical research of ccfa has helped significantly advance our knowledge of these debilitating diseases and the development of new treatments. we were honored and proud to have him as a dedicated supporter of our mission. we extend our deepest sympathies to his devoted wife, joan, their five children and especially his beloved grandchildren in whose future he has contributed so generously to ccfa. shelby and bill modell, national co-founders, ccfa suzanne and irwin rosenthal, national co-founders, ccfa richard geswell, national president, ccfa david solomons, greater new york chapter president marilyn haggerty-blohm, regional executive director, greater new york chapter the board of directors and staff of ccfa  falk--charles h. ''harry'' loving husband of joan, passed away suddenly on january 3, 2007 at age 66. harry's wisdom, integrity, quiet strength and humanity inspired everyone he touched. his devotion to family and commitment to his work and to charitable causes earned him the respect and love of all who knew him. he was a man to whom people were drawn for his insight, advice, guidance, and honesty in both his personal and business life. harry was a visionary and a leader in his 48 year career in the commodity industry. starting as a clerk in the sugar business and ending as ceo of the new york board of trade, where he negotiated a $1.6 billion deal to combine bybot with the intercontinental exchange, the wide-ranging influence of his work will be felt far beyond his lifetime. but his most cherished role was as proud and devoted grandfather to his twelve adoring grandchildren: zachary, regan, sydney, hayden and spencer falk, sophie gruniss; jonathan, alexandra & jacob studwell & ethan, matthew & noah jaynes. harry is also survived by his children, ken, kevin, and karen falk; and stepdaughters jennifer studwell and allison jaynes. his humor, warmth and intelligence will be forever remembered and deeply missed. services at higgins funeral home, new city, ny saturday jan 6th 11:30am. in lieu of flowers, contributions may be made to the crohn's and colitis foundation of america or futures and options for kids.  