what should a billionaire give - and what should you?   i was all set not to like peter singer's article (dec. 17). i think that the freedom to choose what one does with one's own money is a fundamental building block of a free society. that said, i found myself agreeing with nearly all of what he wrote. as a christian, i strongly believe that the more fortunate should give generously to those in need. also, i agree that one's capacity to give greatly increases after one's basic needs are met, so the calculation methods and their underlying assumptions rang true to me, too.  it seems to me that the only real way to permanently eradicate poverty is to attack the conditions that create it -- overpopulation, the lack of the means to produce food, clothing and shelter locally, the lack of other viable jobs and industries, etc. perhaps these are the sorts of things the united nations millennium summit has in mind as ways to meet the goals listed in the article.  i think most people's inclination to give is increased by knowing that their gifts will be carefully channeled into projects that deliver long-term benefits. equally important is knowing there are safeguards, audits and independent watchers in place to make sure the charitable organizations themselves are handling the monies efficiently and ethically.  russ maney  louisville, ky.  private philanthropy allows for the kind of risk-taking that governments won't and, frankly, can't do. that's good. but private philanthropy cannot sustain the scale of global interventions needed over the long term the way governments can. philanthropists may get bored and want to move on to other issues. or they may not want to get involved in the difficult and complex politics often needed, perhaps for fear of offending the richest markets for their business-related products.  patti culross  crockett, calif.  why does singer suggest that wealth should be given away as earned each year? warren buffett and bill gates are able to give away many billions of dollars only because they continued, over a period of many years, to reinvest in building their companies, as opposed to spending or giving away their wealth. are they even now giving it away too soon? assuming a 15 percent annual rate of return, if they waited five more years, they could give away twice as much as today.  william roth  avon, conn.  