paid notice: deaths   falk, harry c.   falk--harry c. everyone at the new york board of trade mourns the profound loss of our dear friend and colleague, harry falk. harry's history was filled with achievements, professional and personal: president, ceo, chairman of the board (nybot & coffee, sugar and cocca exchange) and leader in the sugar industry with czarnikow - rionda, richco sugar, and louis dreyfus and more important husband, father, grandfather, brother and friend. he was a student of history and often found himself in the middle of some of its defining moments. from the rise of castro in cuba to the terrible tragedy of september 11th, harry responded always as a man of good sense who understood that his role was to do his job with his considerable intelligence, understanding and compassion. he was not the man who proclaimed loudly and made headlines in the midst of all the chaos. he emerged in each instance as a leader who listened intently, spoke honestly, cared deeply about those around him and led them forward with a clear-eyed concern. history sometimes chooses its leaders wisely and it did just that when it chose harry falk to lead new york's oldest futures exchange out of the death and destruction of september 11th to a return and renaissance in lower manhattan. his practical wisdom was of the rare sort that could see through the turmoil of the current crisis, one eye on the past and one on the future, and act on that knowledge. that ability to look in both directions had after all led him to strongly support the building of the backup facility after the 1993 bombing that allowed the exchange to survive september 11th. he was not afraid of what he saw or what we must do even if it meant we must face wrenching change. he believed that if we all did our jobs to the best of our abilities we would persevere and prosper. harry loved honesty, curiosity, fairness, decency, kindness and the truth. he hated hypocrisy, greed, injustice, needless suffering, fear and above all the ignorance that produced them. he could not abide the abuse of power and fought passionately against the big and powerful who bullied the little guy. perhaps that explains his devotion to children. he always loved to say that his main hobby was being with his grandchildren. he knew real joy in the company of children. he understood that the real job of the powerful was to care for those who had little power so he gave much of himself to the exchange's charitable organization, futures and options for kids. harry loved children so much, because he knew they alone carried the real keys to the future, a good heart and an open mind, two things that he cherished. god bless you, harry, as you have blessed us with your wisdom, kindness, integrity, wit and presence all these years. may your family and friends find comfort and consolation in the memories of the remarkable life of a truly good man. the funeral service will take place on saturday, january 6th, 2007 at 11:30 am at higgins funeral home, 321 south main st., new city, ny 10956, 845-634-6110. in lieu of flowers, the family requests that donations be made to the crohn's and colitis foundation or nybot futures and options for kids in memory of harry.  