u.s. requiring port workers to have id's and reviews   more than 750,000 port workers will be required to have criminal background and immigration checks in an antiterrorism program that the homeland security department announced on wednesday, and industry leaders say the effort could disrupt port traffic nationally.  since shortly after the sept. 11, 2001, attacks, work has been under way on a tamperproof card, the transportation worker identification credential, that workers will receive after passing the reviews.  the homeland security department this week issued 469 pages of final rules for the program, which is intended to make it harder for terrorists to sneak into secure port areas.  starting in march, workers like longshoremen and truck drivers will have to apply for the card, which will include a fingerprint and a digital photograph.  the applicants will have to prove that they are legally working in the united states. they also cannot have been convicted of any terrorism-related crimes like spying, sedition or treason, as well as other charges like murder, improper transport of hazardous materials or illegal possession or purchase of explosives.  anyone convicted in the past seven years of a much longer list of crimes like possession of illegal firearms, bribery, arson, robbery or extortion will have to seek a waiver before obtaining a card. people involuntarily committed to mental health centers because of drug or alcohol addiction will have to prove that they have successfully completed rehabilitation.  industry officials say the restrictions may disqualify thousands of workers, particularly truck drivers, based on estimates that a signification segment of the drivers may be working here illegally.  union leaders have said workers with criminal records who have served their time or paid fines might lose their jobs.  ''we don't want to keep people who are not a terrorist risk to be kept from doing their job,'' said steve stallone, a spokesman for the international longshore and warehouse union.  kip hawley, assistant secretary of the transportation security administration, said in an interview wednesday that he was confident that the effects would be modest. drivers of trucks carrying hazardous materials have similar background checks, with 1 percent disqualified, mr. hawley said.  ''we do not anticipate this will be a huge issue,'' he added.  the government has expanded the appeals process so workers with criminal histories can present their cases to an administrative law judge.  the cards will first be issued at a few ports and then expand over 18 months until they cover the nation's estimated 770,000 maritime workers.  applicants will have to pay up to $159 for the card, which will be good for five years. over all, the government estimates that the program will cost $1.8 billion over the next decade, factoring in related costs like paying escorts required for people without cards who need to enter secure port areas.  