an ousted chief's going-away pay is seen by many as typically excessive   robert l. nardelli's rich compensation and poor performance at home depot have long been cited by shareholder activists as a prime example of what they view as excessive executive pay. some union members dressed up in giant chicken outfits to protest the board's reluctance to clip mr. nardelli's wings.  what did all their outrage get them? mr. nardelli's removal -- and at least a $210 million bill for a golden handshake on his way out the door.  yesterday, home depot's board ousted mr. nardelli as chairman and chief executive in a surprising move that highlights the growing influence of investors pressuring boards to rein in executive pay. but it also illustrates another point: even when their voices are heard, shareholders often wind up holding the bag.  at home depot, mr. nardelli is expected to receive an exit package worth more than $210 million on top of the nearly $64 million he was paid during his six years at the helm. that equals about $45 million a year; over that same period, home depot's stock has fallen from over $50 a share early in his tenure to $41.16 just before mr. nardelli's resignation was announced.  by contrast, home depot's chief competitor, lowe's, has paid its chief executives about one-third of what mr. nardelli made during the same time, while investors have enjoyed a healthy increase in their holdings.  mr. nardelli's compensation may have a prominent place in the pantheon of pay-for-failure, but his arrangement is by no means unique.  ''the company is big, the underperformance is significant and the numbers are very large,'' said lucian bebchuk, a harvard law school professor who is an outspoken critic of executive pay. ''but each of the pieces that lead to the decoupling of pay from performance are very common to the executive compensation landscape.''  across corporate america, chief executives have been walking away with lavish riches even when their companies fail to perform, according to an analysis by the corporate library.  at pfizer, henry a. mckinnell left with an exit package worth $213 million, including an $82 million pension, after the pharmaceutical giant he ran for six years lost over $137 billion in market value on his watch. jay sidhu, the former chairman and chief executive of sovereign bank, received $44 million last fall when he was removed after a bitter proxy fight.  morgan stanley's board awarded philip j. purcell an exit package worth more than $95 million when he was forced out in july 2005. tom freston, who was ousted at viacom in september, and carleton s. fiorina, who was forced out by hewlett-packard in february 2005, were handed tens of millions of dollars when they abruptly stepped down.  ''you can call them pay-for-failure packages,'' said jesse m. fried, a law professor at the university of california, berkeley, who has been critical of excessive compensation packages. ''you get what you pay for.''  the reason highlights the ''heads i win; tails i win'' nature of executive pay -- especially for chief executives hired to orchestrate a turnaround. over the last decade, many boards and big investors bought into the belief that a celebrity c.e.o. or corporate savior was vital for success.  there have certainly been a number of examples of chief executives who delivered outsize gains to their shareholders, enjoying big rewards themselves.  as a result, most executives have been able to take advantage of the perception that they would deliver big rewards to negotiate employment contracts that guaranteed them bonuses when they arrived, paid them handsomely with stock options during their careers -- and in many cases, ensured severance contracts providing millions more once they left.  ''the justification that is given for these big executive pay packages is that we have to give them very strong incentives to create shareholder value,'' mr. fried said. ''but if you are allowing them to walk away with hundreds of millions of dollars even if they do extremely poorly, you are undermining that case.''  that appears to be what happened at home depot. when mr. nardelli was hired in december 2000, he was seen as a strong leader who could help restore home depot to the luster it enjoyed in its early years. home depot's board offered him a contract that would pay him well if times were bad and even more if the company's performance was better.  mr. nardelli received $63.5 million in salary, bonuses, and other compensation, including $21 million in forgiven loans and company-paid taxes during his career at home depot. in that time, however, he failed to turn the company around.  yesterday, details of his $210 million exit package were released. as part of the negotiated arrangement, mr. nardelli is expected to take home a severance payment of $20 million, a $32 million pension, a $2 million 401(k) and $139 million in deferred equity awards and stock options that he now will be able to cash early. that amount could grow if home depot's shares rebound under a new leader.  mr. nardelli also stands to receive another $18 million in ''other entitlements,'' which the company did not disclose, but will be paid over the next four years so long as he does not violate a noncompete contract.  under his employment contract, mr. nardelli was eligible for benefits like life insurance, and dental and medical coverage for several years after his departure. it is unclear whether he will still receive them.  ''when you guarantee income to an executive regardless of performance, you end up paying and you rarely get performance,'' mr. hodgson said. ''the board could have saved themselves hundreds of millions of dollars and still have their reputations intact.''  representative barney frank, the massachusetts democrat who is the new chairman of the house financial services committee, called mr. nardelli's exit package ''confirmation of the need to deal with a pattern of c.e.o. pay that appears to be out of control.''  some investors were so happy to see mr. nardelli leave that they declared victory -- no matter how hollow. they are holding out hope that his ignominious exit will serve as an example to others.  william c. thompson jr., new york city comptroller, said he hoped ''all the attention that has been focused on him -- with his excessive pay and his underperformance -- will lead to change within this company and send a message to other companies.''  still, he conceded that the $210 million exit package was something ''we would have preferred not happen.''  a chairman's fall  