recipe redux; 1959: stuffed pork chops   thrift is often the best catalyst for culinary invention. penny-pinching dishes like panzanella, poule au pot and beef ragù were all responses of wily cooks to hard times. likewise, the recipe for these pork chops with rye-bread stuffing, which the times published in 1959, was billed as a dinner on the cheap. pork chops are an inexpensive cut of meat, and bread stuffing was used, as it has been for hundreds of years, to stretch the portions.  using rye bread, with its strong grain flavor, and seasoning it with sautéed onion, garlic, parsley and caraway, give the stuffing distinction far beyond its means. from here the technique is pure 1950s: the chops are browned in the oven, and a sauce is made with the brown but succulent drippings. the result is very ... brown. but toothsome -- like a better-dressed cousin of pastrami on rye.  nowadays supermarket pork chops have become so thin and industrially produced that they yield a dish with the texture of particle board. it's worth the effort to find a butcher who carries good, fat-marbled chops and who can cut them thickly -- an inch is best. (also, i've reworked the recipe a bit, cooking the meat covered in the oven to keep it moist, then finishing it under the broiler.)  i gave the recipe to marco canora, the chef at hearth in new york, to try, and he was surprised by how much he liked the pork chops. ''i'm not just saying this,'' he added. ''they were delicious.''  when canora modernized the recipe, he turned to an even cheaper cut: pork belly. first he brined it, then braised it in a combination of thick, cloudy apple cider and stock infused with garlic, thyme and caraway. ''i've always liked cabbage with pork,'' he said, so he also braised a little red cabbage with apple, mustard seeds, cider vinegar and more caraway. the finished dish -- a square of meat and a tangle of wilted red cabbage shored up with braising juices (pink on red on brown) -- is an intoxicating blend of pork, caraway and cider vinegar. it's pastrami on rye's urbane, wholesome cousin.  on first read, canora's recipe is cheflike and daunting. but while its steps stretch over three days -- brining, braising, finishing -- the total amount of work involved is little more than that for the pork chops. still skeptical? the night canora put the dish on his menu, it sold out in half an hour.  1959: pork chops with rye-bread stuffing  this recipe appeared in the times in an article by craig claiborne.  6 bone-in, 1-inch-thick loin chops  3 tablespoons butter  1 medium onion, finely chopped  1 large clove garlic, minced  3 1/2 cups soft rye-bread crumbs  (a mix of large and small pieces, without caraway seeds)  1/2 teaspoon caraway seeds  3 tablespoons finely chopped parsley  salt and pepper  1 large egg, lightly beaten with 3 tablespoons water  1 tablespoon flour  3/4 cup chicken broth.  1. have a butcher cut a generous pocket in each chop or a slit to butterfly the chops for stuffing.  2. preheat the oven to 350 degrees. in a sauté pan, melt 2 tablespoons butter over medium heat. add the onion and garlic and cook until softened, about 5 minutes. scrape into a large bowl and add the bread crumbs, caraway seeds, parsley, teaspoon salt and 1/4 teaspoon black pepper. add the beaten egg and mix with a fork until blended.  3. fill the chops with the stuffing, then seal the pockets with toothpicks. season on all sides with salt and pepper. arrange in a braising pan or other shallow baking dish fitted with a lid. bake, covered, until a thermometer inserted into the thickest part of the meat, not the stuffing, reaches 155 degrees, 40 to 45 minutes.  4. remove the lid and place the pan under the broiler just until the chops are browned and the temperature in the thickest part of the meat is 160 degrees, 3 to 5 minutes. transfer to a serving platter and keep warm.  5. set the braising pan on the stove over medium heat and reduce the pan juices to a thick glaze. add the remaining tablespoon butter. stir in the flour and cook for 1 minute. add the broth and simmer, scraping up the pan drippings, until thick enough to coat the back of a spoon; strain. season to taste. serve the pork chops with the sauce. serves 6.  brined-and-braised pork belly with caraway  by marco canora, the chef and co-owner of hearth  for the brine:  1 cup caraway seeds  3 tablespoons fennel seeds  3 tablespoons whole black peppercorns  3 tablespoons coriander seeds  1 cup diamond crystal kosher salt, plus more as needed  1 cup packed dark brown sugar  6 cloves garlic, crushed  2 cups cider vinegar  2 pounds pork belly (center cut)  for the braise:  salt and freshly ground black pepper  2 tablespoons canola oil  1 carrot, chopped  1 stalk celery, chopped  1 onion, chopped  4 cloves garlic, crushed  6 sprigs thyme  3 tablespoons caraway seeds, toasted  4 cups apple cider  4 cups chicken broth.  1. two days before serving the pork, prepare the brine: in a large skillet over low heat, toast the caraway seeds. cool and grind in a spice grinder. in a large plastic container, combine the caraway, fennel, peppercorns, coriander, salt, brown sugar, garlic, cider vinegar and 4 cups water. add the pork, cover and refrigerate for 24 hours.  2. the next day, preheat the oven to 300 degrees. remove the pork from the brine and pat dry. season with salt and pepper. in a braising pan over medium-high heat, heat the oil. add the pork and brown on all sides. transfer to a plate. add the carrot, celery, onion, garlic, thyme and 2 tablespoons toasted caraway seeds to the pan. brown the vegetables until the onion is translucent, about 5 minutes. return the pork to the pan, skin side up. pour in the apple cider and enough broth to cover the meat by three-fourths. bring to a boil, then cover and braise in the oven until the pork is very tender, about 2 hours. cool the pork in its cooking liquid and refrigerate overnight.  3. the next day, preheat the oven to 300 degrees. scrape off and discard excess fat from the braising liquid. remove the pork and discard loose gelatin. cut the pork into serving pieces and place in a wide sauté pan with a heatproof handle. bring the braising liquid to a boil and reduce by about two-thirds, or until it lightly coats the back of a spoon; strain. pour just enough liquid over the pork to submerge halfway. sprinkle with the remaining caraway seeds, then place the pan in the oven and heat through, basting occasionally. top pork with sauce and serve with braised cabbage, a recipe for which can be found at nytimes.com/magazine. serves 4.  