smiles, backslaps, even a civility meeting: for a day, at least, bipartisanship reigns   capitol hill observed a national day of comity on thursday. against the sober backdrop of war and as democrats ascended in both chambers, people of both parties spoke of how committed they were to working together and changing the political tone.  and how many times have we heard that before?  ''almost on an annual basis,'' said senator christopher j. dodd, democrat of connecticut, a three-decade veteran of civility vows in the capital. ''it's like our new year's ritual around here.''  but maybe this time really will be different. like 63-degree weather in january (and cherry blossoms out of season), washington seemed to have flipped on its head, power-wise, karma-wise, at least for a few hours.  there were children and flowers everywhere, and pictures of vice president dick cheney and senator edward m. kennedy mugging together.  and a warm-looking handshake between the only muslim in congress, the newly elected representative keith ellison, democrat of minnesota, and representative virgil h. goode jr., a virginia republican who had condemned mr. ellison's plan to use the koran at his ceremonial swearing-in. (mr. ellison made history in more ways than one at that ceremony thursday by using a koran once owned by thomas jefferson.)  and dapper old senators saying things like this:  ''the place is like a bubbling bottle of champagne, overflowing with joy and hope and civility,'' said senator john w. warner, republican of virginia. and to think, this guy is in the minority now.  o.k., so maybe the venerable mr. warner was exaggerating a bit. or indulging in a smidge of sarcasm. but his words and the big smile with which he delivered them neatly captured the spirit of the day.  the senate's top leaders, harry reid, democrat of nevada, and mitch mcconnell, republican of kentucky, convened a bipartisan meeting at 9 a.m. to discuss bipartisanship.  ''i'm here for the civility meeting,'' declared one freshman, senator amy klobuchar, democrat of minnesota, as she stepped out of an aide's honda outside the capitol. she pretended to fuss with her hair, as if this were the first day of school and she was nervous. an upper classman, senator tom harkin, democrat of iowa, sat in an idling cadillac a few feet away.  nearly all senators showed up for the civility meeting, which was held in the plush and ornate old senate chamber. they left the doors open for several extra minutes so the photographers could come in to take pictures of the smiles and shoulder squeezes and hugs all around.  after a few minutes, the meeting reverted to the slightly awkward feel of a junior high school mixer, with the boys and girls (or ds and rs) repairing to separate sides of the room. there were a few exceptions, as when senator joseph i. lieberman of connecticut, an independent who caucuses with the democrats, took a seat next to senator johnny isakson, republican of georgia, after working both sides of the chamber.  at the very least, no one was alleged to have acted in an uncivil manner.  ''of course not,'' reported senator john e. sununu, republican of new hampshire, shocked -- shocked -- that anyone could even suggest such a thing.  ''people want us to stop acting like kindergarten kids,'' said senator lamar alexander, republican of tennessee.  it was an open question as to how long this era of good feeling would last.  ''what time is it?'' senator claire mccaskill, a newly elected democrat from missouri, asked just before noon. ''it's still early yet.''  not two minutes later, senator jim bunning was asked a question -- shouted a question, actually -- about this latest of calls for civility.  ''we hear them every year,'' mr. bunning, a second-term republican from kentucky, said before storming off, uncivilly.  but that was the exception thursday, as was the seemingly unhinged man who had apparently not gotten the comity memo and interrupted a television interview in the russell office building, shouting profanity as he headed out the door with the capitol police right behind him.  back on the house side, fresh-faced representative patrick murphy, democrat of pennsylvania, was clutching his 6-week-old daughter, maggie, and talking about how he had choked up when taking the oath a little earlier.  an army veteran who served in iraq, mr. murphy said his mind had flashed to his time in the service, the oath he took there. and he nearly teared up again as he rubbed the soft cheeks of maggie, who was sucking on a ''daddy's little girl'' pacifier.  ''it seems pretty collegial here,'' said mr. murphy, basing his assessment on exactly 90 minutes in the house and on his orientation soon after the election, where a fellow newbie gave up his seat so mr. murphy's wife, jennifer, then very pregnant, could sit down.  ''he was a republican,'' mr. murphy recalled. if only he could remember the nice man's name. ''i think he might have been from florida.''  put it down as a baby step on the comity journey.  the 110th congress  