paid notice: deaths   sunshine, abraham m.d.   sunshine--abraham m.d. we have lost a great physician and a much loved friend. while his extraordinary warmth, compassion and acumen will be sorely missed, his memory will be with us always. our heartfelt sympathy to diane, paul, suzy, sam, maura and margaret. giovanna and dan rosenbloom $(6$)sunshine--abraham, m.d. the department of medicine, of new york university school of medicine, is saddened by the passing of our longtime colleague, dr. abraham sunshine. a member of our faculty for over 50 years, dr. sunshine served as professor of clinical medicine. al was a natural teacher, an outstanding physician, and a beloved friend; he will be missed. we extend our deepest sympathies to his family. martin j. blaser, m.d., chair, department of medicine nyu school of medicine $(6$)sunshine--abraham, m.d. dr. abraham sunshine died at age 78 on january 2nd, 2007 at nyu medical center due to complications of multiple myeloma. an outstanding physician, dr. sunshine was professor of clinical medicine, former chair of the medical board of tisch hospital, and benefactor of the abraham sunshine associate professorship in clinical medicine at nyu school of medicine. he was a clinical pharmacology researcher, recognized expert and holder of dozens of patents in the field of analgesia. al, to those who knew him, was the loving husband to diane winter sunshine; father of suzanne sunshine mendel, paul sunshine, and samuel sunshine; son-in-law bill mendel; stepchildren maura bohan and margaret mcquade, their spouses justin and james, grandfather to alexa and marc as well as to aidan, connor, kaitlin, and amelia. al was born in the bronx, ny, received his ba and ma in zoology from the university of wisconsin, his medical degree from the temple university school of medicine and was named chief resident at bellevue hospital. he served as a captain in the u.s. air force medical corps. service thursday, 10 am, the ''riverside'' 76th st at amsterdam ave. in lieu of flowers, the family requests that donations be made in his name to the robert a. kyle hematologic malignancies fund at the mayo clinic.  