a giant receives a second chance, twice   there was a palpable sense of calm in the giants' locker room during the week as the giants prepared to play the philadelphia eagles, a reflection of the second chance that the team received by making the playoffs. and nobody knows the meaning of second chances better than grey ruegamer.  that is not only because ruegamer, a 30-year-old backup offensive lineman, knows what a playoff berth can be worth. he is the only player on the roster with a super bowl ring, from a stint with the new england patriots.  it is also because of what happened to ruegamer two saturdays ago on an early morning drive to giants stadium. he walked away from a single-car accident that left his pickup truck totaled.  a little before 7 a.m., the day before the giants played host to the new orleans saints, ruegamer guided his 2004 dodge ram pickup around the bend that leads from interstate 495, west from the lincoln tunnel, to route 3 toward the meadowlands.  his truck fishtailed one way on the rain-slicked road, then the other. the truck smacked the curb, rolled twice and came to rest on the driver's side on a pile of boulders.  ruegamer was wearing a seat belt. he said he remembered tumbling in slow motion and all the loose debris in the cab of the truck -- shoes and water bottles, mostly -- bouncing around him.  ''it was like being inside one of those lotto-ball things,'' he said, viewing the episode with humor and relief.  hanging sideways in the driver's seat, ruegamer saw a man approach. in what ruegamer -- born in arizona, raised in las vegas and living in the off-season outside los angeles -- called a ''great jersey moment,'' the man swore at him, then asked if he was o.k.  ruegamer was o.k., and he climbed out through the passenger-side door. the worst of his bumps and bruises, a red welt high on his shin, is still visible.  he was sore, but he played against the saints. last week, because of injuries and the benching of tackle bob whitfield, ruegamer started at left guard against the washington redskins.  he left the game after the second series because of a deep cut from a cleat on his shin, just below the welt. he was patched up, then returned to help running back tiki barber gain a franchise-record 234 yards rushing.  but there was an oddity that was not lost on ruegamer or his teammates. they have chided him for being able to walk away from a potentially serious car accident, but leaving his first start of the season because someone stepped on him.  ruegamer, in a rental car, still drives by the scene of the accident -- more slowly now, he said. he can see part of his truck bed lying on the rocks, a macabre memorial to good fortune.  it is a daily reminder to appreciate second chances. only one of the giants knows how rich the prize is at the end of the playoffs, and how helpless the feeling is when life takes a tumble.  pro football  