two weeks after injury, coles remains a mystery   the pass from chad pennington hit laveranues coles in stride as he was running across the middle of the jets' soggy practice field friday. it looked like child's play, and in some ways it was; for it was a route-running drill, the football equivalent of playing tic-tac-toe by yourself.  it will not be that simple sunday, when new england coach bill belichick, a defensive mastermind, will be the one arranging the x's when the patriots play host to the jets in the first round of the playoffs. will coles run across the middle, at full strength and at full risk, looking to crack the belichick code? or will he still be something of a decoy, as he was last sunday against oakland?  ''with laveranues, i always expect him to be at full speed,'' jets coach eric mangini said friday.  the middle of the field is where coles normally likes to set up his office. exhibiting the nerve of a cat burglar, he has solved combinations all season on his way to a career-high 91 catches. he often does his best work in heavy traffic, but his daring has its downside.  the job hazards were driven home in the first half of the jets' dec. 25 game in miami, when coles streaked across the middle of the field and was knocked senseless in a helmet-to-helmet collision with dolphins linebacker zach thomas.  coles came back and played the second half with what turned out to be a concussion. he seemed subdued in the days that followed. he was not much of a factor against the raiders but became more like himself as this week progressed. on friday, he seemed upbeat and ready to embrace the challenge of playing a team that has won three super bowls in the last five seasons.  ''when my opportunity arises to make a play, i feel like it's my time to make that play regardless of whether i'm doubled or whatever,'' he said before practice.  coles and jerricho cotchery combined for 23 catches in the first two games against the patriots. the new england defense allowed only 10 touchdown receptions in the regular season; the jets had three of them. two of the touchdowns were by cotchery and one was by coles, who turned a catch-and-carry into a 46-yard score in the first game, a 24-17 loss, by making five defenders miss. three months, and 13 games later, thomas did not miss and coles was leveled.  during the days after the victory against the dolphins, coles's teammates could sense his distress. coles is to the jets' locker room what rosie o'donnell is to ''the view.'' he amuses -- and occasionally shocks -- his teammates with his commentary, but now he was quiet.  ''he wasn't doing much talking,'' cotchery said.  coles's teammates knew he was around, not because they could hear his laughter but because he left a trail of empty aspirin packets in his wake.  because coles never complains about pain, his teammates thought better than to ask him how he was feeling. ''you usually don't even have to ask l. c.,'' center nick mangold said friday, ''because he's not going to tell you.''  at various times this season, coles has played with a sore calf, wrist and back, so nobody on the jets was surprised when he suited up for the oakland game despite sitting out practices all week to let the cobwebs clear. his routes largely diverted from the middle, he ended up with only two catches in the jets' 23-3 victory. still, he played.  ''he just has a very high pain threshold and very good mental toughness,'' mangini said. ''things that may be too great for someone else to deal with don't affect him the same way.''  coles's toughness is his calling card and his cross. it helps define him, but it leaves him vulnerable, too, because he plays when others might not.  ''it's just something i take pride in,'' coles said friday. ''i always want to be a dependable guy. that's what this business is about. i understand that even if i step out there and i'm not 100 percent, i'm still accountable for my actions. even if i do something wrong, guys know i'm out there doing my best, that i truly care about them.''  but does he feel he must play no matter how badly he is hurting?  ''at times you can feel that way,'' coles said. ''the expectations are that you'll go out and play regardless of what the injury is.  ''sometimes there are some things that come up that it might not be the best situation for you to be out there and people just take it for granted that you'll be o. k.,'' he added. ''they'll say, 'he's fought through everything else.' sometimes i may need somebody to step in there at certain times and say 'laveranues, i think you need to do what's best for you.' but it is what it is.''  coles wasn't fussing; he was being philosophical.  ''you fight to get that reputation for toughness,'' he said, ''so i think it's something that you kind of have to just deal with.''  on the jets' injury report this week coles is listed as having a jaw injury. last week, it was a head and chin injury.  ''as we looked at it more, it is more jaw than chin,'' mangini said.  coles's jaw seemed to be moving fine friday. he and cotchery received new gloves in the mail from their apparel sponsor, and coles was so excited he could not stop talking about them.  he stood beside cotchery, both of them turning their gloves over in their hands.  ''we're going to be styling on sunday,'' coles said.  cotchery smiled. as he explained later, if coles was laughing and joking, it could mean only one thing: he must be feeling better.  pro football  