a very model of a modern meta-musical   ''the beastly bombing (or a terrible tale of terrorists tamed by tangles of true love)'' is not your ordinary operetta. it is a buddy comedy about white supremacists and members of al qaeda who meet while attempting to blow up the brooklyn bridge, all set to jaunty melodies evocative of gilbert and sullivan. the skinheads and terrorists gambol about the stage, engaging with pill-popping first daughters, a saudi-loving president, a pedophilic priest, the new york city police department and jesus. in a rollicking dance number, the neo-nazis, terrorists and a hasidic extremist bond over what they have in common: ''i hate jews.'' (the hasidic extremist hates secular jews.)  certainly it wasn't the sort of thing anyone had pegged for a hit -- not even its creators. after a year of rejections from theaters from london to los angeles, the composer, roger neill, and the librettist, julien nitzberg, had almost lost hope. but then their fortunes changed. ''we were lucky -- no, amazed -- to find a venue with the same ethos that we had,'' mr. nitzberg said.  if that sounds unlikely, well, the steve allen theater is not just any theater. part of the center for inquiry-west, a nonprofit group founded by carl sagan and isaac asimov to promote science and secular humanism, it is known for its willingness to embrace controversy. (in june -- 6/6/06 to be exact -- it held a satanic high mass for leather and tuxedo-clad devil-worshippers.) amit itelman, the theater's artistic director, said the show was a natural fit. ''it may contain material offensive to some muslims, christians and jews, but one can't stop the creative process because of fear of offending someone.''  ''beastly bombing'' opened at the end of september, playing friday and saturday nights, and quickly caught on. michael simmons on the huffington post blog pronounced it ''the first great work of comedy to emerge from the post-9/11 little planet of horrors.'' audiences and other bloggers were also enthusiastic, and word spread.  soon the tiny theater was packed, sometimes with entertainment luminaries who left plush westside neighborhoods for the gritty eastern edge of hollywood. among the crowd on a typical night were the comedian paul reiser, the director stephen gaghan, the actor liev schreiber and the designer diane von furstenberg, who, in recognition of the crosstown trek, characterized the musical as ''a big show hidden in a little theater in east los angeles.''  after going on hiatus in november, the show will resume on jan. 19 and run through april.  mr. neill attributes the success to the chemistry between mr. nitzberg's ''edgy libretto'' and his own music, which is ''elegant and genteel and full of charm'' (if he does say so himself).  ''we know from experience that if you read the script without the music, it comes off as very brutal and mean-spirited,'' said mr. neill, who composes music for film and television. ''reading page after page of 'i hate jews' can be difficult for some people. but when you have the music, and the music is making you smile, you realize the context -- the absurdity -- of bonding over hatred of the jews. it gives you permission to laugh at everything.''  mr. nitzberg, who is jewish, added: ''my mom is a holocaust survivor, but i've always had a mel brooksian appreciation for nazis and their amusingness.''  mr. nitzberg, who had previously written for movies and television, had the idea for the show in the early 1990s, after the first attack on the world trade center. he was researching a movie in london when he saw a performance of ''the pirates of penzance.''  ''it wasn't a very good production,'' he recalled, ''but i thought: god, this is the medium.'' that night he worked out every beat of the story, finishing both book and lyrics when he returned to los angeles. then he acted it out in mr. neill's living room.  ''he sang all the parts, even though there was no music,'' mr. neill said. he felt compelled to sign on.  the operetta proved easier to write than produce. so after blistering rejections, they decided to mount it themselves. rorry daniels, a former assistant to mr. nitzberg's agent, stepped in to produce. having quit her job in order to teach english in china, she viewed ''beastly bombing'' as a brief summer job. it didn't quite work out that way.  if the audiences that ''beastly bombing'' attracted were unforeseen, the same cannot be said of the controversy. bloggers have taken aim at it; one who goes by the name archontan called it ''theater that revels in evil.'' mr. nitzberg said arguments often take place in the parking lot after the show: ''one person screams, 'it's anti-semitic!' the other screams, 'no, it's satire!' '' but its champions have proven just as passionate as its detractors. ''i walked out of the theater and saw a woman in her 70s,'' mr. nitzberg recalled. ''she said to her husband, 'that was the cutest show i ever saw.' '' unlikely people are also appropriating tunes from the operetta on their myspace pages. ''i look at who's becoming our friends and see, 'i am a senior at west point' or 'i am a navy seal.' '' mr. nitzberg said.  although ''beastly bombing'' refers to current events, mr. nitzberg said he wrote it for the ages. ''i don't go to the theater to have an editorial thrust on me,'' he said. ''much as i admire the sentiment behind political plays, i have no interest in seeing them.'' or in writing them.  the plot twists, he emphasized, are timeless theatrical devices. when, for example, the president's daughters appear in disguise, they bring to mind the title character's son who traveled undercover in ''the mikado.'' similarly, he explained, when tabs of ecstasy cause some characters to fall for inappropriate people, the drug recalls the magic love potion in shakespeare's ''midsummer night's dream.''  the character who sings ''i am the bravest president'' does resemble george w. bush. but gilbert and sullivan often evoked politicians of their day too. today's audiences may miss the reference, but sir joseph porter in ''h.m.s. pinafore'' was modeled on w. h. smith, a self-made millionaire and newsstand magnate who ended up as head of the royal navy. ''when i was writing the music,'' mr. neill said, ''i never considered that these were political characters. i approached them as archetypes.''  at times mr. nitzberg's characters recognize their own ridiculousness. in the ''song of the sensitive white supremacist,'' a poetic neo-nazi bewails his mistreatment by the group: ''they don't like escargot, renoir or croissants served with brie./they just want to jabber on about their racial purity.'' but some critics have found the show too snide.  ''most troubling is the always smug and generally mean-spirited tone of the writing,'' robert verini wrote in variety. ''gilbert and sullivan had axes to grind but also the deftness to conceal them.'' to fans, though, that indecorousness is the show's best quality. ''they staged it with next to nothing in terms of props or set decoration,'' mr. schreiber said. ''but it communicates in a vibrant, hilarious, irreverent way.''  and mr. neill likes to point out, ''my six-year-old daughter particularly likes 'we like mushrooms,' '' a perky celebration of drug use in the style of ''three little maids from school'' in ''the mikado.'' '' 'we like mushrooms, we like coke' -- she thinks we're talking about a pizza party,'' he laughed.  mr. nitzberg stopped him. ''someday someone from child protective services will show up.''  mr. neill and mr. nitzberg have made, and fielded, inquiries about bringing their show to new york next year. but for the next four months at least they'll be in los angeles, savoring their cult status and preaching their provocative theatrical philosophy.  mr. nitzberg has a name for it: ''c.w.i.c., or cyanide wrapped in chocolate.'' ''if you're dealing with the ugly social issues of our time, why not serve them up as a delicious bonbon?''  theater  correction:  january 14, 2007, sunday  a picture caption last sunday with an article about the operetta ''the beastly bombing (or a terrible tale of terrorists tamed by tangles of true love)'' reversed two names. the librettist julien nitzberg was at left and the composer roger neill was second from left.  