eagles look to the past to bring future success   when the phone rang monday morning, koy detmer let his answering machine pick up.  who would call at 8 a.m. on new year's day?  a half-hour later, detmer's wife, katie, listened to the message at the family's home in san antonio: the eagles were calling. it seemed urgent.  the eagles?  detmer had been cut at the end of training camp. jeff garcia and a. j. feeley had been preferred as philadelphia's backup quarterbacks to donovan mcnabb.  dirk johnson, the punter, took over detmer's job as the holder on field goals and extra points. detmer was out of organized football, working for a real estate investing firm and helping train high school quarterbacks.  ''it was completely out of the blue for me,'' detmer said of the call.  he had not watched philadelphia's regular-season finale last sunday, during which david akers, one of the n.f.l.'s most reliable kickers, clanged a 23-yard field-goal attempt off the goal post during the eagles' 24-17 victory against atlanta.  for the first time in 50 career attempts, akers had missed a field goal inside 30 yards. it was symptomatic of a slight dip in his dependability. akers had been accurate on only 18 of 23 field-goal attempts (78 percent), a career-low percentage for a 16-game season in which he had more than six attempts.  philadelphia had a new long snapper and a new holder. perhaps that helped explain the drop-off. in any case, the eagles were taking no chances, with sunday's playoff opener against the giants approaching and hopes of making the super bowl appearing legitimate.  would detmer lend his hands as a holder during the playoffs? coach andy reid wanted to know.  no problem, detmer said.  not that he had much to pack for the trip to philadelphia from texas.  detmer is one of the most unaffected and frugal of all professional athletes.  in nine previous seasons in philadelphia, he generally carried nothing on trips but a toothbrush. each season, he bought one outfit to wear to away games, spending no more than $100.  usually, he said, he could buy the whole ensemble, shoes to shirt, for $60. spending $100 was considered a shopping spree.  if detmer enjoyed any extravagance, it was his famous abundance of neck hair and his vigorous touchdown theatrics known as the whip.  but the eagles did not want him back for his frugality, scruffiness or inscrutable celebrations. they wanted his hands.  ''you've got a guy out there who can do it as well as anyone can do it and he's available,'' jim harbaugh, the eagles' special-teams coach, said of re-signing detmer as a holder. ''that can make us better in one little area that could be the difference. why not do it?''  a field-goal attempt takes about one second from the snap to the kick. it remains one of the most elementary but technically precise and vital functions in the sport. four of philadelphia's games were decided by 3 points or fewer this season. a successful field goal could mean the difference between victory or defeat in the playoffs.  ''you only get one chance to do it right,'' detmer said.  kickers can be extremely fastidious. but what the left-footed akers wants most from a holder is consistency. he did not request detmer's return, he said, but he knows that after six seasons working together, detmer will provide comfortable uniformity.  detmer will tilt the ball slightly toward the goal posts, and sideways at something less than 45 degrees. and he is familiar with the vagaries of the wind at lincoln financial field.  if the wind is blowing left to right, detmer compensates by tilting the ball more toward himself. if the wind is blowing right to left, he tilts the ball away from himself. the stiffer the headwind, the more the ball is rotated forward. ''it's so technical; people have no idea,'' akers said.  previously, detmer worked with mike bartrum as the eagles' long snapper. but bartrum sustained a neck injury this season, so philadelphia signed jon dorenbos as his replacement. dorenbos's snap stroke is slightly shorter and quicker than bartrum's, detmer said, which required some adjusting to. but akers was successful on 46 of 49 attempts at practice tuesday, so apparently the three have found a rhythm.  ''i just try to be as smooth and rhythmical as i can to give dave a good clean picture,'' detmer said. ''letting him see the same thing every time -- not jerky or fumbly.''  but there is one wrinkle. if the eagles win sunday, they will travel to new orleans next week, and detmer has not bought an outfit for the road.  ''i'll have to pick something out with my new bonus check,'' he said.  pro football  correction:  january 9, 2007, tuesday  a sports article on saturday about the former quarterback koy detmer, who was signed by the philadelphia eagles to be the holder on kicks in the playoffs, misidentified the special-teams coach. he is john harbaugh, not jim harbaugh. (the harbaughs are brothers. jim was recently hired as head coach at stanford university.)  