comptroller voices concern about brooklyn golf deal   a $9.6 million city contract to renovate and operate a golf course in marine park in brooklyn was headed for further review yesterday after the city comptroller raised concerns about ties between the contractor and a man accused of being a soldier in the colombo crime family.  in a letter sent tuesday, city comptroller william c. thompson jr. urged the parks and recreation department to reconsider the 20-year concession contract with east coast golf. mr. thompson cited references in federal court papers to the company's president, dominick logozzo, and his financial relationship with craig marino, whom federal prosecutors describe as ''a soldier in the colombo family.''  mr. marino was one of 10 reputed mob members indicted in march on federal racketeering and conspiracy charges in connection with a stock fraud scheme that allegedly bilked investors of more than $20 million. prosecutors contend that he has a long, violent history, including beatings and stabbings, according to court documents.  mr. logozzo, who has not been implicated in any criminal activity cited in the indictment, was awarded a 20-year contract on jan. 1, 2006, to operate the city-owned marine park golf course. the 18-hole course is one of a dozen city courses, all operated by private vendors, said warner johnston, a department spokesman.  mr. johnston said the contract was awarded before the indictments were filed and complied with all ''the relevant legal requirements.'' but because of the concerns expressed by the comptroller, the department has asked the city's law department and the department of investigation to review the contract.  mr. logozzo did not return phone calls left at his place of business yesterday.  in pretrial detention documents filed in march, mr. marino's lawyer, joseph r. corozzo, wrote that his client and mr. logozzo were childhood friends, and that mr. logozzo had lent mr. marino's father $48,000 to invest in a food service company known as the zone diet.  that investment, mr. corozzo wrote, has been the son's sole source of recent income. mr. corozzo did not return phones calls left at his office yesterday. in court documents, the lawyer said mr. logozzo has an ''unimpeachable background.''  in addition to the loan, documents filed by the united states attorney's office for the eastern district of new york state said that mr. logozzo is the registered owner of a lincoln navigator that mr. marino drives.  mr. thompson said those financial relationships gave ''rise to numerous integrity concerns about the concessionaire.''  according to parks department documents, mr. logozzo's contract calls for it to pay the city a minimum of $9.6 million in fees over 20 years. it also offered to pay additional fees for a restaurant and banquet center.  the company beat out four other bidders to win the contract, including one proposal that offered a minimum $10.35 million in fees. mr. johnston said the fee offer was just one of several factors used to assess the proposals.  mr. johnston said east coast golf's contract called for the company to invest $4.4 million in capital improvements in the course over 20 years. the company has already invested about $1 million, he said.  though the contract was awarded on jan. 1, 2006, the parks department did not submit the agreement to the comptroller, who must register the contract, until november.  the concerns about the golf course contract come as mayor michael r. bloomberg is seeking to restrict powers of the comptroller and borough presidents to approve city deals with vendors. the change is part of a series of measures that would include eliminating background checks of vendors in some circumstances until they have been awarded their contracts.  administration officials say the proposed changes are part of an overall movement to streamline the way contracts are awarded and bring more transparency to a process that has been subject to corruption and inefficiency.  mr. thompson, who is critical of the change, has said it would give him and the borough presidents much less opportunity to catch things like potential mob ties, bankruptcies and other financial problems with would-be vendors.  