tipping over a defense of enron   malcolm gladwell is one smart cookie.  a star of the new yorker magazine, mr. gladwell has written a host of contrarian, provocative articles in recent years on meaty subjects like racial profiling and plagiarism. he is also the author of two best-selling books, one of which, ''the tipping point,'' has become part of the language, influencing the culture in general and business in particular.  as with many new yorker readers, i count myself a fan. and precisely because he sometimes makes business his subject, i half-assumed that one of these days, i would write a column about him.  not this column, though.  this week, the new yorker ran an article by mr. gladwell, entitled ''open secrets,'' that the author describes on his blog as ''my semi-defense of enron.'' no kidding. the article opens, rather poignantly, with the scene of the former enron chief executive jeffrey k. skilling -- ''a pillar of the houston community''-- receiving a harsh 24-year sentence last october for his role in the enron fraud, ''one of the heaviest sentences ever given to a white-collar criminal.''  from there, mr. gladwell goes on to make the argument, provocatively, of course, that the enron debacle was always hidden in plain sight. the signs were there in the company's financial disclosure documents. yes, they were complicated and convoluted, but if you knew what to look for, you could, at the very least, sniff out the fact that enron was a company with lots of problems.  he dismisses the notion that ''senior executives,'' including mr. skilling, withheld critical information from investors. the problem, mr. gladwell concludes, is that the potential receivers of that information, the investing community, primarily, either didn't know how to dissect enron's financials or couldn't be bothered. thus, the enron scandal was as much the fault of investors as it was any enron executive now in prison.  in his blog, mr. gladwell goes even further. ''can anyone explain -- in plain english -- what it is that jeff skilling and co. did wrong?'' he continues: ''the question is strictly a legal one: according to the way accounting rules were written at the time, what specific transgressions were skilling guilty of that merited 24 years in prison?''  i confess that i thought i was done with enron. but it strikes me as important to wrestle with mr. gladwell's position. already, ''open secrets'' has been embraced by those who argue that the enron prosecutions were an effort to ''criminalize'' what amounted to flawed business decisions. the efforts to weaken sarbanes-oxley are also rooted in the idea that the country overreacted to enron and the other corporate scandals. in effect, the central defense argument -- that enron didn't really do anything illegal -- has been given new life by mr. gladwell. and it isn't remotely true.  when i called mr. gladwell a few days ago, he backpedaled from his ''semi-defense'' position. ''i wasn't interested in exonerating enron,'' he told me. ''i was interested in the kind of question it represented. i didn't go into the legal case because i didn't understand the legal case. what i wanted to see was what investors reasonably could have known about the company prior to it falling apart. on that question, the investment community bears equal culpability to make sense of inherently complex environments.''  to be sure, his central point is largely correct, though hardly the contrarian revelation he makes it out to be: wall street's corps of analysts, hedge fund operators, ratings agencies and all the rest should really have paid more attention to enron's public disclosures.  ''they should have been able to scope it out,'' said jonathan r. macey, a law professor at yale whose writings about enron form the core of mr. gladwell's argument. mr. macey points out that it wasn't just laziness at work, either. enron intimidated the big wall street investment banks to ensure that analysts had a buy rating on the stock. this point may be fresh to academia, but it's been made ad nauseam in the business press since the enron fiasco.  but while enron's dwindling cash flow, poor return on capital and so on suggested internal problems, there are lots of poorly performing companies with similar problems. they are not necessarily out-and-out frauds, as enron was. and that's where mr. gladwell's argument falls apart. his view is that more disclosure, which is what the securities and exchange commission tends to strive for, would not have made any difference. but what mr. skilling (and others, including enron's founder, the late kenneth l. lay) were charged with was not hiding things in plain sight -- but hiding things out of sight that would have exposed the fraud. that is, they lied to the investing public about the true condition of the company. and no matter how you slice it, that's against the law.  the examples are myriad. remember the enron broadband business? the one that ''generated'' tens of millions in reported revenue even though it never generated much actual cash? mr. skilling was among the enron executives who hid the true nature of the broadband business, in one notable instance by omitting remarks about its troubles that were included in a conference call script that had been prepared for him. there was simply no way for investors to know that the company was lying about that business, no matter how close they parsed the financials.  or how about the way enron hid hundreds of millions of dollars in losses from its enron energy services business by burying the division inside its profitable trading division? it did so, according to prosecutors -- and buttressed by much trial testimony -- because admitting the losses publicly would have raised huge alarms on wall street and caused the stock to tank. one of the things mr. skilling was convicted of was participating in that particular aspect of the enron fraud.  mr. gladwell makes much of enron's use of so-called special-purpose entities -- those supposed ''independent'' partnerships that were run by the company's chief financial officer, andrew s. fastow. those entities, mr. gladwell argues, are incredibly complicated, and enron's were more complex than most. mr. gladwell calls them examples of enron's ''recklessness and incompetence,'' but not an example of inadequate disclosure. even if enron had publicly disclosed every page of every special-purpose entity, he says, it would have made no difference; they were just too convoluted.  this, however, is where he runs off the rails. yes, the fact that the entities were run by ''a senior enron executive'' is something that the company disclosed (usually in some buried footnote). and it should have raised a huge red flag. shame on wall street for not picking up on it.  but enron's s.p.e.'s were not always used for some legitimate purpose. mostly, they were used to hide poorly performing assets and to launder loans as income. not all of them were structured illegally, but many of them were -- a fact that mr. gladwell glosses over, and which enron never disclosed publicly. mr. skilling, according to prosecutors, secretly guaranteed that mr. fastow's partnerships would never lose money in enron assets, violating the law. it is also a reason mr. skilling is in prison now.  the point is not the sheer volume of disclosure; it's whether disclosure illuminates or obfuscates. enron usually did the latter. in effect, mr. gladwell has conflated fraud with overvaluation. james chanos, the short seller who first raised questions about enron's numbers, told me that until the summer of 2001, when mr. skilling abruptly and inexplicably resigned, ''even i only thought it was a case of overstated earnings; that is all you could tell from their documents.'' he thought he would ride the stock down for a while, and then, eventually, cover his position once the market corrected for the overstatement. you could find plenty of evidence of overstated earnings in enron's financial documents -- but you'd never know that the company was a potemkin village. the kind of information that would have led to such a conclusion was precisely the information enron hid from investors.  as his coup de grâce, mr. gladwell writes about a group of cornell university business school students who looked closely at enron financials in the spring of 1998, over two years before the fraud was exposed. according to mr. gladwell, the students concluded that enron's business model was far riskier than its competitors. and they found ''clear signs'' that ''enron may be manipulating its earnings.'' they put a sell recommendation on the stock, then at $48 a share.  out of curiosity, i looked up the students' work on the internet. their research report does indeed have a sell recommendation. but it's not really because the students thought enron had deep problems. indeed, the report praises much about enron and its business. the main issue was a ''lack of upside potential in the near term.'' over the long term, the students had a neutral rating on the stock. the students put a price target of $42 -- not exactly something you'd do if you suspected fraud.  as for that line about manipulating earnings, that's in the report, too, but it is also not quite as mr. gladwell makes it out to be. the students used a complex statistical tool called the beneish model, which helps investors detect whether there might be some earnings manipulation. sure enough, that is what the model suggested. but then the students went on: ''further analysis of these indicators showed no cause for concern.''  mr. gladwell notwithstanding, my guess is that the students -- and the rest of the world -- would have come to a different conclusion if enron had only disclosed what it should have. that it didn't has a lot to do with why mr. skilling is behind bars.  talking business  