today in business   chief of home depot leaves -- robert l. nardelli, the chief executive of home depot, who came under heavy criticism for his pay package and his failure to lift the chain's stagnant stock price, was ousted by the board. [page a1.]  a victory for shareholders -- the surprising departure of mr. nardelli was a victory for shareholders hoping to force corporate directors to be more accountable on the increasingly incendiary issue of executive pay. market place. [c1.]  no longer automatic -- general electric has long been seen as a training ground of future c.e.o.'s. the ouster of mr. nardelli, a g.e. alumnus, may change that perception. [c1.]  a target of activists -- mr. nardelli's rich compensation and poor performance at home depot has long been cited by shareholder activists as one of the prime examples of what they view as excessive executive pay. [c4.]  kpmg charge dismissed -- a federal judge has dismissed a criminal charge accusing kpmg, the accounting firm, of conspiring to sell illegal tax shelters, after prosecutors said that the firm had met its obligations under a 2005 deferred prosecution agreement. jeffrey stein (above), the former deputy chairman at kpmg, filed his own legal request urging the judge not to dismiss the criminal case against kpmg, arguing that the firm had failed to pay the legal fees for his defense. [c7.]  one drug's side effects -- for many patients who take zyprexa, the antipsychotic drug manufactured by eli lilly, the side effects are severe. exactly how many people have died as a result of those side effects, and whether lilly adequately disclosed those risks, are central issues in thousands of product-liability lawsuits. [a1.]  background checks at ports -- more than 750,000 port workers will be required to have criminal background and immigration checks in an antiterrorism program announced by the homeland security department. [a14.]  concerns over voting tests -- a laboratory that has tested most of the nation's electronic voting systems, ciber inc. of greenwood village, colo., has been temporarily barred from approving new machines after federal officials found that it was not following its quality-control procedures and could not document that it was conducting all the required tests. [a1.]  plays both kinds of dvds -- warner brothers plans to announce next week a video disc that can play films and television programs in both blu-ray and hd-dvd, the two competing formats for high-definition dvds. [c1.]  slowdown in sex trade -- the sex-related entertainment industry's leading performers, owners and fans gather in las vegas for conferences amid indications that pornography's robust growth since it came out from behind the counter in the 1970s is slowing. [c6.]  talent agencies scramble -- two leading hollywood agents with top-ranked clients in movies and television joined the endeavor talent agency after many years at the rival international creative management, sparking a hollywood-style scramble as each agency strove to claim -- or retain -- the agents' star clients. [c6.]  a gecko on the bridge -- the port authority of new york and new jersey, which runs the george washington bridge, is expected to announce a deal with geico, the auto insurance giant, to allow a big billboard on top of the toll plaza, as well as other signs. [b1.]  trains try to outrun critics -- taiwan's new system of sleek, 180-mile-an-hour bullet trains is scheduled to open tomorrow. for some on this congested island, the project is an example of how asia may be able to control oil imports and reduce air pollution; but others fume over the $15 billion price tag. [a4.]  low mark for the big three -- general motors, the ford motor company and the chrysler group ended 2006 with a new low in their collective market share -- 51.5 percent for the month of december. [c1.]  markets finish mixed -- stocks surged early on the first trading day of 2007, but then fell sharply and closed mixed after minutes from a federal reserve meeting indicated that inflation remains a chief concern. [c3.]  earthlink executive dies -- garry betty, an executive who built the earthlink corporation from a struggling start-up into a public company that took on telecommunications giants, died on tuesday in atlanta. he was 49. [b7.]  online  why roots matter -- health scares and mass-produced food have people reaching for local produce, which has meant a lift for small businesses. a special report is at nytimes.com/business/smallbusiness.  who will buy? a special video report follows hopeful entrepreneurs as they bring their products, including greeting cards that hug, to a search sponsored by qvc, the tv shopping network. a report is at nytimes.com/business/smallbusiness.  career choices -- an effective job search requires more than sending out résumés. job seekers must know as much as possible about potential jobs, including salary comparison data and company research. a report is at nytimes.com/marketing/jobmarket.  