town considers guards for library disrupted by students   the maplewood township committee is asking the public library's board of trustees not to follow through with a plan to close its two buildings during after-school hours and is considering providing security guards to help quell disruptive behavior, mayor fred r. profeta jr. said wednesday.  the trustees voted last month to close maplewood memorial library weekdays from 2:45 to 5 p.m., citing an influx of students from the nearby middle school, some of whom have been disruptive.  the committee discussed a plan late tuesday night to provide the library with security guards.  ''the township will pay for that, because it's a public safety issue, though it may go through the library budget,'' mr. profeta said in an interview.  police chief robert cimino said that the department was checking references for several security companies, and that guards could be hired within the next month, at a cost of $280 to $700 a week per guard. plans call for two guards, he said.  the mayor said he would petition the library board to rescind its initial decision before the planned closing on jan. 16.  ''i think the closure's a very bad idea,'' the mayor said. ''i think that it was not warranted, because a lot of the programs we have in the works are designed -- and well designed -- to alleviate the situation. we just have to put those in place.''  but david huemer, who represents the maplewood township committee on the library board, said the library had already indicated that a plan for guards was not enough to rescind its vote on the closing.  the council is also considering an expansion of a youth program at the morrow memorial united methodist church, which now operates on wednesdays. the mayor said $10,000 in private money could be readily used for the expansion, but did not identify its source.  one middle school program is run in the library basement by the recreation committees of maplewood and south orange, and the local y.m.c.a. provides after-school activities every day for $145 a month, but only 29 of its 51 available spots are filled.  ''it's very difficult to monitor 700-plus students once they leave our building,'' said kristopher harrison, the principal of maplewood middle school, adding that he hoped for an alternative soon. ''then we could use this disappointing situation and make something very positive for the students,'' he said.  