bridge ad deal is bargain for geico, some experts say   did geico, the giant auto insurer, get too good of a deal from the port authority of new york and new jersey?  that is what some advertising executives are saying about the $1.6 million-a-year, two-year deal between the authority and geico, which will soon have its name on billboards at the toll plaza for the george washington bridge. geico's name will also adorn each tollbooth, signs on the approach road, and the port authority's web site and direct mail.  the price tag, these executives say, is far too cheap, considering that 57 million eastbound drivers pass through the toll plaza in fort lee, n.j., each year. though far different from ads on billboards, a 30-second television advertisement during the super bowl next month is estimated to cost an average of $2.6 million.  even by the port authority's standards, the deal with geico may be low. the port authority collects $1.7 million a year from hsbc for ads the bank places in the walkways to planes at kennedy international and la guardia airports -- locations with less historical stature than the george washington bridge.  ''to me, it sounds like a very, very big bargain,'' said michael watras, chief executive of straightline international, a brand consultant. ''i just think the port authority was asleep at the wheel. they could have gotten five to six times as much.''  geico, meanwhile, may have gotten the better end of the deal, , mr. watras and others said. it spent more than $400 million on advertising across all media in 2005, according to tns media intelligence, a research firm, so the deal with the port authority is less than half of one percent of its annual advertising budget. in the first nine months of 2006, geico's spending on advertising rose 24 percent, according to tns.  geico representatives did not return calls for comment. but stephen sigmund, a spokesman for the port authority, said the deal with geico is ''competitively priced'' because ''it's the first of its kind.'' some advertising executives agreed, saying that it is hard to determine a fair price without having a benchmark.  geico was not the first company approached about buying ads; many companies were asked, including other auto insurers, but they declined. that could have forced the authority to reduce its price.  the price hsbc paid for the signs at la guardia and kennedy is also difficult to compare with the geico deal because a greater number and variety of travelers at airports see those signs. commuters on the george washington bridge are often the same people day after day.  what's more, commuters, preservationists and residents near the bridge may become so irritated by the geico signs that they take out their anger on the company.  ''it seems a bit low, but then again, you need to get an advertiser to take the risk of putting your name out there for the first time,'' said allen p. adamson, managing director at landor associates and author of ''brandsimple,'' a book about how to maintain brands. ''any time ads encroach on a place where they haven't been before, it's one more refuge from the noise that has been taken away. every time you do this, you'll get people screaming.''  the signs have not even been unveiled yet, but the screaming has already started. the borough of fort lee, where the toll plaza is located, is considering suing the port authority. the borough's mayor, jack alter, said the port authority did not consult the borough government before approving the signs, and may have run afoul of laws that determine the size and location of the signs.  ''no one talked to us about it,'' mr. alter said. ''they are polluting the aesthetics.''  mr. sigmund, the port authority spokesman, declined to comment on the potential lawsuit. but he said the authority is ''working hard not to litter the bridge with signs.''  ''that's why we're doing it in a very small way and seeing what the impact is,'' he said.  