distributor's bankruptcy rattles book industry   book publishers braced themselves for a financial blow this week after a bankruptcy filing by advanced marketing services, a book distributor.  the company filed for bankruptcy protection last friday, reporting more than $200 million in debt to dozens of publishing companies. its creditors included publishers large and small, among them random house, which is owed $43.3 million, and good books of intercourse, pa.., which specializes in books about the amish and the mennonites and is owed nearly $1 million.  a publishing executive said that while authors and readers were unlikely to be affected by the bankruptcy filing, many publishers might not recover much of what they were owed.  ''this is a huge disruption in this business,'' said the executive, who declined to be further identified because he was not authorized to speak for his company. ''the publishers are going to end up taking a big loss.''  according to the bankruptcy filing, advanced marketing services has been looking for additional financing or a buyer for the last 18 months, enlisting the investment bank jeffries & company in the search.  advanced marketing services also owns publishers group west, a distributor for a consortium of publishers including grove/atlantic, which may be hit hardest by the bankruptcy filing.  ''it's a mess,'' said morgan entrekin, the publisher of grove/atlantic, adding that he had been meeting with lawyers for days and was scrambling, trying to figure out how to deal with the situation.  advanced marketing services was granted $75 million of debtor-in-possession financing by creditors so it could continue to function for the next several months.  simon & schuster immediately suspended shipments to advanced marketing services, a simon & schuster spokesman, adam roth-berg, said.  publishers would not give details on their business relationships with advanced marketing services, but the company accounts for as much as 10 percent of some publishers' sales.  ''we're exploring ways to keep working with them,'' a spokeswoman for harpercollins, erin crum, said. a spokesman for random house declined to comment.  the bankruptcy filing came over the new year's weekend, catching many publishing executives by surprise. the book industry is largely shut down the week between christmas and new year's day, and some executives were still trickling back to work late this week.  advanced marketing services, founded in 1982, has headquarters in san diego. it acts as a middleman between publishers and booksellers, obtaining books directly from the publishers and distributing them to retailers like sam's club, costco and bj's wholesale club. the company operates three distribution centers, in indianapolis; hanover, md.; and woodland, calif.  advanced marketing services' financial difficulties were widely known in the industry, after an accounting scandal in 2003 resulted in the ouster of several senior managers. a lawyer for the company did not return calls seeking comment.  the distributor has near-exclusive access to the discount retailers known as price clubs, including costco and sam's club. the price clubs can produce lucrative returns for the right books, like cookbooks and mass-market reading, and can allow publishers to reach people who do not shop at bookstores.  books are a relatively small part of the price clubs' total business, but they have one attribute that retailers love: the suggested retail price is printed directly on the book jacket. because the books are then discounted by at least 20 or 30 percent, this promotes the feeling among buyers that the stores are offering them a bargain.  