cinema verbatim: words on the page   written by pedro almodóvar  in the bathroom, raimunda (penélope cruz) is getting ready for a party at her restaurant. she is half made up. the effect is as if the part of her face that isn't made up has been erased. she is speaking in a loud voice so that her daughter, paula (yohana cobo), can hear her in the bedroom.  raimunda -- paula! get ready, people will start arriving in half an hour.  in her room, paula, serious and indolent, is lying on her bed, still wearing a track suit. she is reading a book by paul auster and doesn't deign to answer her mother. as she doesn't get an answer, raimunda goes into paula's room.  raimunda -- (fondly) are you still like that?  paula -- i'm not in the mood for a party.  raimunda -- neither am i, but it's work. come on, don't be such a lazybones. i'll help you. what's wrong?  raimunda sits on the bed with her daughter.  paula -- (serious) i can't get him out of my head when he's so close, there, in the storeroom.  raimunda's forced optimism fades.  raimunda -- that's the best way to drive yourself crazy and to drive me crazy, too!  paula -- mom, you don't know what it's like to have killed your father!  raimunda looks at her and from her expression seems to be saying: ''there are some fathers who deserve it'' or ''you were just defending yourself.'' however, she says:  raimunda -- paco wasn't your father.  paula -- mom, don't lie to me anymore. i know you're doing it for me, but please, don't lie.  raimunda's recently painted eyes fill up with tears that don't quite overflow. defeated, wearily:  raimunda -- i'm not lying. paco recognized you as his daughter, but he knew he wasn't your biological father.  on the bedside table there is a framed photo of the three. paula is just a baby. paco is rocking her lovingly in his arms. paula looks at the photo.  paula -- then  he was telling the truth.  raimunda -- (without any viciousness, but firmly) yes, but that doesn't justify what he did.  paula, curious and stunned, looks at her mother, overwhelmed by memories.  raimunda -- (pleading) i promise i'll tell you everything, another time. i swear. and now, let's get ready. there's no point in sitting here.  paula -- who was my father?  raimunda -- someone from the village.  paula -- do i know him?  raimunda -- he's dead. (pleading) paula, i swear i'll tell you everything.  paula looks at her and agrees.  paula -- (adult) i'll hold you to your word.  the oscars: excerpts -- volver  