the week ahead: jan. 7 - 13; art   rather than drifting through another big, bland blockbuster this week, why not focus on small shows? you can still see ''art of the lega: meaning and metaphor in central africa'' at axa gallery through jan. 14. lega men and women, from congo, enter an initiation society at an early age to learn life skills and gain wisdom, and most lega art is created as an instrument of moral teaching. the process of growth is complex and stimulating, on the evidence of the elegant sculptures and haunting masks here. 787 seventh avenue, at 51st street, manhattan, (212) 554-4818.  with a little traveling, you can piece together a mini-retrospective of the contemporary artist ellsworth kelly. in chelsea all of matthew marks's galleries (at 522 west 22nd street, 523 west 24th street, 521 west 21st street and 526 west 22nd street) are devoted to him: two spaces with new abstract relief paintings, another with a single panoramic print, and yet another with a terrific series of shadow-derived notebook drawings from the 1950s that have much to say about the way this artist has related abstraction and the world. they are all on view through jan. 27 (matthewmarks.com). through february, the philadelphia museum of art (philamuseum.org) has its own kelly festival, notable for landmark pieces from his formative years in paris.  speaking of small surveys, one of the best, and most moving, shows of political art around is at the fogg art museum at harvard university in cambridge, mass. (through feb. 25). ''dissent!'' brings together familiar pieces and rarely seen work. if all you know about sister corita (1918-86) is big strokes of abstract paint, check out the visually passionate topical prints here. most interesting, though, are the relics of political activism at harvard itself: a t-shirt with a raised-fist emblem was hand-printed in 1969 during a campus strike by design students. they worked around the clock, printing a political message on any object brought to them, for free. (617) 495-9400 or www.artmuseums.harvard.edu/fogg.  