strategy cost cutting   the reality  a knock on the door at 4 a.m. cheering up a homesick freshman. getting the beer out of dorm rooms. mediating roommate squabbles. these are some of the ways r.a.'s spend nights and weekends. pedro pereira, a veteran resident adviser at pace university, is most surprised at the little things that erupt in dorm life. ''somebody doesn't hold an elevator and they have arguments,'' he says.  mostly r.a.'s handle the mundane (as information sources for newbies), but it's an increasingly complex job, especially with more students with mental health problems arriving on campus. ''r.a.'s are being asked to be very cognizant of sexual assault, eating disorder or suicide issues,'' says michele burris, associate vice president for student affairs at fordham university. of course, r.a.'s are not the campus police or psychologists, and there are support systems in place for situations that turn threatening.  ''they can't solve someone's problem,'' says nadine kelley, residential area director at pace.  how to  universities look for leadership and mentoring qualities, self-confidence and at least a 2.5 grade point average. usually sophomores and up are eligible. the process might start with a group interview with other r.a.'s and residence hall directors, then continue with a one-on-one meeting with a campus administrator.  most residence halls start looking at applications now. stony brook university, part of the state university of new york, interviews candidates in march and in fall. at the university of connecticut, students can apply throughout the year and are called in as the need arises.  expect to invest time in training. ''community assistants'' at connecticut return to campus three weeks early to learn about conflict resolution and dealing with alcohol (and the ever-popular writing up of students). new this school year: how a posting on myspace or facebook can affect an r.a.'s image. a four-credit course in education psychology is also required.  caveats  ''it can be very difficult to be an r.a. because it is a peer leadership role and often you are not included in what goes on on the floor,'' says gregory s. blimling, vice president for student affairs at rutgers and author of the widely used guide ''the resident assistant.'' he warns: ''you are frequently ostracized.''  some universities require residence hall directors to meet weekly with r.a.'s to help them deal with problems and schedules. balancing coursework and job demands can be overwhelming, as is the weight of being a role model at all hours. that means thinking twice about drinking.  the university of connecticut has high standards of behavior for r.a.'s, says h. sam miller, associate vice president for student affairs. ''a resident who violated a community standard might have to write an essay or do community service,'' mr. miller says. an r.a. might lose her job. it happens, on average, twice a year, he says. nikki vittore, assistant director for college housing at stony brook, says five r.a.'s in the past year were charged with violating school policy.  success rate  r.a.'s are given a private room on the house, as well as benefits each semester that increase with experience: pace offers three free credits; stony brook, a $300 discount on the meal plan and priority registration; the university of connecticut, a $2,000 stipend. hofstra university on long island knocks $1,000 off board and pays a $200 stipend each semester. fordham gives r.a.'s not only free room and board but waives $525 in tuition.  some colleges are hungry for candidates; others have waiting lists. though anyone can apply, students nominated by residence hall directors have a better shot. pace hires more than half of applicants. hofstra accepts a third, and usually has 30 r.a.'s on a waiting list. but it has to recruit men, who apply in fewer numbers. stony brook hires 100 new r.a.'s a year, with about 50 in the wings.  karan devnani, an r.a. there, sees ''more pros than cons.'' he ticks them off: ''you learn life skills, like interacting with people, and managerial skills. you learn about being responsible.''  strategy  