wheeldon forms a dance company   christopher wheeldon, one of the world's most sought-after choreographers, who recently announced an end to his residency at new york city ballet, has formed his own company, a major event in the dance world.  the company, morphoses the wheeldon company, is to make its debut in august at the vail international dance festival in colorado, followed by four to six performances at the sadler's wells theater in london in september and roughly the same number at city center in new york in october. the company is named after a 2002 dance that mr. wheeldon created for city ballet.  in an interview yesterday mr. wheeldon said performances would include a mix of his own choreography and works by others, performed by stars on loan from city ballet and the royal ballet in london.  ''we're still kind of at the hopes-and-dreams stage,'' he said, adding that he had approached no one to become a permanent member. ''i don't really believe in poaching,'' he said. ''i don't even know at this stage whether i can offer them the security they need.''  at vail, he said, he planned to cast couples from the hamburg ballet, pacific northwest ballet, san francisco ballet and city ballet to dance the four pas de deux from his ''polyphonia.''  among the dancers tentatively scheduled to participate in his first season are wendy whelan, sébastien marcovici, maria kowroski, sofiane sylve and edwaard liang from city ballet, and darcey bussell, alina cojocaru and johan kobborg from the royal ballet, where mr. wheeldon has danced and choreographed.  ''none of these dancers reflect the dancers that are necessarily going to be in the company when it's formed in a more concrete way,'' he said.  mr. wheeldon said he would concentrate on the artistic side and focus on new works, including those by contemporary choreographers.  for now lourdes lopez, a former city ballet principal, is handling administrative matters. the company is expected to have about 20 members and an annual budget of about $5 million.  mr. wheeldon declined to discuss specifics on how the company would be financed, saying only that some potential donors had shown interest. the initial performances are being presented by vail, city center and sadler's wells, which will cover the dancers' fees and serve as long-term partners of the company. he said he hoped those performances would attract interest from potential company members and donors.  the arrival of a new dance company is always an unusual event, given the funds needed to support an essentially money-losing endeavor. it is even rarer for an individual to establish a private company, as opposed to one sponsored by a city. but mr. wheeldon's stature and substantial body of work, especially at his tender age of 33, appear to be enough to attract backers.  mr. wheeldon said in november that he would leave city ballet as its first resident choreographer when his contract expires in 2008. he is scheduled to choreograph two more works for it. peter martins, the city ballet's ballet master in chief, said at the time that he was happy to see mr. wheeldon spread his wings.  mr. martins was in rehearsals and could not be immediately reached for comment yesterday.  inevitably mr. wheeldon's company will compete for attention, donations and dancers, something mr. wheeldon indirectly acknowledged.  he said mr. martins gave his blessing, yet ''he understands also that this may mean some dancers will decide to come to me,'' mr. wheeldon said. ''that's just the way life is and the way things go.''  he continued, ''i'm sort of stepping into an area where people might think, 'why does new york need another ballet company when we've already got two?' '' (in addition to city ballet, new york is home to american ballet theater.) answering his own question, he said, ''maybe it doesn't, but i'm going to do it, and we'll see if i'm foolish or not.''  mr. wheeldon said he wanted to give dancers a greater voice, which is sometimes difficult in large companies like city ballet. referring to leaders of large companies in general, he said that casting decisions were not ''always handled in a perfectly sensitive way.''  ''my mission is to create an environment that is collaborative in all respects,'' he said.  in an earlier recent interview he said he could make a ''change for the better in the ballet world'' by starting a company from scratch.  ''i want to be in complete control of my personal artistic vision and goals,'' he said, ''and am not really interested in inheriting a legacy, but rather taking the opportunity to forge my own.'' starting fresh also meant bypassing the ''big politics'' and bureaucracy of a large company, he said.  the idea began taking shape last summer when the san francisco ballet presented one of his pieces at the lincoln center festival. the choreographer william forsythe had a work on the same program, and the two spoke at length.  ''he basically told me that i needed to take a step forward on my own and do something different, and coming from him -- he is a man who has continued to invent himself -- it was immediately resonant,'' mr. wheeldon said.  mr. wheeldon received a boost from an old friend at city ballet, damian woetzel, who had recently become artistic director of the vail festival and agreed to give him a springboard there.  ''we're going to work together to further the ideas that we've been kicking around all these years,'' mr. woetzel said. ''it's a chance to make a real solid contribution.''  while mainly making dances for city ballet -- itself long a vehicle for george balanchine's work -- the british-born mr. wheeldon has been sought out by companies around the world, including the san francisco ballet, the royal ballet, the bolshoi ballet and the philadelphia ballet.  news of his plans have been percolating through the dance world but were not widely known.  ''what a good idea,'' said george steel, the executive director of the miller theater at columbia university, which began expanding its dance offerings after an evening of wheeldon choreography in the fall of 2005. ''more dancing is wonderful,'' mr. steel said. ''it's a huge opportunity for him to have a company he can run.''  dance  correction:  january 9, 2007, tuesday  an article in the arts on thursday about the formation of a new dance company by the choreographer christopher wheeldon misstated the name of one of the companies that asked him in the past to choreograph for it. it is the pennsylvania ballet (based in philadelphia), not the philadelphia ballet.  