administrator is dismissed from nuclear security post   the energy secretary fired the head of the department's nuclear weapons program on thursday, citing a series of security failures at national laboratories, including the discovery of a computer device containing thousands of classified documents in the home of a former worker during a drug raid by the police.  the official who was dismissed, linton f. brooks, had been administrator of the national nuclear security agency since may 2003. the agency was established in 2000 because of chronic security problems in the weapons program.  the problems continued during mr. brooks's service. on wednesday, the latest in a string of reports by the energy department's inspector general criticizing the agency, dated nov. 27, 2006, was released.  describing the gaps revealed by the drug raid, in new mexico, the new report on the los alamos laboratory, a center for nuclear weapons research, concluded, ''in a number of key areas, security policy was nonexistent, applied inconsistently, or not followed.''  energy secretary samuel bodman said in a statement on thursday that lax security ''can have serious implications for the security of the united states.'' under mr. brooks, the agency ''has done its best to address these concerns,'' mr. bodman said. but he added, ''i do not believe that progress in correcting these issues has been adequate.''  mr. brooks said in a letter to employees that he would leave ''shortly.'' he recounted how the agency was formed to improve security, and acknowledged: ''we have not yet done so in over five years. for much of that time i was in charge of the n.n.s.a.''  on capitol hill and at the energy department, officials said that the department was concerned about oversight hearings planned by the new democratic leadership of the house energy and commerce committee.  representative edward j. markey, democrat of massachusetts, said in a statement on thursday evening, ''while it may be appropriate to begin to address the incessant string of security, safety and management lapses at department of energy nuclear weapons facilities with the removal of high-level managers, i am afraid that it will take more than a new boss to fix the problems, which are far more systemic and pervasive in nature.''  mr. markey, long a critic of nuclear programs, promised a vigorous inquiry.  among the issues to be investigated was how a computer hacker stole social security numbers, birth dates and other sensitive information on 1,500 people at the nuclear weapons agency and why neither those people nor top officials were notified of the problem for nine months.  at the project on government oversight, a nonprofit group based in washington that has issued a series of reports on nuclear security and that first revealed the drug raid, danielle brian, the executive director, said, ''we applaud secretary bodman's decision to force accountability at n.n.s.a., especially since it has been failing in its mission for years.''  but a former subordinate, gerald e. marsh, a physicist who recently retired from the energy department's argonne national laboratory, said he was appalled at the dismissal. speaking of the weapons complex, mr. marsh said, ''i thought he was trying to do what he could to keep a declining operation functioning as well as he could.''  mr. brooks was previously deputy administrator for nonproliferation. he was the united states' chief negotiator for the strategic arms reduction treaty with the soviet union, a role in which he had the rank of ambassador. he is a retired navy officer.  