nets save about $5 million by trading mcinnis to bobcats   the nets traded the disgruntled point guard jeff mcinnis to the charlotte bobcats yesterday for the swingman bernard robinson.  the nets wanted to make the trade to unload mcinnis's $3.6 million contract so they could move under the n.b.a.'s luxury-tax threshold. teams must pay a dollar-for-dollar tax on any part of their payroll that exceeds $65.42 million. those below the luxury tax level receive a rebate at the end of the season.  the trade is expected to save the nets about $5 million. robinson, 26, is making $1 million this season, but his salary did not have to match mcinnis's because the bobcats are below the salary cap. the nets also sent an undisclosed amount of money to the bobcats.  the nets signed mcinnis, 32, as a free agent before last season, but the relationship between player and team soon soured. mcinnis became upset over his playing time early last season, and the situation worsened last january, when mcinnis injured his knee and the nets said they were unhappy with his work ethic during rehabilitation. ''he was not in top-flight condition when he was cleared to do basketball things,'' rod thorn, the nets' president, said in an interview in october.  mcinnis missed the final 48 games of last season, and the nets asked him to stay away from the team for this entire season.  mcinnis and his agent, steve kauffman, criticized the nets at the start of this season, saying that the team's treatment and comments had diminished interest in mcinnis around the league.  the bobcats will be the seventh n.b.a. team for mcinnis. he has had problems elsewhere, most notably in cleveland, where he expressed his displeasure after losing his starting job to eric snow.  mcinnis is a native of charlotte, n.c., and he attended the university of north carolina. ''he's thrilled,'' kauffman said. ''he couldn't be happier. the main thing he's happy about is just to go out and play basketball again. it's especially good that it's charlotte in this case.''  the bobcats could be a good fit for mcinnis because he is close with bernie bickerstaff, the team's head coach and general manager. while working with the front office in denver, bickerstaff drafted mcinnis in 1996. he also coached mcinnis in washington during the 1998-99 season.  ''so i know the total jeff mcinnis,'' bickerstaff said by telephone yesterday.  charlotte became interested in mcinnis after its point guard, brevin knight, tore an abdominal muscle, an injury that is expected to keep him out for about a month. the nets were originally interested in forward melvin ely, but the teams could not agree on a deal.  robinson, a third-year player, is expected to report to the nets today.  pro basketball  