quiz answers   questions are on page 30.  russell a. stone  1. c. chaim weizmann was israel's first president. the president is head of state, and the prime minister is political leader. david ben-gurion was the first prime minister; golda meir (pictured below) was the first, and only, woman; menachem begin, elected  almost 30 years after independence, was the first prime minister not from the labor party.  2. c. the religious holidays of sukkot, shavuot and passover are mentioned in the book of exodus, and were marked by pilgrimages to the temple. hanukkah celebrates the rededication of the temple of jerusalem after the victory of the maccabees over the syrian greeks. it is mentioned in first and second maccabees, ancient books that are not part of the hebrew bible.  3. b. hebrew and arabic are the official languages of modern israel. the english that appears on postage fulfills an international regulation that a country's name be rendered in the latin alphabet. english on currency is a holdover from the days of the british mandate, which controlled palestine before israel's independence.  4. a. principal holy sites include the church of the holy sepulcher and via dolorosa (christianity); dome of the rock and al aksa mosque (islam); temple mount and the western wall, or wailing wall (judaism). so far as is known, the buddha did not visit jerusalem.  5. d. jerusalem's status is still in dispute. from 1949 until 1967, the city was divided. jordan controlled the old city and east jerusalem. israel controlled west jerusalem. since the 1967 war, all of the city has been controlled by israel, and the municipal boundaries have been expanded. the ultimate status of jerusalem has not been decided to the satisfaction of either israel or the palestine authority.  elliott colla  1. c. ali baba and aladdin were likely french inventions of the 18th century, introduced in antoine galland's popular translation ''les milles et une nuits.'' scheherazade, the vizier's daughter who must tell stories each night to keep her head, appears in the earliest accounts we have of ''nights,'' from 10th-century baghdad.  2. c. amid sectarian strife, famine and underdevelopment in the second half of the 19th century, large numbers of syrians and lebanese began to migrate to brazil, uruguay and argentina. thousands settled (the arab-brazilian community numbers more than a million today), but many returned after making their fortunes. this pattern helped fuse mainstays of latin american culture -- soccer, the bossa nova, maté -- into the culture of the levant.  3. d. albumen, silk and olive come from the latin; the rest are from arabic. the words in the first grouping derive from science: al-kuhl (powder) and al-kali (calcined ashes). gauze and muslin are named for places associated with fabric manufacturing (gaza and mosul). sherbet (shurbat) and artichoke (kharshuf) were foods imported into europe through the middle east. magazine (makhzan), tariff (ta'rif) and average ('awar, denoting damaged goods) originated in the thriving mercantile world of medieval islam.  4. a. as a soviet republic, kazakhstan granted women the right to vote in 1924. turkey did so in 1930, france in 1944 and iran in 1963. women still don't have the right to vote in saudi arabia.  5. a. it was not until the mid-19th century that the demographics began to shift to a sunni muslim majority. decades of war against russia in the caucasus, the great powers in the mediterranean, and secessionists from the balkans, greece, the levant and egypt succeeded in breaking off christian territories while concentrating the muslim character of the remaining territories.  6. d. the city had been home to a large jewish community since its founding. like many jewish communities in the arab world, baghdad's began to emigrate in the wake of the violence that attended the founding of israel in 1948.  colonizing libya  1. c.  2. b.  3. d.  4. a.  5. e.  sources on the italian domination of libya include ''forgotten voices: power and agency in colonial and postcolonial libya,'' by ali abdullatif ahmida, and ''italian colonialism,'' by ruth ben-ghiat and mia fuller.  samuel heilman  1. false. ultra-orthodox jews, known as haredim, are in principle neither, though some have recently supported nationalist parties in government coalitions. haredim believe that the jews' exile is god's punishment for sin, and only god, not man, can end this exile.  2. true. religious zionists saw the 1967 war as a sign that god wanted jews to settle their ancient homeland. when they did not, god brought the 1973 war to show that what could be given could be taken away. islamists, on the other hand, saw the defeats as god's punishment for muslim trust in the false gods of nationalism, socialism, pan-arabism and the west. a return to islam, in faith and practice, was essential to returning lost lands to the domain of islam.  3. true. orthodox jewish women cover their hair once they are married. all muslim women are expected to. both are expected to cover their bodies, legs and arms.  john voll  1. c. the great pyramid was built as the tomb for cheops, the old kingdom pharaoh of egypt, in the third millennium b.c.e.  2. b. iran is ethnically diverse. persians make up the largest percentage of the population (responsible estimates range from 35 to 51 percent). and persians are not arab, nor is their language arabic. it's persian. arabs are, in fact, only about 3 percent of iran's population. people tend to confuse religious and ethnic identity. only about 15 percent of the world's muslims are arab.  3. d. benazir bhutto led pakistan; tansu ciller, turkey; begum khaleda zia and sheik hasina wajed, bangladesh.  4. d. syria became independent as a republic at the end of world war ii. but egypt was a monarchy when it became officially independent in 1922 (overthrow: 1952). as part of the world war i settlement, britain created iraq as a monarchy (overthrow: 1958). the united nations created libya as a monarchy in 1951 (overthrow: 1969).  