times co. agrees to sell tv stations to equity firm   the new york times company has agreed to sell its nine local television stations to oak hill capital partners, a private equity firm, for $575 million.  in september, the times company announced that it would sell its broadcast media group as it refocused its strategy on its newspaper and digital businesses. the deal, expected to close in the first half of this year, comes as the times company and other newspaper companies struggle to maintain advertising revenue and circulation.  ''our focus now should be on the development of our newspapers and our rapidly growing digital businesses and the increasing synergies between them,'' janet l. robinson, president and chief executive of the times company, said yesterday in a statement.  oak hill capital partners, which was founded in the 1980s by robert m. bass and others, does not own other media assets. it is one of several private equity firms that have expressed interest in media properties lately.  advertising revenue and circulation growth have suffered at the times company recently, as they have with many other newspaper companies, as consumers spend more time on the internet. the company owns the new york times, the boston globe and the international herald tribune as well as 15 local newspapers, 35 web sites and 2 new york city radio stations.  total ad revenue for the times company has been down more than 3 percent every month since july compared with the same month in the previous year, reversing gains in the earlier months of 2006. as of november, ad sales were down 0.8 percent for the first 11 months of the year compared with the period in 2005.  the times company reported in early december that its companywide ad sales were down 3.8 percent in november from november 2005.  times company stock closed at $23.34 yesterday, down about 14 percent from a year ago.  in late december, standard & poor's lowered its rating for the times company's long-term corporate debt from a- to bbb+.  the times company increased the prices that subscribers to the new york times pay by 4 percent in the fourth quarter of 2006 and increased the price of its sunday papers in the northeast. the price increases are expected to produce about $12 million in additional revenue a year.  the broadcast group has been a profitable part of the times company. the nine tv stations generated $139 million in revenue in 2005, about 4 percent of total revenue, and, according to a forecast issued in september, are expected to account for about $150 million in 2006, helped by political ad spending.  the times company acquired the nine stations, which have 900 employees, over the last 35 years, beginning with a station in memphis in 1971. the company most recently acquired a station in oklahoma city in 2005. four of the stations are affiliated with cbs, two with nbc, two with abc and one with my network tv, which is owned by the news corporation.  the times company is also selling one of its radio stations, wqew, to abc, a unit of the walt disney company, for $40 million. that deal is expected to close in the first quarter of this year.  