cowher resigns; stops short of retiring   in 15 years as the coach of the pittsburgh steelers, bill cowher compiled a brilliant record: 161-99-1, 10 playoff seasons, 6 american football conference championship games, 2 super bowl appearances and, a year ago, a super bowl championship. his reign as the n.f.l. coach with the longest tenure ended yesterday, when he resigned, not unexpectedly, saying he wanted to spend more time with his family.  cowher, 49, said he was not tired of coaching, and he did not say he was retiring. during a news conference in pittsburgh, someone used the word retirement, and cowher said, ''that makes you feel old.''  ''i'm not burned out,'' he said. ''but there comes a time in your life -- i'm healthy and happy, and i've been fortunate -- when you've got to prioritize things. my family has made a lot of sacrifices for me, and i'm looking forward to being there for them. it's the right time.''  he added: ''i'm looking forward to it, spending time with the family. working in a world that is so regimented and scheduled, the ability to sit back at my age and spend time with family and be a big part of their lives again really excites me. right now, all i see myself doing is spending time with my family and working on a golf game that needs a lot of work.''  cowher and his wife, kaye, were athletes at north carolina state in raleigh. last summer, they bought a home there, and kaye and their youngest daughter, lindsay, moved there. their older daughters, meagan and lauren, attend princeton.  cowher, with his fierce look, jutting jaw and mustache, had one of the best-known faces in the n.f.l. he played linebacker from 1979 through 1984 for the philadelphia eagles and the cleveland browns. in 1985, marty schottenheimer, who was the browns' coach, hired him as the special teams coach.  cowher, who was born in pittsburgh, became the steelers' coach jan. 21, 1992, at age 34. he replaced chuck noll, who retired after 23 seasons as the steelers' coach.  cowher's first team posted an 11-5 record, and he was voted coach of the year. his first six teams reached the playoffs, matching the record of the hall of fame coach paul brown.  in 2004, the steelers drafted ben roethlisberger, the first time in 25 years they had chosen a quarterback in the first round. roethlisberger was expected to sit and learn for a year or two, but when the starter, tommy maddox, was injured, roethlisberger stepped in and won his first 13 starts, a record for a rookie.  last season, the steelers were mired at 7-5 before winning eight consecutive games -- four to end the regular season and four in the playoffs. the streak culminated with a 21-10 victory against the seattle seahawks in super bowl xl. the victory gave pittsburgh its fifth championship, its first since super bowl xiv.  this season, the steelers started 2-6, the worst eight-game mark in 20 years for a super bowl champion. roethlisberger was recovering from a broken jaw and nose sustained in a motorcycle accident in june and an appendectomy in september. pittsburgh finished 8-8 and missed the playoffs.  cowher had one year left on his contract and, according to the associated press, was earning more than $4 million a year. several other n.f.l. coaches make at least that much; mike holmgren of the seattle seahawks is the league's highest-paid coach, making about $8 million.  the leading candidates to replace cowher are two steelers assistants: ken whisenhunt, the offensive coordinator, and russ grimm, the assistant head coach and offensive line coach. each has been on the steelers' staff since 2001. they were teammates on the washington redskins; whisenhunt was a tight end and grimm was a guard.  the steelers are expected to interview others. dan rooney, the club owner, led the move to require teams to consider minority coaches for head-coaching vacancies.  rooney, a member of the steelers' founding family, said, ''history will look back on bill cowher as one of the greatest coaches of all time.''  pro football  