dismantling the beat to get to the heart of it   all good musicians have a physical relationship to their instruments, but a few make it really apparent. they tend to be big people with big instruments. charles mingus was this way, as are the brazilian percussionist carlinhos brown and the trombonist wycliffe gordon. and so is the drummer tyshawn sorey, who isn't yet so well known outside inner-circle jazz audiences, who may have heard him play in bands with dave douglas or vijay iyer or steve coleman.  during his set at bowery poetry club on tuesday night with his one of his own bands, oblique, mr. sorey picked up two drumsticks and threw them hard against the side wall of the club, without grimacing or changing his expression. this happened not at an ending or a climax, but somewhere in the middle of everything.  he did many other things too. he did something like a photographic negative of drumming, by putting his fingertips on the drum, weighing down on them and then rhythmically pulling his fingers off. he picked up his snare drum, overturned it and blew and sucked at the metal snares. then he placed the snare drum on top of his floor tom and maneuvered the top half in circles, scraping metal on metal, maneuvering and listening. eventually he undid the high-hat cymbal, manhandling and playing its parts and hardware.  from a distance this isn't so unusual. drummers like andrew cyrille and milford graves and han bennink have been doing these kinds of things for 30 years or more. some of them have become devices, or techniques. and a technique is an outside thing; you can buy it off the rack.  but there was something proprietary about the way mr. sorey was going about his business -- enveloping his equipment, almost inhaling that snare drum when he put it to his mouth -- that made it all seem like an inner imperative. one wants to say that if mr. sorey weren't otherwise such a technically competent and powerfully rhythmic drummer, fluent in broken funk rhythms and swing feeling, these little episodes of wild stagecraft wouldn't have been of much interest. but that isn't true because with him it's all connected, organized into one big style.  the show was a double bill. oblique, a project with revolving personnel, played free-improvisation pieces, with terry mcmanus on guitar, banjo and autoharp; chris tordini on bass; and pete robbins on alto saxophone. mr. sorey controlled the shape of each piece by speeding up and slowing down, or developing patterns that started crisp and spare and grew to be dense and loud. in other hands this sort of thing could be dry: the other musicians busied themselves with single notes or textures rather than developing melodic shapes. but this performance was hot with its own life force.  in the second half mr. robbins, the saxophonist, played with his own band, centric; it included mr. sorey on drums, as well as eliot cardinaux on keyboard, jesse neuman on trumpet and aryeh kobrinski on bass. they played tightly written music, and it was a group much more rooted in a stylistic jazz history. it had the agitated hustle of tim berne's music, with some of wayne shorter's harmonic feeling in the writing, and some late-60s miles davis in the overall group sound, rhythmically elastic and dirtied up with distortion and wah-wah pedals.  mr. robbins played hard and fluidly, landing heavily on unexpected notes to give his solos funk and shape. but he wasn't playing virtuoso; it was a band of equal shares, and they built the abrupt, shuddering, wriggling music together.  tyshawn sorey and oblique will perform on tuesday and jan. 24 at the stone, avenue c and second street, east village, thestonenyc.com. pete robbins and centric will play friday at cornelia street café, 29 cornelia street, west village, (212) 989-9319, corneliastreetcafe.com.  music review  