grand-scale lawn art stirs a debate in connecticut   talk about making waves.  tempers are flaring in this town's historic southport district over a 40-ton, wavelike sculpture made of concrete, steel and lead that for the last few years has been resting just behind a row of shrubs on the front lawn of a waterfront estate.  the town's historic district commission insists that the 80-foot-long, 4-foot-high recumbent object meets the legal test for a structure and requires a certificate of appropriateness.  but the owners of the sculpture, andrew and christine hall, disagree, and both they, and their huge artwork by the internationally renowned artist anselm kiefer, have stood their ground.  in 2005, a superior court judge in stamford sided with the town but delayed enforcing the ruling so that it could be appealed. now, the connecticut supreme court has swooped in and indicated that it wants to hear the case next month -- before the state's appellate division had the chance to act.  the artwork causing the stir is titled, ''etroits sont les vaisseaux,'' or ''narrow are the vessels.'' hardly visible from the street, it is far less conspicuous than some of the other contemporary artworks scattered across the 3.5-acre greek revival homestead, built in the 1840s by oliver h. perry, a former speaker of connecticut's house of representatives.  one work, a blue-and-orange totemish kind of pole, sits on the front steps of the home in sharp contrast with the imposing all-white facade. another work, painted to look like a volkswagen beetle, winks at visitors from the driveway. and a neon-lighted sculpture that the neighbors have taken to calling ''the neon cafe'' shines from inside the house on nights when the couple is home.  the halls declined through their lawyer at robinson & cole, edward v. o'hanlan, to comment. and while the local commission has not taken kindly to the 40-ton wave, neighbors interviewed this week generally supported the couple and chastised the town for wasting legal fees on something that they feel is no bother.  ''of all the things in the world to complain about, art should not be one of them,'' said barbara geddis, a local architect.  neighbors also said that had it not been for the legal challenge mr. hall, a veteran commodities trader and top executive at phibro, which is part of citigroup, would have sent the artwork to a museum and rotated another in its place.  ''we're dealing with people who are not used to being told 'no,' '' said richard saxl, the town attorney.  the fight has not yet become an all-out battle over the first amendment, since deliberations have not dwelt on the artwork's content or message so much as its size and manner of installation.  if the halls lose in state supreme court, they will have 30 days to remove the sculpture or apply for a certificate of appropriateness under the injunction signed by judge taggart d. adams. if then denied a certificate, lawyers said, the halls would be able to go back to court and argue that their constitutional right to express themselves is in peril.  the halls appeared last year in art news's summer compilation of the year's 200 most aggressive buyers of art. they were also cited in a recent new yorker magazine article after they bought an entire collection of contemporary german art -- and tried to buy the 13th-century castle that housed it so they could continue to display them.  as for the fairfield issue, ''it's ridiculous,'' said harry philbrick, director of the aldrich contemporary art museum in ridgefield, conn. ''andy and christine are very serious and first-rate collectors of contemporary art. i strongly believe they have every right to have that sculpture in their front garden.''  mr. philbrick's museum also sits in a historic district. but he received no interference from the town of ridgefield when he displayed a much larger installation by kiefer, a german-born artist living in france, which came in its own corrugated steel pavilion.  the halls, avid collectors of contemporary art, purchased the oliver perry home in 1991 for $3 million, and the kiefer wave about four years ago through a company they control.  the couple had initially sought a certificate of appropriateness but withdrew the application after consulting a lawyer and went ahead and installed the wave in august 2003. they needed five flat-bed trucks to transport it and a crane to reassemble it, at a cost exceeding $33,000. they also paid for the shrubs that shield the sculpture from the street.  ''it's inoffensive,'' mr. hall said in a deposition.  nonetheless, the town's historic district sued in october 2003, and judge adams visited the property in mid-2005 to inspect the artwork personally.  in siding with the town, judge adams said state statute defined a structure as ''any combination of materials, other than a building, which is affixed to the land and shall include, but not be limited to, signs, fences and walls.''  while the halls argued that the sculpture was not attached to the ground and no more subject to the commission's jurisdiction than a jungle gym, the judge said it was ''most similar in nature and form to the stone walls created by generations of farmers in new england,'' which rest on the ground through their own weight and are subject to commission rule.  don kukuc, a southport native who was sitting in his car near the halls' estate on thursday, reminisced about a simpler time -- long before multimillionaires arrived in connecticut -- when the area was covered with onion fields and was famous for producing a variety known as the southport globe.  ''to each his own,'' mr. kukuc said of the various artworks on the halls' lawn. ''if you own the property, you should be able to do what you want within reason.''  then, after climbing out of his car to take a closer look at the kiefer, he later amended his comments. ''i am the first to agree that art is in the eyes of its creator and the viewer,'' he wrote an e-mail message, ''but honestly, that thing looks like a bad chunk of interstate 95.''  