man in the news -- john michael mcconnell; a member of the club   in choosing mike mcconnell to be director of national intelligence, president bush is turning again to a steady intelligence professional who first achieved prominence during his father's administration.  like gen. michael v. hayden, the central intelligence agency director, mr. mcconnell, 63, a retired vice admiral, has served as director of the national security agency, the eavesdropping giant. like robert m. gates, the new defense secretary and former c.i.a. director, mr. mcconnell first operated in the highest circles of government in the tumultuous time that included the persian gulf war of 1991 and the fall of the soviet union.  ''it's a gathering of the clan,'' said retired adm. bobby r. inman, himself a former director of the national security agency and an early promoter of mr. mcconnell's intelligence career. ''you're getting strong professionals in all these top jobs. they'll set out to solve problems, and they won't be motivated by turf or politics.''  william p. crowell, who worked as mr. mcconnell's deputy at the n.s.a., called him a ''consummate professional'' who managed the agency with great care at a difficult time of severe post-cold-war budget cuts. ronald d. lee, who worked as the security agency's general counsel under mr. mcconnell, called him ''an exceptionally gifted leader who was completely devoted to the rule of law and the constitution.''  but w. patrick lang, a former defense intelligence agency official who has been highly critical of the bush administration, took a more skeptical view. he called mr. mcconnell, who made his career in naval intelligence, ''competent but compliant'' and expressed concern that he might not stand up to policy makers, particularly on highly charged issues like iran's nuclear program.  for the last 10 years, mr. mcconnell, a courtly, soft-spoken south carolina native, has been out of government, working for booz allen hamilton, the consulting company. but much of his work has been for government agencies on intelligence and information security, and he has often written and spoken about the organization and future of spying.  colleagues say he was first approached several months ago about the possibility of replacing general hayden as deputy to john d. negroponte, the director of national intelligence. he turned down that job and was eventually invited to succeed mr. negroponte in the top job.  mr. mcconnell first came to public attention as the top intelligence officer to gen. colin l. powell, then chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, during the 1991 war. he conducted daily briefings not only for general powell but for the defense secretary, dick cheney, now the vice president. he had contact with mr. gates, mr. hayden and condoleezza rice, now secretary of state, all of whom worked on the national security council in the administration of mr. bush's father.  ''he was measured, methodical and detailed,'' bill smullen, then an aide to general powell, said of mr. mcconnell's war briefings. ''secretary cheney saw mike mcconnell in action on a daily basis.''  mr. mcconnell became a familiar figure on television during the gulf war, explaining troop movements and airstrikes. but on becoming director of the security agency in 1992 he retreated behind its traditional curtain of secrecy.  matthew m. aid, a historian of the agency, said that during his four-year tenure, the agency's monitoring did not keep up with the revolutionary technological changes in communications, including the internet, cellphones and fiber-optic cable. but he said mr. mcconnell had been handicapped by a steadily declining budget and work force.  ''he begged and borrowed and took money from research and development to pay for operations,'' achieving considerable success in tracking the warring parties during the war in bosnia, mr. aid said.  john michael mcconnell was born on july 26, 1943, in greenville, s.c., where his father worked in the shipping business and his mother in the garment industry. he graduated from furman university and was commissioned as a line officer of the navy in 1967. he served a tour in vietnam and then became an intelligence officer.  he is married to terry mcconnell, a homemaker, and has two children and two stepchildren, all grown.  former colleagues invariably remark on his quiet and courteous manner and say he rarely shows a temper. on thursday some wondered whether that was the right temperament for a job created to force 16 competing and sometimes feuding agencies to cooperate and share information.  but mark m. lowenthal, who served as staff director for the house intelligence committee when mr. mcconnell ran the national security agency, said he was not concerned about that.  ''his quiet manner and his lovely south carolina accent belie it, but i have no doubt he can be forceful when necessary,'' mr. lowenthal said. he noted that mr. mcconnell had thrived at booz allen. ''you don't do that by being shy and retiring,'' he said.  