defending the printed page as the new china stirred   china's growing prosperity and the soaring prices for contemporary chinese art make it easy to forget that the country first opened its doors to modernization in the late 1970s, when mao's successor deng xiaoping introduced capitalist-oriented market reforms. deng also removed restrictions on the flow of information in china, which allowed foreign ideas to flourish. most of this information arrived not via the internet, of course, but in the form of books.  ''shu: reinventing books in chinese contemporary art,'' now at the china institute, glances back at this period of expansion and its contraction, when the communist party clamped down on free expression after the 1989 tiananmen square protests. the exhibition, divided into two parts (the first ran this fall), doesn't break new art historical ground, but it does provide a savvy snapshot of the early-1990s chinese contemporary-art scene.  ''shu,'' meaning book in chinese, was organized by wu hung, an art history professor at the university of chicago. dr. wu specializes in tang dynasty painting, but his true passion lies with contemporary chinese art. unsurprisingly, ''shu'' focuses on how current chinese artists bridge the gap between china's literati past and its increasingly capitalist present.  in ''reimagining tradition,'' the first installment of ''shu,'' in the fall, artists put new spins on china's centuries-old artistic traditions. gu wenda, for example, displayed modernized versions of scholar's accouterments, including ink made from mr. gu's signature material: real chinese human hair. xu bing exhibited the wood blocks he used to print ''book from the sky,'' a series of 50-foot-long scrolls first shown in 1988 in beijing. the calligraphy looks authentic, but can't be read. mr. xu made up every single one of its 4,000 characters.  while mr. xu's text literally says nothing, it does intimate how hard it was to be an artist in a country that was out of the habit of valuing intellectuals. now, the second part of ''shu,'' ''negotiating history and memory,'' portrays the anxiety of artists under pressure during the early years of china's emergence.  life in china during the cultural revolution (1966-76), with its public denunciations, forced labor and death by mob violence, was traumatic. but for many chinese, including the artist gu xiong, it was also a time when china was sure of its cultural self.  at 16, mr. gu was sent to the countryside for re-education. when he wasn't working in tobacco fields, he created an illustrated diary, on exhibit here under the title ''cultural revolution sketchbooks'' (1972-76). his drawings, all stylistically similar to cultural revolution propaganda posters, show no sign of a disgruntled teenager. instead, they quietly celebrate revolutionary life among comrades.  chinese cultural life changed dramatically in the 1980s, when literature other than mao's ''little red book'' surfaced. qiu zhijie's photographic ''library,'' which papers the walls of the china institute's main staircase, makes the extent of this information explosion evident. among the thousands of titles are chinese classics, books on natural sciences and treatises by plato, disraeli and harold bloom, as well as art books on indian stupa, japanese manga and barbara kruger.  such a trove might have been considered a treasure before the tiananmen square protests; afterward, such resources became sources of angst. the figure that appears throughout zhang xiaogang's 1991 series ''private notes,'' for example, looks as if he is losing his mind -- and his head, torso and myriad other body parts -- as he struggles to write letters and decode illegible manuscripts. without easy access to words, the images imply, there can be no such thing as free expression.  in the early 1990s the average chinese citizen wouldn't have had time to bother with such intellectual problems, as xiaoze xie's photorealist painting depicting worm-eaten books left to rot on library shelves suggests.  yue minjun's ''garbage dump'' (2005-6) highlights how a lack of appreciation for things scholarly caused tension between the educated and the uneducated. here books are the subject of a bizarre, cavemanlike ritual, as six semi-naked men squat together in a circle on top of piles of books, grinning like village idiots.  ''garbage dump'' implies that narrow minds, not books, make people stupid. cai guo qiang's contribution, an ink-painted miniature screen that is actually a proposal for a museum project, suggests that fear also creates thought imprisonment, and not only in china.  in 1995, when the naoshima museum in japan commissioned mr. cai to create a project, he proposed ''wako: japanese pirates in the middle ages.'' his idea involved taking a boat from china to japan via taiwan and korea. when the boat stopped, it would take on board a stone stele carved with that region's dictionary definition of wako. these pirates historically disrupted trade along the ancient silk routes; everyone who came into contact with them (except the japanese, of course) hated them. afraid that the project might incite antagonism toward japan, the museum canceled the show.  today it is unlikely that mr. cai's project would be censored. china has metamorphosed from an isolated, intellectual desert into fertile ground for cultural exchange. it is in this soil, not in the post-tiananmen world of the early 1990s, where the future of chinese contemporary art lies. china, after all, now more than ever, is a superpower.  ''shu'' continues through feb. 24 at the china institute, 125 east 65th street, manhattan; (212) 744-8181 or chinainstitute.org.  art review  