l.s.u. swarms quinn, and offense does the rest   jamarcus russell came into the sugar bowl as the other quarterback, a gifted one but not the one wearing the iconic gold helmet or the one trying to put a happy ending on a storybook career at notre dame, like brady quinn. but russell left the superdome on wednesday night as a louisiana state legend and may just leave college football altogether as the n.f.l's next no. 1 pick.  russell, a 6-foot-6, 260-pound junior, was alternately bruising and brilliant in leading the no. 4-ranked tigers to a 41-14 drubbing of the no. 11 fighting irish. he ran for one touchdown and threw for two others, one of them a 58-yard dart to brandon lafell that finally broke the spirit of notre dame in the closing seconds of the third quarter.  his statistics were formidable -- russell was 21 of 34 for 332 yards. but it was his poise in the pocket, his nimble feet and his rocket launcher of an arm that made him dwarf quinn, who for most the season had been regarded as the best quarterback in college.  ''my main thing was to go out and play a good game against brady quinn's defense,'' said russell, who was named the sugar bowl's most outstanding player. ''he wasn't the guy i was playing against.''  quinn, a senior, is indeed a fine quarterback and will most likely be a high first-round pick in the n.f.l. draft. as the week progressed here, however, russell's teammates could not squelch their irritation that the discussion revolved around quinn rather than russell.  ''jamarcus is a good team leader, great guy, has a great work ethic, strong arm and he's a great athlete,'' said glenn dorsey, the tigers' all-american defensive tackle. ''when i step on the field with him, i'm just glad he's on my side.''  there was little doubt that russell was the difference in handing the irish their ninth straight bowl defeat, much to the delight of the predominately l.s.u. crowd of 77,781. he showed that his remarkable regular season was no fluke: russell had the nation's third-best passing rating, and he completed 211 of 308 passes for 2,797 yards and 26 touchdowns, with 7 interceptions.  ''our quarterback was the finest quarterback in the country,'' said l.s.u. coach les miles.  quinn, on the other hand, struggled mightily wednesday. miles had been polite about the task his defense faced in containing quinn, but he expressed extreme confidence in his unit.  ''to be honest, i like our matchup there,'' miles said before the game. ''i like our defense.''  the tigers (11-2) bull-rushed and blitzed quinn, sacking him once and forcing him to hurry his passes and throw two interceptions. his two touchdown passes were the 94th and 95th of his career at notre dame (10-3), but he was just 15 of 35 for 148 yards. for much of the first half, notre dame's offensive line, which gave up 30 sacks this season, looked overwhelmed by a swarming tigers defense that was led dorsey.  in the irish's last three losses, to southern california, michigan and ohio state in last year's fiesta bowl, they trailed at halftime by a combined score of 75-31. coach charlie weis had hoped his team would get off to a strong start, especially against an l.s.u. team that had outscored its 12 opponents this season by 122-20 in the first quarter.  instead, the tigers needed just two plays and 35 seconds to put the irish into a 7-0 hole after snuffing notre dame's fake punt attempt on its first possession. first, russell found early doucet for a 31-yard completion to notre dame's 3-yard line, then running back keiland williams rammed the ball in the end zone.  still, behind darius walker's 125 rushing yards, the irish managed to control the ball for 19 minutes 35 seconds to l.s.u.'s 10:29 and claw their way back to a 14-14 tie with 2:25 left in the first half after quinn drilled a 10-yard touchdown pass to jeff samardzija.  but russell needed just 1:10 to take the tigers 82 yards, sending a pass 58 yards to doucet to the notre dame 5. then, on a quarterback draw, russell ran into the end zone for a 21-14 l.s.u. lead.  ''they took it from us there in the third quarter,'' quinn said. ''we really didn't convert any third downs. some of that maybe came from the momentum they got at the end of the first half, but we just didn't play well enough in the second half.  ''i'm proud of my guys, especially these seniors and everything we been through. i think we laid the groundwork for these guys to do great things in the future.''  college football  