a blending of euripides, martial arts and noh   something must have happened to company east's well-reviewed ''medea'' on its way from the edinburgh festival fringe to new york, where it opened on thursday night for two weeks at la mama. directed, choreographed and designed by kenji kawarasaki, this staging of ''medea'' looked hastily put together and insubstantial, with a sudden last conceit suggesting some indecision about what it means to be.  the 75-minute production got off to an anomalous start with the stretching of a sleekly tapering leg into a perfect ballet developé and extension by yoko tomabechi's gauze-clad glauce. moments later the dancer slipped between handsomely colored panels, hanging from what looked like a laundry line, to enter into the dark stage space and narrative.  there were some striking visual images in this retelling of euripides, which stays pretty close to tradition until the end and incorporates japanese and english text as well as movement. jin nakayama's lighting designs make the most of a simple technical setup, and the uncredited score is as adroit a blend of styles as the choreography, which draws from noh theater, modern dance and martial arts. the costumes, chiefly brilliantly colored metallic robes, are handsome.  but the performers -- who also include hiroshi jin in the title role, and sho tohno as jason, yuji koide as nurse and chorus, and chinatsu shimoyama as chorus -- looked as if they'd be even better in a better vehicle. mr. kenji's ''medea'' is too much a thing of rolling, darting, wailing ghosts.  mr. jin has made a name for himself in japan as an interpreter of female roles and an adapter and director of theater and film works. in addition to founding company east, he formed a group called the j-boys, described in the sketchy program notes as an ''all-male, ultra-extreme show team.'' but his medea is relatively straightforward, a matter more of immersion in a character than self-conscious female impersonation.  mr. jin is most affecting in his rare moments of relative stillness, as when medea contemplates the murder of her two young sons. but there is only one possible response -- a heartfelt ''huh?'' -- to the startlingly sudden intrusion of modern gender-identity questioning in the final moments of ''medea.''  company east performs ''medea'' through jan. 14 at la mama e.t.c., 74a east fourth street, east village; (212) 475-7710 or lamama.org.  dance review  