in nod to realpolitik, offering carrots to both sides   sure, some of gov. eliot spitzer's calls in his first address to the legislature on wednesday -- for spending less money, ending gerrymandering and limiting campaign donations -- were met with the kind of icy reception he might have received if he had worn a red sox cap to yankee stadium.  but mr. spitzer, the new governor, also generously sprinkled his state of the state address with proposals that were clearly tailored to meet the needs and sensitivities of his politically divided audience, which will in large part determine his success or failure.  mr. spitzer, a democrat, took pains to call for some proposals that are favored by the democratic-led assembly and others sought by the republican-led state senate in the hopes that by offering something to everyone, he would be able to push his agenda through both houses.  ''all new yorkers ask is that when we address these problems, we reject the interest-group politics of division and fear,'' mr. spitzer said, ''and compromise enough to find consensus and listen enough to find solutions.''  mr. spitzer explicitly linked some proposals, like his call for more education spending, which democrats cheered, with his call for a $6 billion property tax cut over three years, which brought republican senators to their feet for an ovation. ''because of the different needs of our state, as we provide more resources to school districts, we must provide more property tax relief to overtaxed homeowners,'' he said.  his education proposals offered something to each house as well: mr. spitzer called for making prekindergarten available to every 4-year-old in the state, long one of the assembly's top priorities, by the end of his first term and for lifting the cap on charter schools, which the senate tried to do last year. but his call for a ''new, transparent school funding formula'' was met with uneasy murmurs from some republican senators, who jealously protect the current formula, which favors suburban districts.  democrats applauded mr. spitzer's calls to insure the 500,000 children who lack health insurance, enroll the 900,000 adults who are eligible for medicaid but not currently enrolled in it, and issue debt to pay for stem cell research. republicans applauded his calls to make workers' compensation more affordable for businesses and to overhaul the wicks law, which requires school districts and others to hire at least four contractors for big construction jobs, a rule that many school officials say drives up building costs.  of course, in albany, linking unrelated issues to one another is nothing new; many a legislative session has ended with negotiations on a raft of measures that get wrapped up in one huge deal, hatched behind closed doors, that is often referred to in the halls of the capitol as a big ugly. and the danger of all-or-nothing negotiations in albany is that nothing often winds up winning the day.  but the leaders of the legislature, assembly speaker sheldon silver and the senate majority leader, joseph l. bruno, seemed determined on wednesday to give the new governor a break, in the form of some kind words.  mr. silver, who in recent years had taken to lamenting what he called the ''wrong choices'' in gov. george e. pataki's addresses, found himself in the unusual position of praising a governor's speech -- effusively. where he might once have expressed skepticism about a state of the state address that promised to increase education spending and insure the uninsured without raising taxes, mr. silver was all praise on wednesday.  ''to the extent that all of the issues he outlined are resolvable by consensus, by taking all of the different views, and putting them together, there was very little i can disagree with,'' mr. silver said.  mr. silver even praised the way mr. spitzer had proposed some items that the assembly had blocked in the past. mr. silver said, for instance, that he was glad that the governor had called for reforming the wicks law instead of repealing it. he also said that he was pleased that the governor's proposal to add more charter schools included a pledge for more aid to the school districts that would lose money if their students chose charter schools.  and senate republicans were upbeat. mr. bruno said that there were enough measures laid out in the speech to please members of both houses -- even if each house might have to go along with some items it dislikes to get what it wants.  ''there are things to get things done that you have to kind of swallow hard on, but that's the business we're in,'' mr. bruno said. ''now, what gridlock has been created in the past is because people were not willing to come together, openly, in a creative and imaginative way and compromise.''  toughest, of course, will be the measures that touch lawmakers directly: the reform agenda. asked about mr. spitzer's call for the full public financing of campaigns, mr. bruno said that he would support it for statewide positions but not for state lawmakers. and asked about the governor's call to end gerrymandering, mr. silver said only that the assembly supported changing the current system, but did not say how.  mr. spitzer, who may have antagonized his somewhat subdued audience with his early references to albany's problems and his proposals for change, seemed aware of the difficulty. when his call for the legislature to analyze and report the fiscal impact of its budget amendments was met with stony silence, he teased the crowd a little.  ''you applaud for eliminating gerrymandering, but not for that?'' he asked.  changeover in albany: news analysis  