what's on tonight   8 p.m. (hbo) munich (2005). steven spielberg ventures beyond this story's historical impetus -- the 1972 olympics, at which 11 israeli hostages were murdered by members of a palestinian terrorist group known as black september -- to create a philosophical thriller about its aftermath, when israel purportedly waged a campaign of vengeance with five agents who criss-crossed europe to hunt suspects over months and then years. eric bana plays the film's moral center, a former mossad agent sent on a mission to eliminate those responsible for the murders. daniel craig (the newest james bond), ciaran hinds, hans zischler and mathieu kassovitz (above left, with mr. bana) play his team. tony kushner and eric roth wrote the screenplay, based on a book by george jonas.  8 p.m. (food network) emeril live -- if we are what we eat, then it pays to feed ourselves well. tonight, mr. lagasse teams up with the boxer laila ali and the tennis player martina navratilova to prepare an energizing meal.  9 p.m. (showtime) mo'nique: i coulda been your cellmate -- she's big, she's bold and, by the looks of this comedy special, she's brave. tonight, mo'nique (left) checks in for a two-day entertainment stint at the ohio reformatory for women, a correctional facility for female felons.  9 p.m. (hallmark) murder 101: college can be murder -- dick van dyke and his son barry head up the cast of this made-for-television mystery about a criminology professor looking into the murder of a colleague. turns out his friend wasn't very well liked. it also turns out he was having an affair.  9 p.m. (food network) 10 days to a new you -- john is a father of two boys who worries that he won't live long enough to watch them grow up. angel has been either dieting or binging for the last 25 years. and jackie, a breast cancer survivor, knows that carrying too much weight sets her up for a recurrence. in this special, ellie krieger takes the three individuals through a 10-day program meant to help them manage their health issues for the rest of their lives.  10 p.m. (food network) spa-tacular destinations -- forget the grilled chicken salads and the vegetable broth. these days, spa food is as exotic and luxurious as the pampering treatments offered for more obvious parts of the body. (sometimes it's even incorporated into the treatment.) in this hour-long special, katrina szish and brant stead go in search of spa experiences involving food, from the chocolate baths and fondue wraps (above) at the spa at the hershey hotel in hershey, pa., to the four-star cuisine at canyon ranch in lenox, mass.  11 p.m. (fox) mad tv -- the los angeles kings forwards scott thornton, sean avery and tom kostopoulos offer hockey tips -- from the ice.  kathryn shattuck  tonight's tv listings  