defensive strategies and fast food cravings   the media poured into town this week for the bowl championship series national title game between florida and ohio state. the first day of news conferences tuesday offered a nice snapshot of some of the storylines emerging this week.  here, in no particular order, are 10 that may fill the airwaves and newspapers around the country:  the defensive pow-wow  during the off-season, the ohio state defensive staff took a junket to gainesville to share ideas with its florida counterparts. the coaches shared ideology, terminology, watched film and talked philosophy. this is a common practice among college football programs that don't expect to play each other during the season. ooops.  the tent boy  the star ohio state receiver anthony gonzalez sleeps in a tent that simulates altitude and that has been a key, he believes, to his all-america caliber season. it's similar to the training method used by athletes like lance armstrong. gonzalez has brought the tent with him to arizona. he's even angling for colorado altitude training, the company that produces the tent, to hook him up with a room of adjusted altitude when he graduates. ''i've given them enough free advertising,'' he said with a smile.  the speed factor  anytime a fast sec team plays a traditionally plodding team from the big 10, there are a lot of stories about speed. the biggest difference the buckeyes will likely see this year is the speed of the gators' defense, especially the front seven.  the layoff  when the buckeyes take the field on monday, it will be 55 days since they defeated michigan. if they struggle early in the game, the talk will immediately turn to how the team suffered from the lay off. ''both of us have a huge layoff,'' gonzalez said. ''so i think it is a complete non-issue.''  the in-n-out factor  nothing brought more smiles to reporters' faces on the first full media day than troy smith's detailed description of just what makes the local delicacy, the in-n-out burger, so tasty. he offered this explanation: ''for the folks back in ohio, they need to understand first and foremost, it is a fresh burger. the lettuce and tomatoes are extremely fresh. and they toast the buns. that's huge. that's key. they toast the buns. they use a special kind of sauce, too. it is an extremely -- the sandwich is incredible after a long night.''  (personally, i find the fries are much better and fresher than conventional fast food fries.)  the underdog role reversal  there are several similarities between the 2002 ohio state team that upset miami in double-overtime in the national championship game and this 2007 florida team. like the '02 buckeyes, the gators are uninspiring on offense. and like ohio state coach jim tressel's national championship team four years ago, florida coach urban meyer's team is a heavy underdog going against a dominant, undefeated team.  we'll see if history repeats itself and florida can pull off a stunner monday night.  reggie nelson's psyche  meyer has maintained all season that his best player is reggie nelson, the star safety known for big hits, special teams brilliance and timely plays. nelson's mother passed away from cancer more than a week ago and meyer hasn't made him available to the media.  ''reggie is holding up good,'' said joe cohen, one of nelson's close friends. ''he loves the support, but that's kind of just personal. that's a little too personal. he kind of just wants to keep that to himself.''  leak vs. tebow  florida has treaded the delicate line all season of rotating quarterbacks tim tebow and chris leak. tebow is the backup and often comes off the bench in short-yardage situations. the tactic has helped florida compensate for the team's lack of a competent tailback. it's a credit to meyer that the system hasn't turned into a chemistry disaster.  troy smith's height  expect the well-gelled mel kiper clones to keep bringing up the fact that troy smith is only 5-foot-10, which makes his n.f.l. stock questionable despite a stellar senior season that included the heisman trophy. this will be a repetitive theme until april's draft. but the florida defensive coordinator charlie strong pointed out that smith doesn't get many balls tipped at the line of scrimmage.  the team that can't kick straight  one of florida's glaring weaknesses all season has been kicking field goals. the kicker chris hetland is 4-of-13 on the season, which is good for less than 31-percent. his long for the season is 33 yards. if the game is close, expect a lot of fox camera close-ups of hetland's face in high definition.  b.c.s. notebook  