a former leader returns, taking a different path   can it be that absence actually does make the heart grow fonder? or is it just that hearing lorin maazel's micromanipulations of the standard canon so regularly has made almost any guest conductor at the new york philharmonic sound refreshing?  or perhaps zubin mehta's conducting has gained some depth during his more recent travels. mr. mehta's tenure as the philharmonic's music director in the 1980s was, at least as i remember it, a time of charmless interpretation and indifferent music-making. and his return visits over the years have not significantly altered that impression.  yet when he led the orchestra in beethoven's violin concerto and stravinsky's ''sacre du printemps'' on thursday evening at avery fisher hall, mr. mehta drew the kind of incisive, rich-hued performance that many concertgoers despaired of hearing when he was conducting the orchestra week after week. ''le sacre,'' in particular, was a virtuosic performance, as notable for the suppleness of its quieter sections as for the brutal energy and brashness of its climactic dances.  judith leclair, the orchestra's principal bassoonist, played the opening solo with minute shifts of color and dynamics to create a sense of hazy mystery. and mr. mehta tended to let the stravinsky's gradually coalescing chaos of woodwind and brass writing build at a leisurely pace, so that sudden leaps into full-orchestra overdrive seemed all the more dramatic and shocking, familiarity notwithstanding.  there was plenty of purely visceral appeal, as there must be in ''le sacre.'' so much of that comes from the sheer power of the score itself that it can be easy to overlook the importance of precision within the most splendidly rambunctious passages. this illusion of cacophony must be shaped by a firm hand: in everything from rapid-fire trumpet phrases to the walloping full-orchestra chords that are the work's signature, ensemble unity is paramount, and mr. mehta and the players delivered that. the salient feature of mr. mehta's reading, though, was a clarity of texture that illuminated the inner workings of stravinsky's scoring.  pinchas zukerman was the soloist in the beethoven, to which he gave a warm if often generic performance. when he was at his best and most engaged, he brought the solo line to life with touches of rubato in his phrasing or a tightly focused vibrato applied to climactic passages. and he gave a lively account of the finale, with rich-toned, energetic support from mr. mehta and the orchestra.  between those moments, if the performance wasn't the beethoven of your dreams, it was never less than respectable.  zubin mehta will conduct the new york philharmonic in the same program tonight and on tuesday at avery fisher hall, lincoln center; (212) 721-6500.  music review  