the roads ... not taken   i am driving down a dirt road in the woods to a friend's house. he didn't say how many miles away his house was. he did say it was beautiful there, on the lake, so i suggested to e. that she come along, and she is sitting next to me, chatting. the car jerks and bucks on the rut-filled path. there aren't any houses in view. i start looking for mailboxes and don't see any. i can't see any driveways leading to concealed houses either. it would appear that the road is quite isolated.  i am fine for the first mile but slowly start to feel as if i were suffocating. the woods are dense, and all i can see are trees. occasionally a branch strikes the windshield. my breath is becoming short and shallow, and a dark cloud seems to be forming in front of my eyes. i keep looking for houses, and there aren't any. without noticing it, i slip into a dreamlike state, wherein the passage of time has slowed painfully, as if i'd been driving down the road for hours. my eyes are straining through a blurry film. i feel as if i were only partly in my own body. e. is still speaking cheerfully but sounds both irritating and distant, as if we were separated by an invisible screen through which her usually melodious voice sounds grating. i say a few words in response that come out pinched, curt and crabby.  i have been working on this ''agoraphobia'' problem. i started going for treatment about a year and a half ago, my third serious effort. i am 58, but tackling this problem again makes me feel 5. in a sense it is a trivial problem, merely an inconvenient personality trait. it can't be compared for a moment with suffering a life-threatening illness or countless other torments that people face. on the other hand, a scroll listing the individual phobias that influence my life might unroll all the way to china.  i don't like heights. i don't like being on the water. i am upset by walking across parking lots or open parks or fields where there are no buildings. i tend to avoid bridges, unless they are on a small scale. i respond poorly to stretches of vastness but do equally badly when i am closed in, as i am severely claustrophobic. when i go to a theater, i sit on the aisle. i am petrified of tunnels. i don't take subways. i avoid elevators as much as possible. i experience glassed-in spaces as toxic, and i find it very difficult to adjust to being in buildings in which the windows don't open. i don't like to go to enclosed malls. in short, i am afraid both of closed and of open spaces, and i am afraid, in a sense, of any form of isolation. when i am invited to a new house or apartment or to an event of any kind, my first reaction is to worry about its location.  i grew up in new york city, where i ultimately acquired a number of urban fears, and in some ways being in the country lets me escape them. i now live in vermont. i stay within the radius of five states and within a clearly practiced itinerary. i always travel the same roads, usually the service roads. i won't drive on highways unless there are frequent exits and visible towns along the way. recently i went south of new york for the first time in 15 years. i last flew in the summer of 1993.  occasionally i gear myself up for a new trip. but each excursion is an isolated accomplishment. i am almost frozen with anticipatory anxiety for weeks or months in advance. and behind every arrival at a new destination lies a series of test runs, many of which are failures. a recent trip to syracuse to hear its orchestra play one of my pieces required no less than six attempted trips in advance, as i repeatedly rejected routes as intolerable, returning to a point of reference i knew well and to which i developed a rather compulsive connection: a mcdonald's decorated in '50s-diner style.  all of this would be funny were it not sad. even i myself laugh thinking about it and forget the pain, the fact that behind each of these self-imposed restrictions lie experiences of intense anguish. i tend not to talk about it. we all have ''problems,'' after all. the women in my life have tried to put up with it, as have my wonderful children, but even my own brother and most of my friends don't know more than that i tend to avoid certain experiences.  what precisely is the matter?  the odometer says we have been driving for four and a half miles, but the numbers have no meaning. i am growing confused and resentful and agitated. the road back will be bumpy and slow, too, i think, and wasn't there a fork at some point? how will i remember the way? my legs are stiff and heavy, and i am trembling. i want to turn the car around. the road seems to grow darker. my muscles are coiled around one another, pulled taut. i am breaking, more and more confused, and i can't breathe. there's no sky overhead.  i turn the car around.  lives allen shawn, a composer and pianist, teaches at bennington college. this essay was adapted from his book ''wish i could be there: notes from a phobic life,'' to be published next month.  