chávez plans one big venezuela leftist party, led by him   president hugo chávez has begun forging a single socialist party among his varied supporters, one of his recent efforts to create momentum for far-reaching changes to venezuela's political system that analysts say will effectively concentrate greater political power in his hands.  mr. chávez formally announced the plan for the single party, called the united socialist party of venezuela, in a speech last month to supporters here. he reminded them of his 23-percentage-point margin of victory when he was re-elected last month to a six-year term.  ''those votes don't belong to any party.'' mr. chávez said. ''they belong to chávez and the people.''  since then the swiftness and boldness of mr. chávez's attempt to create such a large party tied so closely to his personal leadership have created concern, even among sympathetic political analysts, that the step would effectively turn venezuela into a one-party state.  in an essay published on aporrea, an influential pro-chávez blog, edgardo lander, a sociologist at the central university of venezuela, questioned the reasoning behind forming a single political party described as socialist when the definition of the ''21st-century socialism'' that mr. chávez aspires to build remained extremely vague.  ''isn't the cart being placed in front of the ox?'' mr. lander wrote. ''what future, from the point of view of pluralism and democracy, lies ahead for a political organization decreed in this fashion?''  analysts more critical of mr. chávez have drawn a parallel with fidel castro's successful effort to create a single ruling party in cuba in the early 1960s.  mr. chávez has tried to assuage concerns that his project would lead to authoritarianism by saying party leaders would largely be chosen by his rank-and-file supporters, an idea lambasted by critics here. ''his tireless finger won't stop singling out those who are going to be the bosses,'' said teodoro petkoff, the editor of the opposition-aligned newspaper tal cual.  some of mr. chávez's supporters say the creation of a single party would strengthen the government's hand in combating excessive bureaucracy and corruption stemming from the need to distribute political spoils to an array of different parties. others view the new party as a way to remain ahead of a fractious opposition.  the move has already revealed tensions within the coalition of more than 20 political parties that currently supports the president. critics of the plan say it could marginalize relatively small pro-chávez parties that support an open economy, existing government institutions and a pluralistic political system.  by contrast, much of the support comes from more hard-line members of mr. chávez's own party, the fifth republic movement, which was dissolved last month to make way for its larger successor.  some of those supporters want to strengthen parallel political institutions created by mr. chávez, like a system of health clinics and universities closely tied to the president and his socialist project for the nation.  for instance, he has announced a plan to build as many as 50 new universities, expected to be modeled on the three-year-old bolivarian university of venezuela, which provides socialist-inspired, tuition-free classes to more than 170,000 students.  ''we're witnessing a struggle between two ideological currents within the chavista movement,'' said steve ellner, a political scientist at university of the east in venezuela.  some of the strongest resistance comes from mr. chávez's allies on the far left. the communist party, in particular, stands to lose considerable stature if it folds into the new party, though it is expected to do so.  the communists have weathered decades of persecution and the collapse of the soviet union. ''the communist party was created to defend the workers and should continue this struggle,'' jerónimo carrera, a senior party official, told the newspaper el nacional.  mr. chávez's critics on the left and right regularly say he is carrying out a ''fake revolution'' exemplified by a boom in consumer spending on imported goods and the distribution of economic favors and government contracts to those who support his oil-financed administration.  but mr. chávez has also created thousands of agricultural and industrial cooperatives. and he has expanded the influence of ''communal councils,'' groups of 20 or so people in poor areas who make routine planning decisions and are financed by small communal banks. he said recently that he would put $2 billion at the disposal of these councils in 2007.  he still runs the risk, however remote, of losing one or two smaller but important parties in his coalition. these parties, which include podemos and fatherland for all, are expected to decide this month whether to join the new party.  as mr. chávez presses forward with that party, he seems eager to imbue senior officials with a greater understanding of socialist ideology, as well as closer allegiance to his own wishes.  late last year, legislators in the national assembly, controlled by supporters of mr. chávez, were enrolled in classes on marxist analysis and socialist thinking taught by professors from the national armed forces experimental university.  signaling a desire for even his highest-ranking allies to fall into step with what he calls his bolivarian revolution, mr. chávez publicly dressed down vice president josé vicente rangel and interior minister jesse chacón last month.  the reason? they let an orchestra omit the panamanian anthem from an act honoring simón bolívar, the south american independence leader, who died 176 years ago.  ''we have to struggle against such inefficiency,'' mr. chávez said in comments broadcast on the state television. ''what a shame to have such disorganization for such a sublime event,'' he added, as a small crowd in attendance applauded.  