paperback row   the cold war: a new history, by john lewis gaddis. (penguin, $16.) gaddis, a history professor at yale, has written six volumes on the cold war. in ''the cold war: a new history,'' he presents an authoritative account of the soviet-american conflict, re-evaluating the events and strategies that created, sustained and eventually dismantled the nearly 50-year standoff. each chapter focuses on a significant theme -- the arms race and the prospect of global annihilation, for example -- and there are fresh assessments of leaders including dwight d. eisenhower, john paul ii and mikhail gorbachev. gaddis can now use ''the once-secret information and hindsight that a scholar needs to write true history,'' michael beschloss wrote in the book review.  across the bridge of sighs: more venetian stories, by jane turner rylands. (anchor, $14.95.) in her second volume of interconnected stories, rylands examines venice through the lens of the locals, who take the old-master altarpieces for granted and overlook the shimmering light on the canals. in one story a young thief is redeemed by the unexpected discovery of a lost passport. falling palace: a romance of naples, by dan hofstadter. (vintage, $13.95.) hofstadter's travelogue lovingly portrays the ancient city with its volcano, its architecture, its animation and a girl, benedetta, who embodies all these for the author. our reviewer, shirley hazzard, called hofstadter's observations ''literally breathtaking lyrical in the neapolitan tradition.''  waterloo, by karen olsson. (picador, $14.) a melancholy comedy of texas politics, olsson's first novel follows a jaded alternative-weekly reporter, a conservative state assemblywoman and several others as they plan, protest or mourn the razing of two neglected buildings: a music club beloved by aging hipsters and a historically black library.  goya, by robert hughes. (knopf, $29.95.) this is a moving, superbly illustrated study of the dark genius of francisco de goya y lucientes (1746-1828), informed by the author's own ghastly experience after a car crash. hughes deconstructs goya's technique -- his use of light and shadow, his framing of chaotic, sometimes surreal subject matter -- and situates his work against spain's harrowing war with napoleon. in the book review, jenny uglow called hughes's account ''dazzling, disturbing and intensely personal'': ''we feel the painful immediacy of goya's work, as if we had one skin less.''  fledgling, by octavia e. butler. (warner, $13.99.) butler, an internationally acclaimed science fiction writer, died last february at 58. her 12 novels, set in time periods ranging from the historical past to the distant future, were known for their strong protagonists, many of them black women. her final book follows shori, an amnesiac vampire who looks like a 10-year-old black girl, on a dangerous journey of self-discovery and survival.  live fast, die young: the wild ride of making ''rebel without a cause,'' by lawrence frascella and al weisel. (touchstone, $15.) a lively overview of the classic 1955 film, ''live fast, die young'' reconstructs its tumultuous production history and looks closely at the director nicholas ray's relationship with his mercurial, seductive, frustrating star, james dean.  a disorder peculiar to the country, by ken kalfus. (ecco/harper perennial, $13.95.) a national book award finalist last year, this bitingly satiric novel chronicles the marital split of joyce and marshall harriman, new york professionals with two young children. kalfus sets their familial hostilities against the background of the terrorist attacks on the world trade center, the war in afghanistan and the invasion of iraq. (the novel begins on the morning of sept. 11, 2001; reasonably imagining that the other has been killed, neither joyce nor marshall can escape ''a giddiness, an elation'' at the thought.) ''with cool black humor, kalfus invites us to compare religious and cultural hatreds with personal ones, refracting his characters' domestic miseries through the light shed by international events,'' sylvia brownrigg wrote here.  the edifice complex: how the rich and powerful -- and their architects -- shape the world, by deyan sudjic. (penguin, $16.) sudjic, the architecture critic for the london newspaper the observer, documents 20th-century architectural grandiosity, from presidents and dictators to the merely rich, and the complementary ego of the architects they hire. ''architecture is about power,'' sudjic writes. ''above all, architecture is the means to tell a story about those who build it.''  ihsan taylor  