what's on   8 p.m. (nbc) grease: you're the one that i want -- then again, now that i've watched you sing and dance, maybe you're not. the tony award-winning choreographer kathleen marshall, the writer jim jacobs, who co-created ''grease,'' and david ian, a theater producer, are judges for this new competition series that follows the search for a man and a woman to play the lead roles in a broadway production of ''grease.'' olivia newton-john, who played sandy opposite john travolta's danny in the 1978 film, weighs in on what it takes to fill their shoes in the first two episodes, which follow casting calls around the country. but it hardly matters what the pros think. ultimately it's viewers who decide.  4 p.m. (nbc) latin on ice -- brian boitano, rudy galindo, michael weiss, caryn kadavy and others kick up some steam as they skate to music from marco antonio solís at the hard rock casino in fort lauderdale, fla.  7:30 p.m. (nickelodeon) just jordan -- lil' jj, a 16-year-old comedian, vents his teenage angst in this new series, based on his standup routine, about a ninth-grader trying to get a life after being transplanted to los angeles. tonight he goes out for the varsity basketball team at his new school.  7:30 p.m. (sportsnet new york) sny playoff blitz -- the former jets quarterback ray lucas and the former giants linebacker carl banks offer analysis of the jets (1 p.m. on cbs) and giants (4:30 on fox) games.  9:30 p.m. (nbc) the apprentice: los angeles -- carolyn kepcher and george ross have been replaced by ivanka trump and donald trump jr. and their father, donald trump (right), seems to have dyed his tresses to match this season's sunny locale. even the premise is slightly different: 18 candidates will compete for a job with the trump organization. only the winning team will get to live in a mansion for the week, while the losers will sleep in tents and use outdoor facilities. now that's what we call incentive.  10 p.m. (mtv) i'm from rolling stone -- deadlines. criticism. nerves (make that a double). in this new reality series, six aspiring journalists fight for a job with rolling stone magazine and the dream of seeing their names in print.  10 p.m. (showtime) the l word -- marlee matlin (left) joins the series's fourth season as an artist who captures bette's eye; cybill shepherd signs on as a married woman who has kept her sexuality under wraps -- and then decides to reveal it with a vengeance.  kathryn shattuck  