police training and gun use to get independent review   responding to the shooting death of an unarmed queens man by police officers nearly seven weeks ago, new york city's police department has commissioned a six-month independent review of its firearms training, of instances in which officers have fired their guns and of the phenomenon of so-called contagious shooting, the department's top official said yesterday.  the study, which police officials said was the first of its kind commissioned by the department, will be done by the rand corporation, a private nonprofit organization that has reviewed police practices in other major cities, police commissioner raymond w. kelly said. the announcement came amid continuing bitterness since the death of sean bell, who was killed in a hail of 50 police bullets in jamaica, queens, hours before his wedding on nov. 25.  ''questions have arisen as to the quality and effectiveness of our training'' mr. kelly said at a news conference. ''we thought it would be appropriate to bring in a recognized world-renowned nongovernment organization to take a look at all of our firearms training.''  mr. kelly said a team from rand would assess five aspects of firearm use by police officers. they include initial, continuing and tactical firearms training, investigations of police-involved shootings, and situations in which shots fired by one officer spur other officers to shoot, a phenomenon that may have played a role in mr. bell's death.  the organization will delve into the details of shootings in which the police are involved, examining an officer's experience, the nature of the threat, the environment in which they fired their guns and other issues. comparisons will be drawn to firearms training in other law enforcement agencies, mr. kelly said.  rand will not be looking into the death of mr. bell, which is under review by a grand jury in queens, mr. kelly said.  k. jack riley, the acting director of the rand center on quality policing, said the organization had previously evaluated training in the los angeles police department, investigated racial profiling among oakland police officers, and examined ways to improve recruitment and retention among the police in new orleans after hurricane katrina.  ''this is a very proactive step the n.y.p.d. is taking,'' mr. riley said. ''i think there is an honest interest in having a dispassionate third party take an objective look at their training, and see if there's anything they're not getting right -- or can improve -- with regards to firearms training.''  news of the new york study, which will cost about half a million dollars and be paid for by the new york city police foundation, a charity that supports the police department, drew mixed responses from experts in firearms and police tactics.  thomas a. reppetto, a former president of the citizens crime commission, said that bringing in an outside organization like rand would likely inspire more public confidence, which has wavered of late, than an in-house police department review would.  but dean speir, who writes about firearms and tactics, asked why the police department had not undertaken such a review before, citing the death of amadou diallo, the unarmed west african immigrant whom officers shot at 41 times. another expert suggested that the money would be better spent on hands-on tactical training.  ''if you talk to cops, they'll tell you people on the front line are starved for operational training,'' said eugene o'donnell, a professor of police studies at john jay college of criminal justice.  but paul j. browne, a spokesman for the department, said that one purpose of the review was to determine whether the current training needed to be revamped. he also noted that mr. kelly was not the police commissioner during the diallo shooting.  ''what the commissioner wants is an independent assessment,'' mr. browne said. ''if the training needs to be improved, he wants an independent assessment of what improvements are needed.''  