life shaped by tragedy, built on resolve   the tragedies happened long ago, nearly three decades, but an emotional callus has yet to fully form for the man over a boy's wound. jeff garcia's retellings are both matter of fact and wistful. they are spoken without tears but with hints of how unimaginable loss has contoured a life and a career now being celebrated here for unexpected victory.  garcia said he was 7 years old in the late 1970s when his 6-year-old brother, jason, drowned during a family camping trip in northern california. when jeff was 8, his 5-year-old sister, kimberly, tumbled out of the bed of a truck and sustained fatal head injuries.  ''i think i'm very conscientious of how precious life is and how quickly life can be taken away from you, especially at times when it can be least expected,'' garcia said wednesday in a brief interview.  ''to experience that personally with family tragedies, it's one of those things where i really value where i am today and everything i've been able to achieve,'' he said. ''and i think it's created so much gratification within my family and so much satisfaction within myself.''  with garcia at quarterback, the philadelphia eagles (10-6) have won five consecutive games to take the national football conference east and to earn a home playoff game sunday against the giants (8-8). it is the most unlikely and cherished of seasons for garcia and the eagles, who seemed finished after donovan mcnabb tore a ligament in his knee in november.  yet again, resolve has overcome expectation for garcia.  he was unsigned by any major college out of high school; undrafted out of san jose state; untethered from san francisco after three pro bowl seasons with the 49ers; unwanted by many n.f.l. teams after backwater seasons in cleveland and detroit; unforeseen to do much in philadelphia as a backup; and unappreciated by many fans here until losing turned into winning.  but here he is, at age 36, on the cover of sports illustrated, a poster boy for fiery grit and doggedness, a remade player on a revived team that kept tilling a fallow season until it blossomed with hopes for the super bowl.  ''i don't think he understands the word no,'' said john lango, the coach at gavilan college in gilroy, calif., garcia's home town, and an assistant coach for a season during garcia's days at gilroy high.  ''jeff has said that sport is really what kept the family together after all this tragedy,'' lango said thursday in a telephone interview. ''i think that's what's driving him. that and his fiery desire. people have said, 'the family will never overcome this,' or 'he's not big enough to play division i.' there has always been a negative thing that he has used as a positive thing.''  last month, garcia, who has two younger sisters, spoke more expansively about his wrenching family history to philadelphia reporters. not only did he lose a younger brother and sister, he said, but before he was born, his parents lost a set of premature twins. his brother, jason, had been his best friend. jeff was left angry and confused. why did one family have to suffer so much? why didn't he die instead of his brother?  the garcias did not seek counseling, he said. instead, sports became the family bond.  ''part of my growing up was always trying to make my parents proud and always trying to keep them happy,'' jeff told local reporters, adding, ''i think part of what held them together was my involvement in sports.''  bob and linda garcia, jeff's parents, did not return calls seeking comment, but their excitement over his accomplishments can be heard on their answering machine: ''the eagles are flying high! oweeee!''  it can be a heavy burden, trying always to please someone else, to shoulder their hopes. jeff used similar words wednesday in speaking of philadelphia's faithful and fickle fans, who once booed him and now are cheering him. ''in no way do i want to let them down,'' he said. ''in no way do i want to disappoint them.''  so far, he has not.  relying on familiarity with the west coast offense, precise timing, an accurate and soft touch and gut instinct, garcia has guided a team that found balance and ballast after losing five games out of six in a midseason slump. he has thrown 10 touchdown passes and only two interceptions since replacing mcnabb.  ''he's playing every bit as well as when he was in his prime,'' said marty mornhinweg, philadelphia's offensive coordinator who held a similar position in san francisco when garcia played there.  not long ago, philadelphia's season was dismissed as a failure. prematurely, it turns out. garcia, along with running back brian westbrook and safety brian dawkins, have led the eagles into the playoffs with momentum and a lack of the fractiousness that soured the team a year ago after a corrosive feud between mcnabb and terrell owens.  apart from being teammates who play the same position, garcia and mcnabb have in common a mercurial history with owens. both succeeded by relying on his receiving skills -- mcnabb here, garcia in san francisco -- and both have been strafed by his incendiary words.  in august 2004, during his first training camp after being traded to the eagles, owens suggested that garcia was gay. at the time, garcia said he would not respond to ''ridiculous, untrue allegations.''  he has since become engaged to carmella decesare, playboy's 2004 playmate of the year. garcia has made it a point to appear with her this season when he has been a guest on a monday night sports program on local cable television.  garcia said wednesday that owens's remarks had been hurtful, especially to his father, who had coached jeff at gavilan, the junior college in his hometown.  ''yeah, it hurt me, but i told my dad, 'we just need to move past it,' '' garcia said.  move past it. this has become a career mantra for garcia.  when no major college wanted him out of high school, he went first to junior college. when the n.f.l. did not want him, he played for five seasons in the canadian football league and won the 1998 grey cup. when the 49ers, the browns and the lions no longer wanted him as a starter, he found a spot as a backup in philadelphia.  ''he's the toughest guy i've ever been around, pound for pound,'' said john ralston, who coached garcia during his senior season at san jose state.  as he has since high school, garcia displays a fierce passion evident in the way he pumps his fist, shouts encouragement, springs up after a hard tackle, occasionally head-butts a teammate and kisses one on the helmet.  ''i've never seen a quarterback as fired up as him,'' tight end l. j. smith said. ''from high school on.''  ultimately, it is an intensity forged, in part, from tragedy.  ''i can't feel the things he felt from those incidents,'' mornhinweg said of garcia. ''however, i do know that he's very, very tough physically and very, very tough mentally. he's been through a lot, both in his personal life and his football career. he's had some ups and downs, and he's come out the other end, and it may very well have made him stronger.''  of course, there are still melancholy moments. last month, garcia became emotional as he described to philadelphia reporters the close bond between him and his brother, jason, telling how they did everything together -- wrestled, played soccer, everything.  ''i still think about if we all would have grown up together, that we all would have been in high school at the same time and it just would have been a fun life,'' garcia said atthe time. ''who knows if i would be where i'm at today, but i would give this up for him to be here with me.''  if time and distance can never bring complete healing, they have brought context and perspective. a defeat to the giants on sunday would hurt, but losing a football game is not the end of the world, garcia said wednesday, no matter how devastating it can feel at the moment.  ''if this is the worst that we're going to experience in our lives, then we're living pretty good lives,'' he said.  pro football  