a woman called iran, a refuge called america   my name is iran  a memoir  by davar ardalan  illustrated. 323 pages. henry holt & company. $24.  iran davar ardalan, the author of ''my name is iran,'' has spent her life bouncing back and forth between america and iran, torn between these two poles in her family history, always finding herself an outsider in both countries, always missing one nation's traditions and ideals when living in the other.  as a high school student ms. ardalan -- who dropped her first name, iran, after anti-iranian sentiments blossomed in america in the wake of the hostage-takings in 1979 -- entered a beauty contest in massachusetts and posed ''like brooke shields in her famous calvin klein ad''; within a few years she had moved to iran, donned the veil and entered into an arranged marriage with a man she hardly knew. she attended a mass audience with ayatollah ruhollah khomeini and chanted his name, lost in the moment ''of the islamic dream'' ; later, feeling suffocated by her marriage and disenchanted with the direction of the revolution, she moved back to the united states, where she eventually became a producer with national public radio.  by turns fascinating and frustrating, ms. ardalan's memoir is a case study of a book in desperate need of an editor. while compelling portraits of relatives are left curiously truncated and incomplete, the volume is padded with clumsily written, new agey asides that should have been left on the cutting-room floor.  the reader wants to know more about ms. ardalan's memories of life under the shah and less about her early jobs in the united states; more about what she witnessed during the islamic revolution of 1979 and less about her quest to see ''the oneness of humanity.'' the book lacks the keen, reportorial eye that azadeh moaveni demonstrated in her 2005 book ''lipstick jihad: a memoir of growing up iranian in america and american in iran,'' and it most definitely lacks the lyrical power of azar nafisi's remarkable 2003 book ''reading lolita in tehran: a memoir in books.''  what keeps the reader reading ''my name is iran'' is the remarkable trajectory traced by members of three generations of ms. ardalan's family, as they moved back and forth between the east and west, iran and america, trying to balance a personal equation of tradition and modernity, religious faith and individualistic freedom.  the story of her maternal grandfather, abol ghassem, is in itself a remarkable tale of perseverance and will. at the age of 40, abol -- who grew up in a remote village in the bakhtiari tribal area of iran -- enrolled in the american mission school, learned english alongside 7- and 8-year-olds, and eventually received a scholarship to study in america.  after attending columbia university, he joined a carnival (where he was billed as the ''persian lion'') to earn money for medical school, graduated from syracuse university medical school at 54, and married the author's grandmother helen, a young nurse, who had grown up in a strict christian home in a small town, weiser, idaho. the couple moved to iran in 1931, rented a large tehran house that doubled as their private hospital, and had seven children.  ''their days began early in the morning,'' ms. ardalan writes, ''when abol would rise at 4 a.m., shave his face and head, and listen to the bbc news on a shortwave radio. he would then do laps around the balcony for 20 minutes. as he ran, he recited the 'shahnameh' '' -- an arthurian-like epic about iran's early kings -- ''to himself. then, summer or winter, he would wake the children and line them up under the shower as he continued to chant to them from the 'shahnameh.' ''  helen and abol eventually decided that their children should be raised in the united states, and the author's mother, mary nell -- the one child not given a persian name -- was sent to a private boarding school in washington. at 19 she met a kurdish aristocrat named nader ardalan on a blind date; she soon married him and a few years later moved with him to iran, closely following the path her mother had chosen years before. nader, a harvard-educated architect, had accepted a job with the national iranian oil company to design worker housing and later became an associate partner in a leading architectural firm in tehran.  in discussing her childhood in iran and her visits to america, ms. ardalan does a better job conveying her own sense of emotional dislocation than giving the reader a palpable appreciation of the two very disparate worlds she straddled. her descriptions of life in iran under the shah feel oddly generic and familiar: ''in our school many different cultures flourished, but for the most part we were all americanized. by 1977, the bee gees's hit 'night fever' landed in tehran, and 'saturday night fever' was the big rage.''  and her descriptions of the harshness of life in post-revolutionary iran tend to have the impersonal feel of a wire report: ''increasingly, the penalties imposed were gruesome and brutal. under the penal code, the penalty for adultery for unmarried men and women was a hundred lashes of a whip.''  toward the end of this ungainly book ms. ardalan asks: ''could the telling of this story about iran's search for a lawful society also be my conscious quest for my own identity as iran, the woman?'' the problem is she never convinces the reader that her personal journey is more interesting than the plight of iran, and in focusing too insistently on her own search for an identity, she seems to have squandered a splendid opportunity to give us a window on a conundrum of a country that she has known intimately through several tumultuous decades of change.  books of the times  