hard epilogue to 'freedom writers': a violent death   hollywood endings aren't always simple.  not one of the 150 disadvantaged high school students erin gruwell started teaching more than a decade ago in long beach, calif., has been killed in street violence. many have gone on to college and graduate school. some are now teachers themselves.  their inspiring story is told in ''freedom writers,'' which opened yesterday to generally favorable reviews, starring hilary swank as the young, white ms. gruwell. it portrays her classroom trials and triumphs with black, latino and asian students, some from the area's most violent neighborhoods.  but death did come, with the blast of a gun, to one of the young actors cast as a student in the movie. armand jones, who plays grant rice, died in the lobby of a denny's restaurant early on the morning of march 17. mr. jones was an ambitious, bright-eyed 18-year-old whose dreams of a career in entertainment were starting to come true with his role in the movie.  according to police officers in anaheim, about 20 miles east of long beach, he had joined a number of youths who had left a local nightclub and were congregating at the restaurant. mr. jones was robbed of a necklace in the bathroom. he and a friend confronted the suspect in the parking lot, police said. a gun was drawn, and mr. jones was shot. he staggered back into the restaurant and died.  the case received a flurry of local news media attention at the time, but not because mr. jones had recently finished filming ''freedom writers.'' it was of local interest because it was the third shooting death in a month at a denny's in southern california. police officials said the three shootings were not related.  no arrests have been made in mr. jones's death, said rick martinez, an anaheim police spokesman.  meanwhile, the tears over mr. jones have eased but not stopped.  many of the actors in ''freedom writers'' were cast after a talent search at high schools in poor los angeles neighborhoods. the film's casting director, margery simkin, started crying while discussing mr. jones by phone on wednesday, the day before the movie's premiere.  ''there were 1,500 people at his funeral,'' ms. simkin said.  when she and richard lagravenese, the writer and director of ''freedom writers,'' first watched the movie's promotional trailer a few months after mr. jones's death, they saw him in it and both started sobbing. ms. simkin said that mr. lagravenese recalled a scene from the film in which ms. gruwell asks her students to step on a line she has drawn down the middle of the classroom if any of them knew someone who had died in gang violence.  ''richard looked at me and said, 'now i can step on the line,' '' ms. simkin said.  mr. lagravenese's movie is based on a 1999 book, ''the freedom writers diary,'' a collection of journal entries written by students in ms. gruwell's english classes. it was through sharing their diary entries with one another that they began overcoming the racial tensions that marked their lives.  some of that inspiration has affected the actors who play the original freedom writers.  two years before getting the part of marcus jefferson, jason finn, now 20, was shot by a stranger because, mr. finn speculated, he was wearing basketball shorts with a gang color not welcome in the neighborhood he was in. by 2005, mr. finn was homeless, after his mother moved to memphis and he had a dispute with his father.  in high school, mr. finn said, he had never had a teacher like ms. gruwell, who helped her students focus on achieving high goals. the movie came along, and he found that focus.  ''the whole time making this movie,'' he said by phone on the morning of the premiere, ''i'm telling myself: 'man, am i going to get into a fight, or come in with a black eye, or am i going to go to jail? am i going to mess this up?' up until the movie, it was really hard for me to finish things.''  after his last scene was shot, he was so proud, he rushed to a corner of the set and wept, he said.  mr. jones's death was tough for mr. finn. ''i can't tell you how i came to peace with it, but i came to peace with it,'' he said. ''i felt the anger building up inside me, and i just told myself it was meant to be.''  ms. gruwell, 37, said the shooting death of mr. jones, who was from long beach, made the film's plot ''more real.''  ''it shows us that the story is not over,'' she said, while preparing for the premiere. ''there's still gang violence, there's still murder, there's still intolerance.''  sergio montalvo, 17, who plays alejandro santiago, said he had not known mr. jones well, but that he had known ''roughly 15 to 20 people'' who have died in gang violence.  mr. montalvo said he gave his entire first paycheck and part of every check thereafter during the filming of ''freedom writers'' to his family, which has been homeless in the past.  mr. montalvo had awakened at 4:30 a.m. on thursday to exercise. he gets up that early, he said, every other day to try to lose the weight he put on eating all the catered food on the film set.  there's a lesson, he added, in going from sleeping on a church floor to acting in a hollywood movie: ''the sky isn't the limit. there's so much more out there.''  his family continues to live in the crime-ridden south central neighborhood in los angeles. mr. montalvo's wages as an actor on one film were not enough to change their lives completely.  ''i really hope i get another film, a really big film,'' he said. ''i want to take my family out of the neighborhood. i don't want them to go through any more pain.''  