news summary   international a3-10  bush shakes up iraq team as part of new war plan  president bush has decided to name lt. gen. david h. petraeus as the top american military commander in iraq, part of a broad revamping of the military team that will carry out the administration's new iraq strategy, administration officials said.  a1  president bush intends to name zalmay khalilzad, the afghan-born diplomat who has been ambassador to iraq for the past 21 months, to be the new envoy to the united nations, an administration official said.  a6  colleagues and friends of john d. negroponte said he agreed to trade his cabinet-level job as the nation's first director of national intelligence for a subcabinet post as deputy secretary of state because he felt miscast in the role and longed to be back in the thick of policy making.  a1  israel raid sours peace talk  prime minister ehud olmert of israel met president hosni mubarak of egypt in an effort to give momentum to the israeli-palestinian peace negotiations. but the meeting was overshadowed by an israeli military raid in the west bank in which four palestinians were killed.  a6  violence spreads in somalia  days after ethiopian-led troops helped rout islamist forces in somalia and install a new government in the capital, antigovernment attacks are raising security concerns. but despite the violence, somalia's transitional government is moving to consolidate its grip on power.  a9  national a11-14  democrats take control; pelosi becomes speaker  in a day of transition and pageantry, exultant democrats took control of both houses of congress for the first time in a dozen years and elected the first woman to be speaker of the house.  a1  study on church embezzlement  a survey by researchers at villanova university has found that 85 percent of roman catholic dioceses that responded had discovered embezzlement of church money in the last five years.  a11  white house counsel resigns  harriet e. miers, president bush's longtime confidante and onetime supreme court nominee, has resigned as white house counsel, officials announced.  a14  new massachusetts governor  in a ceremony rich with gestures of openness and symbols of conquering adversity, deval l. patrick, the first black governor of massachusetts, took the oath of office.  a11  science/health  meningitis scare in schools  more than 20,000 rhode island students were told to stay home from school as officials investigated whether a case of an elementary school student hospitalized with meningitis was related to an outbreak of encephalitis that killed a second grader.  a14  new york/region b1-6  along a newark street, signs of urban renewal  a two-mile boulevard through newark's central ward is showing signs of progress six months after mayor cory a. booker took office with lofty promises to recast his struggling city as a national model for urban revitalization. yet newark faces steep obstacles to prosperity.  a1  under arrest, and talkative  statements given by defendants in new york city courts, almost always damaging, are a window into the criminal justice process. notwithstanding the constitutional right to remain silent, many people arrested talk freely. a1  neediest cases b5  business day c1-10  activists flex new muscles  for decades, activist shareholders have been a wall street sideshow. today, it seems as if activists have taken the center ring. one of them, ralph v. whitworth, pressed home depot's board to oust robert l. nardelli, its chief executive.  c1  business digest c2  obituaries b7  vincent sardi jr.  the owner and manager of sardi's restaurant, his father's theater-district landmark, he was 91. b7  editorial a16-17  editorials: mr. negroponte's newest job; lagging judicial pay; tax cuts and the minimum wage; rethinking the death penalty.  columns: paul krugman, thomas l. friedman.  crossword  e28  public lives  b4  tv listings  e38  weather  a15  