spitzer requests sweeping array of new measures   gov. eliot spitzer proposed overhauling almost every corner of the state's operations and policies in his first address to the legislature on wednesday. he said he would move swiftly to guarantee health insurance for all children in the state, toughen campaign finance laws, cut property taxes by $6 billion and draft constitutional amendments to overhaul the state's courts.  the dizzying collection of ambitious proposals reflects how the new governor is moving quickly to capitalize on the momentum of his landslide victory and recent government corruption scandals to push through major initiatives early in his term. while some of the proposals were outlined during his campaign, in his speech to lawmakers he offered several new initiatives and promised to accomplish others during his first year in office.  ''make no mistake, the changes i just described will not be easy, but change rarely is,'' he said near the end of the speech, in which he used the words ''reform'' or ''reforms'' 31 times. ''at every major transition point in our history, we have experienced uncertainty and growing pains. we will experience them again.''  in an hourlong address that was largely a repudiation of the policies of his predecessor, george e. pataki, the new governor said he would seek to broadly overhaul the state's ethics and lobbying rules. he said he would make prekindergarten available to all 4-year-olds by the end of his term, overhaul the public authorities that control most of the state's debt and make new york more inviting to business by reducing the cost of workers' compensation.  the speech came two days after his inaugural address, in which he laid out the broad themes of his administration. wednesday's speech, by contrast, included the outlines of the specific proposals that he hopes to accomplish in the year ahead and in his first term, as he appealed directly to lawmakers.  during the speech, lawmakers responded with varying degrees of applause, cheers and silence as the list of proposals ticked past -- with mr. spitzer once jokingly encouraging them to show more enthusiasm.  the two legislative leaders who have ruled the state for the last decade alongside mr. pataki generally embraced the speech afterward.  ''this is our agenda,'' said the senate majority leader, joseph l. bruno, the state's top republican. ''tax cuts, no new taxes, job creation, education, health care for everyone, reform.''  assembly speaker sheldon silver, long used to being mr. pataki's democratic foil, responded with relief.  ''for the last 12 years, we have witnessed what happens when the two-party system becomes the too-petty system,'' mr. silver said, adding that there was ''very little i can disagree with'' in the governor's speech.  but there is no shortage of questions, including how mr. spitzer will find the money for all his proposals -- an elixir of promises to decrease spending growth over all but, at the same time, spend billions more on school aid and to insure the state's roughly half a million uninsured children while also providing $6 billion in additional property tax relief over the next three years.  mr. spitzer's plan to rein in health care spending, the largest part of the budget, is politically risky; it is likely to alienate the state's powerful health care unions and lobbyists. among his proposals are broad changes in the state's medicaid and health care policies, including carrying out a plan, formulated last year, to reduce the hospitals in the state by about 20. he would also shift ''spending away from expensive institutional nursing homes toward community and home-based alternatives.''  he pledged to bring transparency to the state's inscrutable formula for doling out school aid, and he said revitalizing the economy of upstate new york would be a top priority. he called the rebuilding effort at ground zero ''a monument to government gridlock'' and said he would move swiftly to reassess the program. he said he would propose legislation to create a nonpartisan redistricting commission and veto ''any proposal that reflects partisan gerrymandering.'' and he said he would seek to eventually have campaigns for state office publicly financed.  mr. spitzer's proposals are at the mercy of lawmakers who benefit from the current system, which practically guarantees them re-election. but the new governor may capitalize on cries for reform in a capital spurred by the investigation, indictment or conviction of at least 10 state lawmakers in recent years.  and just as mr. pataki was able to push through tax cuts and the death penalty in his first year in office, lawmakers may be inclined to support many of the spitzer proposals given his huge election victory.  but some proposals would face other formidable obstacles. in his pledge to address longstanding problems with the state court system, his remedies would require amending the state constitution, a process that involves approval in two consecutive legislative sessions and then direct ratification by voters.  he said he would submit two constitutional amendments, one of which would tackle the state's court system, which has been described as one of the most complex in the country. in new york, criminal cases are handled by a variety of courts, while lawsuits against the state have a special court of their own. divorces are heard in the state's supreme courts, which are the highest trial courts, but child custody and support cases are often heard in family court.  the second constitutional amendment would allow for the appointment of judges based on merit, which mr. spitzer said ''will take the politics out of the selection of judges.'' most judges in the state are now elected, a process that critics say has been tarnished by a spate of scandals involving unqualified or politically connected judges.  his ethics reforms echoed pledges made during the campaign, but they have been given more immediacy by the recent spate of scandals. he said he would move within weeks to introduce ''a reform package to replace the weakest campaign finance laws in the nation with the strongest.''  the package will include drastically lowering campaign contribution limits, closing loopholes that allow individuals to evade those limits easily, and to ''sharply reduce contributions from lobbyists and companies that do business with the state.''  after ethics, he said ''our second major challenge'' would be ''the revitalization of our economy in a rapidly changing world,'' and he gave particular emphasis to reviving the battered economy of upstate new york.  that was endorsed even by new york's mayor, michael r. bloomberg. ''his focus in particular on helping upstate -- where we have had population declines and where education has been falling behind the curve and the economy has been slow or even worse -- that's exactly what this state needs,'' mr. bloomberg said after the speech. ''and eliot spitzer's going to do a great job.''  mr. spitzer also called for using new state debt to support research into stem cells and other advanced sciences, a proposal that could be resisted in the republican-led senate.  among his transportation initiatives, he called for expediting a new peace bridge, which connects western new york and canada over the niagara river at buffalo. downstate, he called for building the ''first segment of the second avenue subway'' and planning ''for the full extension to lower manhattan.'' he also called for finishing the plan to replace the tappan zee bridge and enlarge stewart airport in the hudson valley ''to become the fourth major airport'' downstate.  much of the fine print of the governor's proposals will have to wait until the end of the month, when mr. spitzer unveils his first executive budget. but even members of his own party are preparing for upheaval.  ''some of the things are tough, but as i told my colleagues, it's been pretty easy around here,'' said the senate minority leader, malcolm a. smith, a queens democrat. ''now you have to step up, and you're going to have to buckle down a little bit, and do the work that the people voted you to be doing.''  changeover in albany  