living with fidel   the initials of the earth  by jesús díaz.  translated by kathleen ross.  430 pp. duke university press. paper, $24.95.  within the revolution, everything; outside the revolution, nothing,'' has long been a favorite saying of fidel castro's, the memorable, simple-sounding formula he has cited when he has felt the need to silence a critic, justify an apparently indefensible repressive measure or simply remind cubans that his all-seeing eye is ever upon them. jesús díaz's ambitious novel ''the initials of the earth'' was published in cuba in 1987, which makes it by definition a within-the-revolution product. but that distinction was, it seems, hard won -- the prize at the end of an arduous journey from nothingness to the sanctifying light of full, fidel-approved being. in an essay appended to this first english-language edition, ambrosio fornet, a friend of the writer's, tells us that díaz wrote a version of the book in the late '70s that was ''condemned ... to the limbo of a tacit censure.'' when the censure was lifted (presumably also tacitly) in the early '80s, díaz had, we are told, ''the composure and professional sobriety to sit down and rewrite the novel from scratch.''  it's fitting -- in a grim way -- that the writing, rewriting and publication of ''the initials of the earth'' should have been something of an ordeal because the novel is itself constructed as a sort of endless ordeal, a lifelong series of tests for its revolutionary-generation everyman protagonist, carlos pérez cifredo. the book frames carlos's life, from his prerevolutionary bourgeois childhood through the first dozen years of the castro era, as an exercise in ''self-criticism'' -- the socialist equivalent of what roman catholics call ''examination of conscience.'' carlos is reviewing his past behavior in clammy preparation not for the confessional but for a communist party meeting at which his comrades will rule on ''whether he was or was not an exemplary worker.'' the novel is, in essence, one long dark night of a cuban revolutionary soul awaiting eternal salvation or eternal damnation. it's the story of a penitent on his knees.  this is by its nature a little depressing, although díaz tries hard to cast his hero's adventures in fidelismo as a joyous, life-affirming hymn to the spirit of collectivity. in order, apparently, to establish that carlos is a fully representative cuban -- rather than, say, one of those dour russian-style communists in their baggy gray suits -- díaz allows him to enjoy music, dancing, movies, jokes and sex. but because these pleasures are mostly confined to discrete set pieces (which, unfortunately, tend to read like pastiches of cabrera infante's great 1967 novel of pre-castro havana, ''three trapped tigers''), the novel's depiction of caribbean sensual exuberance actually feels dutiful, wearily bureaucratic, as if the writer were checking off an item on an official form.  everything in this chunky, busy book, even its attempts at vivacity, feels forced, diligent, painstakingly conscientious and, finally, rather melancholy. poor carlos, working like a mule to embody the ideals of the revolution, never gets a break from the internal ideological vigilance his travails require, the unremitting interrogations of himself. and because the measures of revolutionary virtue keep changing, an incurable ache of unworthiness sets in: the humility of the saint or the slave. the labors of carlos are extensive and often grueling. he walks 38 miles in one day to join the militia, and at the end of the march his reward is weeks of harsh training. he fights to repel the bay of pigs invasion. he serves briefly, and zealously, as president of a university student association, and although that doesn't work out well, he later becomes ''general secretary of the core committee of the young communists and section head at the center for international studies.'' that posting ends badly too, but he manages to do penance by volunteering for a long, back-breaking stint cutting sugar cane. thereby restored to some semblance of political grace, carlos is assigned to run a large sugar mill, where he drives himself and his workers into the ground, trying to meet the 10-million-ton quota mandated by fidel for the 1970 harvest.  that harvest fell short of its goal, and the mill episode, which is the climax of ''the initials of the earth,'' concludes with a sense of sadness and general exhaustion, relieved only mildly by the hero's reflection that ''they had produced more sugar than the companies in their greatest harvests and that they had done it with a large dose of craziness, but without hunger or the whip.'' by this point carlos and the reader have experienced several turns of an infinitely repeating cycle -- striving, failure, rehabilitation, striving and on and on -- and the revolutionary rhetoric of constant struggle has come to sound less noble and inspiring than calculating and insidiously punitive. who needs a whip when you can get so many decent, idealistic people to flagellate themselves?  what's fascinating about the novel is that the ''self-criticism'' becomes -- gradually and perhaps not entirely consciously -- something else, a subtle but devastating criticism of the reality to which the cuban self has for so long been subject. it's difficult, as you examine this odd artifact, not to feel grave doubts about castro's revolution: its orthodoxy, its capriciousness, its suspiciously permanent state of incompleteness. in the final chapter, carlos endures the interrogation of his comrades, and after a fair number of imperious demands for explanations of his behavior, thinks, ''it was an error, another error'' -- his tone betraying a crushing fatigue, and more than a touch of annoyance that the reward for all his efforts should be another act of political contrition.  the publication in cuba of ''the initials of the earth'' came near the end of jesús díaz's own experience as a servant of the revolution. díaz was, by every account, a zealot, as the protagonist of his novel often is. but in 1991 díaz left cuba forever. he settled in spain, criticized the castro government as tirelessly as he had once hounded its enemies, and founded the exile journal encuentro -- which remains widely read nearly five years after his sudden death, at 60, in madrid. this book was the last he brought out in cuba before his expatriation, and although it is clearly the work of a still committed revolutionary, it is just as clearly also the work of a man who has begun to question the meaning of his life: a life lived, to that point, with absolute, selfless, single-minded dedication to a cause.  it's appropriate that the first appearance in english of díaz's ambivalent epic is a university-press edition. the book needs all the scholarly apparatus it can bear because its value is more documentary than literary; it's less interesting as a novel than as an act of self-revelation. the chronology, the notes, the bibliography and the map help us understand both where jesús díaz was coming from in 1987 and where he ended up. (the foreword by fredric jameson does not, though it does perform the useful function of reminding the reader how unsavory academic marxism can be.) and the translation, by kathleen ross, is splendid: inventive, idiomatic and precise without being pedantic. but in the world outside cuba (this part of the world, anyway) ''the initials of the earth'' is an academic curiosity, and there's an awful, message-in-a-bottle poignance to that. díaz set out to be exemplary, to write the scripture of his revolution, and wound up with something more like a shaky priest's confession -- a desperate attempt to persuade himself that his faith isn't heading for the rocks.  terrence rafferty is a frequent contributor to the book review.  