paul verhoeven goes to war one more time   there are directors who are prone to controversy. and then there is paul verhoeven, a connoisseur of sex and violence whose four-decade career has played out against a more or less continual backdrop of condemnations and protests.  gay activists took exception to the histrionic portrayal of a bisexual murderess in his ''basic instinct'' (1992). ''starship troopers'' (1997), a satire of militaristic fascism, sparked accusations that mr. verhoeven was himself a fascist. he received even tougher treatment in his native netherlands. the 1980 film ''spetters,'' a male precursor to ''showgirls'' with dirt-bike racers instead of pole dancers, featured full frontal nudity and a homosexual gang rape. it inspired the formation in the netherlands of an anti-''spetters'' association, which prompted mr. verhoeven's defection to hollywood.  with the new film ''black book,'' his first since ''hollow man'' in 2000 and his first dutch project in more than two decades, he had reason to be apprehensive. ''the dutch have always been critical of my work,'' he said at the toronto international film festival in september. ''now that i've dared to come back, they have another chance.''  ''black book,'' a breathlessly paced world war ii drama, does not exactly cast mr. verhoeven's countrymen in a flattering light. the jewish heroine (carice van houten) joins the dutch resistance and infiltrates the nazis. in what you might call a conflict of interest, she falls for the gestapo officer she has been sent to seduce. while this (relatively) good german turns out to be the film's most sympathetic male figure, the resistance is exposed as a hotbed of traitorous mercenaries.  so far mr. verhoeven's worries have been unfounded. last year ''black book'' was the top-grossing dutch-made film in the netherlands. it is also the country's oscar candidate for best foreign-language film this year, 33 years after mr. verhoeven was nominated in that category for ''turkish delight,'' a sort of ''last tango in amsterdam.''  ''inspired by true events,'' according to its opening titles, ''black book'' is the world war ii film mr. verhoeven, 68, has wanted to make for more than half his life. he has tackled that period twice before: in a 1968 television documentary about the dutch nazi leader anton mussert and in ''soldier of orange'' (1977), based on the memoirs of a resistance fighter.  on both occasions, while doing research at the netherlands institute for war documentation in amsterdam, mr. verhoeven found more material than he could use. among the discoveries that haunted him for decades: a ''little black book'' that detailed a horrific plot between the nazis and certain members of the dutch resistance, and the humiliating revenge exacted on dutch collaborators after the war. ''the dutch treated their prisoners à la abu ghraib,'' he said.  over the years mr. verhoeven and gerard soeteman, a screenwriter on all his dutch films, stockpiled research on the war. they took some stabs at a script but ran into dead ends until a few years ago, when they changed the protagonist from a non-jewish man to a jewish woman (a composite of three real-life figures). ''once we had a character who could use her sexuality to get into german headquarters, everything fell into place,'' mr. verhoeven said. among other things, ''black book'' -- set to open here march 2 -- confirms that there is no genre this director cannot turn into an erotic thriller.  mr. verhoeven considers the new film a corrective to the more heroic ''soldier of orange.'' but despite its pervasive cynicism, ''black book'' is a full-throttle adventure without the somber piety that has become a default mode for world war ii movies.  ''for me the war was more a spectacle than a real threat,'' said mr. verhoeven, who was born in 1938 (and whose family was not jewish). ''it was like big special effects in the sky, hundreds of planes passing by and rockets shooting over our house. a lot of my memories are from the point of view of a child who was not really fearing for his life.''  but he also witnessed terrible carnage, like the wreckage of a downed british plane and the retrieval of the pilot's remains. he said: ''when you're 6 or 7, you think: oh, that's strange. the human body is just meat. it comes apart in pieces, and you can put it in little boxes. the emotional truth behind death, you don't get that as a child, so i think my memories are very cold.'' he added, ''that might be the reason why i'm always interested in the damage done to the human body.''  mr. verhoeven's best films are well-oiled contraptions, as taut and propulsive as vintage hitchcock, but they also make a virtue of vulgarity. spilling through their plastic facades is a brutish vigor that owes much to pulp auteurs like samuel fuller. and despite his fondness for broad strokes, there is a diabolical sophistication in the way he thwarts the process of audience identification.  ''black book'' builds a tension between the brash certainty of mr. verhoeven's filmmaking and the ethical ambiguity that clouds the characters' actions. ''i'm not trying to put things in a moral context,'' he said, adding that he does not always believe in punishing the villains in his films. ''people get away with it. that's true in real life.'' a trained mathematician and physicist who joined the royal netherlands navy, starting his career by making recruitment films, mr. verhoeven has a strong rationalist streak.  ''what people call provocation has a lot to do with an enormous respect for reality,'' he said. ''this is what people do to each other, sexually, violence-wise. i'm not using metaphor, not shooting it around the corner, but going straight at it. that's very dutch, i would say.''  mr. verhoeven lives in los angeles but returned to the netherlands for ''black book,'' partly because it was getting harder to be himself in hollywood. ''i was losing myself a little bit,'' he said.  he had no interest in the projects that were offered to him, among them ''basic instinct 2,'' and concluded that a return to smaller budgets (about $20 million for ''black book'') might be a smart career move: ''i wanted to prove to american studios that i was not addicted to $100 million movies.''  on paper mr. verhoeven's recent track record is one of critical duds and expensive flops, but his biggest disasters have been rehabilitated to a state of near respectability. reborn as a camp classic, ''showgirls'' even appears ennobled by its initial drubbing. as for ''starship troopers,'' mr. verhoeven suggested that current events have caught up with its sardonic take on warmongering rhetoric. ''perhaps iraq has made it more understandable,'' he said.  it is a firm belief of mr. verhoeven's that nothing is sacred, and his next project will probably serve as ample demonstration. he is finishing a book on jesus, to be published later this year. a self-described ''non-christian,'' he has been involved since the mid-'80s with the jesus seminar, an association of bible scholars devoted to investigating the historical authenticity of the words and deeds of jesus.  summarizing the contents of his monograph, mr. verhoeven said: ''thesis no. 1 is that jesus was a man. that's already a big thing, as opposed to what christianity says, that he was the son of god.'' the book will be based on a close reading of ancient texts,he said, ''eliminating everything that's not possible, in my opinion.'' he added: ''it's impossible that jesus would have multiplied all this bread, isn't it? and the resurrection. all these things that are not possible are not possible.''  mr. verhoeven's fascination with religion should come as no surprise to his fans, who will be familiar with the blithe blasphemy of ''the fourth man'' and may have detected the jesus allegory embedded in ''robocop.'' it was the lack of a christian upbringing that paved the way for his obsession. ''i was not basically brain damaged by growing up in a christian family,'' he said.  asked why he started reading the gospels in his mid-teens, he responded with typical bluntness: ''probably because i was also interested in the occult, in black magic, in u.f.o.'s. and ultimately i ended up in the new testament.''  mr. verhoeven said he hopes his jesus book is the first step toward his dream project, a jesus movie, one that he said would be like no other: ''my hubris tells me it would be more normal and more real.'' dismissing ''the passion of the christ'' (''it's just about torture'') and ''the last temptation of christ'' (''basically fictional''), he said the only such film he admired was pier paolo pasolini's ''gospel according to st. matthew'': ''he gives it a marxist spin, which made the jesus more belligerent, much stronger, more like he really was, i think.''  he hastened to add that despite this confrontational stance, his bible studies were motivated by an intellectual ardor. ''i'm a big fan of jesus,'' he said. ''i think jesus was an extremely interesting, innovative, talented person, a theological genius, and as a poet, his parables are absolutely magnificent. he's like mozart.''  mr. verhoeven knows his approach is risky. ''to do this movie in the u.s. might not be without personal danger,'' he said. ''the power of the screen is so enormous. that's why i'm writing the book first. it gives me time to think if i want to get into hotter water than that.''  the oscars  