those two '80s heroines, tough as toenails   about the time cagney and lacey were having their groundbreaking heart-to-heart talks in the ladies' room of the precinct house, another pair of new york women were also meeting on the sly to kvetch: in the laundry room of a greenwich village brownstone.  they were kate mcardle and allie lowell, divorced mothers sharing a home, three kids and a load of wisecracks on the cbs sitcom ''kate & allie,'' which began as a midseason replacement in 1984 and enjoyed critical and popular success until 1989.  two decades ago, ''kate'' registered as a mild shock in television land: it featured two single women (played by susan saint james and jane curtin) rearing their children together with only minimal help from their ex-husbands. in 1984, when the top-rated network shows were ''dynasty'' and ''dallas,'' that qualified as feminist television. times have changed. the first six episodes of this sitcom, now available on dvd, seem mostly quaint and a little cloying. there's a lot of hugging and a lot of learning, two things that can seriously date a comedy in the post-''seinfeld'' universe. even before ''seinfeld'' made it hard to have a heart, the great sitcoms -- ''cheers,'' ''the mary tyler moore show'' -- gained the distance necessary for humor by making most of their main characters into losers the audience could love without having to take seriously. but ''kate & allie,'' wearing feminism like a banner, champions its heroines. the scripts want us to admire them, and that makes it hard to laugh at them.  jane curtin's allie, the ex-wife of a cheating connecticut doctor, is truly miserable, and so the better character. she's recently divorced, she has no skills beyond laundry and needlepoint, and she's convinced she'll never go on a date again. when a subdued, pre-''frasier'' kelsey grammer asks her out in the first episode, allie is so nervous that she turns into a drama queen and ruins her chances. ms. curtin's sketch-comedy background on ''saturday night live'' serves her well: her exaggerated delivery jibes with the oppressive laugh track, and her tendency to fake prissiness is perfectly in keeping with her character. even with bad lines, she is deft enough to have won two emmys for this role.  susan saint james's kate is less well-drawn. as the resident free spirit, she's supposed to help allie loosen up. the problem is, kate never does anything remotely irresponsible, unless you count dancing with her 14-year-old daughter to the latest michael jackson release. she's a travel agent whose idea of an expletive is ''tough toenails!'' caught between allie's conservatism and the network's idea of acceptable maternal behavior in 1984, ms. saint james has nowhere to go but perky. the wildest thing about her is her taste in sweaters.  which brings us to wardrobe. from kate's puffy, traffic-light-colored vest to allie's starched blouses with floppy bows and pearls, the clothes really wear the women on this show. but the women wear the hair -- and how. ms. curtin's blondish curls are occasionally coiffed almost beyond recognition, and ms. saint james's glossy brown hair is sometimes sculptured into a gravity-defying sine curve. just looking at them is an exercise in nostalgia, and one more reason women should be glad it's 2007.  susan stewart  dvd  