singing puppets, but without the expletives   as the lead actor of broadway's ''avenue q,'' john tartaglia explored the what-might-have-been adult life for children's puppets, and it was definitely an r-rated universe. in his new ''playhouse disney'' series ''johnny and the sprites,'' mr. tartaglia, who is also a former ''sesame street'' puppeteer, has firmly returned to the world of preschool simplicity and sweetness, but he is bringing a broadway musical sensibility back with him.  in the new show -- he is a creator, an executive producer and star -- mr. tartaglia, 28, shares the stage with two dozen magical woodland-creature puppets, including the sprites, a two-inch ladybug and some fur balls known as fuzzies. together they sing and dance their way through preschool concerns like fitting in when you think your antennae are too curly, putting down video games to go outside and play, and learning new skills and how to be a good friend. ''everyone's a little bit racist,'' from ''avenue q,'' has been replaced by tunes like ''brightly shining,'' a tribute to the giving spirit of christmas.  the original songs that are the core of the stories, which will be shown saturdays and sundays starting next weekend on the disney channel, are written by more than a dozen musical-theater composers. not one contributed anything near as basic as ''i love you,'' the ''barney'' song that detractors often cite as the epitome of overly simplistic children's television.  among the contributors to the new show are stephen schwartz (''wicked,'' ''godspell''), who wrote the theme song and ''brightly shining,'' and mark hollmann (''urinetown''), who came up with ''how do you spot a nospotalotacus?'' one of the ''avenue q'' creators, robert lopez, and his brother billy lopez -- who have also composed for the nick jr. musical series ''the wonder pets!'' -- wrote music. so did michael patrick walker of ''altar boyz''; the ''boyz'' themselves drop by in one episode.  gary adler, the musical director of ''avenue q'' and mr. walker's ''altar boyz'' co-writer, supervised the music for ''johnny and the sprites.'' he solicited contributions, he said, by offering composers a chance to help ''create the future broadway babies, and have people listen to music by writers they may not necessarily have been exposed to.'' he said he was hopeful that through the show ''we can start training young people's ears to a different kind of music.'' the eclectic collection of styles he ended up with are tied together by the singers and orchestration.  mr. schwartz has written plenty of children's material -- his credits include the disney movies ''pocahontas'' and ''the hunchback of notre dame'' -- but ''johnny and the sprites'' is aimed at his youngest audience yet. he made no adjustment for the age difference, he said in an interview. in ''brightly shining,'' ''glittering'' rhymes with ''skittering,'' and the holiday music is lyrical, not jolly. ''i basically always approach it from the point of view of writing the best song i can,'' he said. ''i try to tell the best story, get across the emotion.'' if there is a vocabulary word that the children might not know, he added, ''that's o.k., now they will.''  mr. tartaglia knew the music to ''fiddler on the roof'' by the time he was 5 and said he missed that kind of layered storytelling in songs for youngsters. the music in much of children's television is ''very simple and dumbed down,'' he said.  the sprites started out on his sketchpad when he was about 16 but came to life in 2005 as a handful of short segments on ''playhouse disney.'' these were commissioned by disney channel worldwide's president, rich ross, after he saw mr. tartaglia in ''avenue q.'' when parents responded to the first ''sprites,'' the decision was made to expand them into a 13-episode series, with two stories an episode.  like other children's television shows, ''johnny and the sprites'' hopes to draw its viewers into a completely believable, self-contained alternate world. so it was all the more disorienting to see gordon, the ''sesame street'' father figure, wandering through the lush grottoed set and chatting with the sprites on a november day while the show was in production. but puppeteering is a small world, and the humans behind two of the sprites -- leslie carrara-rudolph, who plays ginger, the pink air sprite, and carmen osbahr, who plays lily, the blue water sprite -- also play the muppets abby cadabby and rosita on ''sesame street.'' (there is also basil, the earth sprite, played by tim lagasse, and the baby root, played by heather asch.) gordon, better known as roscoe orman, had just come by for a visit. the two productions were based just floors apart at kaufman astoria studios in queens, which made for some running back and forth for the actors when the shooting schedules overlapped for a couple of weeks.  again mr. tartaglia was the bridge between the two worlds. growing up, his dream was to work with jim henson, the muppets creator, who died before that was possible. still, at the age of 16, mr. tartaglia became a ''sesame street'' puppeteer and stayed for eight years. (on the new show he is also the voice and puppeteer of sage, the oldest sprite, who never leaves his tree.)  offered the chance by mr. ross to create his own show, mr. tartaglia said that he immediately thought of puppets, which had been largely displaced by animation on the disney channel. ''i miss on children's television today the sense of another world,'' he said. ''i like immersive experiences.'' and he decided he wanted it to be a show that worked for children but had enough inside jokes and music parents could enjoy as well.  for some of the puppeteers -- who already had to manipulate the hands, wings, eyebrows and other sprite body parts and deliver lines all while crammed together on rolling stools just out of sight of the cameras -- the complex tunes ''challenged them more musically than other shows,'' mr. adler said.  at a recording session in october in the east village, ''we don't want to be in combat with a schwombat'' proved to be one of those challenges. if the quick up-and-down melody was sung correctly, then a puppeteer would say ''wombat'' instead of ''schwombat,'' mr. adler would request another take, and the room would erupt in laughter. mr. adler eventually changed the melody and pronounced himself satisfied.  with the tv production now finished, some of those involved have returned to broadway. ''johnny and the sprites'' viewers are probably still too young to see ''avenue q,'' but if the tv show inspires them to see a musical, as mr. adler said he hoped, disney has cast mr. tartaglia for a stint as lumiere in ''beauty and the beast.''  television  