today in business   reversal of fortune -- activist shareholders, once derided on wall street as irrelevant distractions, are wielding growing influence in corporate inner sanctums as they successfully press for changes in investments strategies or the removal of executives. [page c1.]  a director's influence  -- kenneth langone, below, a director at home depot, has a reputation for paying his chief executives well, which he demonstrated when he recruited robert l. nardelli. but when mr. nardelli failed to agree to a pay cut, he lost mr. langone's crucial support on the board. [c1.]  seeking answers at gap -- gap, the clothing chain, said sales plunged 8 percent in december -- the third dismal holiday season in a row -- and its directors are intensifying pressure on the chief executive, paul s. pressler, to pull the company out of its sales slump. [c1.]  a hometown firm's malaise -- the color of ford motor's well-known logo -- blue -- now best describes the mood at the company, which is rapidly seeing its position in the industry and in its hometown of detroit eroded by its failure to combat foreign competition. [c1.]  tough talk by g.m. chief -- the chief executive of general motors, rick wagoner, said his company was not ready to concede its position as the world's largest automaker, but he offered scant evidence that g.m. could fend off a challenge from toyota. [c4.]  drug maker offers to settle  -- eli lilly agreed to pay up to $500 million to settle 18,000 lawsuits from people who claimed they had developed diabetes or other diseases after taking zyprexa, lilly's drug for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. [c1.]  an expensive 30 seconds -- more than a dozen marketers have agreed so far to pay a estimated average of $2.6 million -- a record amount -- for each 30-second commercial during super bowl xli on feb. 4. advertising: stuart elliott. [c3.]  a bankruptcy in publishing -- book publishers braced themselves for a financial blow this week after a bankruptcy filing by a book distributor that owes more than $200 million to dozens of publishing companies. [c3.]  considering a buyout at tribune -- the mccormick tribune foundation, the second-largest shareholder in the tribune company, said it had hired a buyout firm to advise it on a course of action while the tribune company is on the block. [c3.]  times company sells tv stations -- the new york times company has agreed to sell its nine local television stations to oak hill capital partners, a private equity firm, for $575 million. [c5.]  markets helped by oil prices -- wall street struggled but ultimately closed higher as a bounce in technology stocks and sharply lower oil prices helped investors brush off concerns about sluggish consumer spending. [c7.]  signs of a slackened economy -- growth in the services sector slowed as expected in december and new factory orders rose at a disappointing pace in november, pointing to a slackening economy, reports showed. [c4.]  merger of law firms is off -- one of the biggest proposed law firm mergers of the last year has been called off, the victim of too many insurmountable issues between the two firms: dewey ballantine and orrick, herrington & sutcliffe.[c3.]  a hopeful change in newark -- after 30 years of decline and a decade of sporadic renewal efforts, newark is showing signs of promise: more than 2,500 private homes are being constructed, barnes & noble is looking for a space downtown and suburbanites and new yorkers are moving into the city's first luxury high-rise in a generation. [a1.]  monsanto's jump in profits -- monsanto, the agricultural products company, reported a 53 percent jump in first-quarter profit because of rising demand for corn seeds and roundup herbicide, and forecast 2007 earnings below analysts' estimates. [c7.]  ethanol demand on corn supplies -- a study has found that ethanol plants could use as much as half of america's corn crop next year, a finding that renews concerns about whether there will be enough corn to support the demand for both fuel and food. [c7.]  infant seats suffer damage -- car seats for infants often fail to withstand the impact when a vehicle is struck by another from the side, according to laboratory tests conducted by consumer reports. [a11.]  taking from the collection plate -- a survey by researchers at villanova university has found that 85 percent of roman catholic dioceses that responded had discovered embezzlement of church funds in the last five years, with 11 percent reporting that more than $500,000 had been stolen. [a11.]  online  wii's means of motion -- the nintendo wii video game console is redefining the way video games are played. an interactive graphic can be found at nytimes.com/technology.  more camera for the money -- a look at 11 compact digital cameras that offer more bang for the buck. a slide show can be found at nytimes.com/technology.  second opinion -- despite disease outbreaks, public outrage over filthy conditions in produce seems to be lacking. a report is at nytimes.com/science.  