a school search shaded by painful memories   school choice, as any sane person knows, is a mixed blessing. last spring, when it was time to choose a middle school for my daughter, baldwin, i was not a sane person. for two months i talked to at least 15 people (and i don't mean five-minute chats) who had chosen one of three public and four private schools in or around montclair, n.j.  the private school tours had begun in the fall. images of the pingry school in martinsville, the rolls-royce of educational institutions, danced in our heads as my husband, cliff, and i headed home from a meeting with the admissions director and alumni. the school was indeed impressive, but the travel time, a good hour each way, was just too much for an 11-year-old to handle every day.  then i spoke with the parents of students at kent place in summit, a bucolic all-girls' school that baldwin refused even to consider. (we plan to revisit that idea for high school.) cliff had explored newark academy's 68-acre campus in livingston a while ago, and i revisited it online, again weighing the pros of independent schools (smaller classes, more individualized attention and fabulous-looking facilities) and the cons (elitist attitudes of some children and more than $20,000 in tuition added to property taxes that are already enough for a private school education).  by the time i looked at the nearby montclair kimberley academy, where my children had loved their day-camp experiences, the public school tours had begun, and my private anxieties were marching to the fore. i would wake cliff in the middle of the night with all kinds of scenarios, many of them products of being a black parent in suburbia. if we sent our daughter to public school, suppose the girls were mean, suppose she had to start choosing her friends based on race and not common interests, suppose some eighth-grade boy turned her head. the same things could happen in private school, of course, plus she would be around youngsters with so much money she could end up feeling as if she were underprivileged. suppose she felt she had to choose to sit at the black table at lunchtime or, worse, what if she was a minority of one in some of the private-school classes and felt she must wave the race flag full time.  now i was getting to the guts of my insanity. i was tortured in the newark public school i attended, which was practically all black; the misery began in sixth grade, and it was downhill from there. i was reliving my demons -- the taunts of ''who do you think you are?,'' ''you think you cute?'' and my personal favorite, given the junior revolutionary that i was, ''you think you white?'' i worry that things are neither worse nor better, that they have probably, pathetically, stayed the same.  like most parents, i want the best for my children and would do anything to make that happen. i also realize that what works for one child doesn't work for another. (we have a 5-year-old son who would probably thrive in the kind of small, precious school that baldwin dislikes.) but as a black parent i have an extra job. not only do i have to help baldwin navigate her class work, always to do her best and all that, but i've also got to teach her that when three black boys act out in class, it's not because they're black, that there is no excuse for anyone's bad behavior.  i have to teach my girl and my little guy, who just started kindergarten, to be proud of their heritage. i have to encourage them to immerse themselves in black history, both in and out of the classroom, so they understand why some history books talk about enslaved people as if they were born that way -- without a culture and centuries-old traditions. i have to teach, as so many of my peers were taught, that no one is better than you and you aren't better than anyone. as my old pal, the director george c. wolfe, said of his kentucky childhood, ''this created some schizophrenia.''  montclair is a town that took pride in its diversity long before the word was part of our national lexicon. it is vibrant, the kind of place an urban dweller like me could live.  there are three centers of town where one can enjoy moving around on foot -- my personal test for a good place to live. more important, it is a place where my family lives among many other families who look like us and even, occasionally, think like us.  when searching for a suburban home, cliff and i wouldn't even consider towns where there was little to no racial or ethnic mix. this decision was for our children. we never wanted them to be ''the only one.'' we know that children just want to be like everyone else, and if everyone else is brown, that's the cool thing to be; if everyone is all kinds of things then, well, you get the point.  interestingly, montclair kimberley, one of the private schools we considered, has a sizable number of black students, and baldwin already knew many of them. it would have been easy (not the check-writing part) to send her there and avoid our initial anxieties. instead, we decided -- or, more accurately, my daughter decided -- on glenfield middle school, a public school that i initially wasn't even going to tour. it was not the one that is literally a short block away, where you can roll out of bed and still get there on time, and it was not the progressive school that i was leaning toward. after viewing all three public schools, baldwin announced that she liked the nearby school o.k., but that it was ''pink -- and glenfield is yellow.'' i asked her to speak english and not artistese. ''well, i like pink, it's like my favorite color,'' she said, ''but yellow is vibrant and glenfield is vibrant.''  the diversity she has to deal with at glenfield is real and true and crosses racial and economic lines. she has been challenged, educationally and emotionally, and so have i. the next few years are not going to be a cakewalk. but a rich life is made up of relationships that are complex, with people who are unlike you, people from whom you can learn and stretch and grow. and while i didn't think glenfield was where we would end up, so far i'm glad we did. my daughter is beaming and excited about learning. i'm happy with what's coming home in the backpack.  generations benilde little's most recent novel is ''who does she think she is?'' (free press), about three generations of black women.  