new congress, leftover challenge   the nation should welcome the ambitious agenda being offered today by the new congress's democratic majority, from raising the minimum wage to advancing stem cell research to restoring oversight of the executive branch. but the real test for the 110th congress will be its willingness to clean up its own act by adopting forceful and credible ethics reform. that is what the democratic leadership promised voters. any hesitation will be rightly seen as a cynical re-endorsement of the capitol's lobbyist-enabling, corruption-steeped business as usual.  congress's ethics rules have been rife with loopholes and wrist-slapping punishments that grease rather than police the quid pro quo world of washington. fixing some of these problems requires nothing more than a majority vote on the house or senate rules.  house democrats appear ready to start with a firm, and long needed, ban on gifts, entertainment and junket travel -- including low-cost v.i.p. rides on corporate jets -- arranged by lobbyists or their clients. the ban should cover staffers as well, and the senate should match it. even that will require wary monitoring, particularly of a provision that would allow members preapproved day trips for speeches, with travel paid by non-lobbying groups.  both houses should also bar congressional alumni and other lobbyists from the debating floors and other capitol inner sanctums. and members of congress with other ambitions should be blocked from slyly negotiating lucrative private jobs while they're still on the public's payroll and sworn to defend the public's interest. there should be early disclosure of all job feelers.  the back-scratching closeness of politicians seeking campaign donations and deep-pocket interests seeking favors is a capital disgrace. part of the solution is to douse their dealings with sunshine through prompt and detailed filing disclosures. and there should be full disclosure of the cornucopia of ''earmarks'' -- costly favors inserted without debate or any requirement to disclose authorship in mammoth spending bills. earmark authors and beneficiaries should be unmasked in time to be mocked by taxpayers.  broader reforms will require longer legislative debate, not just a rule change. paramount is the need to create an independent office for ethics enforcement to end the clubbiness that more often than not covers up or excuses abuses. house speaker nancy pelosi has ordered a bipartisan study of this vital proposal by march. we expect this overdue step to receive the forceful support of ms. pelosi and harry reid, the senate majority leader. the voters are watching, and lawmakers dare not slip away from the promise to clean up their act.  editorial  