six women, all headed in different directions   ''fresh tracks,'' an annual series of new choreography, has been presented by dance theater workshop since the organization's creation in 1965, giving more than 400 artists -- bill t. jones, david parsons, anne teresa de keersmaeker among them -- their first opportunity to try their craft onstage.  the latest edition opened on thursday night, featuring six choreographers chosen from the 120 applicants who turned up at the open audition. all are women, and all used electronic scores that provided sonic ambience rather than rhythmic impetus, but there were few other common denominators in a program of uneven work.  heather mcardle's ''whitelife blackhole'' provided a compelling theatrical experience through the physical intensity of ms. mcardle, a white-clad fragile figure with a mop of tousled red hair and remarkable coordination.  the piece began as she typed ''are your thoughts crippling you? i feel like a robot most days'' on an all-white computer at an all-white desk, and her subsequent fluid falls to the floor and abrupt recoveries, endlessly circling legs and folding arms, effectively suggested both an encroaching madness and a desperate struggle against it.  another solo, ''sternum,'' choreographed and performed by tara o'con, showed impressive bodily control in near-imperceptible shifts of position but looked more like a promising sketch than a developed work.  deganit shemy's descriptively named ''queentet'' offered five women in short skirts and blouses who could have been pupils at a particularly upmarket private school. one stood, passive and catatonic, throughout the piece, as the others alternately tormented and ignored her, moving in awkward, jerky bursts with knock knees, fussy gestures and dragging feet, while occasionally emitting little shrieks.  ms. shemy's deliberately repetitive vocabulary and affectless tone go on a little too long, but her counterpointed duos and trios are skillfully made, drawing the eye to the details of the movement.  another ensemble piece, lala ghahreman's ''mourning glory,'' was less successful in its use of two women and three men in a series of disconnected episodes that involved inflatable rings and the singing of ''over the rainbow.''  ursula eagly's ''garden of earthly delights'' was an even more impenetrable duo for a blood-spattered, hand-clasping pair who snorted, sang and shuffled about. the audience seemed to like it.  ''fresh tracks'' will be performed again tonight at dance theater workshop, 219 west 19th street, chelsea; (212) 691-6500 or dtw.org.  dance review  