a little folk, a little rock and a lot of minimalism   white magic is an entity in flux. it began in 2004 as a trio, led by the singer and keyboardist mira billotte. then it became a duo, with ms. billotte and the guitarist doug shaw. for now it's a shambly, spooked quartet, not quite folk and not quite rock, and as such it played with the bassist brad truax and the drummer jim white on thursday night at the mercury lounge.  ms. billotte is the focal point, and her voice was affect-free and handsome: restrained despite a big range, and forthright enough in long tones. she hasn't had a lot of time in the sunlight, and her performance was carefully unstagy, in a kind of indeterminate zone. one step further, and she could be interestingly antisocial; one step back, and she'd be boring.  white magic owes quite a lot to cat power, alias the singer-songwriter chan marshall, who has been very effective with very little. and so a white magic song is built on hardly anything: an unsyncopated vocal pattern, uncertain keyboard technique, shorthand lyrics (''who we are/how we live/all that has to do with innocence/has grown apart'') and very, very few piano notes.  ''childhood song'' has three, at least for a long stretch. ''the light'' has two. it's juvenile and frustrating: ms. billotte is in control of her performance and knows how to write a song; she's holding back, or going childlike on purpose.  but those two songs -- from white magic's good new record, its first full-length album, ''dat rosa mel apibus'' (drag city) -- were the best parts of thursday's show. ms. billotte made her vocal melodies carry the tunes, and the four musicians leaned into the music, imposing their wills on it. mr. shaw played skeletal guitar chords and undernourished, echoey leads; mr. truax played minimally and cleanly. and then there was jim white, the drummer. let's talk about jim white.  much of the grace in the best not-quite-rock, not-quite-folk music since the mid-1990s -- cat power, beth orton, smog, dirty three, nina nastasia, bonnie prince billy -- is attributable to mr. white, who played with them all. on thursday he tuned in: he watched and listened like a demon. he held his sticks way down at the bottom, raised his arms up high, and let the weight of the stick coming down determine the size and character of the beats. he played simple, unusual patterns in midtempo grooves that were perfect for this music -- not too put-together, but giving it the support it needed.  (without him, ms. billotte and mr. shaw opened the show by themselves, performing a two-guitar version of the old folk song ''katie cruel,'' learned from a very obscure karen dalton record; the gesture was stout, but the performance was anemic.)  this was deeply deceptive music, driving toward something not altogether satisfying but still fascinating: a deadpan warmth, a halfhearted bliss.  music review  