giants see the angles in a prism tinted blue   at one end of the range of possibilities is a blowout first-round playoff loss to the philadelphia eagles on sunday. on the opposite end is a super bowl victory next month.  and somewhere between may be the point where giants coach tom coughlin saves his job.  perhaps only the team president, john mara, and the chairman, steve tisch, know what it will take for coughlin to be back for the fourth and final season of his contract. given that they are declining to discuss the topic, it is reasonable to believe that they are not sure, either.  that is why the giants' game against the eagles is only a small part of the franchise's larger backdrop. it is a big game, to be sure, but much of the intrigue is not simply from the result on the field, but from what it might do to the giants' long-term future.  the giants, considering themselves a super bowl contender at the season's outset, started 6-2, then lost six of their next seven. they beat the redskins on saturday, 34-28, to finish 8-8 and slip into the playoffs.  if the giants beat the eagles, they will play the chicago bears. maybe it will be enough to ensure coughlin's return for the 2007 season. maybe it only takes a solid effort against the eagles, even in a loss. but if the giants lose, the focus immediately will turn to the co-owners, the mara and tisch families. they must fill the general manager position because ernie accorsi is retiring. now they are being faced with two questions that cannot be viewed independently of that search: do they give coughlin another chance? or do they become the rare team to fire a playoff coach?  the analysis is complicated. it would have been easier if the giants did not make the playoffs. it can become easier if the giants make a promising playoff run.  but the giants are wallowing in the middle, and it leaves all of them -- owners, coaches and players -- in an awkward spot.  ''of course, when a team goes 8-8 with high expectations, it doesn't sound good,'' linebacker antonio pierce said. ''truth be told, we're in the playoffs.''  that is why the owners are waiting. they have said nothing publicly about coughlin in weeks. they have not tried to squelch the speculation by saying coughlin's job is safe, by defining what he must do to secure it, or by suggesting that the entire team will be evaluated.  mara declined a request wednesday to discuss coughlin. tisch did not return a phone message left at his office in california.  coughlin has been left to address his own job security. he has given no indication whether he knows his status. on sunday, during a conference call, he said that he does not want to talk about it and that he does not think about it.  the players also are in an unusual position. against the eagles, they could be, in effect, playing for the job of a man many wish was not their coach.  it is not lost on some players that the retiring running back tiki barber, with his franchise-record 234 rushing yards against the redskins and a short history of second-guessing coughlin's coaching, may have helped secure coughlin's job. that might become part of barber's legacy -- bequeathing his soon-to-be former teammates another season or more of coughlin.  rumors about coughlin's future are a locker-room topic, players said, but the speculation is fueled mostly by what they see in the news media. coughlin and his assistants have not suggested during meetings that their jobs are at risk, players said.  players said they do not believe that the uncertainty surrounding coughlin has had any effect on the team's performance. coughlin, with his penchant for militaristic rules and a belief that coaches and players are not meant to be friends, is not popular enough to stir ''win one for the coach'' motivation. but there is no sign that players have given up, either, and the occasional sniping about coughlin has dissipated.  ''we're all in it together,'' said receiver plaxico burress, whose occasional nonchalance has put him at odds with coughlin. ''i think we all know that we've all got to do our job, and if we don't, nobody's job is secure.''  if the result of sunday's game is not the determining factor for coughlin's future, mara and tisch will have to weed through the factors that created the confusion.  on one hand, the giants had the toughest schedule among the 12 teams that made the playoffs, measured by opponents' winning percentage. their midseason fade coincided with season-ending injuries to their best defensive player (end michael strahan), their primary off-season acquisition (linebacker lavar arrington), their sturdy left tackle (luke petitgout) and their most reliable receiver (amani toomer). they made the playoffs for the second season in a row, the first time that has happened for the giants since 1989 and 1990. only a handful of n.f.l. teams have fired coaches after a playoff appearance; the giants have never done it.  on the other hand, they squandered the 6-2 start. they have occasionally displayed a galling lack of discipline and have consistently struggled with injuries -- two traits that coughlin inherited three years ago and vowed to correct. this season's offense was ranked 14th in total yards; the defense was ranked 25th. and, perhaps most important, the progress of the third-year quarterback eli manning has stalled.  mara and tisch have the unenviable task of mulling it all and deciding what to do. and maybe it will take one last game -- at least -- for the answer to be clear.  extra points  tight end jeremy shockey (sprained ankle) did not practice and is questionable for sunday's game.  pro football  