second-largest tribune company shareholder hires buyout consultant   the mccormick tribune foundation, the second-largest shareholder in the tribune company, said yesterday that it had hired a buyout firm to advise it on a course of action while the tribune company is on the block.  the foundation's five directors are all current or former members of the tribune company management and could influence the company's decision whether to sell some or all of its assets. the foundation and the company said they had taken steps to avoid any conflicts of interest.  a person close to the process said bids for the company were due jan. 17. its assets include the los angeles times, 10 other newspapers, two dozen television stations and the chicago cubs.  joseph a. hays, a spokesman for the foundation, said it had hired the blackstone group buyout firm as part of its fiduciary responsibilities because 75 percent of the value of the foundation is in tribune stock. blackstone is to review the company's financial information and advise it on a course of action.  ''it's a full range of opportunities, from standing pat to divesting stock to acquiring stock, and in between there is infinity,'' mr. hays said.  the mccormack foundation, founded at the death of col. robert r. mccormick in 1955, finances an array of charities. it has an 11.7 percent stake in tribune. the cantigny foundation, which is associated with the mccormick foundation and owns 1.4 percent of the shares, has joined in retaining blackstone.  tribune's biggest shareholder is the chandler family, which owns 20 percent and has expressed interest in buying the company.  the foundation said it had set up a special advisory committee of two of its five board members to direct blackstone's work. those two -- james c. dowdle and john w. madigan -- are retired tribune executives. the other three are current members of the tribune company management: dennis fitzsimons, chairman and chief executive; scott c. smith, president of tribune publishing; and david hiller, publisher of the los angeles times. colonel mccormick stipulated in his will that the foundation's directors be current or former officers of the tribune company, but that has raised questions of potential conflicts of interest.  daniel borochoff, president of the american institute of philanthropy, a watchdog group in chicago, said it was not clear where the board's interests began and the company's interests left off. he said it was unusual for a foundation to have so much of its assets invested in one company. he also questioned whether only two of the five directors could decide the foundation's course of action, given that they do not constitute a majority.  in a regulatory filing yesterday, the foundation said that the three current executives ''have been isolated from this process on behalf of the foundation,'' referring to the potential sale of tribune. in addition, mr. fitzsimons sent an internal note to employees saying, ''given our role as current officers of the company, scott, david and i have voluntarily recused ourselves from any deliberations regarding alternatives'' for the foundation's investment in the tribune company.  mr. hays said that mr. madigan owned stock in tribune and that mr. dowdle did not. he said mr. madigan's stock ownership did not pose a conflict because ''his interests are aligned with the foundation.''  until recently, mr. madigan was a special partner at madison dearborn, a private equity firm that is considering a bid for tribune; the firm said yesterday he had left to avoid any appearance of a conflict.  late in the day, the foundation said it was receiving so many questions about its intentions in establishing an advisory committee that it issued a statement saying the move ''should in no way be construed as a reflection on the management of tribune company.'' the committee, it said, ''continues to have complete confidence in tribune company management.''  as a philanthropic organization, the foundation could not make a bid itself for tribune because it has no cash. but it could participate in a deal with a private equity firm or another company. ''this is where a financial adviser would be helpful,'' a person close to the process said.  the chandlers started the process that led to the auction of the tribune company when they expressed displeasure last year at the company's slumping stock price and said management was muddled. the tribune company said it would examine its strategic options, including the sale of part or all of its assets.  correction:  january 6, 2007, saturday  a picture caption in business day yesterday about a decision by the mccormick tribune foundation, a large shareholder in the tribune company, to hire the blackstone group as an adviser while the tribune is up for sale, misstated the role of the company's chief executive, dennis fitzsimons, in the sales process. mr. fitzsimons, who is also chairman of the foundation's board, has recused himself from issues regarding the sale; he is not a member of the special committee dealing with the blackstone group.  