people who live in (fictional) glass houses populate a new novel   writing has always been cathartic for alice hoffman, the novelist. when she received a diagnosis of breast cancer in 1998, chemotherapy and radiation didn't stop her from moving a futon into her office and continuing to write.  the ''what ifs'' that haunted her then surface in her 17th novel, ''skylight confessions'' (little, brown, january 2007), the story of a family tormented by the death of arlyn singer, who succumbs to breast cancer in her mid-20s. she leaves behind her brilliantly artistic but angst-ridden 6-year-old son, sam; her baby, blanca; her husband, john moody, an architect who had little interest in his wife; and her lover, george snow, who washes the windows on the glass slipper, the all-glass house where the family lives.  ''it took me a long time to be able to write this book, to be able to emotionally go to that place, what could have happened,'' said ms. hoffman, 54, who grew up in franklin square and now divides her time between homes in cambridge, mass., and manhattan.  ''i always feel like my books are a handbook of how to deal with sorrow,'' she said.  ms. hoffman will read from and talk about ''skylight confessions'' at 7:30 p.m. friday at the book revue in huntington.  ms. hoffman's sons were 10 and 15 when the cancer was diagnosed. her sister-in-law, who was then dying of brain cancer and had children the same age, told her that the worst part was leaving her children behind.  ''even if your mother is not there, you are not losing her,'' ms. hoffman said. ''her influence is there. she is part of your life whether she is there or not.''  ms. hoffman's parents divorced when she was 8 years old. during the summers her mother, sherry hoffman, a nassau county social worker, dropped her and her best friend off at the malibu beach club in lido beach. her teen novel based on those experiences, ''aquamarine'' (scholastic, 2001), was released as a movie this year.  ms. hoffman, who admits she wasn't a great student, graduated from valley stream north high school in 1969.  ''i was going to drop out of school,'' she recalled. ms. hoffman spent half a day working at the doubleday factory in garden city before quitting. she was a ''secret writer,'' but coming from a working-class area and having no role models to follow, she figured she would cut hair or be a secretary.  ''i didn't know what the possibilities were,'' ms. hoffman said.  after initially enrolling as a night student at adelphi university in garden city, ms. hoffman eventually earned her b.a. in english and anthropology. she recalls the small classes and ''great professors'' at the university. she now helps pay for a summer program there for high school students called the alice hoffman young writers retreat -- ''the kind of program i wish existed in high school,'' she said.  her first novel, ''property of,'' was written at age 21 while she was on a fellowship at stanford, where she received her master's degree in creative writing. she has also written two books of short fiction and eight books for children and young adults, as well as numerous screenplays.  ''i always feel like my fictional life is kind of an escape from my real life, even though there are threads from my real life,'' ms. hoffman said.  ''skylight confessions'' opens in a waterfront town on the north shore of long island modeled on port jefferson. john moody, who is lost, knocks on arlyn singer's door on the day her father, a ferryboat captain, has died. though they are totally mismatched, arlyn thinks moody is destined to be her one true love. she follows him to connecticut, a place that she thought of growing up as ''a far-off country that you can see on a clear day,'' ms. hoffman said.  arlyn frequently returns to the ramshackle house on long island to show sam her childhood home.  ''wherever you grow up is, in many ways, the most important place in your life, just the way i think that what you read as a child is very often the most important material you are ever going to read,'' ms. hoffman said. ''it forms who you are, who you become.''  as in ms. hoffman's other magic-imbued tales, mysterious things unexpectedly happen: dishes and tiles break, soot falls out of the chimney, flocks of blackbirds descend on the hedges. grief and betrayal merge with hope and faith in the future.  ''this is a ghost story, but it is more the way we are haunted by memory,'' ms. hoffman said. ''the book is a lot about how damaged people are, and how you don't know who loves you and who doesn't love you.''  after 30 years as a novelist, ms. hoffman won't say which book is her favorite. ''i always have the feeling it is going to be the next one, which is why i keep writing,'' she said.  alice hoffman will read from and discuss ''skylight confessions'' friday at 7:30 p.m. at the book revue, 313 new york avenue, huntington; (631) 271-1442.  