transactions   baseball  american league  boston red sox--agreed to terms with rhp joel pineiro on a one-year contract.  cleveland indians--agreed to terms with rhp keith foulke on a one-year contract. designated rhp brian sikorski for assignment. promoted mike chernoff to director of baseball operations.  los angeles angels--designated rhp chris bootcheck for assignment.  national league  florida marlins--agreed to terms with inf joe dillon, inf john gall, inf zach sorensen, inf jason wood, inf scott seabol, of alex sanchez, c chris ashby, c paul hoover, c nick trzesniak, rhp roy corcoran, rhp nate field, rhp lee gardner, rhp mike koplove, rhp wes obermueller, rhp eddy rodriguez, rhp jimmy serrano and lhp chris george on minor league contracts. named roger jongewaard scout.  houston astros--agreed to terms with inf mark loretta on a one-year contract and c eric munson, inf cody ransom, rhp jose rodriguez, lhp stephen randolph and lhp kevin walker on minor league contracts.  san diego padres--named tom tornincasa hitting coach for san antonio of the texas league, bob skube hitting coach for fort wayne of the midwest league and dan morrison minor league strength and conditioning coordinator.  basketball  national basketball association  charlotte bobcats--named jared bartie chief administrative officer and general counsel.  philadelphia 76ers--waived f steven smith.  seattle supersonics--waived g desmon farmer and c andreas glyniadakis.  football  national football league  oakland raiders--announced art shell, coach, will not return next season.  pittsburgh steelers--signed te jon dekker, rb carey davis, ot brandon torrey, db mike lorello, lb ron stanley and wr walter young to reserve/future contracts.  hockey  national hockey league  anaheim ducks--recalled c tim brent and rw bjorn melin from portland of the ahl. assigned c ryan shannon to portland.  carolina hurricanes--recalled lw ryan bayda from albany of the ahl. named curt johnson director of marketing.  los angeles kings--recalled rw konstantin pushkarev from manchester of the ahl. loaned d mike weaver to manchester. placed lw scott thornton on injured reserve, retroactive to dec. 29.  rangers--signed f blair betts to a two-year contract extension through the 2008-09 season.  ottawa senators--assigned c josh hennessy to binghamton of the ahl.  