nonfiction chronicle   pigeons: the fascinating saga of the world's most revered and reviled bird. by andrew d. blechman. (grove, $24.) consider the pigeon. rather not? well, reconsider, and do yourself a favor by reading blechman's charming book. for once, a subtitle that doesn't exaggerate! for many of us, pigeons are just nuisances who foul the ground with their copious droppings. yet the pigeon also inspires cults of rabid admirers who race them, breed them and show them off in pageants as bizarre as any snooty dog show. blechman wittily traces the history of this gentle, intelligent, misunderstood bird -- pigeon hatred, he shows, is a recent phenomenon -- and journeys into its obsessive subcultures. he hangs out on brooklyn rooftops with a die-hard who breeds ''homers'' (as racing pigeons are known) as if they were thoroughbreds, prepping them for a west virginia-to-new york race called the main event. then there is the world of dandified show breeds: jacobins, among the oldest and most stylish, sport ''a regal-looking mane of soft feathers, like greta garbo snuggled in a fur coat.'' blechman gives equal time to the haters, from avian exterminators to a pigeon-shooting club in pennsylvania. along the way, he offers plenty of revelations about pigeon habits. in fact, they're rather tidy birds -- it's we pesky humans who make the urban poop problem worse by feeding them white bread, as processed flour makes for ''rock-hard droppings.'' even those in the business of killing pigeons don't think they're that bad: ''they're pacifists,'' an exterminator concedes. ''they don't mean any harm. they just want to eat and hang out.''  monopoly: the world's most famous game -- and how it got that way. by philip e. orbanes. (da capo, $26.) here's a real estate tip: next time you're playing monopoly, don't make like donald trump and snap up the coveted boardwalk and park place. much better to build a portfolio of cheaper properties, which will give a better return on your investment. so observes orbanes in his spirited pop history of the classic board game. an unabashed fan, orbanes is also a historical consultant to hasbro games, which owns parker brothers, the manufacturer of monopoly. this trivia-heavy, sometimes gushing book is at its best when chronicling monopoly's early 20th-century precursors. interestingly enough, the game that celebrates entrepreneurial cunning had its roots in the populist, anti-monopoly theories of the economist henry george, which inspired a high-minded actress named elizabeth magie phillips to create the landlord's game in 1903. the game was designed to educate players about an unequal property system, and handmade versions passed from friend to friend. by the early '30s, one version, imprinted with atlantic city street names and shorn of its rule that properties be sold at a fixed price, made its way to an unemployed philadelphia plumbing repairman, who added the now familiar brightly colored bands and graphic icons. parker brothers bought the game in 1935, and it became a global depression-era smash, with versions tailored to various markets. italians of the mussolini era, for example, enjoyed ''monopoli,'' which featured a ''via del fascio,'' while the british could bid on bond street. today, custom editions abound, from harvardopoly to elvisopoly to dog-oply.  sex and the eighteenth-century man: massachusetts and the history of sexuality in america. by thomas a. foster. (beacon, $28.95.) in this plodding if occasionally saucy book, foster -- a historian at depaul university -- argues that our view of colonial america is much too chaste. you might not know it from reading those blockbusting biographies of the founding fathers, but sex was everywhere, ''regulated, controlled, discussed and crafted as part of an effort to create social stability and define racial, class and gender social boundaries.'' foster's lethally earnest style is anything but sexy, and his convoluted argument often takes maddening turns, but his research shows real archival flair. zeroing in on the bay state, foster uses sermons, newspapers and court testimony to uncover a frank, often viciously witty discourse on male sexual behavior. not surprisingly, marriage was ''the only legitimate site for male sexual expression,'' foster writes. giving pleasure was a male duty: in addition to making an honorable living, a husband had to keep things interesting in the bedroom. sexual failure was grounds for divorce. (one wife complained that her husband was ''naturally and incurably so defective in his body, that he is utterly incapable of procreation.'') bachelorhood was deeply suspect, and one tract warned that even single men who were celibate would ''fry in the grease of their own sensuality.''  portrait: the life of thomas eakins. by william s. mcfeely. (norton, $26.95.) unfortunately for mcfeely, his book arrives in the wake of two major books on eakins published in the last few years. specialists and competitors may sniff, but mcfeely -- author of a pulitzer prize-winning biography of ulysses s. grant -- has written a brief, solid introduction, more an essay than a full-blown biography, to one of the 19th century's great realists. if he skimps on eakins's later years, mcfeely sensitively chronicles the maturation of this enigmatic philadelphian, who died in 1916. after the civil war, eakins made the obligatory trip to paris. but it was spain, mcfeely contends, that ''held the key to eakins' greatest paintings,'' with velázquez proving a decisive influence. on the vexed matter of the artist's sexuality, mcfeely generally accepts that eakins, who married in 1884, had homosexual leanings. and mcfeely's account of eakins's work is provocative. taking his cues from photography and from careful study of anatomy -- ''the gross clinic'' (1875) is, among other things, an homage to medical science -- eakins excelled at painting naked flesh, perhaps nowhere more so than with the male divers of ''swimming'' (1884-85). while acknowledging its homoeroticism, mcfeely sees something more profound in this summer scene: it is an ''appeal for freedom, for something truly natural.''  there goes the neighborhood: racial, ethnic, and class tensions in four chicago neighborhoods and their meaning for america. by william julius wilson and richard p. taub. (knopf, $23.95.) like many of america's big cities, chicago has been transformed by white flight and immigration. in the decade after 1990, the latino population surged by some 38 percent, while whites continued to trickle out into the suburbs. in this compact study, the esteemed sociologist wilson and his colleague taub gauge these changes in an effort to highlight ''a major national challenge: the development of intergroup harmony in an era of rapid ethnic change.'' it's a noble goal, but their findings aren't terribly encouraging (and their academic prose -- these are essentially research papers -- can be a bit mind-numbing). assisted by a platoon of ethnographers, wilson and taub surveyed four mostly working- and lower-middle-class neighborhoods -- ones they felt ''best represented ordinary americans'' -- on the south and west sides of chicago, where fierce competition prevails for safe schools, parks and playgrounds. in beltway (all neighborhoods are given pseudonyms), working-class whites -- many of them municipal employees who by law must live within the city limits -- bemoan the city's racial mix. (''if we leave there'll be nothing in this goddamn city,'' an electrician complains.) in dover, a former polish neighborhood that is now a haven for mexican-american strivers, the authors find an entirely negative instance of ''intergroup harmony,'' as white and latino parents lobby to keep their children from being bused to schools in poor black neighborhoods. indeed, from the recently arrived mexican immigrants of archer park to the middle-class blacks of groveland, anxiety about poor african-americans is nearly universal. still, the authors place their hopes in ''local coalition building that would bring together diverse communities to identify common goals and concerns'' -- though their own data suggests this is but a remote possibility.  matthew price is a critic whose reviews have appeared in bookforum, the boston globe and other publications.  