job growth is strong, surprising economists   job growth was brisk last month as businesses added to their payrolls with surprising confidence, further evidence that the economy is not likely to slip into a recession.  this growth helped both the employed and the unemployed. the prospects for working americans strengthened as wages for most workers climbed at a steady clip. those looking for a job last month found a more welcoming job market, and the amount of time they spent out of work dropped considerably.  the national unemployment rate held steady at a low 4.5 percent.  such strong numbers, reported yesterday in the government's monthly survey of households and businesses, came as a surprise to many economists, who expected the slowing economy to pressure employers to rein in hiring.  the report also came just two days after an employment survey from a private statistics firm suggested that businesses had shed 40,000 jobs last month.  ''such weakness as we have seen in the job market has been quite narrowly confined to those sectors immediately affected, like construction and manufacturing,'' said nigel gault, chief united states economist for global insight. ''it really does help alleviate fears of a cumulative downturn spreading from housing and pulling everything down.''  the report dashed cold water on those who were expecting the federal reserve to lower interest rates anytime soon. investors, who have been counting on a rate cut by the central bank sometime in the first half of the year, bid stocks lower on the news and sent the bond market reeling. on wall street, stocks had their worst day since the end of november.  the labor department reported that employment outside the farming sector grew by 167,000 jobs in december, seasonally adjusted -- more than enough to absorb natural growth in the work force. in another sign of just how strong the job market has been, the figures for october and november were revised to show that businesses hired more employees than the government first thought.  with the housing market in a slump, builders eliminated 3,000 jobs in december, after cutting substantially more in october and november. and economists said that had it not been for unseasonably warm weather, builders probably would have eliminated even more workers.  downsizing in the american auto industry helped contribute to an overall decline in manufacturing jobs last month. for the year, manufacturers shed a net 72,000 jobs.  retailers, too, shrunk their payrolls last month, reflecting a weak holiday shopping season. home-improvement supply stores, clothing stores and sporting goods stores led the industry in jobs cut.  but the services sector of the economy showed considerable strength. professional and business services -- companies that offer things like administrative support, computer software design and waste management -- added a net 50,000 jobs last month. health care providers added 31,000 new jobs, and so did hospitality businesses like restaurants and bars.  in all, the largest percentage of the population since september 2001 was employed in december. the employment-population ratio edged up a tenth of a percentage point, to 63.4 percent.  ''you want to see folks who are sitting on the sidelines able to come in and find work,'' said jared bernstein, an economist with the economic policy institute. ''you've had a really important expansion in labor force, in particular by people who were waiting for jobs and wages to heat up a bit.''  not only are more americans working, but they are being paid more for it. average wages have been outpacing inflation by enough of a margin in recent months that workers have seen some of the biggest real gains in their paychecks this decade.  in december, that trend appeared to continue as the average hourly earning for a worker in a nonmanagerial position climbed 8 cents, to $17.04. that was a 4.2 percent gain compared with december 2005, and it matched november's rise, which was the highest in more than five years. it has not topped that rate in more than six years.  some recent evidence had suggested that wage gains were beginning to taper off, but yesterday's labor department statistics showed that workers continued to enjoy the benefits of a strong labor market.  ''if you want a signal of what the labor market looks like, see if employers are paying more,'' said drew mathus, an economist with lehman brothers.  it appears that employers are giving their workers raises because tightness in the labor market demands it. the report is not likely to put any pressure on the federal reserve to ease interest rates .  ''the fed has got to be pleased with these numbers,'' said edward yardeni, chief investment strategist with oak associates, a money management firm in akron, ohio. ''interest rates are where they should be.''  jobless rate falls in canada  by the new york times  ottawa, jan. 5 -- canada's unemployment rate fell to a 30-year low of 6.1 percent as employers added 62,000 jobs last month, statistics canada said on friday.  the government agency said that during all of 2006, employment rose by 2.1 percent, its strongest increase since 2002.  much of the growth came in alberta, where energy production has created labor shortages for oil and gas projects. employment there rose by 6 percent, the most in 26 years.  the agency said that 7 of canada's 10 provinces reached record high employment rates during 2006.  it estimates that about 80 percent of the new jobs created last year were full-time positions.  the job growth, however, did not extend to every sector. manufacturing was down by 2.7 percent and what the agency calls the ''information, culture and recreational services'' sector also experienced job losses, particularly in british columbia. that sector includes tourism which, like export-related manufacturing, is being squeezed by the high value of the canadian dollar.  