news summary   international a3-11  intelligence chief is shift to deputy state dept. post  john d. negroponte, whom president bush installed less than two years ago as the first director of national intelligence, will leave his post to become the state department's second-ranking official, bush administration officials said.  a1  iraq defends hussein hanging  the iraqi prime minister's office mounted its first public defense of the way the government carried out the execution of saddam hussein and said iraqi authorities had detained a guard they believe recorded the execution on a cellphone camera.  a6  the white house declined to criticize the conduct of the execution, even as state department officials and military leaders in baghdad raised questions about the timing of the hanging and the manner of the execution.  a8  some key senate democrats say they could consider supporting a short-term increase in american troop levels in iraq, a stance that reflects division within the party and could provide an opening for president bush as he prepares to announce his new plan for iraq.  a6  kenya closes somali border  kenyan officials said they were closing their northern border because of the conflict in somalia, but denied accusations from united nations officials that they had turned back hundreds of refugees.  a3  chávez unifies socialist party  president hugo chávez of venezuela has begun forging a single socialist party among his varied supporters, one of his recent efforts to create momentum for far-reaching changes to the political system.  a3  national a14-21  lab barred from approving new voting machines  a laboratory that has tested most of the nation's electronic voting systems has been temporarily barred from approving new machines after federal officials found that it was not following procedures and could not document that it was conducting all the required tests.  a1  trial relies on wiretapping  the government will rely largely on wiretapped conversations when it puts jose padilla and two others on trial as a ''north american support cell'' that sent money, goods and recruits abroad to assist ''global jihad.''  a1  severing ties with lobbyists  on the precipice of regaining power after 12 years, house democrats said they would move immediately to try to sever ties between lawmakers and lobbyists who figured into scandals that helped democrats win control of congress.  a18  former president is buried  gerald r. ford was buried on a grassy hill beside the rushing waters of the grand river in michigan as the sun set, a final farewell in a week of remembrances for the nation's 38th president.  a14  science/health  drugs said to harm heart  two drugs, pergolide and cabergoline, used to treat parkinson's disease and other disorders, can seriously damage heart valves, researchers are reporting in the new england journal of medicine.  a16  new york/region b1-6  with a sweeping agenda, spitzer challenges albany  gov. eliot spitzer, in his first address to the new york legislature, proposed overhauling almost every corner of the state's operations and policies, saying he would move swiftly to guarantee health insurance for all children in the state, cut property taxes by $6 billion and broadly overhaul ethics and lobbying rules. a1  zoning laws slow growth  the 20-year building boom on staten island, long new york city's fastest-growing borough, is decelerating dramatically, thanks to new zoning rules.  b1  brought to you by  the port authority of new york and new jersey is expected to announce today a deal with geico, the auto insurance giant, to place an advertisement atop the george washington bridge toll plaza in fort lee, n.j.  b1  business day c1-14  home depot fires its chief  in a surprising turnaround, home depot's board decided robert l. nardelli, the chief executive, should go, and it gave him a $210 million exit package. what ultimately divided the board and its chief executive appeared to have been mr. nardelli's compensation.  a1  eli lilly's troubled drug  eli lilly found that compared with an older antipsychotic drug, haldol, patients taking zyprexa, a drug that treats schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, would be more likely to develop heart disease.  a1  business digest c2  editorial a22-23  editorials: the ugly death of saddam hussein; new congress, leftover challenge; out with the old; a big hero in the big city.  columns: david brooks, bob herbert.  bridge  e10  crossword  e10  obituaries  b7  tv listings  e11  weather  b8  