no place for a zamboni: a hockey rink where players sink   in the raw context of the human condition, of life and survival on this planet, all sports are unnecessary, silly even.  but underwater hockey -- a sport incorporating lead pucks, stout wooden sticks, rubberized gloves, snorkels, face masks and bulbous ear guards -- is in a realm of its own.  underwater hockey, indeed, is a sport that begs legitimization in even the most innocent passing reference, said bryna nielsen, a member of the united states national team. ''no one's ever heard of it,'' she said, ''and when you explain what you do, people just say 'what?' ''  ms. nielsen, a 21-year-old student from amery, wis., has played since she was a toddler. her prowess rose during high school, where holding her breath while pushing a three-pound puck across the pool bottom with a foot-long stick became natural. in the last five years ms. nielsen has traveled extensively to play in tournaments.  ''i love the team aspects, the camaraderie,'' she said of the sport, which is played six to eight feet underwater in a bubbly, muffled silence.  while variations exist, a common match is 30 minutes long and includes six swimmers per team kicking, diving, defending and sucking fast gulps of air through snorkel tubes. the simple premise of the game -- to push the puck into the opposing team's goal -- is complicated by the medium. underwater, communication is tough. the puck travels just a few feet per swipe, quickly slowed by the water's resistance.  and then there's the whole issue of breathing.  ''good teams have a rhythm, a zen,'' said ben erickson, captain of the minnesota loons, a club team in minneapolis. mr. erickson has played underwater hockey almost every week for 25 years. ''you just know or sense where your guys are, up or down or getting a breath.''  a main challenge of the game, mr. erickson said, is communication.  low bubbly grunts and taps of the stick on the bottom of the pool are common devices. ms. nielsen screams through her snorkel to get attention, she said.  lung capacity is important, though holding your breath for long periods of time is not a required skill. rather, players who consistently swim up and down for the whole match -- alternatively grabbing gulps of air and attacking the puck below -- are most effective. ''the rhythm is all about breathing and then dropping to the bottom; breathing, dropping to the bottom,'' mr. erickson said.  last august, five members of the minnesota loons traveled to sheffield, england, to compete in the two-week-long underwater hockey world championships, where mr. erickson's zen strategies helped the united states take gold in the men's masters division.  underwater hockey -- called just ''hockey'' by its participants -- is played by about 1,000 people in the united states, according to gregory appling, a director with the underwater society of america, which serves as underwater hockey's governing body. club teams dot the map, from sacramento to sandwich, mass.  internationally, the sport is big in britain, where it was invented in the 1950s by a group of divers looking for an off-season training regimen. new zealand, australia, france and south africa have strong underwater hockey scenes, mr. appling said, adding that numbers are on the rise: ''it's a sport you can play competitively into your 50s or 60s, so many of the veterans stick around while new people continue to come try it out.''  a pool of deep translucent blue framed 12 members of the minnesota loons last week at the university of minnesota's aquatic center, where the team met for a scrimmage. the game began at 7:30 p.m. on the dot.  ''sticks up, go!'' a player yelled to start the match, prompting a mad swim to the center of the pool. a pink puck sat undisturbed on the bottom 8 feet down and in the middle of the 75-foot-long pool.  fins kicked up in unison near the middle, green, red, black and pink rubber wings cresting like whale tails before the teams dove.  bubbles percolated around the mass.  then silence.  players swam in circles, heads looking down. snorkels poked up quietly. splashing was minimal.  ''all the action is underwater,'' said karen nielsen, the team's self-described hockey mom, who was sitting at the edge of the pool. ''they use the jumbotron screen with underwater cameras during important games.''  a lap swimmer from an adjacent pool walked over, toweling himself off. ''are they looking for a weighted ball?'' he asked, dumbstruck.  but underwater, viewed through a face mask from the sidelines, the game's athleticism was easily seen. twelve stick-wielding players crowded at a midfield play, bodies twisting, contorting, reaching for the puck. swimmers dived up and down.  the puck skipped and jumped from stick to stick, moving down the pool toward a 10-foot-wide underwater goal. bubbles leaked from snorkel tubes, air and energy waning quickly on the bottom of the swimming pool.  passes and strategies played out. sticks tapped the tile around the puck in miniature sword fights to gain possession. to distinguish who was who, one team wielded white sticks, and the other black.  ''did you see that move?'' ms. nielsen exclaimed, surfacing to talk to her teammates. the opposing team -- the white sticks -- had tapped in a goal, twisting past ms. nielsen and three other swimmers in an offensive dash.  teams collect between each goal (4-3 is a typical final score for a tournament game), resting, breathing and concocting strategy. ''our forwards are getting too far away from our backs,'' said chris tommaso, a 26-year-old chemical engineer. ''let's keep to the positions.''  then at the signal -- ''sticks up, go!'' -- both sides dived back in, swimming the front crawl to the center of the pool before heading down.  ''let the feeding frenzy begin,'' said a player resting on the pool's edge.  underwater, the athletes swam and spun in the deep fuzzy blue. arms stretched for the puck.  eight feet down, water pressure pushed in on ears and eyes. players kicked hard, swimming off into the deep, twirling in the fizz of their own alternate universe.  below the surface  the sport of underwater hockey has a worldwide following of several thousand participants, including teams in slovenia, brazil, japan, zimbabwe and 28 other countries.  ''the sport provides an outlet for former competitive swimmers and divers,'' said gregory appling, a director with the underwater society of america.  teams like the minnesota loons, a 25-member club in minneapolis (www.mnuwh.com), practice once or twice a week all year and travel to tournaments around the country.  about 50 underwater hockey clubs exist in the united states, with teams from hawaii to new york. newcomers are welcome at most clubs, mr. appling said.  a list of underwater hockey clubs is at www.pucku.org/uwht.  adventurer  