what's on tonight   8 p.m. (discovery health) get fresh with sara snow -- ms. snow, the channel's resident natural-living expert, was reared on an organic farm by parents who fed their children carob bars and rice balls with seaweed while their peers munched potato chips and drank soda. in this new series, ms. snow (above, at the center valley organic farm in clayton, ind.) offers suggestions on ways to ''go green,'' as she puts it, that will benefit not only us but the planet.  8 p.m. (nbc) my name is earl -- when an episode of ''cops'' comes on the television at the town diner, earl and a few other locals recount their 15 minutes of fame.  8 p.m. (turner classic movies) 42nd street -- (1933). go ahead and tap those toes. ruby keeler started out as a dancer on broadway but, after her marriage to al jolson (left), moved to hollywood, where she became a star on the warner lot opposite dick powell, who was soon wrapped in the arms of joan blondell. tonight, the foursome sings and dances its way, in various permutations, through some of the decade's most rollicking musicals, starting with this age-old story about a chorus girl who gets her big break replacing a show's injured star. the evening continues with ''gold diggers of 1933'' at 9:45; ''footlight parade'' at 11:30; ''dames'' at 1:30 a.m.; ''gold diggers of 1935'' at 3:15, and ''go into your dance'' at 5.  8:30 p.m. (nbc) the office -- a racy photo from michael's jamaican vacation makes the rounds. so much for that laid-back vibe.  9 p.m. (national geographic) coffee: beans to buzz -- how can one little bean pack such a social, political and economic wallop? this special chronicles the journey of coffee from africa to the middle east and europe, where the french revolution was planned in coffee houses, and eventually north america, where more than 200 years ago coffee drinking became a patriotic duty in the colonies after the british taxed tea.  9 p.m. (discovery health) the dan ho show -- mr. ho used to think his life was perfect. he owned a successful restaurant in chicago. his country house was exquisitely decorated. and then, in 1998, he had a seizure in the middle of dinner and an out-of-body experience that led him to realize, he said, that his home and body weren't his own. in this new series, mr. ho (above) attempts to liberate viewers from the impossible standards of certain lifestyle gurus with the philosophy that living a true but flawed existence may be the most perfect expression of life after all.  11 p.m. (spike) afro samurai -- samuel l. jackson lends his voice to the lead character in this new anime series, which he also executive produced, about a black samurai who sets out to avenge his father's wrongful death in a futuristic japan. the path is bloody.  kathryn shattuck  