here's a switch: tv rescues a couch potato   erik chopin, decked out in the clean white butcher's apron synonymous with self-respecting deli countermen everywhere, offered up a cupful of his homemade potato salad and seemed miffed when the offer was refused (out of politeness, not lack of interest). it seemed cruel to scarf down potato salad right in front of a strapping 36-year-old guy who, after registering the most drastic weight loss in the history of the reality television competition ''the biggest loser,'' made a new year's resolution for 2007 that mandates keeping off the 200-plus pounds he shed -- for profit and in public -- in 2006.  ''you can't tempt me nowadays, but don't worry about it, i'm not living like a monk,'' mr. chopin said, seemingly oblivious to the mountain of muffins in the display case behind him at emma's, the delicatessen/catering business he owns here. ''i'm a guy who got into the food business because he liked food.''  after he divined that he did not like accounting, despite putting himself in debt to get a degree in it from hofstra university and securing a job with price waterhouse, he returned to his pre-college career, with a caveat: this time he did not just work the counter, he owned it. and, as it turns out, ate everything on it. cheesecake for dessert while working the breakfast shift? yum.  fortuitously, mr. chopin broke his new year's resolution last year: he scheduled himself for gastric band surgery, in shock after finding out that he weighed more than 400 pounds (bad news that he confirmed at a weight watchers facility, as his home scale maxed out even before he hit 350). then he reneged on the plan. he suspected there might be a better way. one that entailed a national television audience tuning in and overseeing the diet, just to keep him honest.  mr. chopin is not the shy type. when you top 400 pounds, you can't be. ''i tried to make myself out to be the fat, jolly guy, because who wants to be around the fat, miserable guy?'' he said.  on a whim on a frigid january morning a few days later, he stood in a line of overfed hopefuls in new york city that was five blocks long at an open casting call for the third season of ''the biggest loser,'' the popular program that sequesters its contestants at a california fat farm for a crash course in exercise-fueled weight loss. just as his wife, michele, predicted, he was selected. how flattering! in a symbolic field of 50, with one dieter representing each state, mr. chopin of new york, homegrown and still living in west islip, and weighing in at 407 personable -- though secretly miserable -- pounds, was the heaviest contender of them all.  mr. chopin was a fan of the show and had toyed with the thought of trying out for the second season, but instead stayed home to run his new delicatessen here in a strip mall where his immediate neighbors include a bakery, a pizzeria, an italian foods market and a chinese takeout spot.  he generously, or maybe not, took home pizzas and ice cream to share with michele. ''i dragged her down with me,'' he said. ''it was like having a partner in crime.'' but she quit first: even before mr. chopin made the final cut for ''the biggest loser,'' she joined a gym. while he was off for four and a half months taping the show, she ran the deli, cared for their two daughters and lost 60 pounds. heroic.  the delicatessen was purchased with home equity loans and is named after their daughter emma, 6, who waited for him to lose 214 pounds before he could muster the stamina to help her ditch the training wheels on her bicycle and pilot a two-wheeler. until he dropped the weight, he was unable to run behind her bike. or run at all. he was a hapless couch potato with a 54-inch waist and type 2 diabetes. not a useful playmate.  ''when i came back from the show, i had to call around to find out where the gyms were in my neighborhood,'' he said. ''i never knew.'' before the final weigh-in for the ''loser'' competition, he worked out three times daily, ate no carbs and dropped to 193 pounds. maintenance weight is 210; he is still right on the button.  the roast beef sandwich at emma's delicatessen is named for his youngest, holly, 4, who craves a trip to disney world with her newly svelte daddy now that he can finally fit behind the safety bar on the roller coaster.  the most requested sandwich in the place? the 450-calorie chicken wrap that helped mr. chopin take home ''the biggest loser's'' $250,000 grand prize last month. well, he did not actually take it home. in fact, he is still waiting for the producers to send his check. but he is not quibbling. he credits the show with saving his life.  the island e-mail: theisland@nytimes.com  