postcards from the edge   the goldfish went on vacation  a memoir of loss (and learning  to tell the truth about it).  by patty dann.  166 pp. trumpeter/  shambhala publications. $18.  most parents try to shield their young children from harm, an elastic concept that covers not just imminent threats but painful knowledge. yet even the most protective parent must one day reveal the hard truth that life ends. for patty dann, a writer whose books include the novel ''mermaids,'' that wrenching task came sooner than any mother would wish.  in april 1999, after dann's husband, willem, took a drive with his wife and 3-year-old son, jake, he unexpectedly asked, ''what's a car seat?'' a dutch-born historian and archivist who ''had spent so long on his doctoral dissertation that i called him dr. footnote,'' willem was soon similarly baffled by a paper clip. a brain scan showed that these lapses were symptoms of glioblastoma, a brain tumor that progressively destroys language, memory and the ability to move.  despite her shock at the news, dann at once understood she would have to address the effects of willem's decline and near-certain death on jake. much of ''the goldfish went on vacation'' centers on this challenge, resulting in a narrative that is part memoir, part self-help book. as dann remembers it, her first act after learning willem's prognosis was to phone her pediatrician for guidance. she is referred to sallie sanborn, a specialist in helping children deal with the loss of loved ones (she also provided the book's afterword). at jake's first session, as he crashes toy trucks together, sanborn warns, ''it will be a bit of a roller coaster ride.''  the phrase could also be applied to the trajectory of ''goldfish,'' which avoids a linear narrative, favoring brief, evocatively titled chapters that chart dann's emotions and memories throughout the 15 months of her husband's illness. in one early vignette, dann recalls a childhood friend weeping for her mother, whose fatal illness she had been told nothing about, and surmises there must be a ''better way'' to prepare children for such losses. later, when willem's cancer has advanced, dann flashes back to her adolescence, when a recently bereaved husband asked her to sleep with him, then cried in her arms. that the widower had kept his dead wife's clothing no longer strikes dann as strange. the most striking anecdotes, however, are those that point up the tragedy of a disease that not only robs her husband of his seven languages but undermines their cherished marital routines.  given dann's elliptical storytelling as well as her decision to focus on jake's needs, readers learn relatively few details of willem's illness. even the account of his last weeks is grounded in a familiar discussion of how hard it is for americans to come to grips with death. after willem returns from the hospital for the last time, his day nurse notes that in her native trinidad: ''we're born at home and we die at home. there's nothing to be ashamed of. there were 11 of us kids. some lived long. some died young. that's nature.'' dann incorporates these comments into a larger observation that, given all willem has suffered, his dying at age 50 has come to feel natural. yet the nurse's words may strike some readers as inadvertently cruel. that dann's memoir is filled with brave arguments for accepting death may underscore the very natural difficulty most people have in doing so.  polly morrice is a frequent contributor to the book review.  