goal is to look good, writer of democratic memoir admits   most memoirs -- and virtually all memoirs by people in politics -- are heavily varnished and blatantly self-serving. say this for terry mcauliffe, the former democratic party chairman and fund-raiser extraordinaire: at least he admits it right up front in his author's note.  ''this is my book and i've done my best to make myself look good,'' he writes in his new memoir with the ungainly title, ''what a party! my life among democrats: presidents, candidates, donors, activists, alligators and other wild animals'' (thomas dunne books).  ''even if you think i'm full of it, i bet i can still make you laugh.''  there are any number of humorous anecdotes sprinkled among the chest-deep pile of dropped names in the 406-page volume, including yasir arafat's repeatedly rubbing mr. mcauliffe's leg under the table at a dinner in washington in 2000 and the south korean secret police's warning the white house in 1998 that president bill clinton had spent most of the night in a hotel room in seoul with ''a good-looking younger man.'' that younger man was mr. mcauliffe, who had been up late playing cards with his buddy the president.  and he shares the tale of getting up on stage half-plastered at the foxwoods casino in connecticut to sing ''will you still love me tomorrow?'' to nail down a $500,000 contribution from the chief of the mashantucket pequot indians. there are two sections of photographs, a portable version of the washington power wall, displaying the author with all manner of celebrities and potentates: jimmy carter, kevin spacey, thomas p. o'neill jr., richard a. gephardt, pope john paul ii, al gore, chris tucker and cicely tyson, hillary rodham clinton, olivia newton-john, edward m. kennedy and john kerry, ariel sharon, king juan carlos of spain, mikhail baryshnikov.  and a washington memoir would not be complete without a little old-school score settling, in this case with mr. kerry, who lost the 2004 presidential campaign despite what mr. mcauliffe portrays as his own herculean efforts.  mr. kerry's biggest blunder, in mr. mcauliffe's account, was to forbid any attacks on president bush from the lectern at the 2004 democratic convention. mr. mcauliffe calls that decision ''one of the biggest acts of political malpractice in the history of american politics.''  he also knocks mr. kerry for not responding forcefully to the swift boat group's attacks on his military record and for hoarding money at the end of his campaign, ending the contest with a surplus of $15 million that mr. mcauliffe believes would have made the difference in ohio, the decisive state.  david wade, a spokesman for mr. kerry, said that his boss was grateful for mr. mcauliffe's ''incredible'' efforts in the 2004 campaign and that he wished the outcome had been different. but, mr. wade added, ''it's time to look forward, not backwards.''  mr. mcauliffe, reached on the golf course at the army-navy club in arlington, va., on friday afternoon said, ''kerry and i went through all these issues, and he agrees with me on every one.''  he added, before teeing off with mr. clinton, ''i say a lot of nice things about kerry in the book, too.''  