2 law firms call off plans for a merger   one of the biggest proposed law firm mergers of the last year has been called off, the victim of too many insurmountable issues.  the two firms, dewey ballantine and orrick, herrington & sutcliffe, announced the news yesterday. the two had been in talks since last fall to join their specialties in mergers and acquisitions and debt financing. the new firm would have been one of the nation's largest legal advisers, with 1,500 lawyers based in new york and san francisco.  unlike most merger talks, which are conducted in secrecy, the firms announced in october that their top committees had given preliminary approval to the proposal. at every step in the process after that, the firms expressed confidence that the deal would go through.  the two had already decided upon the name dewey orrick for the combined firm. dewey's chairman, morton a. pierce, and orrick's chairman, ralph h. baxter jr., would have served as co-chairmen, with mr. baxter taking on the additional title of presiding partner.  partners were to have voted on the deal last month. but as several obstacles proved intractable, those elections were postponed to this month.  ''while both firms tried their best to work through these challenges, we were unable to bring the merger to completion,'' the two firms said in a statement. ''no one issue led us to this point.''  among the most visible distress signals was the departure of 10 partners from dewey since merger talks began. most ominous were the exits of three lawyers from dewey's mergers and acquisitions team, including michael j. aiello and jack s. bodner, who had been considered protégés of mr. pierce.  people familiar with the negotiations said the talks had continued as recently as last weekend.  the chairmen of both firms said in interviews that the decision to part ways was mutual.  ''we reached a point where we decided it was in the best interest of both organizations to go our separate ways,'' mr. pierce said.  both chairmen said that they would look for future growth opportunities, but that neither was looking for another merger partner right now.  ''when you look at how law firms grow, while mergers have great advantages, it's the statistically least likely way to do it,'' mr. baxter said.  unlike mergers in other sectors, law firm consolidation involves the joining of companies whose main assets are their people. orrick is acquainted with such situations, having undertaken merger talks with several firms in recent years, including coudert brothers in 2005 and donovan, leisure, newton & irvine in the late 1990s. none of those talks came to fruition, though orrick subsequently hired lawyers from those firms.  the dilution of brand names, unclear lines of authority and unfunded pensions are among some of the issues that may have played a role in the talks' demise, said peter zeughauser, a law firm consultant who did not work on the deal.  unfunded pensions have long been a concern in the merger of law firms because partners inevitably bristle at taking a pay cut to help new colleagues' retirement plans. several consultants and lawyers at other firms previously questioned whether dewey's unfunded pension system would pose problems for the deal.  ''it's not at all uncommon for an unfunded retirement plan to be a deal breaker,'' mr. zeughauser said.  a person familiar with the negotiations also pointed to questions over management authority. though the deal had been labeled a merger of equals, it was clear that orrick would retain control over crucial matters, the person said.  both dewey and orrick have long histories. dewey is a storied new york adviser whose name comes from gov. thomas e. dewey. orrick is one of san francisco's oldest law firms, founded in 1863.  both have prominent corporate deal-making and litigation practices. dewey, a 550-lawyer firm, is known as a specialist in mergers and acquisitions, having advised on major deals like the hospital operator hca's $33 billion leveraged buyout. and orrick, with more than 950 lawyers, is considered a leader in debt financing and capital market transactions and restructurings.  last year proved profitable for the two firms, with both claiming profits of about $1.4 million per equity partner. dewey earned $408 million in gross revenue and orrick pulled in $666 million for the 2006 fiscal year, both showing improvement over 2005.  