players' off-season regimens are as different as their swings   after christina kim struck her final golf shot last season, she suddenly had a number of options at her disposal for the off-season.  she could fly to her ancestral south korea, where yoga, acupuncture and long runs along snow-covered footpaths comprised her off-season program a year ago.  but she could also stay in orlando and continue to break in her new six-bedroom house, complete with an indoor putting green, a 60-inch flat-screen television and stacks of renè caovilla shoes.  eventually, she decided to stay home.  ''it's the ultimate bachelor pad,'' kim said. ''i haven't left the house for a month.''  kim is one of the hundreds of golfers on the l.p.g.a. and the pga tours whose off-season regimens are as unique as the golf swings they employ. with no spring-training games, mandatory minicamp practices or training-camp two-a-days, a professional golfer disappears for the winter and reappears months later on the first tee. [the pga tour season began yesterday at the mercedes-benz championship in hawaii; the l.p.g.a. tour season also starts in hawaii, feb. 15 at the sbs open at turtle bay.]  how golfers spend their off-season is entirely up to them, and it is up for review on an annual basis.  some golfers put their clubs away for weeks after the final tournament. some use the time off to open their own golf courses, which is what phil mickelson and davis love did in cabo san lucas, mexico. some golfers receive boxes full of new clubs to test, from titanium drivers guaranteeing the most distance, to putters promising a truer roll on the green.  almost all of the golfers head out to a driving range in long-sleeved shirts, looking for answers in the dirt and dew.  tiger woods said the weakest part of his game at the end of last season was driving. to address it, he spent part of his off-season testing several new drivers, including a square-shaped driver called sumo.  ''i do hit it further but launching it a little high,'' said woods, who will make his 2007 pga tour debut at the buick invitational on jan. 25. ''that's what the off-season is for, to try to dial it in.''  only days after competing at the season-finale tour championship in november, vijay singh was on the golf course at the t.p.c. at sawgrass with two golf bags attached to his golf cart. for several hours he worked his way through the bags, sending an array of wood and iron shots into the distance.  if there is a universal truth among golfers, it is that the off-season is often the ideal time to try new clubs and new approaches.  ''that's when i'll tinker,'' joe ogilvie, a pga tour golfer, said in a recent telephone interview. ''i've changed the driver, 3-wood, 5-wood and all my irons. once the season starts, the only thing i'll change the entire year is my wedges,'' he said, because the grooves of the wedges tend to get worn down during the season.  kim also called the off-season ''the best time to change clubs.''  ''whether you've had a great season or a crappy season, you start fresh,'' she said. ''i don't know how people can change clubs during the season. i see some girls changing three times a year. so much about golf is about trust. if you're used to hitting a club 150 yards and you get a new one and it goes 180, you're in trouble.''  the most common thread of a golfer's off-season is the workout program, though the amount and intensity vary from player to player. kim's trek to south korea at the end of the 2005 season was the talk of the l.p.g.a. tour. she shed more than 30 pounds on the trip.  ''i went over there to train and try to lose a winter coat i've been wearing for the last 20 summers,'' she said at the time.  kim woke up at 5 a.m. every day to run, eventually working her way up to nine miles. she attended yoga classes and saw an acupuncturist. she met with massage therapists and a dietician. she said she also hit about 700 balls a day, which burned even more calories.  she began the 2006 season by joining five of her l.p.g.a. tour peers at two academy awards after-parties.  but when tournament play started, her game suffered. after winning a tournament in 2004 and 2005, she did not win in 2006.  ''it felt like my worst season ever,'' kim, 22, said. ''it was an embarrassing situation for me. i had lost a lot of weight, and it affected my mental game. i'd be standing over a putt and it'd be: 'oh, i can see both of my feet now. one sock is higher than the other. there is a spot of lotion on my leg.' ''  when the season ended, kim started to replay the shots of her season, especially the ones that cost her victories and higher finishes.  she reviewed the women's british open at royal lytham and st. annes in particular, the tournament where she finished tied for 45th after a final-round 83.  ''on two par 3s, two shots that i thought i hit perfectly, i walked off with an 8 and a 9,'' kim said. ''those are the shots that wake you up and the shots you have nightmares about. some people say that it's karma when you hit a good shot and it rolls into a pot bunker. i don't remember doing anything so bad to make a 9.''  the season was tough enough that kim decided that she needed a little extra time away from the game this off-season. she kept her clubs on ice for a little longer than she did last year before finally driving over to lake nona golf and country club on a late december afternoon and hitting some balls.  she wore a bright outfit of purple and fuchsia and quickly found her rhythm on the range. soon she will be chasing annika sorenstam and lorena ochoa, karrie webb and paula creamer, but there is also a house to furnish.  ''everybody needs a break from golf, i don't care who you are,'' said kim, who plans to make her season debut next month in hawaii. ''i want to let the golf bug come back a little stronger.''  as for her goals once the off-season is over and her year begins?  ''i want to be the youngest player to get to $3 million,'' kim said, ''and then paula can get it a week later.''  golf  