commuters stranded after a boy, 13, is killed on l.i.r.r. tracks   a 13-year-old boy was struck and killed by a long island rail road train in queens at the height of yesterday evening's rush, the police said. the accident shut down the railroad's main line for nearly two hours and stranded thousands of commuters at pennsylvania station in manhattan.  the boy, whose name was not immediately released, was crossing the elevated tracks with two friends near 63rd drive in rego park at 5:40 p.m. when he was struck by an eastbound train heading toward huntington, said chief kevin mcconville of the metropolitan transportation authority police.  one of the friends told the police that the boy who was struck was taking photographs, the police said. acquaintances of the dead boy said that he was a budding graffiti writer and may have been trying to paint or photograph his tag on the side of the 63rd drive overpass, which is covered with spray-painted letters and scratchy designs. the tracks are fenced off, but there are gaps in the fence on the hill leading from the street level to the tracks.  neighbors in the boy's apartment building nearby on booth street said he had immigrated with his family from israel and he attended russell sage junior high school.  the boy was declared dead at the scene. his friends were not seriously injured.  the engineer, whose name was not released, followed railroad procedure and applied the emergency brake but was not able to stop in time, chief mcconville said.  the accident occurred on a straightaway between the woodside and forest hills stations where the speed limit is 40 miles an hour. the boy who was struck was the last of the three boys crossing the tracks, chief mcconville said. the main line carries the bulk of the railroad's traffic.  three miles east of where the accident occurred, the railroad branches out to half a dozen lines at jamaica station, but no trains could get from pennsylvania station to jamaica while the main line was shut down.  susan mcgowan, a railroad spokeswoman, said about 90 percent of rush-hour trains were delayed, one of them by nearly four hours. full service was restored by 8:30 p.m., she said.  about 1,000 passengers were on the train that struck the boy, which left penn station at 5:17, ms. mcgowan said. they were stuck on the train, above 63rd drive, for more than 90 minutes and were finally evacuated to another train and taken back to penn station around 8 p.m.  ''they told me it was going to jamaica and they just brought us back to manhattan,'' said one of the passengers on the train, robert keller.  mr. keller, a vice president for sales at a clothing company, said he learned about the accident during a phone call from his wife.  ''it's horrible what happened to the kid,'' he said. ''my heart goes out to the conductor.''  within hours of the boy's death, a friend had posted a memorial to him on myspace.com. beneath an epitaph was a photo of a brown-haired boy in a blue knit hat and a gray t-shirt, lying on a bed, flashing his braces as he smiled up at the camera.  correction:  january 13, 2007, saturday  a map in some copies last saturday with an article about the death of a 13-year-old boy who was struck by a long island rail road train in queens showed two branches of tracks in rego park that no longer exist. a corrected version of the map is at nytimes.com/region.  