with a 3-goal barrage, straka humbles the flyers   when his turn came to absorb the cheers after he was named the game's first star last night, rangers forward martin straka skated a small circle on the madison square garden ice. he raised his stick, lowered his eyes and disappeared into the tunnel as quickly as he could.  straka retreated from his moment in the sun, which came courtesy of a hat trick in the rangers' 3-2 victory over philadelphia. like usual, straka was content to let his game do most of his talking and all of his boasting.  ''i have said many times, sometimes you play the same way the whole year and the puck goes in and sometimes it doesn't,'' straka said. ''when you have the confidence, maybe you have a little more luck.''  of all of the rangers' big scorers, straka is by far the most unassuming. he regularly draws praise from coach tom renney for his diligent work habits and unflappable demeanor. it is impossible to tell after a game if straka has scored three goals or none. he plays on a line next to the dynamic and charismatic jaromir jagr and michael nylander, a gourmet menu on which straka's personality makes him the peanut butter sandwich.  ''he is a genuine, sincere guy, a soft-spoken, humble man who comes to work,'' renney said. ''he works awfully hard.''  that hard work has produced 21 goals, the latest three fashioning his sixth career hat trick. only brendan shanahan (23) has more goals for the rangers this season.  most of straka's success has come when renney stops tinkering with his usual line combinations. for much of the rangers' recent seven-game losing streak, straka had been playing with shanahan on the second line, an attempt to spread the scoring around.  but late in a 2-0 loss to the islanders last week, renney reached back for the chemistry of the straka-jagr-nylander line and is now reaping the benefits. the rangers (21-17-4) are on a three-game winning streak, firmly lodged in second place in the atlantic division and giving teams like philadelphia nightmares about trying to stop their big three.  ''they're a first line that is as formidable as there is in the league,'' shanahan said. ''i think the big thing they have is puck control. that's their best form of defense is having the puck on their stick.''  straka opened the rangers' scoring early in the first, slipping free in front of the goal to fire a pass from nylander past flyers goalie robert esche. straka scored again with 14 minutes 31 seconds left in the second, this time when a shot by michal rozsival deflected off flyers defenseman joni pitkanen and bounced right to him.  the flyers scored on a power play early in the third and came tantalizingly close to scoring again when a shot by dimitry afanasenkov bounced from one post to the other behind rangers goalie henrik lundqvist. an instant later, straka intercepted a flyers pass, tipped it to himself and skated off for a breakaway. he faked esche and slid a backhand inside the right post with 13:06 left.  the game got interesting late thanks to a stomach-dropping move by lundqvist, who corralled the puck and spotted the flyers' empty net with 21 seconds left. lundqvist wound up to shoot, but instead hit flyers forward mike york in the chest. york quickly fired the puck past lundqvist to make it a one-goal game.  on the bench, renney looked stricken. ''yeah, where's the air-travel bag,'' he said.  lundqvist did not feel much better. ''it was a bad decision,'' he said. ''i definitely wouldn't have done that if it was a one-goal game.''  fortunately for lundqvist, straka had already become the story. not that straka wanted it that way. he quickly credited his success to the outsized attention opponents pay to jagr, who routinely gets double-teamed.  asked if that might change if he keeps scoring, straka let out a big laugh.  ''oh no,'' he said. ''believe me it won't.''  slap shots  defenseman marek malik returned to the rangers' lineup after missing seven games with a groin injury.  philadelphia center peter forsberg missed the game with a groin injury, the latest in a series of woes that has limited forsberg to 27 games.  hockey  