spitzer's health care pledge focuses on easing the way for those entitled   gov. eliot spitzer vowed yesterday to make health insurance available to all children and enroll all eligible adults in medicaid. if carried out fully, his pledges would cut the number of uninsured new yorkers in half.  but those promises may not turn out to be as ambitious as described. how far they go will depend on details the governor and his staff said would not be made public until late this month.  at their most far-reaching, the governor's plans would give new york the lowest percentage of uninsured people in the country, and would mark a sharp increase in coverage for the poor. even so, such promises would not be as hard or as expensive to carry out as most people would guess, according to people who study the politics and economics of health care.  people who have no health insurance tend to be young and healthy, cheaper to care for and cheaper to cover than those who are currently covered. as a result, the united hospital fund, a policy research group, has estimated that covering all of the uninsured in new york would cost $4.1 billion a year -- less than one-tenth of what the state already spends on medicaid, the health plan for the poor. most of the uninsured are also poor, and already qualify for medicaid or a similar program, child health plus, so experts said that easier enrollment and more aggressive recruitment in those programs would almost certainly be at the center of mr. spitzer's plans.  the biggest obstacle, they said, could be new federal requirements that people signing up for medicaid produce birth certificates or other proof of citizenship.  in his first address to the legislature, mr. spitzer said, ''we will introduce a budget that in the very first year, guarantees access to health insurance for all of new york's 500,000 uninsured children.''  but to guarantee access to insurance and to guarantee actual coverage could be two very different things. many people have access to government programs, at least in theory, but do not take advantage of them. again, the governor did not say precisely what he meant by his promise.  in new york, children qualify for free health insurance through either medicaid or child health plus, in households that earn up to 160 percent of the federal poverty line -- about $21,000 a year for a family of four. above that limit, up to 250 percent of the poverty line -- about $33,000 for a family of four -- they are eligible for child health plus for a premium of $15 a month or less.  about two-thirds of new york's uninsured children already qualify for one of the programs on those terms. danielle holahan, senior health policy analyst at the united hospital fund, said, ''that, plus the fact that children are pretty cheap to insure,'' suggests that getting most of them enrolled ''is something we could tackle pretty easily.''  state law also says that any child, no matter how high the family income, can be enrolled in child health plus by paying a premium that averages less than $200 a month, much less than a commercial insurance policy. officials in the pataki administration argued that that means new york already guarantees access to coverage for all children.  ms. holahan said the state could draw middle-income children into child health plus by putting the premiums on a sliding scale as incomes rise, rather than having an abrupt jump up from $15 a month.  mr. spitzer said that within four years, ''we will enroll the 900,000 medicaid-eligible adults'' by simplifying the paperwork.  that promise could be tougher to keep, experts said, because he is promising not mere access but actual coverage. each year, about one-third of the people on medicaid in new york fail to renew their enrollment, though they remain eligible, so policy analysts say that an easier renewal process would keep some people enrolled. they also proposed tying medicaid enrollment to food stamps, welfare, schools and other public services.  but some people are reluctant to sign up, particularly immigrants who mistrust the government or just cannot be bothered.  ''the only way you ever get to really universal coverage is with some sort of individual mandate requiring people to enroll,'' said diane rowland, executive director of the kaiser commission on medicaid and the uninsured.  almost 14 percent of new yorkers are uninsured, according to the census bureau, below the national average of nearly 16 percent but well above minnesota, with the lowest rate, less than 9 percent. if mr. spitzer succeeds in insuring all children and all people eligible for medicaid, the number of uninsured in new york would drop below 7 percent.  medicaid spends more than $45 billion a year to insure 4.2 million new yorkers, but most of those costs are spent on older and disabled patients.  an estimated 1.2 million people qualify for medicaid or child health plus but are not enrolled. they are disproportionately healthy young adults and children.  ''low-income people who have serious health needs end up in a hospital emergency room, and they enroll in medicaid at that time, if they're not enrolled already,'' ms. rowland said. ''so the remaining uninsured tend to be healthier than those who are insured.''  changeover in albany  