a meeting with gerald ford   in the summer of 1975, i was asked by robert goldman, president ford's in-house intellectual, to participate in a discussion on ethnicity at the white house, one of a series put on for the edification of the president.  america was then going through the so-called ethnic revival. talk about the recovery of threatened ethnic heritage was everywhere, the beginnings of what later evolved into the multicultural and identity movement. politicians had been quick to grasp the movement's potential, and it would become a controversial issue in the subsequent presidential election.  i gathered from our conversation that the unusual nature of ford's ascent to the presidency had prevented the normal electoral process of learning that transformed local politicians into potential statesmen, and that the discussions were a crash course substitute. the other members of the ethnicity session would be daniel patrick moynihan, the future senator from new york, nat glazer, my colleague at harvard, michael novak, a writer and public speaker who had recently emerged as the leading ideologist of the revival, and john higham, the historian of immigration. i was flattered to be so honored, but felt it necessary to point out that i was then the friend of and special adviser to the second most radical leader in the hemisphere, prime minister michael manley of jamaica, who at the time was very much on the radar screen of the c.i.a. and state department. they already knew that, but my associations were deemed irrelevant. i was impressed.  we met one saturday in an airy, informal part of the white house, the room flooded with the late-morning light of early fall. the president's golf game had gone on a bit longer than anticipated, and as we waited i mused to myself that we were being asked to perform the intellectual version of a medieval jousting tournament. novak would passionately defend the ethnic revival; i was strongly against it. higham was more of my persuasion. moynihan and glazer were presumably the moderates, but since their recently published text, ''beyond the melting pot,'' had rapidly become the locus classicus of the new ethnicity, it was hardly an even match.  the president's entry was refreshingly lacking in drama. there was no sudden hush, no ego filling up the room, not the slightest whiff of alpha male testosterone. he was a fine-looking man, in a lake wobegon sort of way. casually dressed and relaxed in manner, he shook hands firmly, apologized for being late with a self-effacing remark about his game, then invited us to have drinks with him. he finished two martinis before lunch. moynihan and i happily joined him, while the others discreetly held glasses filled with something else.  accompanying the president was the soft-spoken young aide who had initiated and made this all possible. his shoulders hunched in a confiding way as he addressed us, and his thoughtful, collegial manner put us instantly at ease. this was dick cheney, the chief of staff, and i will never be able to reconcile the open, intellectually broad-minded person i met that day with the secretive éminence grise of today.  during the discussion's more formal phase, i told the president that i had been drawn to america by the cosmopolitanism of its mainstream, not to seek sanctuary in an atavistic cocoon. i argued that all ethnic movements are two-edged swords. beginning benignly, and sometimes necessary to repair injured collective psyches, they often end in tragedy, especially when they turn political, as illustrated by german history.  i also argued that the ethnic revival was partly a reaction against the recent gains of black americans. sadly, black leaders' shift to separatism and identity politics had legitimized this reactionary backlash against them. whatever the president's personal position, i urged him to keep the state out of it.  throughout our discussion the president listened attentively. he occasionally asked a question -- nothing profound, but enough to suggest that he was following it all quite closely. as we talked over lunch it slowly dawned on me that the president's behavior was the most inspiring display of self-assured humility i had ever witnessed. here he sat, the most powerful man in the world, eager to learn about his own society, even from a recent immigrant.  he was a man at peace with himself. uncomplicated but without a trace of shallowness; calm, dignified and quietly engaging, a person you would like to be your friend.  op-ed columnist orlando patterson, a professor of sociology at harvard, is a guest columnist.  