artists caught in the act   in a formal museum setting, there's nothing quite like a depiction of an artist at work to lower your guard. especially in older art. whether by degas or rockwell, these scenes frequently combine the allure of intimate, taboo or arcane knowledge with an irresistibility similar to that exerted by small cute things, like puppies or babies. they let us inside and they soften us up, offering a mix of reality and romance that is the visual equivalent of a backstage tour or a behind-the-music video. we see an artist's process, circumstances or sense of self, and glimpse the tools and tricks of a given trade. the seeming collapse of art's fourth wall is almost inevitably thrilling.  i realized this at the metropolitan museum of art a couple of days before christmas, when i was suddenly brought up short by ''in the studio,'' a midsize canvas from 1888 by alfred stevens (1823-1906), a paris-based belgian painter who was a friend of manet's. if not entirely enthralled by the fussy realism of the painting -- which hangs in the long, wide thoroughfare that leads past the 19th-century paintings and sculpture galleries -- i became fascinated with its story line and the spell it cast.  i began to wonder what else the met might have on view in the way of images of artists or artisans at work. aided by suggestions from several met curators, i set forth under crowded holiday conditions a few days before new year's eve, combing the collection for moments of self-disclosure, self-reference and self-celebration.  since i had previously only glanced at the stevens in passing and never focused on its title, i think i must have assumed that it showed three women having tea. wrong. it shows three women (and a fourth under construction) having what might today be identified as a studio visit.  the artist -- hair up, wearing a smock -- stands to one side, resting her elbow familiarly on the upper edge of a painting in progress. on the canvas is a brushed-in rendering of the woman at the left, who sits cross-legged on a cushy russet sofa, holding a pose, hair down, wearing a shimmering gold robe and holding in her lap a gold platter. the label explains that she is posing as salome (the platter awaits john the baptist's head); that the painting and the studio are stevens's own; and that the image is similar to a well-known salome painted in 1870 by henri regnault. (conveniently, it is in the met's collection and hanging next to the stevens.)  close to the artist and her painting sits an alert, engaged visitor, a young woman dressed in a proper, high-necked black day suit, possibly offering a friendly outside opinion. as usual with paintings of this sort, the furnishings are a calculated mix of exotic and functional, including an animal-skin rug; a small, messy chest of drawers; and a silk screen. on the wall is a veritable catalog of pictorial idioms and cultural influences: a cluster of small contemporary paintings, a japanese hanging scroll (and small parasol) and a convex mirror whose reflection has a dark, old masterish mien.  as with the mirrors in velázquez's ''meninas,'' arguably art's greatest image of an artist at work, the mirror extends the painting's spatial illusion outward. it circles behind us and puts us in the picture, a frequent hook in images of artists at work.  and what did stevens -- who was unusually welcoming to female pupils -- mean by painting a woman painting salome? perhaps he was being a man of his time, warning against feminine wiles. or perhaps he was a little ahead, suggesting the unacknowledged power of women as artists.  the notion of the artist as a worthy subject for art became especially prominent in the west in the 17th century and was further bolstered by the onset of romanticism in the first half of the 19th. so i wasn't surprised that most, but happily not all, of the working artists i came across at the met were in works made in europe or the united states after 1750.  these portrayals can range from realistic portraits or self-portraits to caricatures or symbolic surrogates. you can see what i mean downstairs from the stevens, on the first floor of the lila acheson wallace wing. just to the right of the entrance is a nice antidote to the hot-house detail of the stevens: Édouard vuillard's almost vaporous ''self-portrait with a friend,'' from 1889. the painting discreetly tips its hat to ''las meninas'' with the doubled liquor bottle in the lower right corner, which recasts the painting as the mirror in which vuillard studies his reflection while painting the work we are looking at.  the self-portrait is a medley of soft, loosely brushed greens and grays and merging shapes that shows vuillard with brush and palette, while a male friend stands just a little behind him on his left. it suggests attention to degas and perhaps whistler at a point when vuillard was finding himself as an artist. within a year or two, he would be on his own in the close, flattened interiors populated by his family and its wallpaper, blended suggestively together with tactile dabs of paint. here he seems to assess his prospects with quiet, unhurried confidence.  the figure of the artist is considerably more abstract and symbolic in george braque's ''woman seated at an easel'' in the same galleries. painted in 1936, it entered the met's collection only in 1996, with the florene m. schoenborn bequest. as in the stevens, the artist is female, but she is also a sign: a cut-and-folded descendant of the cubist muses who has taken up the brush herself, possibly to make a self-portrait. but the main event here is the play of light and dark that subdivides the whole scene: artist, palette and easel, even the lemons in a still life hanging on the wall, but most dramatically the patterned wallpaper behind her, creating a trapezoid of yellow that, not unlike a mirror, indicates an unseen window, curtains included. the painting's puzzlelike richness of interlocking shapes and patterns reminds us how great braque could be, after picasso.  nearby, overlooking a gallery of classically demure european modernist works, red grooms's clunky, comical homage ''chance encounter at 3 a.m.'' fuzzes the line between working and not working. this large, tactile canvas -- whose heroic scale evokes new york school painting -- shows mark rothko and willem de kooning sitting stiffly on a bench in washington square park, smoking and staring into space, with the panorama of the arch, 1 fifth avenue and washington square north (where edward hopper had his studio) behind them.  they wear paint-splattered clothes and startled expressions, as if they have both just bolted from uncooperative works-in-progress. their stiff demeanor suggests mutual surprise (misery doesn't love company?) and indicates, perhaps, that for some artists, not working is just a less productive, more tormented form of working. the muse of painting drifts above them in a green party dress. the painting documents the artists' first meeting, although it occurred in the 1930s, not in the '50s, as the setting here suggests.  meanwhile, not too far into the european painting galleries at the top of the met's grand staircase, you'll find two depictions of women making art, at opposite ends of a long wall in the second large gallery. the more opulent is adélaïde labille-guiard's 1785 ''self-portrait with two pupils,'' which shows the beautifully dressed artist, in a frothy gown and an elegant feathered hat, busily at work while two respectful female pupils look on. she glances up from her easel, toward her subject, us. labille-guiard (1749-1803) was an established artist who segued from portraits of royals to portraits of the revolutionary government. trained by a miniaturist, she was unfailingly attentive to details of dress and furniture. here the tour de force may be the parquet floor.  at the other end of the wall, marie-denise villers's 1801 ''young woman drawing'' shows another beautiful woman looking up from her work as if, again, we are the sitters. the intervening 16 years have brought great change: the simple white, high-waisted muslin gown and the spare setting of the villers attest to the passing of rococo and the rise of neo-classicism. but for all its restraint, the picture, a possible self-portrait, advertises villers's skills. because of a gaping hole in the lower right pane, the view outside -- of a building and a couple on a balustrade -- is painted in two subtly contrasting tones, one through dusty glass, the other en plein air.  no disrespect intended, but the met's musical instrument galleries are a useful shortcut from the european galleries to the american wing, which is in excellent shape these days and rife with paintings of working artists. and sculptures, too. on the mezzanine of the engelhard court, you can take in daniel chester french's theatrical ''angel of death and the sculptor from the milmore memorial.'' this larger-than-life marble tableau from 1926, based on a turn-of-the-century bronze, memorializes the sculptor martin milmore, who died in 1883 at 39. death is a pre-raphaelite amazon, with enormous wings, grecian gown and cantilevered shroud. she stays the chisel of the peter pan-ish artist as he fashions a relief of the sphinx. his sleeveless t-shirt is worthy of bruce springsteen.  in the american wing's painting galleries, the first notable sight is thomas cole's classic panoramic view of the ox-bow of the connecticut river from mount holyoke, near northampton, mass. as the eye sweeps across the valley and its loop of shining water, don't miss cole himself. he's down the hill a bit, in a red shirt and a high hat, sitting at the easel between two boulders. it is 1836, and he looks back over his shoulder as if to catch our eye: look at me. i'm painting america as never before.  the challenge of being an american painter must have been on matthew pratt's mind decades earlier, when he painted a group portrait presciently called ''the american school'' in london in 1765. in this silken image, three young artists so soft-skinned they might almost be babies group around a table while a slightly older artist, possibly benjamin west, examines a drawing proffered by one. pratt includes himself at the right, but looking more mature and with a painter's tools and a just-started canvas. the main pictorial action is determined by shifting levels of the men's heads and the more regular rhythms of their neatly stockinged calves, alternating with the wood legs of chairs, table and easel.  several works near the pratt, and in surrounding galleries, amount to a vigorous debate between sophisticated realism and naïve rendering. that exchange finds a certain resolution in the quiet, stiff accuracy of the pratt.  on the north balcony you'll find several paintings of artists at work clustered in a corner, as well as louis moeller's delectable, if empty, ''sculptor's studio,'' a meticulous study in shades of gray, beige and white that a met curator recommended, even though it didn't quite fill the artist-at-work imperative. i can see why. on the mezzanine level below, you'll find samuel aloysius murray's small 1907 bronze of thomas eakins sitting cross-legged on the floor with his palette (the label says he is working on ''the agnew clinic,'' which was too big for the easel) and louis lang's ''women's art class,'' from around 1868.  as mentioned, not all the artists at work in the met's art are western. a door in the long hallway in the american wing leads to the japanese galleries and the marvelous installation ''flowing streams,'' which includes two hanging scrolls, side by side, both titled ''the poetry gathering at the orchid pavilion.''  one was painted in 1816 by okada beisanjin, the other in 1855 by yamamoto baiitsu. like the efforts of earlier chinese and japanese painters, these works commemorate a legendary (but real) get-together that is often seen as the genesis of the literati tradition of the scholar-painter.  the gathering was convened in 353 by wang xizhi (303-361), the period's premier calligrapher, in zhejiang province in southern china. in the 1855 version, the poets enjoy a drunken frolic beside a winding stream. in the earlier one, they are more subdued and isolated, with the visual buzz provided mostly by strange pretzel-like rocks (scholar's rocks crossed with barbara hepworth). in both images you can make out the tiny figure of wang in the middle distance, at a table with brush and paper. in the yamamoto he is seated in the pavilion contemplating some waterfowl in the lake before him. in the okada he is already at work, in the open air.  directly below the asian wing, a curator's suggestion steered me to a rare image of egyptian sculptors at work. (it is in gallery 26 of the egyptian wing, at the bottom of the stairs leading from the asian.) on display are tempera copies of wall paintings in a tomb at thebes that were made in 1927 by the artist nina de garis davies (1881-1965), although davies's name is not on the label. the image is high on a wall in group 33 and shows five artists on a scaffold, working collectively and in strict profile, polishing and inscribing a large royal statue.  you could say that a work of art is remade every time someone savors it in a long, thorough way. absorbing art's effect and grasping its meaning starts partly by deciphering the how and what of its physical particulars. it was in that spirit that two curators who specialize in art from opposite sides of the globe and widely spaced centuries, displayed in galleries on opposite sides of the museum, arrived at a similar conclusion.  both recommended abstract works with nary an artist, studio or tool in sight. but both works convey, as each curator said in slightly different ways, the essence of the artist's gestures and being -- and nothing more or less. one, you may have guessed, is jackson pollock's extravagant yet ordered whirlwind, ''autumn rhythm (number 30)'' of 1950. the other is a hand scroll by the chinese calligrapher huang tingjian in the marvelous exhibition ''brush and ink'' in the chinese art galleries of the asian wing. working in the 11th century, huang wanted to liberate calligraphy and make it more personally expressive, which is confirmed by the way his characters dance and unravel across the paper. if you decide to see the two works in succession, you might travel between them on a route that takes you through the belfer court and pre-classical greece. there, with more curatorial guidance, i found another rare portrayal of a working artist, this one from the late eighth or early seventh century b.c. and displayed in a vitrine just inside the court (on the right, coming from the great hall).  it is a delightful, if relatively minute, bronze of an armorer working on a bronze helmet. clearly related to the abbreviated, sticklike figures on the large vases in the vicinity, it has a plasticity and life force all its own. like alfred stevens's painting of the all-girl studio visit, it is something you might have passed, oblivious, more times than you can count.  art  