are 'guaranteed departures' guaranteed?   after taking time off from work, reserving plane tickets and finding a pet sitter, the last thing travelers want to find is that their vacations have been canceled because too few people signed up for the tour. but that's what usually happened when a tour operator didn't get enough paying customers to cover the cost of a trip -- until now.  to encourage bookings and gain the trust of travelers whose trips have been canceled, a growing number of tour operators are promising to run certain tours no matter how many people sign up. the so-called guaranteed departures began showing up in the brochures of escorted-tour operators like trafalgar tours and globus & cosmos in 2005. others quickly followed suit.  collette vacations, based in pawtucket, r.i., just started offering guaranteed departure dates for trips in 2007. travel alliance partners, a collection of 33 north american tour operators, put together a catalog of 64 guaranteed-to-run tours for 2006 that was so successful it rolled out another one for 2007 with 92 trips from its members. travelers can book the trips at www.guaranteeddepartures.com. country walkers, a soft-adventure travel company in waterbury, vt., started guaranteeing departures for its 2006 itineraries paid in full 90 days before the start date.  promising that a trip will operate on the day it is scheduled and will not be canceled for lack of participation has helped build confidence in the tour industry, which was forced to cancel many trips for that reason during the travel slump after sept. 11, 2001.  ''many times, people were disappointed because there were not enough in a group for the bus to go,'' said james j. palmeri, executive director of travel alliance partners. ''individual travelers were disappointed because their vacation was canceled, tour operators were disappointed because they lost a trip they thought they had, and travel agents were disappointed because they thought they had a sale on a trip.''  eileen rudden, an executive at a boston communications company, was let down after her first choice in tour operators, backroads, of berkeley, calif., canceled the march trip she wanted to take to costa rica -- even before she had a chance to sign up.  ''i was extremely disappointed,'' said ms. rudden, who added that she had traveled with backroads and enjoyed the trips. ''they had it in all their materials, and i was calling them in november for a trip in march. it made me think maybe they don't have this costa rica thing down.''  backroads said it doesn't cancel trips because of low enrollment, but a small number of departures listed in its brochure are scrapped if no reservations are made after a period of time.  ms. rudden has since booked her vacation with country walkers, which is guaranteeing the departure date. although she booked the trip based mainly on her rigid vacation schedule, ms. rudden said the departure guarantee ''is something of value.''  but as reassuring as they sound, guaranteed departures aren't always, well, guaranteed. travelers who read the fine print soon learn that even though a trip may be called guaranteed, there is still a chance that their vacations could be canceled or postponed.  in some cases, this is simply good practice on the tour operator's part. tour operators reserve the right to cancel guaranteed departures, if a major event like a war could endanger travelers. there are also circumstances outside of an operator's control.  for instance, many companies, including travcoa, which guarantees all departure dates in its brochure, were forced to cancel trips to libya last year after the country stopped issuing visas to american travelers. others canceled trips to israel when war broke out last summer.  but tour operators also reserve the right to cancel tours for financial reasons. promising that a trip will run even when there are too few customers signed up to cover the cost of the tour means the tour operator has to absorb the balance. to avoid a potentially big loss, many companies exclude particularly expensive trips from their list of guaranteed departures.  travcoa, for example, excludes trips that involve chartered boats or aircraft. country walkers doesn't include trips like those to iceland, new zealand and chile in its guaranteed departure program because of the high costs and, sometimes, currency fluctuations associated with such trips.  other tour operators avoid the high cost of running trips with too few participants by guaranteeing only their most popular journeys. trafalgar, which guaranteed about 30 percent of all its journeys in its brochures this year, plans to guarantee more departure dates on its web site as demand grows and trips start to fill up. and globus & cosmos, in fact, flags trips on its web sites as ''guaranteed departures'' for travel agents, but calls those same dates ''popular departures'' on their consumer sites, www.globusjourneys.com and www.cosmos.com.  that nomenclature helps avoid an obvious question: how likely are trips to operate that aren't guaranteed? ninety-nine percent, tour operators say.  so why offer guarantees at all? ''it gives people peace of mind,'' said john g. severini, president of trafalgar tours.  and peace of mind, in turn, encourages early bookings. ''we did it to meet the demand of people wanting to book way in advance,'' he said, ''and get the early payment discount and be assured of a departure.''  some companies, like wilderness travel and mountain travel sobek, stay away from guaranteed departures altogether. ''it can be a bit misleading to clients,'' said barbara banks, a spokeswoman for wilderness travel, a berkeley, calif., company that instead offers tiered pricing, which lowers the cost of the trip per person as the number of participants grows. for example, a 15-day journey in argentine patagonia costs $4,995 a person if 11 or 12 people sign up, compared with $5,595 for 6 or 7.  ''we let them know that we make every effort to run the trip,'' ms. banks said, ''and we also let them know how much it is going to cost them.''  practical traveler | tour operators  