with ed, all's green on the domestic front   allow me to begin with a confession: i had no idea that ed begley jr., an actor whose near constant presence on television doesn't swing his curriculum vitae easily into recollection, is at heart an impassioned conservationist. i was unaware, for instance, that many people consider him, as his wife, rachelle carson, explains in ''living with ed,'' a new reality show about the couple's home life, ''an environmental hero.''  apparently mr. begley has been publicly doing good things for the planet for more than three decades. admired by people like robert f. kennedy jr., he is no good-cause opportunist driving around hollywood in a prius because that is what the famous and peripherally famous fashionably do. no, mr. begley driving a prius would be like raymond chandler writing an installment of the hardy boys. instead he has a volkswagen reconfigured to run purely on electricity. he relies on it when he's not on his mobile bike, which he uses when not home powering his toaster with energy summoned from a stationary bike.  ''living with ed,'' which makes its debut on hgtv on sunday night, explores a marriage between two people with opposing domestic agendas and it is a delight, a ''green acres'' for an era in which we have come to expect connecticut to feel like cuba well past columbus day. the begleys live in a modest two-bedroom home in studio city, calif., where ms. carson has a certain appreciation for fluff: big functionless pillows on her bed to supplement those used for sleeping.  what man really understands boudoir pillows anyway? mr. begley doesn't, nor does he understand why his wife takes showers that are way too long or why she doesn't like the look of the energy-saving compact fluorescent lighting he insists on. you quickly see that ecological idealism is not as compatible with the spare aesthetic of affluence as design magazines would have us imagine. sacrifice is not a living room that looks like a spa in bali; it is a fence made out of recycled milk jugs.  mr. begley happens to have one, but he doesn't demand that you do. he is too eccentrically charming for sanctimony, which is why, it would seem, ms. carson remains more amused by her husband than annoyed by him. she can't supply the fakery reality tv demands and consequently is fun to watch.  the directors want her to come off as a bit of a gold-digger -- a woman presumably hoping to upgrade to a bigger house where she could leave the lights on all day -- but she isn't a very believable one. it is clear that she is happy just where she is, with a man who composted way before he had a backyard.  living with ed  hgtv, sunday night at 10, eastern and pacific times; 9, central time.  bud brutsman, executive producer; joseph brutsman, co-executive producer; jennifer shields, supervising producer; andy singer, vice president of original programming for hgtv; ed begley jr. and rachelle carson, hosts.  television review  correction:  january 18, 2007, thursday  a television review in weekend on jan. 5 about the new reality show ''living with ed,'' on hgtv, misidentified the car that ed begley jr. drives. it is a toyota converted to run on electricity, not a volkswagen.  