genetic park   next  by michael crichton.  431 pp. harpercollins publishers.  $27.95.  though the moment may lack the inherent gravitas of harriet beecher stowe's encounter with abraham lincoln, or even elvis presley's private audience with richard nixon, surely history should reserve a special place for the day in 2005 when michael crichton was invited to the white house to meet with george w. bush. imagine: the modern era's leading purveyor of alarmist fiction, seated side by side with michael crichton. oh, to be a concealed recording system in that oval office! did crichton confess to his host that he'd been inspired to write ''rising sun'' by a certain poppy in chief with a propensity for puking on japanese dignitaries? did our president tell crichton he found the dinosaurs of ''jurassic park'' every bit as frightening as our ancestors did at the dawn of time, 6,000 years ago?  a serendipitous f.o.i.a. request may later prove me wrong, but i'm going to assume the conversation at that fateful appointment focused largely on crichton's 2004 novel, ''state of fear,'' his heavily footnoted attempt at expressing his skepticism about man-made climate change (a k a global warming) via mass-market fiction. perhaps sensing that no one would buy a techno-thriller with senator james inhofe as its protagonist, crichton made his apostate hero an m.i.t. scientist/undercover agent who battles eco-terrorists and enunciates rousing catchphrases like ''there is mass balance data extending five years or more for only 79 glaciers in the entire world.'' step off, ian fleming!  crichton's latest novel, ''next,'' not only preserves the hysterical tenor and questionable methodology of ''state of fear,'' but also completes the author's metamorphosis from steely-eyed augur of the not-too-distant future to unabashed demagogue.  the nebulous bogeyman of ''next'' is the field of genetic research, which, in crichton's view, is driven not by scientific goals but by the financial ambitions of private firms and universities and the egos of professors, and is progressing at an exponential rate that regulatory legislation cannot keep pace with. nor can our judicial system protect the public from science's unwanted advances, because the courts, as one character claims, ''are totally incompetent. the courts don't realize how fast things are changing. they don't understand we are already in a new world. they don't get the new issues.'' unless we correct our present course, the novel suggests, we might soon face a world where we lose control of our own tissue and dna to corporations, insurance companies revoke our policies based on our genetic predisposition to disease, our offspring sue us for passing our biological infirmities on to them, and maybe -- just maybe -- half-human, half-chimpanzee hybrids are permitted to live among us and attend our public schools.  some of these concerns are more valid than others, but rather than risk a fair hearing of the arguments, crichton once again stacks the rhetorical deck heavily in his own favor. the characters in this multipronged narrative who espouse the author's beliefs are given ample opportunity to explain their viewpoints in calm, rational tones, while those who would dare to contradict him are depicted as sophists, plagiarists and charlatans or, worse still, trust-fund liberals who live in northern california lofts and read mother jones magazine.  in one scene, a biology professor who clearly enjoys crichton's sympathy delivers a four-page-long speech on the perils of stem cell research, beginning with the familiar gambit that any suggestion such treatments might soon cure degenerative diseases is a cruel fraud ''intended to ensure funding for researchers, at the expense of false hopes for the seriously ill.'' never mind that this canard has been shot down time and time again -- is it any more responsible of crichton to dismiss the potential of stem cell research in a novel that implies we're just around the corner from talking apes, gene therapies for drug addiction and transgenic parrots that can recite whole swaths of dialogue from ''red river''?  hypocrisy is only one of the novel's sins. throughout ''next,'' crichton divides his competing plotlines -- a trial lawyer fleeing a bounty hunter who wants to claim the lawyer's valuable genetic material; a pedophiliac biotech worker beset by a 16-year-old girl savvy enough to fake her own rape -- with chapter breaks that are meant to read like authentic newspaper articles and press releases. some of these reports are based in reality, but they often play fast and loose with the facts: while it is true, for example, that the australian performance artist stelarc has sought to grow a quarter-scale replica of his own ear from living cells, it is not true, as crichton suggests, that the project was successfully completed at m.i.t., or that hearing-aid companies were interested in licensing the technology. the author makes no attempt to distinguish his extrapolations from established fact, and even seems to relish the ambiguity. as crichton helpfully puts it in a disclaimer, ''this novel is fiction, except for the parts that aren't.''  elsewhere, a subplot about a pipeline construction supervisor who learns that his cancer-fighting cells were extracted by his doctor and sold to a drug company seems to be based on the real-life case of a leukemia patient, john moore. in 1990, the supreme court of california found that moore's tissue ceased to be his property once it left his body, and that his doctor had the right to profit from conducting research on it. the court, however, did not rule that the doctor owned all the dna in moore's cells, or that he could forcibly extract replacement tissue from moore or his offspring. but that doesn't stop crichton from allowing his version of events to play out to this unintentionally ridiculous conclusion.  all science fiction has some element of titillation -- a strategy of taking known facts and stretching them to the limits of credulity, for the purposes of both entertaining and enlightening. but crichton seems intent on confusing his readers, pummeling them with a barrage of truths, half-truths and untruths, until they have no choice but to surrender. as one of the author's numerous stand-ins warns a naïve interlocutor, ''disinformation takes many forms.'' here, finally, crichton has a point that should be heeded.  dave itzkoff writes the across the universe column for the book review.  