with ad deal, insurer wades into bridge traffic   drivers crossing the george washington bridge must contend with 18-wheelers, infuriating delays and noxious exhaust. soon, they will also have advertisements from geico.  the port authority of new york and new jersey is expected to announce an arrangement with geico, the auto insurance giant, that will include the posting of a huge billboard on top of the toll plaza in fort lee, n.j., that says ''geico drive safely.'' drivers will also see geico signs with the company's mascot, a gecko, on the tollbooths and electronic signs on the approach roads.  geico's message will also be integrated into the port authority's direct mailings and its web site, and costumed gecko mascots will appear at port authority bus stations.  the arrangement, first reported in the wall street journal, will provide the agency with $3.2 million over two years. it is the first of its kind for the port authority, which has been trying to find new sources of revenue to offset rising costs, said stephen sigmund, the agency's chief of public and government affairs.  geico is not the first company to think about buying a bridge -- or at least the advertising rights to one. and other public agencies have been exploring unconventional ways to bring in more money, even if it means toying with long-held taboos about commercializing public spaces. the golden gate bridge, highway and transportation district, for instance, is exploring how to sell sponsorships in san francisco.  mr. sigmund said the port authority had been looking for the right advertisers since at least 2005, adding that geico was a natural since it is one of the country's largest and best-known auto insurers.  in a world where consumers can fast-forward through television advertisements, subscribe to commercial-free satellite radio and block pop-up ads on the internet, companies like geico are continually looking for fresh ways to get in front of consumers.  in that context, getting in front of about 57 million eastbound drivers who cross the george washington bridge each year could amount to a gold mine, especially because it is not uncommon for cars to spend 15 or more minutes creeping toward the toll plaza in new jersey.  ''this is more than just eyeballs; it's about reinforcing a message about a bridge that people have an endearing feeling to,'' said drew sheinman, chief executive of axcess partners worldwide, a marketing company hired by the port authority to develop new advertising.  mr. sheinman said that under the agreement, no other signs can compete with geico's at the bridge, which may allay fears that the toll plaza will become overrun with ads.  ''this is not going to be left field at yankee stadium,'' he said.  still, the new signs could irritate drivers who view their cars as a refuge from media messages, as well as preservationists who see the bridge, a landmark, as unfit for commercial advertisements -- even if they appear only on the tollbooths.  ''it's a city icon that should not be tampered with in this way,'' said vanessa gruen, of the streetscape committee at the municipal art society, which deals with street and sidewalk advertising. ''it's not really worth the amount of money they'll get out of it to block the view of the span.''  brand experts also questioned whether geico, which has won plaudits for its imaginative advertising campaigns, may turn off customers and dilute its name by making it too prominent.  ''since advertisers have generally lost some degree of control over what messages get into people's lives, consumers resent getting them foisted on them,'' said robert passikoff, the president of brand keys, a brand consultant.  but, mr. passikoff added, consumers may warm to the geico ads as well as others on prominent public buildings and bridges if they know the proceeds are being used to improve service.  the port authority has set a goal of generating $100 million in advertising and sponsorships, about three times more than it currently brings in, mr. sigmund said. he said, though, that the new advertising must match the surroundings and not jeopardize safety.  last month, for instance, the port authority announced an agreement with samsung, the electronics giant, to install power outlets at kennedy international airport that travelers with laptop computers will be able to use.  