handshakes, hoodies and hostility   the h.c. of the n.y.j. introduced a novel approach yesterday to the bittersweet but largely bland business of competing against the familiar headmaster in the hoodie on the new england side of the field.  ''i thought my handshake was strong, firm,'' eric mangini said, breaking down his postgame salutations of earlier this season with his mentor betrayed, the patriots' bill belichick. ''my dad always told me it was important to have a good handshake. i try to be consistent with that. i've experimented with a couple of different handshakes that haven't worked for me. so i feel good about what i brought in.''  what mangini delivered yesterday, with armageddon a mere 72 hours away, was what is known outside the fraternity of fatally serious professional football coaches as a wry sense of humor. give credit where it's due. belichick, for his part, was probably off perfecting his look-away shake, or a halfhearted wave from the hole he will want to fall into should his patriots go down and out sunday to mangini and the jets.  not yet 36, riding a rookie coach wave of good cheer into his postseason debut, maybe mangini understands he will be playing with house money at gillette stadium in foxborough, mass., now that his 10-6 team has defied the experts, now that the genius we call belichick has acknowledged him by name, been made to cry ''eric.''  as it took four months and two regular-season snubs, it's difficult to not think there is some poetic justice in belichick having to deal -- sooner than he ever imagined -- with mangini in a postseason setting. this can't be fun for belichick, sweating out the specter of being upstaged at home by mangini, who as a wide-eyed twentysomething spliced film for him in cleveland and rose all the way to defensive coordinator last season in new england before landing his head-coaching gig.  no one, least of all mangini, expected belichick to stay in close touch, telephone his encouragement, as have members of the old gang he mentioned yesterday -- charlie weis at notre dame, romeo crennel in cleveland, even the patriarch of this successful but sometimes dysfunctional coaching family, old papa parcells down in dallas.  ''it's harder to call people in the same division,'' mangini said, insisting as he has all season there is no belichick feud, at least not from his end. ''the way i feel about bill is the way i've felt about bill since i first got to know him. my feelings have not changed one iota.''  nor have belichick's, apparently. even when he admitted wednesday, ''eric and his staff have done a great job,'' it came with an addendum: mangini inherited a team that two years ago was within a kick of the a.f.c. championship game.  true that may be, it was another strange and petty slap upside the headset. whatever mangini's perceived offense -- he tampered with the former patriots receiver deion branch or tried to recruit from belichick's staff or refused belichick's suggestion that he spurn an organization belichick has come to despise -- belichick's own separation from bill parcells made mangini's from him look like a tearful embrace at the foxborough bus station.  at least mangini made a conventional departure, as opposed to belichick's scribbling of his january 2000 resignation in shorthand -- the infamous disclaimer that he did not want to be the h.c. of the n.y.j. -- on his way to the patriots from the jets.  much as belichick's decision to escape parcells's shadow turned out to be the stroke of his career, it was a truly bizarre divorce, little bill from big bill, who himself has never quite perfected the art of the graceful exit. is parcells's clumsiness some kind of ancestral defect?  witness how the former belichick assistant in cleveland, nick ''i'm not going to be the alabama coach'' saban, played his former employer in miami against his new one in tuscaloosa. after he was reminded again by louisiana state on wednesday night of how notre dame lacks the overall athleticism to compete on the january bowl stage, will weis soon recant his contention of no interest in the giants should a defeat sunday in philadelphia result in the dismissal of tom coughlin?  consider the gothic symmetry of coughlin, another product of the parcells school of inner conflict, replaced by charlie the second-generation tuna, while parcells himself bows out (again) after a cowboys defeat tomorrow in seattle.  instead of firing up the jets with old fight films, mangini could consider showing them the parcells extended coaching family archives. then again, as bert randolph sugar, boxing's cigar-chomping author and raconteur, reminded me the other day, there is a rather historic encounter that mangini might recognize as fitting: larry holmes was a beloved sparring partner of muhammad ali's before soundly beating his mentor in a 1980 championship bout.  would mangini be that self-serving? is he breaking the mold, taking the career high road, or is he eddie haskell playing nice for the cleavers of the news media?  ''he strikes me as a guy who has thought this was what he was going to do 15 to 20 years ago,'' said pete kendall, the jets' candid guard. ''i don't think i can recall a moment where i looked over at him and thought, 'uh, i bet he wishes he had a do-over there.' ''  as long as he doesn't get too sappy this weekend, roll out ''rocky.''  ''i'm hoping he doesn't feel like he has to resort to fiction at this point,'' kendall said.  why would he? this long-running jets-patriots rivalry is as real as belichick's resentment, as firm as the mangini handshake will be sunday, when he has so much to win and so little, really, to lose.  sports of the times e-mail: hjaraton@nytimes.com  