how to end long island's sour vintages   the decision by the leucadia corporation to forgo planting vines on the two long island vineyards it purchased in 2005 is only the latest news to give pause to supporters of long island wine.  as the first corporate investor on long island with well-regarded properties in california and oregon, leucadia's purchase was seen as an endorsement of the region's winegrowing potential. now its decision to give up on the purchased vines comes just as two other north fork wineries -- lieb vineyards and sherwood house -- put themselves on the market. let's face it: the fact that nearly 25 percent of north fork wineries are for sale suggests that all is not healthy for long island wine.  despite the public relations image of happy daytrippers frequenting busy local wineries, a close examination of the industry and its winegrowing environment suggests a more troubled picture. what's wrong?  winegrowing, notwithstanding all the romance, is at root an agricultural and economic enterprise, and conditions for both must be right. unfortunately, experience thus far shows that the agricultural environment prevents the region from being economically successful, and the economic environment is becoming increasingly treacherous.  long island's small land mass limits the amount of wine that can be produced. the region's temperate climate produces a style of wine that is middle-weight and crisp, not the smooth, rich style of reds and whites currently commanding critical and consumer acclaim -- and high prices.  in addition, the year-to-year vagaries of the climate prevent the region from producing top quality wines every vintage. and these variations alienate consumers who are used to the consistent style they can get from an australian or californian merlot or chardonnay.  initially, the variation between vintages was put forward as an advantage by local vintners, who touted the region as ''america's bordeaux.'' this comparison, however, has led producers down a perilous path. yes, bordeaux wines taste quite different year to year. but with the exception of the top chateaus, the bordeaux market is now in crisis, with producers unable to recoup their costs and invest in their properties to improve their wines -- a dubious business model for any winegrowing region.  additionally, it is not at all clear that the major bordeaux grape varieties -- cabernet sauvignon, cabernet franc and merlot -- are well suited to long island's growing conditions. indeed, even in the broad expanse of bordeaux -- almost 300,000 acres of vines compared with roughly 3,000 on long island -- few properties consistently produce extraordinary wine. long island producers have nonetheless seized on merlot as ''their'' variety because, after the initial comparison to bordeaux, merlot has produced a more consistent crop than the other varieties.  but being better than the few varieties that have been tried doesn't equal being best. too few wineries are experimenting with varieties and blends beyond the sauvignon blancs, chardonnays and merlots already well represented in a crowded marketplace. and even when the vintage yields ripe fruit -- never a guarantee on long island -- too many wines still reflect poor winemaking choices, often to mimic popular styles that will never be long island's legacy.  the bordeaux comparison also illustrates local producers' lack of understanding as to why people buy expensive wines: either history has given a region a venerable, pedigreed, romantic reputation, or critical accolades have vaulted the wine into cult status. some regions have garnered attention when one spare-no-expense, no-compromise producer -- such as biondi santi in italy's brunello di montalcino region or vega sicilia in spain's ribera del duero -- produces extraordinary wines, and not just in one vintage but consistently year after year.  long island has neither history nor, thus far, a quality-at-all-costs producer to arrest the consumer's attention and inspire the neighbors. long island is a lovely place to live, work and play, but its wines have nothing to justify prices beyond those for everyday wines.  it is unfortunate that so many elements of long island's ''terroir'' -- embodied in such vineyard immutables as soil type and climate -- conspire against profitability and quality. while advances in winegrowing and winemaking may improve wine quality, the small family producer will continually be squeezed as escalating land values ensure that the opportunities for any newcomer will diminish.  still, for those whose true goal is developing a world-class winegrowing region, a number of avenues remain:  break out of the bordeaux box. vintners should recognize that the real competition is not the pedigreed wines of bordeaux but the less exalted european wines that show character and complexity for well under $20. competitive pricing, with the classic sales technique of ''under-promise and over-deliver'' is more likely to develop consumer loyalty in this fast-growing market segment.  embrace what nature offers. in the best examples, long island wines have a distinctive aromatic profile and delicate fruitiness. winemakers need to exploit the fresh fruit flavors and mouthwatering acidity these wines have naturally, not obscure them with long aging in oak or poor winemaking. pure, balanced wines, when priced fairly, will improve the reputation of long island wines.  evaluate new, more appropriate grape varieties. while this is inevitably a very long-term and expensive process, producers could share costs by supporting the cornell cooperative extension's agricultural efforts in suffolk county. all major winegrowing regions have a regional university or enological institute seeking to enhance wine quality. cornell's service is woefully underfinanced; a self-imposed tax in the industry would augment its research capacity.  also, unless the producers are content to be a weekend playground, a more sustained presence in new york city is imperative; it's the only way for the producers to understand their competition and to raise awareness among both consumers and the trade. a first step would be to move the offices of the long island wine council, now in suffolk county, to manhattan. heavily promoted annual vintage tastings are also needed, to compete with well-financed efforts in new growing regions in chile, italy and other winegrowing nations.  without a new focus on wine quality, the east end will be overrun not just by the developers, but also by the competition.  op-ed contributor lisa granik is a master of wine. she wrote her dissertation on the long island wine industry.  editors' note:  february 11, 2007, sunday  an op-ed article on jan. 7, about long island wines, should have mentioned that the writer, lisa granik, works for a wine wholesaler that distributes wines from long island and other regions.  