home remade overnight? red chair team was here   every home has a heart, and for carmen alexander and her four children, it is the red armchair that sits in the family's once-bare living room.  the family left iowa in july 2005 when ms. alexander, who works for an investment management company, was transferred to westchester county. at the time, the family found it too expensive to move their furniture, and for the next year and a half, they ate meals on a used kitchen table, and two of ms. alexander's sons, shareef, 10, and shakir, 12, slept on mattresses on the floor.  in mid-december, the family came home one sunday night to a visibly more comfortable house. over the course of a weekend, some four dozen volunteers with the red chair project, a new westchester-based nonprofit group, had given the house a top-to-bottom cleaning, painted the interior and used two truckloads of donated furniture to fill it with items like couches, an armoire, end tables, framed pictures, a computer, a king-size sleigh bed for ms. alexander (who is going through a divorce), and new bedroom furniture for shareef and shakir and her two other children, indigo, 13, and kenneth, 16.  when the family came home (red chair had paid to have them spend the night at a hotel), frank sinatra was singing on a donated stereo system in the newly outfitted dining room, and a red chair had been placed in the living room.  ''it's hard to soak it all in, but this is like a home now,'' an astonished ms. alexander said.  some nonprofit groups focus mostly on building homes for those who need them, while others sell donated furniture to raise money for special causes. but the goal at the red chair project is to collect furniture that is no longer needed (and which many charities are now reluctant to pick up) and use it to furnish homes whose occupants cannot afford to do so on their own.  the group's trademark is a donated red chair, which the group's volunteers have left behind in the houses of the three families they have helped to date. ''it's a symbol of comfort and stability, a reminder to the family that they're not alone,'' said patricia cozine, a rye resident who is one of the group's founders.  ms. cozine, an accessories designer, founded the group in october 2005 with two friends from rye, keith and theresa spencer, and javier viera, who was then the pastor of mamaroneck united methodist church and has since moved on.  the group still works closely with the church and with other local community organizations, like the hispanic resource center and the shiloh baptist church in new rochelle, to help locate families in need of furniture and furnishings.  so far, red chair volunteers have collected some seven truckloads of furniture through word of mouth or by soliciting big-box retailers like linens 'n things. but help has also come, they say, from many locally based businesses, like chatsworth furniture, harrison paint supply, bilotta kitchens, sound shore liquor pantry, and contemporary moving systems, a mount vernon moving company that was founded by john rieman and frank maro in 2000.  when mr. rieman arrived at the home of ms. alexander and her children last month, he was driving a truck of furniture collected by his company in new york city, where it delivers furniture for retailers like lillian august and ligne roset.  ''when we make deliveries, a lot of times people don't want what's already there, and they can't find anyone else who is willing to take it from them,'' he said, as he helped unload a large, almost-new pine armoire.  james bilotta, a co-owner of bilotta kitchens, said it was not unusual to see presumably time-pressed executives put in time for red chair, even if means scrubbing toilets.  ''i don't know who gets the most out of this -- the people doing it or the people who live in the house,'' he said. ''it's not a charity where you just write a check -- it's one where you participate and also transform lives.''  ms. cozine said the group could use more warehouse space, as well as someone to help set up a web site. for now, she said, e-mail messages can be sent to spencers@theredchairprojects.org.  still, the group's efforts have already paid off. in mamaroneck, norma galvez, 16, said that a refurbishing effort in october 2005 had made the house she shares with her mother and four siblings feel much more comfortable.  ''they did a pretty good job, for which we're very thankful,'' she said.  charity  