giddy sea of fresh faces in the capitol, united by a serious mission   hours after casting his first votes in congress, representative zack space still beamed with excitement on thursday, showing off the identification card that doubles as an electronic balloting device.  ''i had to ask someone how to use it,'' he said, proudly whisking the card out of its carrying case as he gave his family a tour of the capitol.  back in his office, a new receptionist apologized for hanging up on someone who called. ''sorry, second day on the job,'' she chirped.  even before his arrival in washington this week, mr. space, 45, typified the incoming freshman class: a democrat from ohio, he campaigned hard on the issue of ethics reform in a race to succeed representative bob ney, who pleaded guilty in a corruption case. despite his political inexperience -- and the fact that democratic officials considered him one of their weakest candidates -- mr. space beat his republican rival, in an increasingly republican district, 62 percent to 38 percent.  now, he is one of 66 new members of the 110th congress, part of a historic democratic tide that swept republicans from power after a dozen years and left president bush on the defensive.  although mr. space at times exudes a certain good-natured goofiness -- his campaign web logo featured a starry rendering of outer space, and one of his mottos is a riff on his father's first name, socrates (''being the son of socrates, zack space knows a thing or two about ethics'') -- he has a mission of the utmost seriousness in congress. on thursday, his first day, before all his boxes were unpacked and his shared apartment furnished, mr. space was given a high-profile role in introducing his party's ethics reform package.  ''the winds of change have brought me here,'' mr. space said in his first speech on the house floor, arguing in favor of the package. ''the time to act is now. we have an extraordinary burden to prove to those who have given us this honor. we must make clear to them that we are representing their interests, not bartering legislative favors in order to gain gifts and trips.''  on the other side of the capitol dome, the incoming senators will not cast their first votes until next week (and the first one, a resolution honoring the late president gerald r. ford, will not exactly cause heartburn). their transition will take longer in other ways: new senators are housed in temporary offices in the basement, while administrators try to establish which sitting senators intend to move.  that left freshman senator jon tester, a democrat who previously lived on an 1,800-acre ranch in montana, squeezed into a small space in the bowels of the dirksen senate office building. in the office of senator james webb, democrat of virginia, the phone system was so problem-plagued that his line remained busy for hours on end.  but the wave of newcomers was most palpable in the house, where the dozens of arrivals circulated through welcome parties, herded their families on tours and waited in long lines to have their photographs taken with representative nancy pelosi of california, the new house speaker. representative carol shea porter, a new hampshire democrat who won an upset victory, let out an audible gasp when she set foot on the house floor the first time, said her chief of staff, harry gural.  ''walking in was a little bit like walking into the lights of yankee stadium, going out onto the field as a player rather than a spectator,'' mr. gural said.  the cable network channel c-span chronicled even the most anonymous new members, setting up a camera position in the cannon house office building to lure members of the freshman class into interviews.  ''so far, so good,'' said representative mazie k. hirono, democrat of hawaii (and one of two new buddhist members of the congress), as she concluded her 15 minutes of c-span.  ms. hirono had a press schedule, but little else: unable to buy office gear until she was sworn in, the newest democrat from the farthest state was working without computers.  unlike earlier eras, when newcomers simply showed up in washington and had to fend for themselves, freshmen now undergo a series of orientation programs in the weeks between election day and the swearing-in.  ''it's much different than when i came here. you were on your own,'' said representative george miller, a california democrat now in his 17th term.  representative barney frank, democrat of massachusetts and another house lifer, offered the freshmen some advice: learn time management, and how to resist invitations to social events.  ''the default answer when people ask you to do things should be 'no,' '' mr. frank said.  then there is the issue of housing, always tricky for members of congress who are in washington on weekdays but at home in their districts most weekends. mr. space and his new roommate, representative michael arcuri of new york, moved into their ''small, subterranean'' apartment earlier in the week, an arrangement prompted in part by mr. arcuri's fondness for mr. space's greek cooking. by friday, they still appeared to be getting along.  and mr. space, grinning as he wandered the halls, had not grown disillusioned by washington, he said, nor strayed from his pledges.  ''not yet,'' he said, when asked if he had broken any campaign promises. then he corrected himself. ''i mean -- no.''  congressional memo  