two teenagers confess to committing deadly spree of robberies in queens park, police say   the trail of the crime spree is brutal and damning: a burned-out minivan, a string of victims viciously beaten and robbed, a dead man's body found floating near a boathouse in flushing meadows-corona park in queens.  behind the monthlong mayhem are two teenagers, the police said yesterday, and they said one of them, who is homeless, told investigators that he and his partner beat and robbed lone strollers in the park for cash to buy food. on thursday, the police arrested the homeless teenager, belter yovanni gubara rivera, 17, and charged him with murder in the death of carlos flores, 40. mr. flores was an immigrant from ecuador whose body was found floating in a pond in the park on dec. 5. mr. rivera was also charged with four counts of robbery.  the police arrested the second teenager, marcos polanco, 17, who they say was mr. rivera's partner, at his home in corona a day earlier. he was charged with attempted murder and four counts of robbery.  the teenagers are accused of committing four robberies in the park from nov. 22 to dec. 25, attacking men who were walking alone. after spotting a mark, they would follow him for awhile, creep up from behind, then try to knock him out, said lt. edward ruttler of the 110th precinct. in at least two of the robberies, they threatened their victims with a knife, lieutenant ruttler said. the two are also suspected in four other robberies that took place during that same time span.  ''they both said they did it for food,'' the lieutenant said. mr. rivera, he said, had been kicked out of a relative's house two months ago and had been sleeping in an abandoned building at 104th street and otis avenue.  mr. rivera, whose nickname is nyquil, ''was known to put people to sleep,'' lieutenant ruttler said, ''to knock them out with one punch.''  ''even though he wasn't physically big, yovanni knew how to throw a punch,'' he said.  the police said the two became ruthless in their attacks, which usually yielded less than handsome returns. but for the pittance they took, their victims paid a hefty cost.  one victim, jae woo park, 36, of little neck, was attacked and severely beaten on dec. 25, the police said. the circumstances of the attack were unclear yesterday, but at some point, mr. park's 2007 honda odyssey was taken and set on fire, the police said. the minivan was later found, burning, near the horace harding expressway. mr. park, the police said, was still unconscious yesterday at elmhurst hospital center.  when he was arrested, mr. rivera had severe burns on his face, said louis croce, the chief of detectives in queens. the medical examiner's office has said the burns were the result of a flash ignition injury consistent with someone setting a vehicle on fire, the police said.  the teenagers' crime spree turned deadly on dec. 4, the police said, when they set upon mr. flores, who lived in ridgewood, queens. he fought back, but paid with his life.  his body, with multiple slash wounds and skull fractures, was found at 10:30 the next morning, floating in the pond, the police said. lieutenant ruttler said mr. rivera had used a machete in the attack.  mr. polanco, a dishwasher in manhattan, has no criminal history. mr. rivera was arrested once before, but the details were sealed, police said.  investigators tracked down the teenagers using evidence like transaction records from a credit card the pair are accused of stealing from one victim, and the burned-out minivan, which investigators were able to trace to mr. park, the police said. but most damning of all, they said, were the young men's confessions.  