making no small plans   gov. eliot spitzer is fond of saying that you can't change the world by whispering. what new yorkers saw in his first week in office was a governor in full trumpet about how to overhaul their state government. while some veterans of state politics saw mr. spitzer's state of the state speech on wednesday as too ambitious, former gov. hugh carey got it just right. ''it's a very big agenda,'' he said, ''but it's not too big for new york.''  we are still in the promising stage, of course, and the real test will begin later this month with mr. spitzer's first executive budget. but he has begun by laying down a number of important, and sensible, markers. on health care, he wants insurance for all children. he hopes to find some of the money to do this by consolidating hospitals and shifting patients from nursing homes to at-home care.  on education, mr. spitzer says he wants to spread money out more fairly to students who most need it. suburban lawmakers whose schools are favored by the current formula will object. but he may win them over with his plan to lower property taxes that fall heavily on middle-class suburbanites.  he made a strong pitch for economic revitalization upstate, a familiar but elusive goal of a long line of new york politicians.  mr. spitzer also proposed a series of reforms that are certain to rile legislators accustomed to lifetime tenure in albany. he intends to create a nonpartisan redistricting commission and vowed to veto any future district lines that are gerrymandered to make elections uncompetitive. and he wants to ''replace the weakest campaign finance laws in the nation with the strongest.'' that means lowering contribution limits and providing public financing so that moneyed interests can no longer buy political clout.  also on mr. spitzer's ambitious to-do list, and appropriately so, are restructuring the courts and organizing the overlapping local governments across the state.  mr. spitzer faces two major hurdles. one is finding top-flight appointees to make these proposals a reality. one of the most important sales jobs he has now is convincing enough good people that working for government wages is worth it to help reinvent such a powerful state government. mr. spitzer's other challenge will be getting the legislature to go along. much of his speech was met with an odd silence from lawmakers. perhaps it was the way mr. spitzer carved out new political territory that does not entirely cater to upstate republicans or downstate democrats. but it may simply be that they do not yet know what to make of all that urgency, all those promises, all that work.  mr. spitzer certainly acts like a man ready to go forward quickly. the goals he has set may be daunting to the old guard in albany, but anything less from this governor would have been a grave disappointment.  editorial  