living here | smart houses; an online getaway   who -- mike einstein, 54, an electronics executive from crystal lake, ill.  what -- 4-bedroom house  where -- st. petersburg, fla.  when i bought this house two years ago it was really a tear-down, but i decided instead to fix it up. in the process, i added a full wireless automation system to the house. i'm the director of corporate innovation for intermatic, which makes, among other products, wireless lighting controls. there are a slew of products out there from different manufacturers including thermostats and security systems that have wireless capability and can be controlled remotely over the internet.  when my son comes down here and turns the thermostat down to 68 degrees, i can turn it back up from my home in illinois. i can log on to a web page from anywhere and control all the lights, the drapes, the outdoor lights, the garage door and even the temperature of the hot tub. one day, i logged on and saw that the hot tub was 103 degrees. my son had been using the house and forgot to turn it off. i don't ever rent out my house, but family members use it when i'm not there. they don't always remember to turn off the lights or adjust the thermostat when they leave. they don't get the electric bill.  hard-wiring an existing house with these capabilities would be an electrician's dream. it would cost tens of thousands of dollars. but with these new wireless systems it ran about $4,000 to set up. but more importantly, it gives me peace of mind. the house still has old hurricane shutters that have to be put up the old-fashioned way, but early this year new models that attach to the house and can be operated over a computer should be out.  as told to amy gunderson  information on properties was supplied by the listing companies.  where -- coronado, calif.  what -- 4-bedroom house  how much -- $4.1 million  this three-level, 4,000-square-foot house is wired so the heat, air-conditioning and rooftop hot tub can be controlled remotely from a computer. a central system in the house controls the thermostat, lighting and security. the house has four and a half bathrooms, granite counters and an elevator. it has 40 feet of waterfront and a dock that can accommodate two 60-foot boats. coronado is about five miles southwest of san diego. agents: kathy pounds and lisa storey, prudential california realty, (619) 423-1558; www.kathypounds.com.  where -- ocean view, del.  what -- 3-bedroom house  how much -- $789,900  built in 2001, this house has a smart system that allows the heat and air-conditioning to be controlled from a remote location. there are two living rooms, two and a half bathrooms and an attached two-car garage. the house has views of the first hole of a 36-hole golf course. ocean view is near bethany beach on the delaware coast. agent: beth evans, remax by the sea, (302) 249-5200; www.bethany-rehoboth.com.  where: destin, fla.  what: 5-bedroom house  how much: $4,989,000  the lighting, security, heating and air-conditioning systems in this bay-front house can be controlled remotely via the internet. it is also wired for surround sound. located in a gated community, this house has 12-foot-high ceilings, marble floors, five full and two half bathrooms, a formal dining room and a breakfast nook. it also has two garages, a swimming pool, 140 feet of water frontage and a deep-water dock large enough for a 65-foot boat. agents: janette klein and cindy blanton, resortquest, (850) 654-7785; www.jkdestin.com.  where: waterville valley, n.h.  what: 4-bedroom town house  how much: $669,000  this 2,750-square-foot house has a central system that allows the thermostat, lights, and appliances to be programmed and controlled remotely over the phone. if the temperature in the house drops below a certain level, the system will alert the owner with a phone call. the house has three bathrooms, maple hardwood floors, cherry cabinets and a gas fireplace. waterville valley is about 125 miles north of boston and is surrounded by the white mountain national forest. agent: frank freeman, waterville valley realty, (603) 236-8333; www.wvnh.com.  where: bridgehampton, n.y.  what: 8-bedroom house  how much: $24,500,000  the security system, heat, air-conditioning, pool temperature and timers, as well as the temperature in the 3,500-bottle wine cellar in this 18,000-square-foot house can be monitored and adjusted from a computer or a blackberry. the house also has wireless internet access throughout. the property is four acres with ocean views. there are 10 full bathrooms and one half bathroom, a pool, a hot tub, a tennis court, a pool house and deeded access to sagg pond. agent: nancy mizrahi, corcoran group real estate, (917) 854-9933; www.corcoran.com.  where: quechee, vt.  what: 4-bedroom house  how much: $515,000  built in 2005, this colonial-style house has fiber-optic wiring and a security system that can be controlled from a remote location. the house, on 1.1 acres of wooded property, has three bathrooms, brazilian walnut hardwood floors, granite counters, a full basement, a fireplace and a two-car garage. it is offered furnished. the community has two 18-hole golf courses and a ski hill. quechee is about a four-hour drive from new york city. agent: kasia butterfield, coldwell banker - redpath, (802) 295-1160; www.cbredpath.com.  