running dry on the m.t.a.   the long island rail road concourse at pennsylvania station has at least a dozen places where a commuter can get liquored up for the ride home. two are saloons, one is a wine shop, and the rest are simple ice-filled plastic bins next to the magazine racks and popcorn machines. the bins overflow with cans, bottles and, for the powerhouse drinker, 24-ounce aluminum hogsheads. a $10 bill will buy you so many supersize budweisers that the clerk has to double the plastic shopping bag, leaving just enough change for popcorn.  the easy abundance of alcohol makes the long island rail road's old tradition of selling beer and mixed drinks on train platforms look hopelessly redundant -- not so much a needed convenience as an all-out effort to make sure absolutely no one gets on board without the opportunity for a good, early buzz. if you ride the railroad often, you know how little -- or how seldom -- it seems to think of you, the customer. but in this one area -- unlike those having to do with lateness, dirty cars, broken toilets and cellphone idiots -- the railroad is quite sensitive to a rider's needs. a drinking rider's, that is.  which raises a question: what about everyone else, especially those who hate riding in filthy cars with loud, sloppy drunks, hearing the ugly slurch of shoe soles on sticky train floors and dodging rolling bottles and tributaries of beer foam? there seems to be enough alcohol spilling around without the railroad adding to it.  mitch pally, a metropolitan transportation authority board member, recently floated the idea of banning alcohol outright on the long island rail road and metro-north. his concern was for safety, since drunken riders presumably turn into drunken drivers. his proposal has been banished to task-force land, where it will presumably die. the idea of a dry commuter railroad has many enemies, particularly at metro-north, which has a longstanding fleet of bar cars and recently ordered new ones.  it may be impossible to turn the commuter railroads, like the new york city subways, into alcohol-free zones. too many riders treasure a cold beer (or two or three) as a small balm for the indignities of a hard workday and long commuting trip.  going dry would be a huge cultural shift. but the same used to be said about smoking cars, and we doubt that many riders nowadays pine for the return of those rolling hazmat wagons, except for the jittery people who cluster by the doors long before their stops, fingering their lighters and cigarette packs.  yes, the commuting life is saturated in alcohol. but there is no compelling reason that the metropolitan transportation authority should be part of it. it should forgo the paltry income from its liquor operations -- about $350,000 a year -- and focus on improving its other operations. to put it another way: a railroad that cannot keep its bathrooms clean should probably not be selling beer.  long island  