what's on tonight   11 p.m. (ifc) gunslinger girls -- no shrinking violets, these. the tag line for this new anime series is ''meet daddy's little assassins.'' the premise is centered on a government-sponsored organization in the business of saving lives. the catch is that the terminally ill girls they save using cybernetic implants must become killing machines (above). ouch. at 11:30, the channel introduces ''basilisk,'' an animated tale of shoguns in love in feudal japan.  8 p.m. (national geographic) the dog whisperer -- cesar millan tries to give gracie, a yellow lab who won't come when called and has eaten a pet chicken, some lessons in respect. and then there is the issue of bella and big boy, who display poor professional habits in the office where their companions work.  8 p.m. (tlc) 20 ways to . . . -- a trainer, a nutritionist, a psychologist and a stylist offer advice on how to slim down. but does it work?  8:30 p.m. (the n) beyond the break -- catch the wave of this teenage drama about four professional female surfers living in hawaii under the watch of their brotherly coach, which returns tonight for a second year. tiffany hines plays birdie scott, who is beginning to feel as if her life is falling apart.  10 p.m. (nbc) law & order -- we've heard something like this before. mariel hemingway (right) guest-stars as a model and tabloid queen who finds her teenage son dead in her hospital room. turns out he developed a brain tumor caused by a bone replacement for his legs. it also turns out those bones were sold illegally.  10 p.m. (showtime) masters of horror -- in ''right to die,'' directed by rob schmidt, the husband of a badly burned, comatose woman longs to end her suffering by pulling the plug. but she has died before. and each time she is revived her apparition grows more violent.  10:30 p.m. (e!) starveillance -- from eric fogel, the creator of ''celebrity deathmatch,'' comes this new claymation series, in which events in the lives of celebrities -- britney and k-fed's wedding, say, or mary-kate and ashley's search for an apartment -- are recreated in clay as they might have happened. note the emphasis on might.  midnight (spike) wild world of spike -- mop jousting, anyone? how about blindfolded kickboxing? in this new comedic action series, kit cope, a martial-arts fighter; jason ellis (near left, mud boxing with mr. cope), a skateboarder; and sam tripoli, a comedian, try to recreate unheralded sports from around the world.  kathryn shattuck  