copyrights and congress   advocates for looser restrictions on copyrights had high hopes for the new democratic congress. those hopes faded somewhat last month when representative howard l. berman was named chairman of the house subcommittee that oversees the internet and intellectual property.  putting mr. berman in charge of the panel, diminishes the chances for ''real reform'' of copyright policy, lawrence lessig, perhaps the best-known authority on the legal issues surrounding intellectual property and the internet, wrote last week on his blog (lessig.org). change is needed, he wrote, ''to fit the legitimate objectives of copyright -- to assure that artists have the incentives they need to create great new work -- into the contours of digital technology.''  mr. berman, though widely regarded as a smart and savvy politician, is a favorite boogeyman of advocates for copyright reform, many of whom say he is in the pocket of his hollywood constituents (he actually represents the san fernando valley, but many media industry figures live there).  in 2002, he introduced a bill that would have allowed media companies to hack into peer-to-peer networks to ''disrupt'' or ''impair'' illicit file trading. the proposed law would have limited the liability of copyright owners to $50 ''per impairment to the property of the affected file trader.''  critics said the measure, which never got out of committee, would have essentially allowed copyright holders to destroy people's computers with near impunity. mr. berman labeled the loudest criticism as ''hysteria,'' and insisted his bill included adequate limitations and consumer protections.  putting mr. berman in charge of the copyright committee ''is like making a congressman from detroit head of an automobile safety subcommittee, or a senator from texas head of a global warming subcommittee,'' mr. lessig wrote.  no. 1 with a bullet -- hitwise, which tracks online traffic trends, reported this week that use of itunes was up 413 percent on christmas day compared with the previous year, beating microsoft's new zune service by 30 to 1 (informationweek.com).  traffic was brisk at zune, too, though, up 1,030 percent over the previous monday. traffic on itunes was up 1,222 percent during the same period. the increase, of course, came mostly from people who received ipods as gifts. the apple store section of itunes showed an increase in traffic of 110 percent over the previous christmas. traffic was so heavy, that customers were complaining about slowdowns and error messages.  electric junk -- what should be done with those old ipods and other electronics once they've outlived their usefulness? that's not an easy question, thanks to all the toxic chemicals they contain, notes the web site of technology review magazine (technologyreview.com).  many companies (including apple) will take back products, and some states force them to, but it's not always easy to tell which companies accept returns for recycling, or how well they'll handle the task if they do.  enter the computer takeback campaign, which offers a company-by-company guide (www.computertakeback.com).  while some companies do a good job, ''the majority of recyclers are not responsible recyclers,'' robin schneider, a member of the group, told technology review. in many countries ''recycled'' electronics end up polluting the land, air and water with mercury, cadmium and other nasty stuff.  the electronics industry offers its own online guide at ecyclingcentral.com.  look before you leap -- according to appleinsider, more than two million macs were sold this holiday season (appleinsider.com). converts from windows will spend much of january getting used to their new machines -- and it's not always as easy as apple would have you believe. cameron banga offers a list of ''things i wish i had known before i switched to a mac'' on his blog ''confessions of a teenage fanboy.'' no. 1: ''when you install an application, you might not have actually installed an application'' (teenagefanboy.blogspot.com).  dan mitchell  complete links are at nytimes.com/business.  what's online e-mail: whatsonline@nytimes.com.  