white house seeks lawyer wise to ways of congress   president bush is seeking a new chief lawyer with credentials as a proven combatant as he and his staff prepare for a potential raft of investigations from democrats in congress who have promised to challenge the white house's conduct of policy and its assertions of executive power.  republicans who have consulted with administration officials on personnel said the white house chief of staff, joshua b. bolten, was looking for a seasoned washington hand to succeed harriet e. miers, the white house counsel who announced her resignation on thursday.  republicans said friday in interviews that the white house was now, in essence, seeking a politically savvy outsider with ties throughout the capital and in congress who might be called upon to become something of a public figure in potentially high-profile fights.  ''they need somebody who can sit down face-to-face with an ornery committee chairman and work out a conflict over an oversight request,'' said bradford a. berenson, a former associate counsel for mr. bush during his first term. ''the job will require a certain minimum level of stature and a minimum level of political experience.''  several republicans, including some former administration officials, said the new white house counsel would also need the stature to counterbalance david s. addington, the powerful chief of staff of vice president dick cheney. mr. addington has tended to argue against cooperating with congressional requests for classified information, a position that may require some softening, or at least more diplomacy, in the 110th congress.  the white house is, in some respects, seeking a figure who is the mirror opposite of ms. miers, who has not shown a high level of comfort being a public figure, especially since withdrawing herself from the supreme court nominating process in 2005 under heavy fire from liberals and conservatives.  ms. miers spent most of her career in texas, and did most of her maneuvering within the white house.  mr. bush's choice will be in the mold of the former solicitor general, theodore b. olson, said republican allies of mr. bush who are familiar with the administration's views. these people, speaking anonymously to preserve their access to white house officials, said they took mr. olson at his word that he was not interested in the position.  these republicans said other contenders in that mold include fred f. fielding, the reagan-era white house counsel who is now a corporate lawyer in washington; charles j. cooper, a former justice department official under president ronald reagan, also now practicing law in washington; laurence h. silberman, the retired united states court of appeals judge close to mr. cheney; and david aufhauser, the former general counsel for the treasury department who is now the global general counsel for ubs, the swiss bank. mr. aufhauser, who has worked with ms. miers, also played a crucial legal role for mr. bush during the recount of the presidential vote in 2000.  another name bandied about by some republicans, but considered a long shot because he lacks washington legal experience, is j. thomas schieffer, the ambassador to japan who is both a friend and former business partner of president bush. mr. schieffer has been overseas since 2001, having been ambassador to australia, and may be interested in a washington job.  the people familiar with the white house thinking said ms. miers's departure, coming amid a number of changes in top administration jobs, had been among the most painful personally for mr. bush, who has grown quite close to her over more than a decade of collaboration.  her resignation capped months of speculation about her future at the white house. republicans close to the white house said that, in the spring, mr. bolten had considered replacing ms. miers but that mr. bush had made it clear he would consider no such thing. but after the democrats' election victories in november and the promises by some to challenge mr. bush's claims of executive power, mr. bolten had new incentive to push for change in the counsel's office, several republicans said.  two administration officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss a delicate personnel issue, said that ms. miers was ready to leave all the same, and disputed suggestions that she was forced out of the post, which they said she could have kept had she wanted to.  correction:  january 17, 2007, wednesday  an article on jan. 6 about white house efforts to find a new chief counsel misstated the working status of laurence h. silberman of the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit, who was considered a contender for the job. on nov. 1, 2000, he took senior status, which allows a judge to continue to serve while handling fewer cases than a judge in active service; he has not retired. (president bush has since named fred f. fielding to be the white house counsel.)  