city ballet brings passion to podium   as the house lights dimmed in the new york state theater last saturday night before act ii of george balanchine's ''nutcracker,'' the conductor, fayçal karoui, turned around and presented a red rose to a woman in the first row. mr. karoui became the new york city ballet's music director on dec. 1, and his tenure seems to have started with a flourish. earlier he had given each female player in the orchestra a rose for the end of the ''nutcracker'' season, and upon finding a spare flower on his podium, he appeared to see no point in letting a chance for a charming gesture go to waste.  all of this seems natural for mr. karoui, whose conducting style is almost dancerly in its physical flamboyance and who is -- there is no avoiding the description -- tall, dark and handsome. he is also french, possessing pitch-perfect gallic-accented english and given to drollery and dramatic gesticulation.  ''it is our honeymoon right now, and i hope it lasts for a long time,'' mr. karoui said, speaking of his relationship with his new orchestra in his unadorned lounge backstage. (he assured those present that it would look a lot better soon: ''they are going to paint it, and this bookshelf'' -- expressive grimace -- ''it will go'').  city ballet's search for a new music director began more than two years ago, when the incumbent director, andrea quinn, told the company's balletmaster in chief, peter martins, that she intended to return to her native britain in 2006 for family reasons. the position is important at any large ballet company, but the job perhaps holds particular weight at city ballet, with its unusually broad musical repertory and balanchine-derived belief in the primacy of the music. (the composer's name is still printed above the choreographer's in the programs.)  ''when peter proposed this job to me, i don't think i realized how big it is,'' mr. karoui said. ''the repertory is fantastic; you could play the music as concert programs. in january i will conduct an all-stravinsky program; these are works that are monuments in the symphonic repertoire, that wouldn't exist if we didn't have these ballets. i cannot hear the reputation that ballet has in some music circles -- that you have to compromise all the time. i say, no, you compromise more for opera.''  mr. karoui (his name is pronounced fay-sal kah-wee), 35, has, in fact, conducted more symphonies and operas than ballets in his short but illustrious career. he grew up in the val-de-marne region just outside paris, in a family he describes as ''not particularly musical.'' but his tunisian-born father and french mother, both doctors, did have a piano, and mr. karoui, along with his identical twin brother and younger sister, took lessons.  ''i would love to say that i was conducting in my apartment at 5 years old,'' he said, ''but i actually can't remember when i decided to be a musician.''  although he studied the piano seriously with the concert pianist catherine collard, mr. karoui began working toward a mathematics degree at paris university's jussieu campus after graduating from high school, ''as insurance,'' before being accepted at the selective and prestigious conservatoire national supérieur de paris. soon after, he decided to focus on conducting.  ''there's a human dimension to working with an orchestra that you don't have as a soloist,'' he said.  after graduating from the conservatory in 1997 with the first prize in conducting, he won a scholarship that allowed him to work with michel plasson, one of france's most eminent conductors and the director of the well-known orchestre national du capitole in toulouse.  ''i was the assistant, so they had to give me something to do,'' he said. ''so it was a ballet, something unimportant, just 'the sleeping beauty,' '' he said, poker-faced. ''i just loved it.''  after five years working with mr. plasson and guest-conducting all over france, mr. karoui was invited by andré labarrère, the mayor of pau in the southwest, to form a new symphony orchestra.  ''it was an amazing opportunity,'' mr. karoui said. ''i'm young and i'm fed up hearing that music is for the rich, the 'cultured.' music itself is not elitist. in pau we could do something different. we spoke to the public about the pieces before every concert; we performed in jails and schools; we mixed repertory and new work; we did a breakfast series for children. i wanted to create bridges, and it really worked.''  during a stint guest-conducting performances by the paris opera ballet school, mr. karoui met richard tanner, a balletmaster at city ballet, who recommended him to mr. martins after he had begun his search for ms. quinn's successor.  ''i was immediately impressed with him,'' mr. martins said in a telephone interview. ''we looked at over 15 conductors, and he was very different from everyone else. he struck me as very impassioned, which i liked. he was everywhere -- watching rehearsals he didn't have to be at, at the school, saying how fantastic everything was. and the musical staff gave him glowing reports.''  mr. karoui, who remains associated with the orchestre de pau, has ambitious plans at city ballet. his job is not simply to rehearse and conduct the orchestra, but also to schedule the roster of house and guest conductors needed during ballet seasons, help to plan repertory programs and the musical direction of new productions and work closely with the dancers and balletmasters. but his biggest goal, he said, is to develop morale by occasionally taking the orchestra out of the pit.  ''of course the orchestra is here for the ballet, but when you play 46 'nutcrackers,' you can forget that you are important,'' he said. ''there are already short concerts before the sunday matinee; i want to expand that, do concertos with a larger group, perhaps have education sessions where the full orchestra will be onstage. it's not a question of competing with the philharmonic, but simply showing the public that they have faces and are wonderful musicians.''  mr. karoui is watching the dancers take class almost every morning (''i love that,'' he said. ''maybe i'll join in soon'') and settling into his new apartment near lincoln center. asked how he feels about the forthcoming visit of valery gergiev, the renowned conductor and director of the maryinsky theater in st. petersburg, russia, who is to conduct the company on feb. 23, mr. karoui appeared -- for the first time -- at a loss for words.  ''i simply can't believe it's true that he'll come,'' he said. ''he is a genius, perhaps the best conductor in the world. i'm just excited that our photographs are on the same page in the company newsletter.''  