paid notice: deaths   colonghi, john l.   colonghi -- john l. 1957-2006. john lawrence colonghi, a respected financial and public affairs consultant to american indian tribes, an accomplished athlete, and a nationally - acclaimed fund raising executive, died at him home in sausalito, california, on december 11th after a long and courageous battle against cancer. friends from around the country will assemble at 11:30 am on january 7th to celebrate his life and to mourn his passing at the san francisco film centre at the presidio. mr. colonghi joined the staff of the smithsonian institution's nascent national museum of the american indian (nmai) in 1991 as director of external affairs and development and eventually, director of its national capital campaign. it was largely through his efforts that the nmai met the rigorous private fund raising goal set by congress before construction could begin on the institution's mall museum, which opened to the public in september of 2004. w. richard west, the museum's executive director, recalled mr. colonghi as the consummate professional, ''undaunted by the immense challenge he faced.'' philanthropist david rockefeller, who worked closely with colonghi on this effort, remembered him as one of the finest development officers he had ever encountered ''well-prepared, deeply knowledgeable about the institution and its mission, and a pleasure to spend time with.'' colonghi brought a deep personal commitment to the task of building the national museum of the american indian. his mother, natalie bozeroff colonghi, an aleut/ inuit from from st. michael's, alaska, instilled in him a powerful respect for native peoples, the preservation of their cultures, and the survival of their ways of life throughout the hemisphere. west noted that passion and courage defined the man. ''he was a passionate man. he loved this place, believed in its mission, and brought an incredible array of the intangibles of personality to bear sympathy, empathy, passion, humor, sometimes even tears -to his work. his father, alfio, a career navy man, encouraged his son's interest in sports. john starred in football at grossmont junior college and attended san diego state, where he played for the legendary don coryell as a defensive back. john was noted for his lifelong dedication to physical fitness. colonghi helped establish the indian studies program at eastern washington university in cheney, washington in the mid 1970's, and later served as director of the school's indian studies program for six years. he returned to san diego in the mid 1980's as an associate director of development for both the medical center and the cancer center. his efforts resulted in the lead gifts that built the thornton hospital, the shiley eye center and the pearlman ambulatory center. after his eight-year tenure at the nmai, colonghi served for three years as vice president for external affairs, development and marketing for buck institute in novato, california. in recent years, mr. colonghi has worked with a number of private clients, including the agua caliente on the development of a cultural museum in palm springs; the alaska federation of the native; the museum of the african diaspora in san francisco; and the john f. kennedy school of government at harvard university. mr. colonghi is survived by his wife, chiara digeronimo, of sausalito, his sister, carmen gaerin, of walnut creek, and three nephews, toby, tyler and todd gaerin, all of san diego. in lieu of flowers, memorial donations may be made to: smithsonian national museum of the american indian, p.o. box 23473, washington, dc 20026-3473, attention: virginia elwell, office of external affairs or shiley eye center, university of california, san diego, 9415 campus point drive, la jolla, ca 92093-0946 (checks can be made payable to the ucsd foundation).  