saban goes to alabama; miami fans turn crimson   nick saban had been saying for more than a month that he would not leave the miami dolphins. nearly two weeks ago, he said, ''i'm not going to be the alabama coach.''  on wednesday, saban became the alabama coach. and dolphins fans were not happy. chagrined by saban's departure, two years after he came to south florida from louisiana state, many fans flooded the airwaves wednesday with claims that included deception and carpetbagging.  saban flew to tuscaloosa, ala., on wednesday to begin a new life, leaving behind an avalanche of ill will. kim bokamper, a linebacker/defensive end who played his entire career with the dolphins from 1977 to 1985 and has been in south florida radio and television since, was among those who said he felt betrayed.  ''wayne huizenga was in the garbage business for years,'' bokamper said on wqam-am wednesday morning in reference to the dolphins' owner. ''nick saban may be the biggest piece of trash he's ever collected.''  bokamper added that he had been inside the dolphins' complex many times over the years. ''and the morale there right now,'' he said, ''is as low as it's ever been.''  huizenga was more forgiving.  ''i am not upset with nick, because it's more involved than what you think,'' huizenga said at a news conference. ''i've been through this with nick for quite some time now, and i feel the pain and so forth and so on, of nick and terry, and it's not a very simple thing. no, i think nick is great. i'm a nick saban fan.''  that was a hint by huizenga that family issues affected saban's decision. there have been reports that saban and his wife, terry, did not particularly embrace south florida. the miami herald reported that saban has a $7 million home on the water in fort lauderdale, but that he longed to spend more time in a house on a lake in georgia.  thus saban's two-year experiment as a head coach in the n.f.l. came to a rocky conclusion. he leaves after a 6-10 season, his only losing year in 13 as a head coach.  saban, who had a 15-17 record in two seasons with the dolphins, departs with three years left on his contract at $4.5 million a year. at alabama, which fired mike shula at the end of the regular season and finished 6-7, saban reportedly agreed to an eight-year deal worth more than $30 million. that would place him among the nation's top-paid college football coaches.  there is some feeling that saban prefers to coach the college game. he told reporters in november, ''there is a great spirit and sense of community when you're in college football, because of people's ties to the school.''  huizenga now faces the prospect of having to find the dolphins' fourth head coach in the past nine years. don shula held the job for 26 years. huizenga would say only that the dolphins have a process to find a replacement for saban, and that the dolphins enterprises chief executive, joe bailey, and the club's chief operating officer, bryan wiedmeier, would be in charge of implementing it.  candidates could include ron rivera, chicago's defensive coordinator; mike sherman, a former green bay head coach and current assistant head coach with houston; jim caldwell, the indianapolis assistant head coach; and cam cameron, san diego's offensive coordinator. two dolphins assistants, dom capers and mike mularkey, have n.f.l. head-coaching experience.  ''in my opinion, the dolphins have always been about winning,'' huizenga said. ''i don't care what it takes, what it costs, what's involved. we're going to make this a winning franchise.''  huizenga appeared to pull off a major feat when he lured saban from the college game after saban had repeatedly declined other n.f.l. overtures. as a college coach for 11 seasons -- at toledo, michigan state and louisiana state -- saban did not have a losing season. at l.s.u., he was 48-16, which included a share of the national championship in 2003.  huizenga, who lives near saban, called him wednesday morning and asked if he could come over for a talk rather than meet him at dolphins headquarters. that was when saban told him of his decision. saban then shared the news with his assistant coaches on a speakerphone at the team complex.  ''this is a decision probably he struggled with tremendously,'' capers said.  college football  