schwarzenegger opens in a sequel   nursing a broken leg but armed with an electoral mandate, arnold schwarzenegger was sworn in friday to his second term as governor of california.  the ceremony, in a nearly full arena here in the state capital, came two months after mr. schwarzenegger's convincing victory over his democratic challenger, treasurer phil angelides, and two weeks after a painful fall on a ski trip to sun valley, idaho, which shattered his right leg.  before friday, mr. schwarzenegger had not been seen in public since the accident and his resulting surgery, though photographs had shown the still-buff, preternaturally tan governor looking surprisingly meek in a hospital bed.  so the ceremony served both as a celebration and as a kind of group get-well card, complete with the kind of bipartisan oratory that usually marks the beginning -- and usually only the beginning -- of any governor's term.  ''there is an incredible change that has occurred here in sacramento,'' said willie l. brown jr., former san francisco mayor and onetime assembly speaker, who acted as the event's rakish master of ceremonies. ''things are getting done. over the last year it has been dramatically demonstrated, and california is better off for that effort.''  likewise, the inauguration was a chance for mr. schwarzenegger to take hold of the political center, something he did effectively during the election year -- the accomplishments included passage of a major bill on global warming and another raising the state's minimum wage -- and in the election itself, which the governor, a republican in a predominantly democratic state, won by drawing large numbers of voters across party lines.  ''we must think of ourselves as belonging not to just the republican party or the democratic party, but to the party of california,'' he said in his inaugural speech, moments after taking the oath of office with his wife, maria shriver, at his side.  the bipartisanship was evident in the half-dozen prominent california democrats on the stage at the memorial auditorium, a 3,800-seat arena just blocks from the statehouse. among them was gray davis, whom mr. schwarzenegger succeeded after a recall election in 2003.  mr. schwarzenegger has already begun to lay out an aggressive agenda for his second term. a major address is set for monday in which he is expected to announce plans for a sweeping health care overhaul that may include providing medical coverage for 6.5 million uninsured californians. his state of the state address will be on tuesday, and the announcement of his budget on wednesday.  friday's speech was devoted primarily to one topic -- centrism in what he called the ''nation state'' of california -- though he struck almost presidential chords when he began his address with references to the war in iraq, a country he described as ''fertile with bloodshed and hate,'' and the killing in darfur.  ''faith and hope are two qualities that are in short supply in the world right now,'' he said. ''there are such deep divisions in our human family.''  by and large, however, the inauguration was a chance for supporters to enjoy the kind of pomp and star power that californians have come to expect during mr. schwarzenegger's tenure. jose feliciano and jennifer holliday serenaded the governor at the ceremony, and a gala here friday night featured paul anka and donna summer as headliners.  before the swearing-in, a procession of multiethnic performers took the stage, including an irish-style dance troupe, a mariachi band, a black gospel choir and a white youth choral group, who performed wearing flag-adorned sweaters and shirts.  mati waiya, a ceremonial leader of the chumash indian tribe, arrived at the inauguration bearing a condor and an eagle feather, which he said symbolized peace and dignity. mr. waiya, who also wore a bear bone through his nose, said he had worked with mr. schwarzenegger's transition team after the recall election and had been impressed by the governor's efforts on the environment and his willingness to differ with fellow republicans.  ''i think he's serving both sides,'' mr. waiya said, ''but it's nice to see him get the republicans a little upset.''  indeed, the two major speakers on friday, other than the governor, were democrats: mr. brown and ms. shriver, whose mother is eunice kennedy shriver, sister of president john f. kennedy. the elder ms. shriver, 85, drew a standing ovation as she took the stage.  mr. schwarzenegger got a few laughs during his address with his now-familiar comparison of his political career to his action-movie days. ''my escapes here have been more hair-raising than anything i've ever done in the movies,'' he said.  but mr. brown got the biggest laugh, when he said maria shriver, a former television reporter, had ''taken the role of the embedded journalist to the ultimate.'' ms. shriver seemed to enjoy the joke.  moments later, mr. brown went even further, calling ms. shriver ''foxy and sexy,'' something he said he would not have had the courage do if mr. schwarzenegger, still backstage before being introduced, had been closer at hand. or not on crutches, for that matter.  