parks agency leaves controversial book on shelf   when complaints emerged in 2004 over the sale of a creationist account of the formation of the grand canyon in national park service bookstores, interior department officials said they would review whether the book should be pulled from the shelves.  but there was no formal review, in part because of differences of opinion among the park service's own specialists, said david barna, a spokesman for the agency, in an interview yesterday.  when officials got together to discuss the book, the geologists and natural resource specialists would say, ''get this book out of here,'' mr. barna said. ''but the education and interpretation people would say: 'wait a minute. if your science is so sound, the fact that there are differences of opinion should not scare you away.' ''  in the end, no formal action was taken, and the book remains on sale because, mr. barna said in a written statement, ''it is not our role to tell people what to believe.''  the park service issued the statement after an organization of state and federal natural resource managers, public employees for environmental responsibility, or peer, said it had filed a freedom of information act request concerning the agency's handling of the book, ''grand canyon: a different view.''  the group received a letter saying a review of records ''did not locate any documents responsive to your request,'' which mr. barna confirmed, saying ''there's no real record.''  jeff ruch, executive director of peer, said the park service was advancing a particular religious view by keeping the book on sale, and was also deceiving people about it, by repeatedly saying that it would be reviewed.  ''if the question is religious values, they ought at least to be honest about it,'' mr. ruch said.  the book was assembled by tom vail, who operates canyon ministries, which offers canyon river tours with a creationist bent.  the book maintains that the heavens and the earth were created in six days about 6,000 years ago and that the canyon was formed in a divine flood sent to wipe out ''the wickedness of man.''  scientists say that earth is billions of years old and that the canyon has been carved over millions of years by the action of the colorado river.  in his statement, mr. barna notes that park service management policies require reliance on ''the best scientific evidence available'' and, as a result, rangers tell visitors that ''the colorado river basin has developed in the past 40 million years.''  but the guidelines also say that material available from concessionaires in national parks should adhere to the standards used to evaluate park service materials.  when the book appeared on park service store shelves, there were objections from a host of scientists, including the agency's own geologists, who said it ''repudiates science.''  in the interview, mr. barna said a new interpretive center would open at the canyon this summer, offering a more detailed explanation of the canyon's development, told in scientific, not religious, terms. he said this investment in science shows where the agency stands.  but in an interview yesterday, mr. ruch said selling the book was one of a number of efforts to promote the views of fundamentalist christians in the park, ''not buddhists or muslims or anyone else.''  ''this is government establishment of religion in a fairly fundamental way, if you pardon the pun,'' mr. ruch said.  