x-ray vision would be nice, but sometimes a nudge will do   most bridge deals would cease to be interesting if everyone knew where all of the cards were located -- what is called playing double-dummy. if declarer could peek into his opponents' hands, he would almost always make his contract. but since he is not blessed with x-ray vision, sometimes the defenders can nudge declarer off the road to rome and onto a dead end.  the diagramed deal, from the swiss teams at the edgar kaplan winter regional in midtown manhattan last saturday, is one of those deals.  the winners were franco baseggio, john diamond, jim krekorian and andrew stark of new york. the runners-up were john fout, michael kopera and john rengstorff of new york and william ehlers of west orange, n.j. third were rozanne and bill pollack of basking ridge, n.j.; martin fleisher of new york; and michael kamil of holmdel, n.j.  what do you think of north's one-spade opening bid?  distributional hands are worth much more than their face value if a fit is found. the drawback with opening this hand is the potential difficulty in showing both suits. if north had, for example, the majors, it would be much easier. some would pass, planning to make a two-suited bid on the next round. and a few would open one club, but it is dangerous not to mention a five-card major immediately. if, for example, west bids hearts, north passes, and east raises to four hearts, this hand is not strong enough unilaterally to compete with four spades.  both auctions were effectively the same, although at the other table stark (north) rebid two hearts to show a normal two-spade rebid, and baseggio (south) bid three no-trump over three clubs. west led the heart king, asking his partner either to unblock an honor or to give count. (this was dangerous without the heart ten. if east had played the queen from a three- or four-card suit, it might have sacrificed the setting trick.)  here, though, east signaled an even number of hearts by playing his five. now west shifted to a spade. baseggio took the trick on the board and ran the diamond ten. west won with the queen and persevered with his second spade, but declarer won on the board and played a diamond to his jack. west, after winning with his king, cashed the heart ace, and south claimed the remainder. the defenders took two hearts and two diamonds.  krekorian (west) led the heart ace, asking for an attitude signal. when diamond (east) played a discouraging deuce, west wondered how east could gain the lead to push a heart through south's queen.  west shifted to the club queen, playing his partner for three to the jack.  the operation was a success, and the declarer did die, but he might have lived. if south had won with his club king and returned a club to dummy's ten, he would have made his contract. the defenders could have taken only three hearts and one club.  but declarer decided it was better to play on diamonds. he won the second trick with dummy's club ace, then ran the diamond ten. now, with careful defense, the contract would always fail. west won with his diamond queen and led a second club to south's king. declarer took his five spade tricks, but west kept the heart king, two diamonds and a club. south, sensing what was happening, played a diamond to his ace, hoping to drop the king, and conceded down one.  plus 400 and plus 50 gave the winners 10 international match points on the board.  bridge  