the penguins and people look great, but are they animation?   like pornography, animation has always been easy to recognize and hard to define. but the definitional problems have grown more perplexing lately. even professionals in the field are finding it difficult to decide: is a computer-generated penguin whose dance moves come from digital mimicry of a human truly animated?  ''maybe 'animation' is becoming a redundant term,'' nick park, whose four oscars include one last year for co-directing ''wallace & gromit in the curse of the were-rabbit,'' said in a telephone interview from his studio in bristol, england. ''they used to define it as anything that wasn't live action, but now the two are kind of merging. it can be difficult to tell what's animation, but the only time that really becomes a problem is when you have to figure out which category to enter for awards.''  this last is no small issue: many of the films eligible for the best animated feature oscar represent either a combination of media or a technique that pushes the traditional boundaries of animation. the rules of the academy of motion picture arts and sciences, which awards the oscars, say that an animated feature film should be created with a frame-by-frame technique, have a running time of at least 70 minutes, display a ''significant number'' of major animated characters and employ animation in not less than 75 percent of its running time. but where the medium begins and ends in an era of nonstop technical change remains a topic of often heated debate.  some prominent artists are cautious about trying to draw lines around their world, even if that leaves room for argument over motion capture technology (which synced the live dancer and the penguin in ''happy feet'') or the processed live action behind the images in ''a scanner darkly.'' (both films qualify for award consideration under current rules.)  ''i think we have to expand the boundaries of definition, but i'm not sure what it should be at this point,'' said john canemaker, the oscar-winning animated filmmaker and new york university professor. ''i think we have to decide what is and isn't animation on a case-by-case basis, rather than being doctrinaire about it.''  in the past animation was usually distinguished from live action by two factors: each frame of film was exposed individually, rather than as part of a longer take; and the illusion of movement was created, rather than recorded. but many recent films exceed those parameters.  motion capture, or mo-cap, for instance, blurs the line by using computers to record the movements of an actor, which can then be reproduced by characters on the screen. (motion capture was also used to create the kids in ''monster house'' and the starkly lighted humans in the french feature ''renaissance.'')  some animators object to mo-cap, arguing that it leaves no place for their creative input. others counter that the captured data almost invariably has to be massaged, which means animators adjust the movements, sometimes minimally, sometimes more so. a third camp compares the process to the rotoscope, an early-20th-century device that enables animators to trace live-action footage frame by frame. walt disney's artists used the rotoscope for some scenes of the heroine in ''snow white and the seven dwarfs'' (1937). ralph bakshi used it extensively in ''american pop'' (1981).  ''how do we deal with the modern-day equivalent of the rotoscope?'' mr. canemaker asked. ''for that matter, how do we deal with the old version of the rotoscope? 'snow white' is considered animation because of the way they altered the image; the input of the artist was so distinct. there has to be a strong input from the hand of the artist -- or, today, the mouse of the artist.''  in a telephone interview from the pixar animation studios in emeryville, calif., john lasseter, the oscar-winning director of ''cars'' and the ''toy story'' films, argued that some element of deliberate distortion will always be of the essence in animation.  ''since animation began, there's always been a desire to replace the animator and devise a technical way of getting movement,'' mr. lasseter said. but, he added: ''the results always look odd, because in animation you're creating a caricatured world. although today's computer-animated films may be getting closer to reality, they're still caricatured. to make those worlds believable, the motions need to be caricatured to the same degree as the visuals. when you put realistic motion from live action into a caricatured world, it doesn't fit.''  although processed live action hasn't appeared in mainstream animated films, richard linklater used it for ''waking life'' and ''a scanner darkly.'' under this technique, the film is shot in live action, and the imagery is altered with computer paint programs.  mr. lasseter is among those who feel that works of this kind should be considered animation. ''it still technically qualifies, as you are manipulating the frames that the audience sees on the screen,'' he said. ''it's not a technique you can apply to the live-footage action automatically. it actually has to be manipulated by an artist frame by frame.''  mr. canemaker said, ''i was intrigued by the look of 'waking life,' but i felt the film would have fared better if a director of animation had been involved. i didn't think the sections were as different from one another as they were touted to be. i'm not that fond of literalism in any form of animation: i think the interpretation of the artist is the important thing, and how the hand and mind are seen in the product.''  ''renaissance'' and ''scanner darkly'' are art house films aimed at viewers interested in experimental techniques. but an increasing number of big-budget, mainstream movies feature computer-animated characters, from stuart little and garfield to gollum and king kong. this fusion of techniques further blurs the distinction between live action and animation.  should ''garfield: a tail of two kitties,'' which places a computer-animated cat in a live-action world, be considered an animated film? should ''star wars: episode iii -- revenge of the sith,'' since it is populated with animated robots, vehicles and creatures? mr. lasseter said the distinction lies in the filmmaker's intent. ''for me the fundamental question is: do you want the audience to know this world does not exist, or do you want to make it look like the real world and just expand what you can do in live action?'' he said.  ''since i started working with computer animation in 1981, the goal in the computer graphics research world has been to create tools that can reproduce reality,'' mr. lasseter continued. ''i use many of these tools, but i use them to create something the audience knows doesn't exist, then mess with their minds by making it look real and believable. i think visualizing a believable world that is very fanciful may be harder than taking a photograph and trying to reproduce it.''  mr. park summed up what may represent the consensus among animation artists when he said, ''i'm anti making things more realistic. everything in me goes against it.''  his view: ''if you aim for realism, and you don't quite achieve it, it can become very ugly. if you separate your work from reality, the artistry and stylization become the focus. for me that's the joy of filmmaking. i don't want to create reality. i'm not interested in reality.''  the oscars  