defense may be ultimate measure of colts' success   running backs have relished playing against the indianapolis colts.  the colts allowed more rushing yards (173 a game) by far than any team in the national football league during the regular season. star running backs hurt them. journeyman running backs hurt them. in an embarrassing 44-17 loss to the jacksonville jaguars, the colts yielded 375 yards on the ground as maurice jones-drew (166 yards) and fred taylor (131 yards) had their choice of which gaping hole to run through.  no wonder coach tony dungy closed practice to reporters this week for the first time all season. the colts face a potential nightmare saturday, trying to contain the running back larry johnson in their american football conference playoff opener at home against the kansas city chiefs. johnson is the kind of gifted, durable running back who can run indianapolis right out of the playoffs.  ''if i was on the other team, and i watched the game, i would say the same thing, 'oh, yeah, we can run on the colts,' '' colts defensive end dwight freeney said before wednesday's practice. ''it's up to us to step up to the plate, to answer all those critics out there.''  it speaks volumes for the offense, led by peyton manning, that the team finished 12-4. indianapolis gave up almost 30 more yards rushing a game than the league's next worst team, the st. louis rams (145.4 yards). and the colts did not face the league's three leading rushers -- ladainian tomlinson of san diego, johnson and frank gore of san francisco.  is one week enough time for the colts' run defense to improve dramatically? dungy hopes so. the colts were not bad every week against the run, but they were extremely schizophrenic.  the week after the jacksonville loss, indianapolis held cincinnati to 133 yards in 30 attempts during a 34-16 victory. but the next week against houston, the former giants and denver broncos castoff ron dayne punished indianapolis for 153 yards on 32 carries, as the texans won, 27-24.  dungy is a defensive coach at heart, and he admitted his team's unreliable defense troubled him.  ''we've had flashes of it, but we have not been consistent all year and that's a little disappointing,'' dungy said. ''i know we have the ability to do it, and we've done it in stretches of games.  ''we've got to put it together week in and week out if we want to do anything in the playoffs.''  indianapolis is hoping to get a lift from the former pro bowl safety bob sanders, who expects to play against the chiefs after missing most of the season with a knee injury. sanders's sure tackling and aggressiveness bolsters the colts' run defense.  ''he's got a lot of speed, and he's a good hitter,'' dungy said. ''more than anything, he probably brings an energy to us, because he's an excitable player, he's an emotional player. i think it's going to definitely give us a lift having him back.''  but dungy may have closed practice because he was planning some personnel changes and different defensive looks.  ''i'll probably keep that to myself,'' dungy said, smiling.  dungy may need some special defensive tactics because johnson is no ordinary running back. only tomlinson (1,819 yards) rushed for more yards than johnson (1,789), and johnson had 11 games in which he rushed for at least 100 yards, including six of the last seven, while setting a league record with 416 carries for the season. kansas city figures to continue to make johnson the focal point of the offense, hoping to wear down the colts' defense while keeping manning off the field.  ''you don't want to give them the ball,'' chiefs coach herman edwards said wednesday during a conference call with reporters. ''against them, that's your whole mind-set. if we don't make first downs and control this clock, most defenses aren't going to be able to slow them down.''  this is the colts' fifth consecutive year in the playoffs, and while manning has been criticized for not leading his team to the super bowl, it will be difficult for indianapolis to win a championship without improved play from its defense.  when dungy coached at tampa bay, defense was the team's staple, but he has grown accustomed to coaching a team with an offensive personality.  ''when we're able to shut people down and give the ball back to our offense, i feel more comfortable,'' dungy said. ''you have to build around what you have, and there's a lot of ways to win.  ''the ideal situation would be to be dominant on both sides of the ball. but for me, with my background growing up in the n.f.l. on defense, you always feel like you want to shut people down.''  for the colts, the first challenge is to shut down johnson. how successful they are at that task will help determine if their season extends beyond saturday.  ''we don't have to come up with a new elaborate game plan,'' freeney said. ''we just need to do what we do, and make plays. whatever it takes, it's about moving on to next week.''  pro football  