the paths to universal health care   to the editor:  re ''a healthy new year,'' by paul krugman (column, jan. 1):  yes! we have a fresh congress and the promise of new approaches. this could be the year to break free from the crippling grip of private insurance companies and provide health care for all, as every other advanced country has long been doing.  medicare, despite some fumbles, works extraordinarily well for millions of our senior citizens. why not for all? this year we should end our national shame with respect to health care and join the civilized world.  dora b. goldstein  palo alto, calif., jan. 1, 2007  to the editor:  paul krugman's proposed solution for our health care mess is half right. we do need a public tax-supported insurance system, like medicare, to replace the hundreds of private, high-overhead insurance companies. these take 10 to 15 percent of the health care dollar and give little in return.  but that would not control rising costs. despite much lower overhead, medicare's costs have risen nearly as rapidly as the private sector's. that's because economic incentives encourage overuse of expensive medical technology even when it is of unproven or marginal benefit.  fee-for-service payments of physicians, investor-owned facilities and a market ideology will have to be replaced by salaried physicians working in prepaid medical groups and by nonprofit ownership. a difficult agenda, but nothing less will do.  arnold s. relman, m.d.  boston, jan. 2, 2007  the writer is professor emeritus of medicine and social medicine at harvard medical school and a former editor of the new england journal of medicine.  to the editor:  with a tragic milestone reached in iraq, it is noteworthy that the milestone of 50 million americans with no medical care coverage is rapidly approaching.  few working americans can afford to pay for their health care if they are seriously ill or injured, or for insurance even when they can obtain it. employers pay about half of health care costs, which are rising faster than inflation because of many factors, including advances in technology and expensive new medicines.  as a doctor, i often see the tragedy when patients delay needed care because they can't pay for it. as an employer, i am faced annually with whether to accept onerous increases in insurance costs or to ask my employees to shoulder more of the burden. our fragmented payment system for health care makes no sense.  i hope that congress will begin at once to rectify this disgrace.  william e. bowman, m.d.  greensboro, n.c., jan. 1, 2007  to the editor:  paul krugman is correct that the nation must find a path to universal, publicly financed and administered health care. but where is that path?  the fiscal consequences of a leap to such health care appear to be insurmountable, yet could it be done in steps?  perhaps coverage through the veterans administration could be the first to be folded into medicare. many veterans are over 65, and all would be offered broader services.  covering all children under 16 could be next. then high-expense procedures like transplants, as is done with dialysis. then medicaid recipients. finally, allowing the remaining people -- relatively healthy, relatively affluent and overwhelmingly employed -- to use their current private insurance payments to buy into medicare.  could that be the path?  michael p. alexander, m.d.  newton centre, mass., jan. 3, 2007  the writer is a professor of neurology at harvard medical school.  to the editor:  thank goodness for paul krugman's willingness to repeat his argument on behalf of us all.  sadly, his appeal for significant and meaningful change has fallen on deaf ears.  legislators, not willing to confront a powerful middleman, are sitting by while lives, jobs, small businesses, international competitiveness and true freedom of choice in health care are mangled by an entity whose value to our overall health is questionable.  carol salter  boulder, colo., jan. 1, 2007  the writer is a registered nurse.  to the editor:  paul krugman (column, jan. 1) does not discuss a major reason we spend so much and get so little for our health care dollar.  insurance and pharmaceutical companies are publicly traded companies whose main goal is to make money. their primary mission is not to provide health care coverage for their members; these are merely tools through which profits are generated.  why do we delude ourselves in thinking that these companies would behave more altruistically than other companies? and why do we think these companies would relinquish these goals to help provide health care coverage for all?  kenneth r. silk, m.d.  ann arbor, mich., jan. 1, 2007  the writer is a professor of psychiatry at the university of michigan medical school.  to the editor:  in thinking about paul krugman's review of the failed history of health reform, i am struck by the inherent irony.  here we are, more than a decade after being buffaloed by the ''harry and louise'' propaganda of the insurance industry, still watching the numbers of uninsured millions escalating, still worried about being at the mercies of the h.m.o.'s, and now hoping that ''big government'' will finally step in and help us out of this crazy system.  yet, with all this, including the clamor to retain and even expand that big government program -- medicare -- we still can't envision getting to where we need to be because of our cynicism and distrust of government!  john schlager  springfield, n.j., jan. 1, 2007  to the editor:  paul krugman's appeal for universal health care is right on.  while we suffer without the assurance of annual checkups, france, canada, scandinavia, germany, britain and others find it within their economic abilities to leave no person without annual medical exams and more.  the principal reason for our haplessness is, as mr. krugman wrote, the lobbying power of insurance businesses. just why their intrusion into the equation is tolerated is beyond logic.  i never saw an insurance agent cure so much as a hangnail.  gil weiss  stamford, conn., jan. 1, 2007  