what's on monday night   8 p.m. (bravo) inside the actors studio -- his first film role was a one-liner in ''mystic pizza.'' and that was about it, career-wise, for the next few years. but then he and his childhood friend ben affleck came up with a project called ''good will hunting,'' and suddenly he was ascending the a-list, with an oscar nomination for best actor and a win for best screenplay. tonight, mr. damon, considered one of hollywood's most good-natured actors (have you ever seen the man frown?), talks about a career that has included steven speilberg's ''saving private ryan,'' anthony minghella's ''talented mr. ripley'' -- not to mention steven soderbergh's ''ocean's eleven,'' ''twelve'' and, soon, ''thirteen'' -- and his latest role, with angelina jolie, as the operative edward wilson in robert de niro's ''good shepherd.''  7 p.m. (abc family) lincoln heights -- boys in the hood: an idealistic los angeles cop (russell hornsby) dreaming of a better life for his children moves his family into his old, inner-city neighborhood in this new series. the transition is far from smooth.  8 p.m. (lifetime) gay, straight or taken? is your radar working? in each episode of this new series, a woman must date three different men and then decide which one is really available.  9 p.m. (lifetime) to be fat like me -- kaley cuoco plays a slender, popular teenager who, tired of her mother's use of weight as an excuse for life's problems, poses as a 250-pound high school student for a documentary film contest -- and to prove that personality trumps appearance. but all that unexpected ridicule and harassment really stings. caroline rhea, as of late the cheerleader in ''the biggest loser,'' co-stars in this made-for-television movie based on the real-life experiences of ali schmidt, a new york teenager who went undercover for a network news special on obesity in 2003.  9 p.m. (vh1) i love new york -- no, not the city. new york, the woman twice-rejected by flavor flav in two different seasons of ''the flavor of love,'' continues her manhunt in this new reality series in which 20 contestants vie for a piece of the apple. fair warning: her mother is in the house, and she bites.  10:30 p.m. (vh1) the white rapper show -- eminem may not have to move over quite yet, but he might want to get out his overnight bag, just in case. michael (mc serch) berrin of 3rd bass is host of this new, er, survival series, set in a rundown tenement in the south bronx, in which 12 contestants put their music and street cred to the test to win $100,000 and a legion of fans. it's no bed of roses.  kathryn shattuck  tonight's tv listings  