brain exercise and the elderly   to the editor:  re ''as minds age, what's next? brain calisthenics'' (front page, dec. 27):  it is unfortunate that the business of promoting ''brain health'' is increasingly populated by companies offering products with great promises but little scientific support.  task-specific, computer-based training products have not demonstrated any significant impact on the daily lives of older adults. more comprehensive approaches offering intellectual challenge, social engagement, healthy lifestyles and the management of chronic illnesses that may affect the brain, like hypertension and diabetes, are far more likely to be effective in maintaining cognitive vitality.  despite a boom in brain health technology, recent scientific research supports the view of the ancient greeks: that having a healthy mind is the result of an integrated approach emphasizing overall health and well-being.  even in brain health, consumers need to distinguish the snake oil from the real deal.  cynthia r. green  howard fillit, m.d.  new york, dec. 27, 2006  the writers are, respectively, the founding director of the memory enhancement program at mount sinai school of medicine, and executive director of the alzheimer's drug discovery foundation.  to the editor:  i am 84, and my hobby and pleasure for the last five years has been writing limerick poems for friends' birthdays, anniversaries and retirements.  keep in mind that a limerick is a five-line poem in which lines 1, 2 and 5 rhyme, as do lines 3 and 4; the last line must also be the punch line.  to those who think that writing one isn't the best brain exercise there is, i suggest they try it.  lee goldsmith  miami, dec. 27, 2006  to the editor:  there is a common attitude in popular culture that mental exercise is a helpful way of warding off age-related cognitive declines, stoked in recent months by the popularity of games like nintendo's ''brain age'' and by web sites like happyneuron.com, which your article mentions.  unfortunately, the empirical evidence just isn't there. not only has physical exercise been shown to be better than mental exercise at preventing declines, as your article mentions, but there is also little evidence that mental exercise has any benefit at all.  a recent overarching review of the mental exercise literature published in the journal perspectives on psychological science shows no effect of mental exercise that cannot be explained by what are termed self-selection effects -- those who are able and willing to undergo mental exercise regimes are in better cognitive shape to begin with, and therefore experience fewer losses as they age.  while mental exercise may certainly have personal meaning for some people, its benefits are far from robust. older adults should not bank on mental exercise as a guarantor of cognitive health.  josh penslar  toronto, dec. 27, 2006  to the editor:  i am a 77 years young retiree enjoying my life to the fullest. you did not mention one aspect of keeping our aging brains young -- music.  remember that many musicians, like the cellist pablo casals and the cellist and conductor mstislav rostropovich, have continued to play music and conduct orchestras long into their later years.  i am a choral singer, and have been for 60 years. i am also a member of the seattle symphony chorale. i sang ''messiah'' three nights last week, and i'm about to start three more evenings of beethoven's ninth symphony. i sang most of ''messiah'' from memory, looking at the score only to remind myself when to enter.  now please tell me whether it is too much to expect a 77-year-old brain whose native language is korean to have memorized the entire bass section of ''messiah'' with the music score and texts in english.  ted kim  seattle, dec. 27, 2006  to the editor:  ''as minds age, what's next? brain calisthenics'' could be a milestone in treating memory loss in the elderly.  i am 85, and have been a substitute teacher for the last eight years for kindergarten through 12th grade. substituting as a first-grade teacher in computer class and for seniors in calculus can be a real challenge to anybody's brain.  but i have no problem in keeping up with 20 kids; it has kept me active. i still ski and work out daily.  most people think that i'm in my mid-60s. and it helps that i still have all my hair.  clifford ashley  lake placid, n.y., dec. 27, 2006  