the neediest cases; after string of crises, a family finds some security   when destiny-rae was quiet at 18 months old, delores pryce knew that something was wrong. ''all my children talked early,'' she said. ''but she wasn't speaking.''  the problem, as ms. pryce discovered, was that her daughter could not hear. the fluid in her ears was not draining properly. an operation to install tubes to drain the fluid in each ear solved the hearing problem.  today, as she turns 7 years old, destiny-rae is a chatty, bubbly first grader who likes to read. ''i read all kinds of books,'' she said.  destiny-rae's premature birth came with medical complications and a wrenching change of address that turned the lives of ms. pryce, now 43, and her family upside down.  in december 1999, ms. pryce was pregnant with destiny-rae and visiting new york with her three children, misty-lee, keano-ross and marie-chantal, then ages 3 through 10. she was on vacation from her native england after fleeing a tumultuous marriage. she had planned to return home shortly after the new year.  on jan. 4, 2000, destiny-rae was born two months early. ''when she came out she was red and then, all of a sudden, she turned blue,'' ms. pryce remembered. ''she wasn't able to breathe.''  destiny-rae spent 16 days in the hospital and was released weighing little more than four pounds. ms. pryce was stranded in new york with four children, one of them a fragile newborn.  ''the hospital wouldn't let me fly home,'' she said.  the family was staying with friends, but the arrangement soured, leaving the entire pryce family homeless. ms. pryce gathered her children and entered a brooklyn shelter.  destiny-rae was in and out of kings county hospital center five times before her first birthday, for pneumonia and other complications. ms. pryce and her three children traveled by subway from their brooklyn shelter to visit her daily. the family lived in a shelter during the next four years. destiny-rae had emotional and behavioral issues, including hyperactivity, a sensitivity to touch and a quick temper.  then, in september 2004, tabernacle church in jamaica, queens, offered a lifeline. ms. pryce had been a member of the baptist congregation for three years. the church offered her a small two-bedroom apartment above its small worship space and set the rent at $250 a month.  ''it looked like a bomb hit it,'' ms. pryce said. ''we cleaned it up. we did our bit.'' the apartment today is furnished with worn, hand-me-down furniture. amy and patrick, the family parakeets, fly around the living room.  destiny-rae pointed to two paper certificates for perfect school attendance in october. ''this is misty's perfect attendance; this is mine,'' she said.  ms. pryce lives here with destiny-rae and misty-lee, 10, who is in fifth grade. her eldest daughter, 17, is in college in england, where students typically start college classes at 16. her son, keano-ross, is living there with ms. pryce's parents and doing well in fourth grade.  the apartment was a huge step toward stability, but paying the electricity bill was a new hurdle.  ''they sent me a bill when i first came here and i paid that bill,'' ms. pryce remembered.  then, she said, consolidated edison sent no bills for months. the con ed office is across the street from destiny-rae's weekly play therapy, and ms. pryce said that she inquired there regularly about her bill. she was told that con ed did not have her account information. about a year and a half later, she received a $1,600 electricity bill.  the family income is limited to $626 a month from destiny's supplemental security income and supplemented by $152 in food stamps, and a $20 stipend from the church food pantry, where ms. pryce also volunteers twice a week. she also picks up baby-sitting jobs, and works one day a week at a neighborhood grocery.  ms. pryce managed to pay $500 toward the electric bill. but in october, con ed threatened to remove the meter, and she asked for help to pay the remaining balance.  she turned to keiko aizawa, a social worker at new alternatives for children, which provides preventive services for families with medically fragile children. the program is run by the federation of protestant welfare agencies, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund.  ms. aizawa, who has been involved with the family since destiny-rae's ear surgery more than five years ago, found money to pay off the remaining $1,100 on the electricity bill, $500 of which was neediest cases money.  ''you guys came through for me. i'm not going back in the shelter,'' said ms. pryce, who is grateful for ms. aizawa's continued support.  things are looking up. destiny-rae receives physical, occupational and speech therapy each week and is catching up academically. ''by the age of 8 or 9, she should be up to par and out of special ed,'' ms. aizawa said.  ms. pryce hopes to find a full-time job now that two of her girls are in school here, and she said that she is finally beginning to feel more secure.  ''i've got the sense that i'm safe here,'' she said. ''everything will be all right. they've got better as things have gone along.''  in her bedroom, misty-lee pulled out some princess decorations and pink paper wall hangings that ms. aizawa gave the girls a few months ago. ''we're going to put it up soon,'' she said.  previously recorded: $4,513,938.29  recorded tuesday: 134,028.54  total: $4,647,966.83  last year to date: $4,776,625.76  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  correction:  january 18, 2007, thursday  an article on jan. 4 about delores pryce, a queens woman whose youngest daughter has health problems and who received help from the new york times neediest cases fund to help pay an electricity bill, referred incorrectly to new alternatives for children, a program that helps families with medically fragile children. (the error was repeated in an article on jan. 5 about dorcas acheampong, a bronx woman who received help from the fund to help pay her rent.) although it is a member agency of the federation of protestant welfare agencies, it is not run by the federation.  