scowcroft's strategy for the middle east   to the editor:  brent scowcroft (''getting the middle east back on our side,'' op-ed, jan. 4) asserts that ''a vigorously renewed effort to resolve the arab-israeli conflict could fundamentally change both the dynamics in the region and the strategic calculus of key leaders.''  yes, peace would be a blessing. it would realize israel's yearning from its founding in 1948 for coexistence with its arab neighbors. and it would give a new start to the palestinian people, who for too long have been fed a misguided diet of all-or-nothing by their leaders.  but mr. scowcroft is wrong to believe that the conflict, even if it were ripe for resolution (a risky assumption given the current upper hand of hamas, the internecine warfare between hamas and fatah, and the existential threats to israel posed by a swaggering iran and its regional proxies) would transform the region.  as the 2003 arab human development report noted, the region suffers from three foundational problems: a knowledge deficit, a gender deficit and a freedom deficit. in each of these areas, the report stressed, arab nations lag far behind other countries.  it would be self-delusional to believe that the region's real challenges -- from corrupt, despotic regimes to fundamentalism; from the shiite-sunni split to human rights repression -- can be addressed by focusing on the arab-israeli conflict and not on these core issues.  david a. harris  executive director  american jewish committee  new york, jan. 4, 2007  to the editor:  brent scowcroft is right on target when he calls for ''a vigorously renewed effort to resolve the arab-israeli conflict.'' but his description of this effort doesn't mention two key groups: the two peoples and the palestinian leadership.  the joint palestinian-israeli public opinion poll released on dec. 25 finds a strong preference in both publics for the comprehensive settlement option, with 58 percent of the israelis and 81 percent of the palestinians supporting this track.  president mahmoud abbas seeks to negotiate with israel, but hamas, which heads the palestinian legislature and cabinet, refuses to recognize israel or renounce terror.  the renewed effort must therefore begin with measures, led by the united states, to strengthen the abbas faction at the expense of those opposed to negotiations for peace.  this would also counteract the expansion of iran's influence into the palestinian territories through hamas described by mr. scowcroft.  seymour d. reich  david m. elcott  new york, jan. 4, 2007  the writers are, respectively, president and executive director of the israel policy forum.  to the editor:  brent scowcroft suggests that a vigorous push for peace between israel and its neighbors will lay the groundwork for stabilizing iraq and ending centuries-old blood feuds among the shiites, sunnis and kurds.  a few short years ago, we were told that a newly democratic iraq would allow peace and harmony to bloom across the middle east.  it is time to recognize the simple truth that the iraqi morass and the arab-israeli conflict are two unrelated problems, each requiring and meriting its own attention and its own solution.  daniel wolf  teaneck, n.j., jan. 4, 2007  to the editor:  brent scowcroft warns us as a nation that ''we cannot afford to fail that test'' of establishing a friendly government from the ashes of saddam hussein's authoritarian regime.  i think that we already sat down for that test, without studying or bringing our trusty no. 2 pencils, and failed.  we can keep sitting at the desk staring at our blank test sheet, but maybe it would be better if we just switched majors. international studies does not seem to be our forte.  dane m. chetkovich  chicago, jan. 5, 2007  