the voice of america   american speeches  political oratory from the revolution  to the civil war.  edited by ted widmer.  810 pp. the library of america. $35.  american speeches  political oratory from abraham lincoln  to bill clinton.  edited by ted widmer.  872 pp. the library of america. $35.  in round numbers we have here, collected by ted widmer for the library of america, 1,700 pages of orated words. volume 1 is designated ''american speeches: political oratory from the revolution to the civil war.'' there we weigh in with james otis (his ''argument against writs of assistance'') and end with lincoln's second inaugural address (is there a stretch of forensic beauty to match this?). with understandable reluctance to be done with lincoln, the editor, who served as a speechwriter in the clinton administration, begins the succeeding volume with more lincoln. his ''speech on reconstruction'' was delivered three days before john wilkes booth put an end to so much. the second volume is titled ''american speeches: political oratory from abraham lincoln to bill clinton.''  but we are left itching with curiosity. for all that the texts are fully transcribed (even interruptions from listeners are recorded), there is an unaccountable neglect of a reader's concern for historical and dramatic detail. there is not a word of introductory material, nothing about sensations political, dramatic, lyrical -- or lack of them -- that these speeches engendered. we have to settle for the notes at the back of the book, a few sentences of biographical material touching on odd points made or data cited. the collections are so conscientiously assembled that they blare out their shortcomings. you can read the enormously influential speech of ronald reagan paying tribute to the candidate barry goldwater in 1964, but you would need to be told by grandpa, or your history book, that the speech catapulted reagan from hollywood to the white house.  and there is the unsatisfied curiosity about who helped to write, or indeed undertook to write, some of the speeches. what we have is canvases attributed to assorted historical figures but not necessarily etched by them. ''william j. clinton, speech at central high school. little rock, ark., sept. 25, 1997.'' very nice. but under what kind of pressure were these words written, stressing what executive design? and who (who-all) actually wrote the speech delivered by president clinton? parts of it were manifestly in his native tongue: ''folks, in 1957 i was 11 years old, living 50 miles away in hot springs. ...'' that was clinton speaking, but changes in gait and style come along a few pages later -- at whose prompting?  we are interested, surely. when i was in school, i was told by our history teacher that the abdication speech of king edward viii had been partly ghosted by winston churchill. that was satisfying behind-the-scenes intelligence. why should the actual identity of the author or authors, where reasonably identifiable, be less than a matter of unofficial public curiosity? reading backward on the contents page of volume 2, you need at least several decades before you feel safe with your own conjectures. obviously william faulkner wrote his own speech when he accepted the nobel prize. but jesse jackson's speech to the democratic national convention in 1984 -- who did that? and there are modest questions about a score of others. robert kennedy, carter, nixon, johnson, mario savio, goldwater, malcolm x, macarthur, margaret chase smith, truman, oppenheimer, patton, huey long.  you get to herbert hoover, speaking in 1928 on the subject of ''rugged individualism,'' and you can be confident that the words you are reading are those of the speaker. hoover was a man of great learning and zero eloquence, here confirmed. martin luther king jr. surely wrote his own words. the parturitions spring live from the thoughts on the page. but the others? there is scholarship extant on who it was who composed the speeches given by franklin roosevelt, but it is not here vouchsafed.  the volumes are a museum, not always of oratorical masterpieces (mario savio?). some of the 20th-century speeches included here were accompaniments (nixon's farewell to his staff, barbara jordan's statement to the house judiciary committee). some are devoid of extra-topical interest. and why give us the speeches and withhold such knowledge as we have about what then happened, or failed to happen, after they were spoken? did we monetize silver? forswear entangling alliances?  the routine media coverage available in the last 50 years dramatizes the transmogrification of the art. when i was a soldier, i undertook (i was bidding for the romantic attention of a student who had fallen behind in her work) a study of sam houston, and learned of the very large impact he had made with his speeches in the decades before the civil war. his speeches received huge attention by word of mouth and from close study of the texts in newspapers.  it seems now an arid exercise, in the perspective of modern political life. but this is how the world worked and how oratory shaped life in the self-governing world. even without the televised drumbeat, some of the orations here preserved give rise to genuine awe. we can sense the enormous weight of an oration by john c. calhoun, his great constitutional affirmation of slavery. the eloquence of the language and the probity of the argumentation were met only by the countervailing oration of daniel webster. reading either lets one actually feel what it is to be aroused by language to fighting spirits.  political oratory of such consequence is now rare. composite productions can't achieve full-throatedness. they can be everything else -- graceful, resourceful, cunning, artful. oratory that commandeers the human spirit is unusual and unmistakable.  martin luther king was grand opera. he deployed his hortatory words to full emotional effect. ''now i'm just happy that god has allowed me to live in this period, to see what is unfolding. and i'm happy that he's allowed me to be in memphis'' -- where, one day later, he was assassinated. ''i can remember [applause] ... when negroes were just going around, as ralph [abernathy] has said so often, scratching where they didn't itch and laughing when they were not tickled. [laughter, applause] but that day is all over. (yeah) [applause]''  i interrupt myself and dr. king to observe, you can hear his voice, can't you? (yeah)  ''we mean business now and we are determined to gain our rightful place in god's world. (yeah) [applause] ... bull connor would tell them to send the dogs forth, and they did come. but we just went before the dogs singing, 'ain't gonna let nobody turn me around.' [applause] bull connor next would say, 'turn the fire hoses on.' ... bull connor didn't know history. he knew a kind of physics that somehow didn't relate to the trans-physics that we knew about. and that was the fact that there was a certain kind of fire that no water could put out. [applause] and we went before the fire hoses. ... we knew water. that couldn't stop us. [applause]''  oratory is here and there taught at school, but it is auxiliary to the practice of debate, in which oratory can figure, but not critically. it is difficult to train students in the oratorical art in the absence of live audiences and bracing causes. some years ago i was engaged to serve as master of ceremonies for 13 hours of televised oratory, re-enacting a history of the practice as suggested by rollin osterweis of yale, a historian and debate coach. the readings were done by theatrical eminences, and i attempted brief introductions designed to infuse a wisp of drama. i introduced many of the same figures who are quoted in these collections. the long hours were broadcast, but the program was a bust, to which i no doubt contributed through my failure to rescue the synthetic speeches from studio listlessness. to recreate the drama that is the sap of successful oratory requires theatrical talent, not the kind of thing that comes along in mundane political exercises. in reading speeches on the page, the historical theatergoer needs to rely on his own creative sensibilities.  these two volumes of american speeches are useful, and sometimes are powerful ignition points for hot flashes of indignation, contempt, rage, veneration and yearning.  william f. buckley jr.'s book of his own speeches, ''let us talk of many things,'' was published in 2000.  