reunion of meyer and smith succeeds   when florida coach urban meyer scored his biggest recruiting victory last summer, it was not achieved by beating out miami, florida state or tennessee.  meyer and his staff managed to lure cornerback ryan smith, the team's most important newcomer, before he transferred to howard university, a division i-aa program.  ''i think it saved our season,'' meyer said. ''he's that valuable to us.''  smith played for meyer at utah in 2004 and earned freshman all-american honors. meyer left for florida in 2005, and then smith clashed with his new position coach. smith lost his starting job, and by spring practice he had become so frustrated he quit the team.  because of an obscure new n.c.a.a. transfer rule that meyer emphatically opposes, smith was able to transfer to florida late last summer. so instead of playing for howard, smith will line up across from ted ginn jr. or anthony gonzalez on monday night when the gators face ohio state in the bowl championship series title game.  ''everything has been moving so fast i haven't had a chance to really think about everything,'' smith said. ''it's been crazy.''  the rule that smith took advantage of allows athletes who graduate from a university to transfer to another without losing a season of eligibility. meyer does not like it because it brings an element of free agency to college sports.  but he is not complaining about the results. smith's transfer allowed the gators to let reggie nelson play his natural position, safety. nelson earned first-team all-american honors there, and meyer called him the team's best player. but nelson would have probably been forced to play cornerback because the starter dee webb entered the n.f.l. draft last spring and avery atkins, another starter, was released from the team after a domestic dispute with his girlfriend.  but smith arrived and exceeded all expectations. his eight interceptions and seven pass breakups helped him earn third-team all-american honors and first-team all-southeastern conference.  ''with him at utah, i had a great year and he knew the type of person that i was,'' smith said of meyer. ''i wouldn't have come here if i didn't think i could run with these guys.''  still, it was not easy for smith to get here. he had to earn 21 credits last summer to receive his sociology degree from utah. he said he took six classes at one time, barely passing a social statistics course.  ''i basically got here by two grade points,'' he said.  once he arrived, smith had an advantage because the schemes the gators ran were similar to those at utah. his biggest challenge was to convince his teammates that a player who struggled the previous season at utah could start for the gators.  greg mattison, a co-defensive coordinator for florida, said smith earned everyone's respect the first day of practice when he blanketed the star receiver dallas baker in a one-on-one drill.  ''everyone came into the locker room after and said, 'boy, this guy is really good,' '' mattison recalled. ''he fit in perfectly right away.''  after rising from obscurity to all-american status, all that is left for smith is a perfect ending to this season in the national title game.  colleges  