a downstate deal maker as driven as his boss   blunt to the cusp of brusque, patrick j. foye, the mergers-and-acquisitions specialist recruited by a long- ago law firm colleague, eliot spitzer, to run the downstate portion of the empire state development corporation, is barking into his cellphone in the driveway of his unostentatious home -- a much-remodeled ranch with three nondescript vehicles outside -- in one of sands point's less sandy neighborhoods. no streetlights, no sidewalks, no stoplights: except for mr. foye and his loud conversation, this wealthy community on long island's north shore is pin-drop territory.  the topic being discussed, just before the december holidays, is a business deal in the final, sensitive stages of gestation. the ear on the other end of the phone belongs to a reporter whom mr. foye doesn't know but whom he wishes to dissuade from a premature story that might adversely affect the deal. he barks again. he listens intently (the mark, he says later, of a highly trained debater, which he has been since high school in queens). he signs off without ultimatums: ''just call before you make a final decision. thanks.'' click. he gives his beard an absent-minded tug. and no, he won't share the specifics of the chat.  he had not, officially, made the segue from his position as chief executive of the united way of long island (a reclamation project of sorts) to his co-chairmanship of the development corporation, a job he accepted instantly over an egg-whites breakfast with mr. spitzer, then the governor-elect, in november, but was already adding his clout to the cause. if you agree to work for a crusader, says mr. foye, 49, whose job in the spitzer administration began this week, you'd better be ready to be one.  ''we're going to do projects that generate the highest fiscal and social return to the state and its taxpayers; we're committed to moving forward on the redevelopment of penn station and west 34th street, atlantic yards and the revitalization of ground zero, and to other deals throughout the state,'' he says, marching into the dining room after exchanging a monosyllabic greeting with his wife, suzanne. it appears that mr. foye is routinely brief, if affable, with everybody, his three daughters included.  ''how are you?'' he asks the oldest, 17. ''i'm sick,'' she says. ''so why are you still going to get a haircut?'' he asks. she shrugs and leaves with her mother, but not before mr. foye, wearing a whimsical red tie sprinkled with tiny gray clouds, hollers a quick question at his wife: ''suzanne, what would you call our decorating style? cluttered?'' she nods. her most obvious contribution is christmas knickknacks and two decorated trees.  his are on the walls, with the overstock crammed in a niche by the fireplace. mr. foye collects world war i bond posters insatiably; the pride and joy of his collection is an original rendition of uncle sam's ''i want you,'' circa 1917, purchased for $500, which he estimates is now worth $10,000. ''it's the buy of a lifetime,'' he says, pragmatic even about aesthetics.  he bought his first poster in 1981 after graduating from fordham law school and joining skadden, arps, slate, meagher & flom. its theme, ''buy early,'' struck him as appropriate for a beginner mergers-and-acquisitions lawyer. he became a partner in 1989, and early on worked alongside eliot and silda wall spitzer, whom he describes as respected colleagues rather than close pals.  ''he's a better lawyer than me, and she's better than both of us,'' mr. foye remarks. ''this is going to sound toadyish, but what he did as attorney general was a masterpiece of lawyering in the vision he had about how that office could be used. as governor, he's totally focused on making life better for the people of new york.''  to help mr. spitzer do that, mr. foye, the son of irish immigrants (his father was an elevator operator, doorman and union leader; his mother, a waitress) and the first in his family to graduate from high school and attend college (on a union scholarship), will have to be adept at squeezing dollars. mr. spitzer's budget emphasizes limited spending with no tax increases; his specific advice to mr. foye: be a tough deal maker and a nonpartisan decision maker.  ''eliot's mandate is for the agency to become more effective and strategic in developing the economy of the state and to make great strides without spending additional dollars,'' says mr. foye, apparently comfortable with the notion of doing more with less. it's similar to the message he preached at united way, where he spent three years righting the books and reconfiguring the mission.  ''it had lost direction, management was tired, and it had lost the confidence of opinion makers,'' he says of the agency. he took a job there in 2004 after leaving a lucrative vice presidency with aimco, a real estate investment trust, because he chose not to relocate his family to denver.  his own fiscal conservatism, he says, is evident in the antistatus cars in the driveway. his idea of having a blast is beer, bagpipes and an annual st. patrick's day party in the backyard.  ''work is where you trade your time for making money, and money allows you to use your time in ways you choose.'' the foyes choose travel when he's not working. mr. foye, a registered independent who was appointed by gov. george e. pataki as deputy chairman of the long island power authority in 1995, switched from law to business because ''businesspeople are decision makers, capital allocators, and leaders -- and the hours for business folks are better, too.''  and the hours for public servants? ask his new boss.  public lives  