marching their way before title game's cameras   on the sideline of a scruffy practice field late this week, the leader of the florida gators gathered his players after a long workout in the heat and the humidity to remind them that they would face more celebrated ohio state opponents monday.  ''and you're every bit as good as they are,'' the band director, jay watkins, said as 300 students listened, nodded and drank from water bottles before putting away their trumpets, piccolos, saxophones, batons, flags and drums for the first of two meal breaks in their 12-hour workday.  while the football players of the gators and the buckeyes prepared to meet in the bowl championship series title game in glendale, ariz., the university bands practiced almost as hard. on thursday, florida's ''pride of the sunshine'' musicians worked from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m., just another long day in a particularly busy year for the university of florida. a gators pep band provided a live soundtrack to a men's basketball national championship last spring and again recently when the women's volleyball team made a postseason run.  this week, while other students were still on winter break, the university's football team had already left for arizona. but here, under morning fog, afternoon sun and night lights, watkins and his staff scolded, cajoled and instructed people like the senior ryan bailey, who plays the piccolo and said it was worth the work.  ''it is absolutely exhilarating,'' she said of performing on game day. ''i get goose bumps just thinking about it. the stadium is just so huge, and when everyone really seems to enjoy what you are doing, it's amazing. i can only imagine what it is like for the football players.''  derrick m. johnson, a senior who has spent the past two years as a drum major, said: ''we're the support group, which binds the fans to the team. who wouldn't want to be a part of that? when everything locks in and everyone gives 150 percent, your soul slightly lifts.''  marching bands have long been a part of the college football scene, but they are enjoying a revival of exposure on television. as jon r. woods, director of the ohio state band, said in a telephone interview, ''the band world is tremendously pleased that bands are back on.''  when the bands play monday, they will present dramatically different signature moments. before the game, ohio state will march for 2 minutes 45 seconds into script ohio, a high-stepping and militaristic formation to the brassy stanzas of ''le régiment.'' because script ohio is so popular, the band will do a double version so that both sides of the field can see it.  in contrast, the florida band's most impressive moment may come after three quarters, when the musicians stand to play ''we are the boys.'' the sentimental old song sounds like a waltz. the gators' fans typically link arms and sway from side to side while singing, ''we are the boys from old florida, f-l-o-r-i-d-a, where the girls are the fairest, the boys are the squarest of any old state down our way ''  jessica clements, a sophomore with a silver bach stradivarius trumpet, was limping from knee and ankle injuries but said she was probable for monday's game. she got hurt while carrying a big water jug for her bandmates. all sorts of other mishaps can occur when hundreds of college students with instruments try to move their mouths, hands and feet in unison.  bailey said she once kept marching while playing her piccolo after the rest of the band had stopped. ''it was probably only two or three steps, but that's enough,'' she said. ''there's nothing like blatantly making a mistake in front of 90,000 people.''  johnson said his faux pas came when he ran up his six-plank stepladder and fell at the southeastern conference championship game. ''i was just rushing and being clumsy,'' he said. ''so i had to get back up there real quickly without having it be too noticeable.''  although most bands perform without incident, the aberrations are notable. there are campus legends about student bands marching, without faculty authorization, into anatomical shapes and making spectators blush. film or photographic evidence is difficult to find.  more documented is the stanford band episode of 1982, when, in a game against california, the musicians marched on the field before the game was over. a cal player carried the ball for the winning touchdown through the band and collided in the end zone with a trombonist.  june stoeber, a former majorette with florida who now teaches baton and flag technique to the gators, said she saw a film of that episode at the college football hall of fame in south bend, ind. stoeber, who married a tuba player she met in the band, told of a few painful situations.  ''we've had a couple girls with broken noses from the flags, and we've had teeth busted out from the batons,'' she said.  stoeber said problems on road trips included rowdy fans putting their hands on female band members. ''that's why we travel with security,'' she said.  usually, they go by bus, which can take about 12 hours for some games. for the b.c.s. title game, they planned to go by plane saturday and play some pep rallies with their ohio state counterparts. many musicians from both universities are in the same fraternities and sororities.  at halftime, florida will play swing-era music, including ''boogie woogie bugle boy.'' the ohio state band will march into the outline of a ship for ''pirates of the caribbean.'' it's not like the rolling stones playing ''rough justice'' at the super bowl, but there is a history of irreverence.  gary langford, the former director of the florida band, recalled a penalty that was called against the gators' football team because the drums were beating too loudly. for the next week, he choreographed a halftime show that included a fake referee and yellow flags all over the field.  the two bands have different looks and sounds. ohio state is all brass; florida uses woodwinds, too. the buckeyes march a traditional high step. the gators prefer a more fluid glide step that rolls the feet and allows musicians to move backward and sideways into abstract patterns.  cornelius ingram, a sophomore tight end, said the florida players seek out the band at the end of victories. ''when the game's sealed, we're looking for our band, because we have to go over to sing the fight song,'' he said.  it is when coach urban meyer shakes hands with watkins, who is in his first year on the job. watkins said there was more to the band-and-football relationship than just fun, games and music. he called band work ''a microcosm of life'' that would serve students long after leaving college.  ''you learn to work next to people you might not like or respect,'' watkins said. ''you learn to give direction and take direction. you put the uniform on, and you give up some of yourself. it's an academic environment. we don't just teach them about music. they learn about life.''  colleges  