just days into the year, killings toll hits 8 in new orleans   a surge in murders since the new year has residents on edge and has raised new fears that officials here remain helpless to contain a lethal combination of guns, drugs and jobless young men.  the worries are particularly acute as this city struggles to repopulate 17 months after hurricane katrina.  eight people have been found dead since jan. 1, seven of them shooting victims, with the most recent being a young woman found lying on her bed in the uptown section friday morning, shot in the head.  as the police were scrambling to investigate that killing and the others, mostly of young men gunned down in high-crime areas, grief-stricken neighbors gathered outside the house of helen hill, an independent filmmaker, and her husband, dr. paul gailiunas, who were shot by an intruder early thursday morning in the faubourg marigny section, the authorities said.  ms. hill, 36, well known in the local film community and the recipient of several awards, was killed; dr. gailiunas, who specialized in treating the city's poor, survived his wounds. the police found him kneeling by the front door, bleeding and holding the couple's 2-year-old son in his arms. his wife lay nearby, shot in the neck. the child was not hurt.  that crime, breaking the typical pattern of drug-related shootings, helped prompt a front-page headline in the times-picayune on friday: ''killings bring the city to its bloodied knees.''  the spate of murders came after a new year's day statement by the city's police superintendent, warren j. riley, that new orleans had been made safer because the 2006 murder total was the lowest in 30 years.  but the assertion was questionable even before these killings started. on a per-capita basis, because of the city's drastically reduced population after hurricane katrina, the murder rate of at least 81 per 100,000 people in 2006 easily makes new orleans one of the most violent cities in the nation.  on friday, flowers and scribbled remembrances fronted the modest duplex of ms. hill and her husband on north rampart street, in a picturesque neighborhood of old creole cottages frequented by tourists and local residents escaping the crowds of the nearby french quarter.  both were remembered as outsiders -- dr. gailiunas is from canada, friends said, and his wife from south carolina -- with a fervent commitment to the city's culture and its underclass.  ''you know what, it's horrifying: you kill my wife, you shoot me while i'm holding my baby,'' said darlene wright, who said dr. gailiunas had treated her two sons at the low-cost clinic he started on esplanade avenue. ''he was different from the other doctors. it didn't matter what your color or culture. he cared about the people.''  friends said dr. gailiunas had been released from the hospital friday afternoon and that he planned to return to canada. the police said his wounds were not life-threatening but they could not confirm his release.  ms. hill, a harvard graduate and recipient of a rockefeller foundation fellowship, had shown her films at numerous festivals in canada and the united states.  ''things didn't matter to them, their whole focus was on people and partaking in the culture of what was happening in new orleans,'' said carlton charles, dr. gailiunas's landlord at the esplanade clinic.  previously, the doctor had worked in the high-crime, impoverished central city area.  ''he wanted to reach out to the poor and the underprivileged, people he felt had a lot of needs,'' dr. henry evans, a colleague there, said.  on friday, david jones, the owner of a bed-and-breakfast near the couple's home, described how, shortly before the shooting, a lanky gun-wielding intruder -- possibly the same one who shot the couple -- had forced his way into his establishment, but apparently fled after panicked guests called the police.  the other recent killings followed a depressingly familiar pattern. earlier thursday, the police found a young man with gunshot wounds lying face-down in a central city alleyway; on wednesday evening, they responded to a report of gunshots in the same neighborhood and found another young man dead; that afternoon, louisiana national guardsmen found the body of a man shot in the head in the desire area, in the ninth ward; and on wednesday morning, they found the body of a woman wrapped in a rug in the lower ninth ward.  the national guard is patrolling several sections of the city at the request of the police department, which is still low on manpower. superintendent riley, who has been out of town, and other senior police officials did not respond to requests for comment on the violence.  compounding residents' fears here is the apparent inability of the criminal justice system to successfully prosecute the murderers. a study by the metropolitan crime commission of new orleans, a foundation, found that from october 2003 to september 2004, only 12 percent of those arrested for murder were incarcerated.  ''you know, there are people in this neighborhood trying to bring it back,'' said mr. jones, the bed-and-breakfast owner. ''i'm tired of this. i'm ready to torch the whole neighborhood.''  