the music is sweet, the words are true   ''i'll tell you what makes a good song,'' julie wilson said before she left for a rehearsal the other day. ''truth. it comes from the heart.''  ms. wilson, 82, who has been performing in cabarets and onstage for more than 60 years, knows a good lyric when she sings one. but there's also more to a great lyric, or perhaps less, than mere truth.  classic lyricists tell a story with wit, elegance and clarity while working within tight compositional rules and narrative constraints. achieving that sublime poetic effect requires a mix of skill and art, tight discipline and free-floating creativity.  ''technically, it is a very difficult craft,'' stephen sondheim, one of the greatest practitioners, said in a recent interview, ''because you're hemmed in by the music.''  this weekend, the craft of the lyric is being celebrated once again at the 92nd street y's lyrics & lyricists series, which is beginning its 37th season. the first program, which runs through monday, is devoted to the singer and actress rosemary clooney.  ms. clooney, who died in 2002, ''was all about the lyrics,'' said the writer deborah grace winer, a longtime colleague and the artistic director of the clooney tribute. ''she was concerned about what a song said. she didn't use her voice as an instrument like ella fitzgerald.''  lyricists, as opposed to the singers themselves, tend to have a more workmanlike view of what constitutes a great line. e. y. harburg, who wrote the lyrics for ''the wizard of oz'' and appeared on the first lyrics & lyricists program in 1970, used to pride himself on being able to think up as many different ways as possible to write about love without actually using the word. bing crosby was said to hate the phrase ''i love you.'' when johnny burke wrote the lyrics to ''moonlight becomes you'' for crosby to sing in the movie ''road to morocco,'' he made the love conditional: ''if i say i love you, i want you to know.''  when it comes to musical theater, oscar hammerstein ii helped revolutionize the lyricist's art. rather than drop a song into the middle of the story like a raisin, to enable the audience to savor the moment, hammerstein made the songs part of the plot in ''showboat'' (written with jerome kern) and ''oklahoma!'' (written with his longtime partner richard rodgers).  ''it's all in the service of the book,'' said mr. sondheim, who considers hammerstein his mentor. ''you are striving to enhance the libretto, to bring to it moments that enhance and expand it.''  the task of a lyricist is ''to fill in the pieces of a larger story, by examining the different characters,'' he said. ''i let the book writer set the tone of the dialogue and colors of the character. i don't write songs until he's set the tone.''  mr. sondheim's criterion for a great lyric is ''to make it not sound like there is a writer there.'' ''clarity of diction'' is essential, he said, because ''unlike written poetry, you can't go back over lyrics. they exist only temporally.'' hammerstein, he noted, ''disavowed trickiness and cleverness in favor of direct expression.''  still, once in a while, mr. sondheim admitted, he likes to play around and show off with language. he used ''pretty little picture,'' from ''a funny thing happened on the way to the forum,'' as an example:  night descends and the moon's aglow,  your arms entwined,  you steal below,  and far behind at the edge of the day,  the bong of the bell of the buoy in the bay,  and the boat and the buoy and the bride are away!  sheldon harnick, the lyricist of ''fiorello!'' and ''fiddler on the roof,'' seconded mr. sondheim's views on the importance of clarity. ''one cannot be too complicated,'' mr. harnick said. ''with poetry you can be as dense as you want because you can read at your own speed. with emily dickinson you can go back over it, but with the theater you only get one chance.''  next month at the y, mr. harnick will discuss lyricists like lorenz hart, who inspired him to become a songwriter.  many lyricists cite as one of the best practitioners of the art dorothy fields, who wrote the lyrics to ''on the sunny side of the street'':  grab your coat and get your hat  leave your worry on the doorstep  just direct your feet  to the sunny side of the street.  ''she wrote the way people talked,'' mr. sondheim said. ''she did not distort syntax very often, the way lorenz hart and ira gershwin did.''  ''conversationality started with hart and gershwin,'' he added, ''but it was all syntactically twisted and contorted for the sake of rhyme. it was not the way people spoke, but using the language people spoke.''  even the best lyricists sometimes fall into the trap of straining the language and laying the stresses on the wrong syllables to make the words easier to sing. mr. sondheim cited hart's ''too good for the average man,'' from the 1936 rodgers and hart musical ''on your toes'': ''psychoanalysts are all the whirl;/rich men pay them all they can.''  ''he works so hard for the tricky lines,'' mr. sondheim said. ''he will distort the natural phrasing of a sentence to get there.''  ''if you're going to make it natural,'' he continued, ''you have to make sure the strongest syllable is on the downbeat'': the ''an'' sound. instead ''the accent is on the 'yst,' '' forcing the singer to emphasize it and making it hard to sing. ''that's lazy lyric writing.'' even hammerstein criticized one of his own songs -- ''what's the use of wond'rin','' from ''carousel'' -- for a similar technical fault. the final line, ''all the rest is talk,'' ends on a hard ''k'' sound, making it hard for the singer to linger on it.  awkward sequences of consonants or unsingable sibilants are also pitfalls to be avoided, the broadway musical director lehman engel wrote in ''their words are music: the great theater lyricists and their lyrics.''  a lyricist must also be careful, mr. harnick added, about ''what vowel he will use on a sustained note so the singer can sing it.''  ''for instance a lot of singers have trouble with the letter 'e,' '' he said, ''because you narrow the throat.''  '' 'love' is a great word to sing,'' mr. harnick noted, because the ''o'' is easy to stretch out. also good, he said, is ''the diphthong 'ah' because the mouth opens wide; you can really swing the note.''  beyond the different contexts in which they are encountered, most lyricists insist, poetry and lyrics are fundamentally different art forms. the lyric's ''resemblance to actual poetry, living or dead, is highly improbable,'' ira gershwin wrote in ''lyrics on several occasions.''  ''poetry deals with metaphor,'' ms. winer, who often writes about lyrics, said. ''lyrics are more an alchemy. lyrics are not written to stand alone.''  still, there are similarities between the two arts. in ''ira gershwin: the art and life of the lyricist,'' philip furia wrote that gershwin studied the anthology ''a vers de société,'' edited by carolyn wells, noting the way poets often wrote catalogs of their mistresses' attributes and used words that rhymed with their mistresses' names.  ms. winer said that good lyricists also strive for true rhymes, avoiding ''near rhymes'' like ''home'' and ''alone.''  ''in the past you would have been drummed out of hollywood or broadway for that,'' she said.  internal rhymes are a favorite technique of some lyricists. mr. harnick cites hart's ''falling in love with love,'' from the rodgers and hart musical ''the boys from syracuse,'' with its internal rhyme of the words ''unwise'' and ''eyes'':  i fell in love with love one night when the moon was full  i was unwise with eyes unable to see.  i fell in love with love, with love everlasting,  but love fell out with me.  mr. harnick also noted the ''reversal'' contained in that last line, a technique also found in poetry.  the final authority on lyrics of course is the singer. she or he must somehow deliver the goods. recently barbara cook listed some of the requirements for good lyrics.  ''there's the way the song scans,'' she said, echoing mr. sondheim. ''are they set in a way someone would say them?''  and, ms. cook added, she has to be able to stand behind the words she sings. for instance she does not like to sing lyrics that lament that the world is a bad place. ''i don't think the world is awful,'' she said.  singing great lyrics is like being an actor in the theater, ms. cook said: ''it's as if the lyricist sets the song in such a way that you are given a great scene to play.''  theater  correction:  january 14, 2007, sunday  a credit last sunday for a picture with an article about the art of writing lyrics misspelled a given name, provided by the associated press. the photo of ira gershwin was from the ira and leonore gershwin trusts -- not lenore.  correction:  january 21, 2007, sunday  an article on jan. 7 about the lyricists' art misstated a word in a stephen sondheim lyric for the song ''pretty little picture.'' the line goes ''and the boat and the boy and the bride are away,'' not ''and the boat and the buoy and the bride are away.''  