after soaring to the top, romo tumbles back to earth   tony romo and the football have parted ways at such an alarming rate in the past five games that romo was forced to wear gloves during practice this week.  dallas cowboys coach bill parcells was not trying to teach romo, his quarterback, an old-school lesson on how to protect the ball like he might his wallet. nor was parcells attempting to make romo learn how to throw with a gloved right hand.  the cowboys practiced here with footballs dunked in buckets of water, a simple simulation of the wet conditions they may face saturday night in seattle when they play the seahawks in a first-round national football conference playoff game.  in a 39-31 loss to the detroit lions last sunday, dallas continued a recent trend by committing a season-high five fumbles, and losing a season-high three of those. indeed, parcells might have ordered wet balls for practice anyway, but the measure takes on a particular urgency for romo, whose turnovers have mirrored the cowboys' recent turmoil and prompted his fall from a celebrity grace of sorts.  ''i don't want to discourage his ability to create,'' parcells said. ''but you have to be aware of the fact you can do more damage than good, and if that ratio gets a little bit high on the damage side, your ability to improvise becomes negated.''  two of the three fumbles lost against the lions were by romo, whose daring scrambles and playmaking instincts perhaps saved the cowboys' season during a 4-1 stretch in his first five games as the starter. he fumbled only twice in that span, threw only two interceptions and earned pro bowl honors. he completed 71.3 percent of his passes, threw for 10 touchdowns and was sacked 6 times.  his past five games show the flip side of a gambling, mobile quarterback. romo fumbled seven times and threw eight interceptions as the cowboys went 2-3 and squandered a two-game lead in the n.f.c. east. he completed 60.5 percent of his passes, threw for 6 touchdowns and was sacked 13 times.  parcells met with romo on new year's day. the message: get a grip.  ''he's so confident that he can do things, i think sometimes it affects the judgment,'' parcells said. ''on certain aspects, when you know you're vulnerable, you have to err on the side of caution.''  parcells added: ''he was getting away with things. and now he's not getting away with things as much.''  romo said: ''that's just the way bill is. he's a guy who always wants to motivate you. he feels if you ever get to a point where you feel you've arrived in any way, you're not going to work as hard or put forth the same effort.  ''as time goes on, he'll understand that's not the way i am. if anything, i feel the more success you get, you have to live up to it every day, so you have to put more effort in.''  given a choice, parcells would prefer a watered-down version of romo as the cowboys look to win their first playoff game in four attempts since 1996.  ''i don't want to intimate in any way he's the reason we're not playing the way we want to play,'' parcells said. ''he's part of the reason. we've just got to do a lot of things better.''  the cowboys' defense has contributed to the recent slide, giving up 33 points a game in the past four games. but romo seems to understand that receiving the brunt of the blame comes with being the quarterback with the third-best efficiency rating in franchise history (95.1) behind roger staubach (104.8 in 1971) and troy aikman (99.0 in 1993).  ''this is definitely not the time to be doubting him,'' wide receiver terrell owens said of romo.  or having his personal life scrutinized. romo experienced perhaps the true measure of fame -- being rumored to be dating another celebrity, in this case the singer jessica simpson, a dallas-area native. the rumors proved false, but now he has been spotted with carrie underwood, the 2005 winner of ''american idol.'' ''she's just a friend; i don't know where that stuff comes from,'' romo said of the rumors that they were dating. ''i really can't talk to anyone anymore or say hi without it getting somewhere crazy.''  romo, who has talked with aikman about the perks and pitfalls of being the cowboys' quarterback, ignores the distractions by immersing himself in football.  ''there's too much talk sometime and not enough just playing and having fun out there,'' he said. ''that part of it sometimes wears on you.''  ''this game isn't rocket science,'' romo said. ''people always want to point to reasons why a team or a guy is or isn't playing as well. the reality of it is that some weeks, teams do a good job and play well against you. they get a good rush or things like that. it's never that fun stuff people want to write about that makes a good story.''  pro football  