gap falters; most rivals post gains   gap's board, it appears, has had enough.  after a dismal holiday season -- the third in a row -- the chain's directors are participating in a broad review of the company's strategy, intensifying pressure on the chief executive, paul s. pressler, to pull it out of a protracted sales slump.  gap said yesterday that sales plunged 8 percent in december after a return to the simple fashions that fueled the chain's meteoric rise in the 1990s, like t-shirts and hooded sweaters, failed to lure customers back into stores.  in an admission that the back-to-basics approach has not worked, the company cut its earnings forecast for 2006, blaming deep discounts -- like $100 off a fur-lined parka -- required to sell left-over piles of winter clothing.  ''we are clearly disappointed,'' mr. pressler said in a statement.  gap's results in december contrasted sharply with that of its competitors. the nation's retailers reported respectable sales increases for the month, according to several industry groups, even as warm weather hurt winter clothing sales and higher fuel prices pinched consumer spending.  sales at stores open a year rose 3.1 percent in december, compared with the period in 2005, according to the international council of shopping centers, which predicted a 2.5 percent gain. for november and december combined, sales rose 2.8 percent, within the group's forecast.  as they have for much of the year, department stores like saks (up 11.1 percent), federated (up 4.4 percent) and j. c. penney (up 2.6 percent) posted strong gains. but smaller clothing chains like abercrombie (down 1 percent); express, a unit of limited (down 5 percent); and ann taylor (down 5.3 percent) struggled to stand out.  ''a lot of these retailers limped across the finish line,'' said john d. morris, a senior retail analyst at wachovia securities, who speculated that bargains on flat-screen tvs captivated consumers in a season when there were few must-have fashions.  wal-mart, which heavily promoted flat-screen tvs, said sales rose 1.6 percent, beating its own predictions of a meager 1 percent increase.  ''flat-screen tvs flogged fur-lined hoodies,'' mr. morris said.  there were plenty of those hoodies at gap, which heavily discounted much of its winter clothing in the days immediately before and after christmas. (the fur-trimmed parka, originally $169, was marked down to $68 several days before christmas.)  as a result of the deep discounting, gap profit margins for the fourth quarter will be ''significantly below'' those of last year, said sabrina simmons, senior vice president for corporate finance at the chain.  the board's decision to intervene in a review of gap's brand strategies suggests that the directors are fed up with the chain's poor results and the executives who have failed, season after season, to turn it around.  ''this is a clear judgment coming down on the leadership of the gap brand,'' mr. morris said.  revenue in december dropped 4 percent, to $2.34 billion, from $2.44 billion a year ago. the worst performance was at the gap and old navy brands, where monthly sales dropped 9 percent and 10 percent, respectively.  as a result, gap yesterday reduced its earnings forecast to 83 cents to 87 cents a share, down from $1.01 to $1.06.  even at gap, which often describes its sales as ''disappointing,'' the december results appeared to jolt executives. the word ''disappoint'' was used at least four times yesterday in a prerecorded phone message and news release describing december sales.  mr. pressler said that he and the board would review brand strategies at gap and old navy and that he was ''committed to making the necessary changes to improve performance.''  banana republic will not be included in the review because that chain's sales are improving. as the division introduced pricier, preppier fashions, like an $88 silk-cashmere half-zip pullover, december sales rose 2 percent, making banana a bright spot for the company.  the strategic review would be the second in the last year for the beleaguered gap division, which has struggled to recapture business after several years of changing missions and fluctuating fashions.  over the summer, after months of brainstorming, gap's brand president, cynthia harriss, introduced the back-to-basics strategy to investors and analysts, even bringing back the lower-case gap logo used for the chain's first store in 1969.  but the trip down memory lane did not win over shoppers. ''we did not gain the traction we had expected,'' mr. pressler said.  