dress their way   when self-improvement begins at home, alone, in the closet, it most often ends on the couch, alone, watching television. fortunately, as marathon viewings of ''what not to wear'' on tlc remind us, reforming our errant ways in fashion is best done with professional help, of which there is a sudden outpouring.  randolph duke and bradley bayou, onetime designers of the halston evening-wear label, who now sell collections on hsn and qvc, respectively, have extended their longstanding red-carpet rivalry with new guides to dressing better. mr. duke is the author of ''the look'' (clarkson n. potter), with testimonials from barbra streisand and sharon stone. mr. bayou's book is ''the science of sexy'' (gotham), endorsed by queen latifah and paula abdul. (''bradley bayou is the bomb!'')  mr. bayou said this week: ''beyond the stick thin, or the size 6s and 8s, real women don't know what looks good on them. they don't really have an eye. their friends don't have an eye. that comes with training.''  mr. bayou approaches the body as dan brown approached leonardo da vinci. he developed a formula based on anthropometrical studies of body shapes, with 48 varieties based on a ratio of height and weight and subdivided by silhouette. this approach involves a tape measure and a lot of math, but the rewards include a pitiless dissection of one's peculiar body failings paired with clear-cut advice on dressing around them.  for example, if your hips are more than 5 percent wider than your shoulders, you're a triangle. and if you are 5-foot-5 and weigh 175 pounds, you're a category 7 triangle. mr. bayou draws a more graphic picture: you have what's called ''a low balance.'' your celebrity body double is kathy bates. off-the-shoulder dresses, corseted blazers and chandelier earrings are in order.  mr. duke puts the burden on the reader to develop something called ''authentic personal style,'' using a method some may find unsettling. to figure out your body type -- mr. duke sees only five -- he recommends beginning with a self-assessment that requires you to stand naked before a mirror with a paper bag over your head.  he suggests this will make you more objective, even if it sounds an awful lot like the punch line of a bad joke.  front row  