colorado, still recovering from 2 storms, is hit with a 3rd   another winter storm bore down on snow-weary colorado on friday, complicating the recovery from back-to-back blizzards in december and raising fears that livestock losses would continue to mount.  at least 1,000 head of cattle were confirmed dead, most of them smothered by drifts when they bunched together along fence lines.  ''this is far from over,'' said don ament, the state's agriculture commissioner.  the latest storm was a pallid reflection of the two holiday-week behemoths that brought as much as four feet of snow between them to parts of the denver area and shut down denver international airport for two days during the peak travel period just before christmas.  but even an additional six to eight inches of snow, predicted through early saturday, was a reminder of how wildly divergent the nation's weather has become this winter, with east coast residents in shirtsleeves and sandals while people here and across the plains and southwest are overwhelmed by reminders of the season's potential for havoc.  a spokeswoman for the colorado division of emergency management, polly white, said the biggest concern in the state's hard-hit southeast corner on friday was wind. across an eight-county area, 25 percent of the roads were still impassable a week after the last storm, ms. white said, and gusts up to 35 miles per hour were predicted from the new one.  bad weather grounded colorado national guard flights that had been dropping hay to cattle stranded by drifts as high as 15 feet in places like prowers county on the kansas border, ms. white said. relief efforts were continuing on friday using tractors and four-wheel-drive trucks.  ''we're hoping that the winds predicted in the southeast don't blow the snow back over and cover the roads,'' ms. white said. ''then we're starting over.''  but the pictures on television of buried cars, collapsed roofs, disgruntled travelers and worried farmers also belie the mixed impact of the weather.  the snow cost denver's airport as much as $11 million, according to preliminary estimates by airport administrators, mainly for cleanup and lost revenue from canceled flights. but many denver hotels had their best december in years as stranded travelers and downtown office workers took shelter.  cattle losses could rise into the tens of millions of dollars, farm experts said, perhaps even approaching the estimated $28 million in farm-animal deaths in a blizzard in 1997. but winter wheat farmers, whose lands have been parched by years of drought, were exulting. the deep snows, they say, will almost certainly produce the best crop in years.  ski resort operators said that thousands of visitors were kept away from the slopes during the storms by the closed airport and the bad roads, but that news coverage of denver's plight during those same snowbound hours had also proved to be the kind of advertising money cannot buy, prompting a surge of reservations and telephone calls.  the aspen skiing company, which operates four resorts around aspen in central colorado, had 3,000 to 4,000 fewer skier-days through the christmas week than expected, with each skier-day worth $50 to $75, said jeff hanle, a company spokesman.  ''but the reservation center had some of the busiest days ever,'' mr. hanle added. ''it gave us a real blip for february and march bookings.''  and the storms also revealed, residents and local officials say, how much the political and demographic pattern of the west continues to evolve.  agriculture, while still important to colorado's economy, is increasingly dwarfed by the clout of denver and its suburbs, which swallowed up most of the available snow-removal equipment and worsened the trouble on ranches and farms.  since 1997, when the last great blizzard hit cow-country colorado, the number of cattle statewide has fallen by 25 percent, to around three million from about four million, according to the state agriculture department.  ''a lot of the equipment isn't available to go out to the rural areas because it's contracted to the cities,'' said barry cooper, the president and chief executive of farm credit of southern colorado, a bank in colorado springs that specializes in agriculture.  insurance concerns have compounded the disparity, mr. cooper said, since municipalities have the resources to protect snow-removal contractors from liability, while rural areas with lots of private ranch roads mostly do not.  but life was grinding back to normal, even in the snowiest spots.  jason dittburner, 33, who drives a 150-mile-a-day route through southeast colorado in a hostess-wonder bread van, delivering supplies to grocers, was back on the job on wednesday, the first day roads were clear enough to make his route since dec. 29, and dorothy grano, for one, was happy to see him.  ''the shelves were getting pretty empty,'' said ms. grano, the assistant manager of the rocky ford mini-mart, about two-and-a-half hours south of denver, as mr. dittburner walked in with his racks of bread, snack cakes and fruit pies.  ranchers say the next worry on the horizon is calving season, which is just beginning.  dale butler, who manages about 700 head of cattle near the kansas border for himself and a partner, said in a telephone interview that his cows were expecting about 350 calves between now and early april, and that he had lost six so far in the cold snap that followed the snows.  ''it was so cold they wouldn't try to get up to nurse,'' mr. butler said.  