faces of war   the crimson portrait  by jody shields.  296 pp. little, brown & company. $23.99.  the phrase ''inspired by'' -- beloved of fusion restaurants, cover bands and biopics about suicidal poets and dyslexic linebackers -- ought to strike caution, if not fear, in the hearts of readers. this is particularly true when it comes to historical fiction. in her 2000 novel, ''the fig eater,'' jody shields reimagined, to moderate acclaim, one of freud's famous patients, dora, as the victim of a grisly murder. now, with ''the crimson portrait,'' she has traded the gumshoes of turn-of-the-last-century vienna for the less hospitable milieu of maxillofacial surgeons in world war i britain.  taking as her subject the bizarre true-life experiments in which sculptors teamed with doctors to fashion masks for soldiers whose faces had been severely disfigured, shields attempts to turn an obscure moment in history into a broad meditation on the meaning of identity. the results aren't as interesting as the raw material; the inevitable movie will probably be even less so.  the recycling of existing subject matter isn't, in itself, the problem with ''the crimson portrait.'' but shields's novel leans less toward riff than rehash. ''it was 1915,'' goes a passage in the lumbering first chapter, ''the first spring since the war started, and her home was being transformed into a military hospital.'' the director of this makeshift institution, dr. mccleary, is fast becoming an expert in facial reconstruction. ''during his weeks of research,'' shields writes, he ''discovered that the first book about skin, 'de morbis cutaneis,' appeared in 1572, and it was another 200 years before the second book on the subject was published.'' the effect is that of an expository writing exercise, with mccleary and his colleagues reduced to clumsy authorial proxies.  still, this is potentially fascinating stuff, and shields smartly engages the rich lexicon of military medicine: ''after she officially became his assistant, she committed all his supplies to memory: saline solution. higginson's enema syringe to cleanse wounds. provocaine and novocaine. modeling compound, vulcanite and gutta-percha to hold damaged jaws in place. a brophy gasoline-  powered blowpipe for soldering.'' however, her blunt lists of period accoutrements sometimes reinforce the suspicion that she is struggling to find similarly vivid words of her own.  when shields tries to transcend transcription, this lack of command becomes more evident. there are the pat similes (''mccleary snipped this last thought as cleanly as a suture''); the near-comic redundancies (''weeks ago, kazanjian and mccleary had treated a severely injured man whose nose had been obliterated by shrapnel''); the stilted sexual subplots (''it was catherine's desire to have julian witness her intimate face''); the mixed metaphors (''catherine had also been born into a house filled with valuables and was conscious of their inviolability, like a walking stick that was always the correct length for the reach of the arm'') -- so random as to bring to mind those kits for creating refrigerator poetry.  ''i remind myself,'' mccleary says, unconvincingly, ''that in medieval times, surgeons and dentists were classified under the sign of mars along with butchers, barbers, tinkers, castrators of animals, murderers and hangmen.'' a sick boy declares: ''i saw things. white wanting to be a color,'' in a scene that makes m. night shyamalan look like a master of restraint.  ''she desired,'' goes a typically overreaching sentence, ''to enter him like an infection, a worm, a bullet nestled at the point of impact, find the hidden place where he was wounded, mend him, and never leave.'' the reader, on the other hand, hopes not to revisit the subject.  lauren collins is on the staff of the new yorker.  