opponents covet brains behind super bowl inc.   the huge super bowl banners hang from the upper deck of the stadium. images of the lombardi trophy -- three of them -- are silhouetted on the front marquee at gillette stadium.  when fans arrive for the ninth home playoff game in the 13 seasons since robert k. kraft bought the team, the new england patriots will not let them forget the success that has transformed the patriots from laughingstock to case study. but the rest of the national football league, especially the jets, needs little reminder that the patriots are trying to win their fourth super bowl in six years.  the rest of the n.f.l., after all, is desperate to replicate new england's success. the patriots' rivals present them with one of the few drawbacks to all those titles: everybody wants their people.  on sunday, the patriots will face a former new england assistant, eric mangini. a year ago, almost everyone thought the jets were reaching when they hired mangini, who had been bill belichick's defensive coordinator for only one season, perhaps plucking the fruit from belichick's coaching tree a year or two before it was fully ripe.  the decision was chalked up to the jets owner woody johnson's near obsession with how the patriots run their franchise. mangini's success makes it even more likely this off-season that opposing teams will try to cull from the patriots the people who have helped establish the dynasty.  even in a season that was marked by unusual ups and downs, the patriots won six of their last seven games after their loss at home to the jets on nov. 12. they have emerged as perhaps the greatest threat to the san diego chargers' chances of winning the american football conference championship -- just as long as they get past the most recent guy whose career was helped by having the patriots on his résumé.  ''eric had the advantage of training under the no. 1 person in the field,'' kraft said in an interview this week. ''he was smart enough to learn from him. when i hear him, it's a replication of a lot of things bill did.  ''this year has been a different year. coach belichick has done an outstanding job in managing our resources. scott pioli has done a great job in the personnel area.''  when johnson hired mangini and made mike tannenbaum his general manager, he hoped to recreate the chemistry that belichick and pioli, the patriots' vice president of player personnel, share.  but the patriots could lose pioli this off-season. he is expected to be pursued by several teams with general manager openings, perhaps including the giants and the miami dolphins.  speculation has long centered on whether pioli, who does not have the general manager title and who shares personnel responsibility with belichick, would prefer to have complete control and a chance to emerge from the considerable public shadows cast by belichick and kraft. and whether he would like to have his own voice. pioli is rarely permitted to speak to reporters as part of belichick's one-voice philosophy.  kraft declined comment on whether he would try to keep pioli from leaving. even belichick's contract status is in question. belichick and kraft have long agreed not to discuss his contract, but belichick is believed to be signed at least through next season.  the disciplined financial philosophy that belichick and pioli have is the envy of salary-cap gurus everywhere. but this season, it generated some painful personnel losses. kicker adam vinatieri and receiver deion branch are in the playoffs with other teams, even though kraft wanted to keep both.  kraft learned early in his time as an owner that decisions based on emotions -- he called branch ''our type of guy'' -- were dangerous. that is how the patriots have carefully cultivated a team nearly free of superstars and absolutely free of outspoken superstar egos. it is almost impossible to imagine the patriots tolerating terrell owens or even the headline-making talk of the giants this season.  whether the personnel losses will hurt the patriots in the long run is debatable. the rookie kicker stephen gostkowski has never been in the playoffs, while vinatieri is a legendary clutch kicker.  the offense and tom brady struggled this season as brady threw to 15 different receivers, finding a comfortable rhythm with none of them so far.  branch languished a bit in seattle after signing a six-year, $39 million deal with the seahawks.  but in the trade of branch, the patriots got something they coveted: a first-round pick from seattle, which, because of the seahawks' record, is likely to be somewhere in the middle to late first round. stockpiling draft picks is a bedrock feature of the patriots' personnel-acquisition theory and late first-round picks suit them best.  ''the first five to eight picks are noneconomical,'' kraft said. ''the sweet spot is mid to late first round, where you get players and the pay is market-friendly. we wanted to keep adam and deion. but if you make bad decisions, you can't bury your errors. you have to balance that with a sense of loyalty to your players and your emotions.''  during parts of the season, brady was visibly frustrated with the state of the offense. he yelled at teammates and in a news conference said that everyone needed to pay more attention to their coaches. but as the patriots prospered in their final three games, playing with no turnovers, brady's exasperation softened.  ''it's just stuff you've got to get used to as a player,'' brady said. ''you realize you don't control any of the personnel decisions that go on. coaches leave. players leave. when you sign a contract with a team, you're signing up to play, not to coach or make decisions on personnel.''  the rest of the n.f.l. wants the patriots to give -- their players, their executives, their ideas -- until it hurts. but with a chance to add to the banners on the stadium, new england does not seem to have gotten there yet.  pro football  