citing 'egregious' conduct, panel removes town justice   the new york state commission on judicial conduct announced yesterday that it had removed an upstate town justice for a number of improper acts, including efforts to intimidate prosecutors to keep them from complaining to the commission.  the commission said the justice, john t. greaney of the berlin town court in rensselaer county, had mistreated defendants, failed to appoint lawyers for them, talked about his cases out of court, conducted his own investigations and worked in local politics even though judges are not permitted to do so.  in 2004, the commission said, he told an assistant district attorney that he knew a lot of powerful people in state government and that if her office filed a complaint, he would not ''go down lightly.''  the commission's administrator, robert h. tembeckjian, said ''the numerous acts of egregious misconduct'' demonstrated the justice's unfitness for the bench.  mr. greaney declined to comment, and the commission said he did not respond to its complaint or attend a hearing scheduled in december. a lawyer who represented the justice, brian e. donohue, said he would not appeal. ''we came to the conclusion,'' mr. donohue said, ''that we really did not have a defense to at least some of the charges.''  mr. donohue said mr. greaney, 71, did not know that sitting judges are barred from political activities for other candidates when he circulated petitions to get candidates on the ballot in 2004. a part-time instructor at a community college, he was elected to the town court in 2003.  the commission said the petitions contained fraudulent entries, including a faked signature. mr. donohue declined to discuss the details.  the commission has moved frequently against town and village justices, who preside in small courts around the state. last year, 6 of the more than 1,250 justices were either removed from office for serious misconduct or resigned while facing charges. the legislature is examining possible changes in the court system after widespread criticism.  like three-quarters of the justices, mr. greaney is not a lawyer. but he has deep political ties, and has long been active in republican politics in berlin, a town of 1,900 people east of troy.  the decision announced yesterday included a catalog of injudicious behavior. it said mr. greaney had questioned a defendant without his lawyer present, called a defendant a liar based on information the justice had heard outside court, and told a police officer to threaten a defendant with jail time unless he became an informer.  when the justice addressed a group of students who knew a schoolmate facing charges in his court, the commission said, ''he told them they would not be seeing corey for a long time'' because he was going to get the maximum sentence.  and when justice greaney came to believe that the county district attorney's office was preparing to file a complaint, the commission said, his response was explicit. he closed the door of his office and told the prosecutor he knew her office was trying to get him removed, the commission said.  he mentioned that he had been the republican town chairman for 20 years. he said he would never talk to the prosecutor again. and he mentioned, the commission said, that he had ties to powerful people and sat on a state panel that gives grants to local prosecutors.  