a revised edition   maya angelou has lived in new york many times. she has had apartments in brooklyn and on central park west and riverside drive. but three years ago she decided it was time to buy a brownstone in harlem.  it was to be a retreat from her full-time residence, an 18-room house in winston-salem, n.c., where she is the reynolds professor of american studies at wake forest university. ms. angelou wanted a space in which to entertain her legions of friends in new york, dating from her first visit to the city in the early 1950s. unlike most second-home owners, she was looking for a getaway to the city -- not from it. and she soon found it.  ''this was the first and only house i looked at,'' she said one mild morning in december as she sat in her breakfast nook in harlem, sipping a glass of ice water and looking chic in a v-neck black velvet chemise and a triple strand of freshwater pearls, her gently curled salt and pepper hair framing her unlined face. she used the verb loosely. in fact, no one had ''looked at'' the four-story brownstone at all. longtime friends, the musicians nick ashford and valerie simpson, caught wind of this landmark property for sale and placed a $10,000 deposit on it for her. built in 1881, the house is nearly 4,000 square feet and sits on a historic block of 120th street in the mount morris park neighborhood, the most-sought-after area in harlem.  but it was a decrepit wreck and tied up in litigation as well. competing claims took two years to sort out. ''i got the house, and then i saw what i got,'' said ms. angelou, 78, speaking in her trademark majestically enunciated syllables with enough space between them for the drama of the tale to sink in. ''it had been vandalized and rained in; there was no floor between the first and second stories and no stairs. a lot of the wainscoting and the newel post were buried under debris in the backyard with nine coats of paint on them.'' at that low point, she intoned wryly, her performer's voice dropping to great effect, ''i owned an address.''  it took a gut renovation to turn the shell into the stunning, high-ceilinged home it is today, with five bedrooms, three full bathrooms and two half bathrooms. ''i was blessed and highly favored, and it only took nine months to finish,'' ms. angelou said with some awe, still finding such a timely transformation hard to believe.  her own well-publicized transformation is far more remarkable -- from her dirt-poor childhood in stamps, ark., to her current iconic literary prominence, by way of california, egypt, ghana and finally north carolina. the best-selling first volume of her autobiography ''i know why the caged bird sings'' is required reading for millions of american students; her collection of poems ''just give me a cool drink of water 'fore i diiie'' was nominated for a pulitzer prize. she has written, produced, directed and starred in productions for stage, film and television, and has long been a civil rights activist.  her front parlor is not unlike ms. angelou herself: vivid and a little larger than life (though a bit frail, she is six feet tall). oversize armchairs and couches are upholstered in raw silk in shades of lime, tangerine, cherry, grape and bright yellow. the grouping gives new meaning to the phrase eye candy, but it wasn't candy ms. angelou had in mind when she chose them. ''i wanted the room to look like a bowl of summer fruit,'' she said. and to accentuate the point, a bowl of perfectly formed glass fruit in jewel-like colors sits in the center of a marble-topped table, topped by a single glass cherry.  the house is 20 feet wide and 50 feet deep. the dining room is behind the parlor, dominated by a round glass-topped table that seats 10 in bright red lacquered chairs. painted clouds drift overhead on the light blue ceiling. ms. angelou still enjoys cooking in the well-equipped kitchen off the dining room; steak and kidney pie with mashed potatoes is a favorite. at the back of the house is her favorite spot, the breakfast nook -- sunlit and painted marigold with terra cotta-colored trim. from its black-and-white checkered farm table, she fields calls, jots on ever-present yellow legal pads and issues instructions to her assistant, lydia stuckey, who lives and travels with her, staying in a ground-floor bedroom when they are at the harlem house. ms. angelou loves several other spaces in her house, but, she says, ''sooner or later, i end up back here.''  these days, the nook occasionally serves as a studio for her newest venture: a weekly talk show on the oprah & friends channel on xm satellite radio. ''it's the first radio show i've had,'' she said, gesturing to a pair of headphones and a pile of audio taping equipment stacked nearby. sex, religion, race, music and food are all fodder for the program.  an elegant stairway arises from the front entryway, although an elevator carries ms. angelou to the blue master bedroom (years of professional dancing have taken a toll on her hips and knees). a 46-inch tv faces her crisply dressed king-size bed, and a 15-foot bay window framed by burgundy brocade draperies overlooks 120th street. a glimpse outside reveals a row of victorian lampposts lining the block, which carry red banners that proclaim ''welcome to mount morris park historic district.'' another bedroom serves as a dressing room.  on the top floor are a laundry room and the two other bedrooms, where ms. angelou's son guy johnson, 61, and his family, stay when they visit from oakland, calif. for their christmas visit, ms. angelou planned a special treat for her two great-grandchildren, caylin johnson, 8, and brandon bailey johnson, 5 -- a lighted seven-foot figure from ''the nutcracker'' in the yard.  inside, eye-catching artifacts of rarer quality are on display everywhere. they vary from luminous paintings of african women ferrying babies in slings to charming drawings of little african-american girls wearing yarn ribbons in their hair, resembling illustrations from the 1950s. african masks, quilts, photographs and sculpture sit on tables, hang on walls, line stairways. collages by phoebe beasley are scattered through the rooms. ''i bought most of the sculpture in ghana 45 years ago, and i've been collecting phoebes since the early 1970s,'' ms. angelou said.  there are works, too, by the harlem artist romare bearden. a 4-by-7-foot fabric piece by faith ringgold, who specializes in painted story quilts, was a gift from oprah winfrey that was commissioned for ms. angelou's 60th birthday. and awaiting proper placement upstairs is a framed two-page newspaper spread that appeared in the new york times on jan. 21, 1993, including a photograph of ms. angelou delivering her poem ''on the pulse of morning,'' written for the inauguration of president bill clinton.  ms. angelou's neighborhood is one of the most gentrified in harlem. the actress marcia gay harden and her family live nearby. three total renovations are under way on ms. angelou's block, and kareem abdul-jabbar has bought another house on the street. contractors hold sidewalk conferences all day long. emperor's roe, a caviar and wine bar and fine-foods shop, and settepani, an upscale bakery cafe, are nearby. and sylvia's, the legendary soul-food restaurant that is one of ms. angelou's favorite spots, is not far.  this is a neighborhood where ravaged brownstones bought for $67,000 in 1996 sold for $500,000 this year, said willie kathryn suggs, owner of willie kathryn suggs harlem real estate. ms. angelou declined to divulge what she paid when she bought her new york house in 2003, but harlem real estate brokers said that similar properties (in similarly horrible shape) were selling for a minimum of $500,000 at the time. ''hundreds of thousands of dollars went into her renovation,'' ms. suggs added. ''with the celebrity factor and the landmark status, i'd list her property at $3.4 million today.''  harlem real estate agents see ms. angelou herself as an agent of change -- ''she's a god here,'' ms. suggs said. and ms. angelou seems to live easily with her fame in this milieu. as a tour bus lumbered down her street she acknowledged that yes, they know where she lives. ''sometimes people get out and pose for photographs on the steps!'' she said with some wonderment.  never a fan of flying, she has given it up nearly entirely because, she said, smiling and shaking her head slightly, ''i've become very well known. i look a lot like maya angelou. people come up and throw their babies into my arms.'' but she gets around on a private coach bus that sleeps six, piloted by a professional driver. decorated in kente cloth, with its own doorbell, the bus serves as ms. angelou's other home away from home. when she's in manhattan, it's parked in new jersey.  she makes the trip to new york every two or three months, staying from a few days to a week or more, a rhythm that feels exactly right. ''i stay away long enough so that when i come back it is new and familiar at the same time,'' she explained. her harlem house is much more than a vacation place or a simple change of scenery. it's a true second home.  ''i never agreed with thomas wolfe,'' she remarked quietly. ''i never thought you can't go home again. i've been coming home to harlem for 50 years.''  away  correction:  january 12, 2007, friday  a picture caption with an article last friday about the writer maya angelou's part-time home in new york misstated the number of its rooms. it has 12 rooms -- not 18, which is the number of rooms in her home in winston-salem, n.c.  