cinema verbatim: words on the page   written by peter morgan  at balmoral castle in scotland, queen elizabeth ii (helen mirren) loads up the vehicle and then heads off across the property with her son charles, the prince of wales (alex jennings), and her beloved dogs. the queen drives hard through woods, dust kicking up in the old land rover's wake. it's a bone-shaking ride.  charles stares out the window, lost in thought.  charles -- i was thinking last night what diana might have done had it been me that died in the tunnel in paris.  the queen privately rolls her eyes.  charles -- she would certainly have taken the boys to paris. i rather regret not doing that now.  elizabeth -- what? and expose them to the media? it would have been a dreadful thing to do. they're much better off here.  charles -- look, whatever else you may have thought of diana -- she was a wonderful mother.  (a beat.)  she adored those boys. and never let them forget it.  (a beat.)  always warm.  the queen's hands tighten on the steering wheel.  charles -- and physical.  (a beat.)  never afraid to show her feelings.  elizabeth -- especially whenever a photographer was in sight.  charles -- yes, she may have encouraged all that, but still  charles looks out of the window. his eyes mist over.  that was always the extraordinary thing about her. her weakness and transgressions only seemed to make the public love her more. yet ours only make them hate us. why is that?  charles looks up.  why do they hate us so much?  the queen mutters under her breath.  elizabeth -- not ''us,'' dear.  charles -- (not having heard) what?  the queen salutes the gamekeepers, who remove their hats as the queen roars past.  charles -- yesterday, when we drove the coffin back into london, there was a noise. a bang. i don't mind telling you i thought it was a gun.  charles's hands wring in anxiety.  charles -- i thought someone had taken a shot at me.  the queen hits the brakes, and pulls up, visibly irritated by her son's weakness. she opens the door and steps out.  elizabeth -- why don't you go on without me? i'm going to walk back.  charles -- are you sure?  elizabeth -- yes. it looks like rain.  the dogs jump out.  and i'm not in the mood for stalking anyway.  the oscars: excerpts -- the queen  