scoreboard shows this isn't same old ohio state   the first tangible sign of how drastically ohio state shifted its offensive philosophy came from the opponent's sideline.  on nov. 13, 2004, in a game at purdue, the normally conservative buckeyes began the game with five-wide-receiver sets, then ran option pitches to the receivers.  a team whose tradition revolved around power football suddenly began running around like a maverick team from the western athletic conference.  ''i don't think you can print the words that we were saying on the sidelines,'' purdue's defensive coordinator, brock spack, said in a telephone interview. ''it was nothing that we expected. they really caught us off guard.''  ohio state lost that day, but the buckeyes have won 24 of their 26 games since, their only losses coming in the 2005 season to texas and at penn state. the overhaul in ohio state's offensive philosophy underscores one of the themes heading into the bowl championship series title game monday in glendale, ariz.: ohio state and florida this season belie their programs' reputations.  florida, the team where the so-called fun'n' gun preceded coach urban meyer's spread-option offense, has won primarily because of a strong defense and opportunistic special teams. ohio state, where woody hayes and his coaching descendants had long worshiped power football, has won with a diverse, wide-open offense under coach jim tressel.  ''when i heard they were doing that, i said, 'man, has football changed,' '' florida's defensive coordinator, greg mattison, said. ''i can remember lining up against them and saying, 'this is the 15th iso that you're going to get.' ''  the iso is football parlance for an old-fashioned run into the line. mattison saw ohio state run plenty of them during a stint as an assistant at michigan.  ''that's where football has changed,'' mattison said. ''you can't line up and just hammer people anymore.''  ohio state wide receiver anthony gonzalez said he remembered walking off the field after that loss to purdue in 2004 and saying to himself: ''we're going to be fine. we're going to be just fine.''  he was right. the buckeyes have gone 12-0 this season and mastered an offense that can be considered one of the most electric in college football.  ''they lost the battle that day but won the war,'' spack said of ohio state's loss to purdue. ''it was a really good move on their part.''  since that day, 3 yards and cloud of dust has turned into 18 yards and a trail of vapor.  the buckeyes are averaging 409.75 yards a game, which puts them no. 16 nationally according to the latest n.c.a.a. rankings. they are scoring 36.33 points a game, good for sixth. the scoring average put them in the same neighborhood as brigham young, west virginia and louisville, teams known for wide-open offenses.  compare that with 2004, when a clunky offense prompted ohio state to switch to the spread with three weeks remaining in the regular season. the buckeyes finished no. 98 nationally in total offense with 320.83 yards a game and no. 71 nationally in scoring offense. their total offense average put them in the same echelon as kansas, ball state and indiana, teams known for losing a lot of games.  gonzalez said he remembered that ohio state's offensive coaches were criticized throughout the 2004 season, in which the buckeyes finished 8-4 and defeated oklahoma state in the alamo bowl.  ''what a difference two years makes,'' gonzalez said. ''all of the talk was about the offensive coaches not having imagination or being creative enough. but the reality was that we weren't very experienced.''  the main factor that led to ohio state's philosophy shift was talent. quarterback troy smith had his breakout game against michigan the week after the loss to purdue.  from there, he developed into the heisman trophy winner and the leader in this offense. the new offense made better use of wide receiver ted ginn jr., who has evolved into one of the country's most dangerous offensive threats. gonzalez, who was a sturdy possession receiver, developed into one of the most versatile and reliable receivers in the country.  an offense in which punting and pinning the other team deep were part of the game plan for years suddenly became stocked with all-americans and became known as the fun bunch.  ''as our talent has grown and evolved, changed a little bit, i think we've tried to do a good job utilizing the people that we have,'' the offensive coordinator, jim bollman, said. ''and that will continue to be that way for as long as we are coaching.''  football  