u.s. is looking into bruno's ties to an investment firm   the federal investigation into the business activities of joseph l. bruno, who was re-elected majority leader of the state senate on wednesday, has widened to include an albany investment firm that has had close ties to him, public records show.  the daily news reported on wednesday that federal authorities had issued a subpoena to obtain documents from mcginn, smith & company, an investment firm that was a client of the senator's private consulting business.  the company's chairman, timothy m. mcginn, who founded the firm with david l. smith in 1980, would not discuss the subpoena. ''we're cooperating fully with the investigation,'' mr. mcginn said in a brief telephone interview.  the financial interests of mr. bruno and mr. mcginn have intersected several times over the years, according to public records.  in 1999, mr. bruno reported making a profit from the sale of stock he owned in the pointe financial corporation, a bank holding company in boca raton, fla., where mr. mcginn was vice chairman and an investor. that profit was reported on a disclosure form filed with the legislative ethics committee, but the publicly available section does not indicate when he bought the stock or how much he made on the sale.  according to records from the state board of elections, two campaign committees controlled by mr. bruno invested contributions in recent years in two companies run by mr. mcginn: integrated alarm services group and the capital center credit corporation.  although campaigns typically leave excess cash in bank accounts, it is legal for them to invest it in stocks, bonds and other financial instruments. campaign finance regulations do not require that committees disclose where they make such investments, but they must report any income gained from them.  records show that from november 2001 to march 2003, capital center credit -- an affiliate of mcginn, smith -- paid $121,470 in ''interest or dividends'' to mr. bruno's committee and the senate republican campaign committee, and that from may 2003 to september 2004, integrated alarm paid $145,833 to the two committees.  integrated alarm, which monitors security alarms, went public in 2003. in 2004, mr. mcginn sold much of his stake in mcginn, smith to focus on his role as chairman and chief executive at the alarm company. he was ousted from the company in june, partly because he resisted talk of a merger. last month, the company announced that it was being bought by another company for $84.8 million.  there are other ties between mr. bruno and mcginn, smith. in 1997, the village voice reported that mr. bruno was a part-time consultant to the firm in 1993 and 1994.  in 2003, mr. bruno announced that he had secured $500,000 in state aid for a proposed $470 million educational, tourism and entertainment project on the troy, n.y., riverfront. pieter s. vanderzee, an executive at mcginn, smith at the time, was one of the three main investors in that venture.  john e. mcardle, a spokesman for the senator, said that mr. bruno's support for the project was ''absolutely and unequivocally not'' connected to any involvement by mcginn, smith. ''senator bruno never provided any funds for the harbor at troy waterfront project because the developers who proposed it did not have the backing or expertise they originally claimed, and it became clear that the project was not feasible,'' mr. mcardle said.  