ties to communist secret police snare polish bishop   warsaw's new archbishop, stanislaw w. wielgus, caught in eastern europe's widening witch hunt for former communist secret police informers, admitted friday that he had collaborated with the sluzba bezpieczenstwa, or security service, known as the s.b.  ''before you today, i confess to the mistake committed by me years ago, just as i have confessed to the holy father,'' bishop wielgus said in an open letter to polish catholics. ''by the fact of this entanglement, i have damaged the church.''  he said he compounded that damage by denying ''facts of this cooperation'' in recent days.  bishop wielgus insisted, however, that he had neither spied on anyone nor harmed anyone. he said the only thing he ever did was to inform the secret police of his agenda during foreign academic meetings and to promise not to take part in anti-communist activities.  he said it was up to pope benedict xvi to decide whether he would keep his new job, which he took up friday.  the bishop is to be officially elevated to archbishop during a ceremony on sunday in warsaw at st. john's cathedral, though many voices in poland have called for him to step down.  the warsaw archbishopric is a particularly symbolic institution in the former soviet bloc. the polish church, together with the polish-born pope john paul ii, were crucial supporters of the pro-democracy solidarity movement, which helped bring down the totalitarian system and end the cold war.  confirmation that the archbishop collaborated is doubly troubling because the polish secret police murdered a charismatic anti-communist priest from the archdiocese, the rev. jerzy popieluszko, in 1984. warsaw's departing archbishop, cardinal jozef glemp, waged a quiet battle with the communist party in those years.  many historians argue that a significant segment of the clergy in poland and other eastern bloc countries collaborated to varying degrees with the secret services. priests have recently been added to those segments of society under scrutiny in several countries during recent efforts to expose former communist collaborators.  two years ago, files surfaced showing that the rev. mieczyslaw malinski, who had been close to john paul ii, worked for the s.b. in the 1980s. several other prominent priests have since been accused of having been informers, and some have admitted that they had links to the secret police. the polish church publicly apologized last year for priests who collaborated with the s.b., but has tried to keep their names secret.  the uproar over bishop wielgus's past began shortly after pope benedict picked him in early december to succeed cardinal glemp as warsaw's archbishop. a polish daily newspaper, gazeta polska, reported dec. 20 that the bishop, 67, had spied on dissidents and fellow clerics for more than two decades, until communism collapsed in 1989.  both bishop wielgus and the vatican sought to deflect the accusations by saying his involvement with the secret police had been nothing out of the ordinary for people traveling abroad during the communist era. leading representatives of the polish clergy denounced the accusations against him.  but poland's human rights ombudsman, janusz kochanowski, said thursday that there was evidence in the secret police archives that bishop wielgus had knowingly cooperated with communist authorities. rzeczpospolita, one of poland's most respected newspapers, published documents showing that he had met with police agents more than 50 times in one five-year period.  even poland's catholic church historical commission issued a statement on friday, saying, ''there are numerous, substantial documents confirming stanislaw wielgus's willingness for a conscious and secret cooperation with the communist security forces.''  the commission said that there was no evidence that bishop wielgus's actions harmed anyone, and that the documents would be sent to the vatican for further study.  monsignor wielgus first admitted friday that he had signed a cooperation statement with the secret police in 1978 under pressure by a ''brutal intelligence officer'' when he was seeking permission to travel to munich. ''that was my moment of weakness,'' he wrote.  but he accused the secret police of falsifying documents that cast him as a more eager, useful collaborator than he actually was.  ''the personality ascribed to me in the intelligence service documents is so far from the truth that i would never have recognized myself,'' he wrote.  those claims are not far-fetched. almost from the moment the iron curtain fell, the nations of the former communist bloc have been steeped in controversies over the files of their secret police forces. the documents are often elliptical and incomplete, and were sometimes embellished by secret police officers eager to impress their superiors, experts say.  the documents published by rzeczpospolita and other newspapers suggest that bishop wielgus was recruited by the s.b. in 1967 when he was a philosophy student at the university of lublin in eastern poland, more than a decade before he signed the cooperation agreement. newspapers cited other documents in which the s.b. claimed he had given them information about activities at the university, where he later served as a professor of medieval philosophy.  the newspapers claimed that some documents referred to bishop wielgus by the code names grey, adam and adam wysocki. they said he received training and was rewarded for his collaboration with a grant to study in munich.  later friday, bishop wielgus issued another statement, which was broadcast by vatican radio's polish service, in which he said he had collaborated so that he could travel abroad for his academic research.  ''i'm not trying to justify anything, i know that i shouldn't have had any relations with the communist regime's secret services,'' he said. ''at the time i thought i had to continue my important scientific research and acquire sound training for the good of the church.''  the vatican has continued to support the embattled prelate.  ''the holy see, in deciding the nomination of the new archbishop of warsaw, took into consideration all the circumstances of his life, including those regarding his past,'' the vatican said in a statement on friday, repeating the position it has taken for the past month.  the statement said benedict ''has every confidence in bishop stanislaw wielgus and in full conscience entrusted him the mission of pastor of the archdiocese of warsaw.''  