new u.n. health chief sets her priorities   dr. margaret f. c. chan took office yesterday as the world health organization's director general, saying her two chief goals are to improve the health of africans and of women throughout the world.  women face risks during pregnancy and childbirth that make them particularly vulnerable to health problems, said dr. chan, 59, a former hong kong health chief. on the positive side, they can be powerful agents of change for better health.  ''women do much more than have babies,'' dr. chan said in a statement on the agency's web site. speaking to reporters yesterday by telephone from the health organization's headquarters in geneva, she added that women were a rising influence in the work force and in their communities -- particularly since so many teachers and health care workers were women.  the organization's member countries elected dr. chan as director general in november after the sudden death of dr. lee jong-wook on may 22.  at the time of her election, she noted that ''the people of africa carry an enormous and disproportionate burden of ill health and premature death.'' yesterday, she told her staff that ''poor health and poverty are closely tied, as are better health and the prospects for development.''  efforts are needed to strengthen the weak national health systems that are africa's biggest public health challenge, dr. chan said.  but over all, she said, ''these are optimistic times for health.''  ''never before has our work enjoyed such a high profile on the political agenda,'' she continued, adding, ''health has never before seen such wealth.''  but while the profile of global health has been raised by programs financed by the united states and other wealthy countries -- and by donations from the bill and melinda gates foundation and other philanthropies -- there is a need to strengthen the political commitment and resources, dr. chan said.  health workers need to work with such partners to coordinate efforts to ensure lasting improvements without overburdening poor countries, she said. also, she said, the world health organization and other agencies needed to assure that the donations were met with strong political will within affected countries.  she cautioned that poor countries did not want to be told what to do, preferring to come up with plans that met their own needs.  dr. chan challenged health workers to improve their efforts to provide treatment and prevention for diseases like malaria.  at a white house meeting on malaria last month, she said, she heard about an area in rwanda that had only three hospitals and 15 clinics, but 800 churches. health workers need to ask whether they have reached out enough to such nongovernmental groups to help deliver what people need to fight disease and poverty, she said.  dr. chan pledged to have the world health organization become more accountable in reporting on the performance of its programs. the agency's budget depends heavily on contributions from governments, and donors are demanding results, she said.  ''we are being held accountable to what we promised to deliver,'' she said, adding, ''i know i am being closely observed.''  dr. chan is the first person from china to head a united nations agency. china has been criticized severely for not sharing information with the world about diseases like influenza and sars, or severe acute respiratory syndrome. asked whether she felt pressure to favor china, dr. chan pledged to be fair, transparent and accountable. ''as an international civil servant, i commit to serve the interests of the member states of the organization,'' she said.  ''when the evidence is clear and health is at stake, the director general must be prepared to take a stand on difficult, and at times political, issues that affect health,'' she said.  dr. chan, who earned her medical degree from the university of western ontario in canada, cited a list of chronic diseases and other problems that were creating new challenges for poor countries. among them are violence, injuries, heart disease, stroke, cancer, diabetes, kidney disease and mental illness.  in recent decades, as progress in medicine raced ahead, resources for public health grew more slowly, leading to greater global imbalances. some people live longer and healthier lives while others die prematurely from preventable diseases. ''this is not a healthy situation -- for populations or world security,'' dr. chan said.  dr. chan, who most recently was the health organization's assistant director general for communicable diseases, urged the world to remain vigilant against the threat of h5n1 avian influenza. the peak flu season normally occurs during cold weather. ''complacency is our biggest enemy,'' she said, in preparing for the next influenza pandemic that could be caused by any strain. she said that scientists had not learned enough about the role of migratory birds in spreading avian flu viruses.  dr. chan also pledged to complete the campaign to eradicate polio.  