law's side effect: putting school budgets on a diet, too   it takes effort for adam drenkard to get a ginger ale these days. adam, a tall, lanky 17-year-old senior, used to stop at the high school store for his daily soda before marching-band practice. but since connecticut's new school nutrition law went into effect before the start of the school year, he has to drive to a nearby gas station.  ''i get 15 or 16 sodas sometimes just for kids here,'' he said, noting that that money no longer goes to the school and its activities.  the law's goal was to address the problem of obesity by restricting the sale of certain drinks in public schools and giving districts the option of participating in a healthful food program in exchange for additional state funds. at least 77 of the state's 169 districts, far more than anticipated, chose to participate, and on the whole students are adapting.  but the resourcefulness of students like adam has not only muted some effects of the law, it is costing some districts money. the law, among the nation's most restrictive, in effect prohibits the sale of soda, sports drinks, coffee and tea in school to students. the only exception is during special events, like football games (though not football practice), but that requires approval from the local board of education.  it is the coffee ban, to the surprise of many, that seems to generate the most unhappiness -- not just for the missing caffeine, but for the missing money. greenwich high school, for instance, used to sell roughly 400 cups a day.  ''in the mornings for breakfast, that was one of the top sellers,'' said haneen sakakini, 16, the trumbull student council president and, with adam drenkard, a member of the district's health advisory committee. ''kids still go to starbucks or dunkin' donuts and they bring the coffee in. it's sad, because they're spending money somewhere else when it could be going to our school.''  there has been a double-barreled financial impact in districts like trumbull. participating districts must make all food sold in school (outside the federal school lunch program, which is already subject to nutrition guidelines) meet nutrition standards based on elements like fat and sugar content. in effect it means no traditional chips, candy, cookies or a host of other snack foods -- exactly the items the trumbull high store was selling. revenues are down 50 percent, said george romano, the retail and marketing-class coordinator who oversees the store.  for years, snacks along with nutritionally questionable foods like french fries and high-fat breakfast sandwiches have been the financial mainstay of school lunchrooms nationwide. many connecticut schools have begun replacing them with more healthful, though more expensive, alternatives like baked chips, smoothies and low-fat ice cream -- using a 300-page state list. school districts contacted generally report breakfast and snack machine sales are down, but lunch sales are up. that is good news for the districts, since they receive 10 cents for each reimbursable lunch sold.  the impact is also being felt by clubs and teams whose fund-raisers chiefly sell items like candy and baked goods. the potential loss of money has kept some districts, like wallingford's, from taking part, even though it has already replaced most snack foods with healthier versions.  ''one of the things we did not realize before this law was the amount of fund-raisers,'' said susan fiore, connecticut's nutrition education coordinator. she encourages districts to be creative about fund-raising by selling items other than food. but she admits there has been confusion about what may be sold and where. regulations restrict only what is sold to students in school. groups can still sell whatever they want to parents on or off school property.  that said, ms. fiore said complaints had tapered off. ''people grumbled when it happened,'' she said, but ''they're moving on.''  nutrition  