at home depot, the new chief needs to sell an old story to wall street   frank blake, the new chief at home depot, has a challenge.  almost everything that robert l. nardelli, his former boss, did, mr. blake had a hand in: doubling revenue and profit in six years; running the company more efficiently; building the new home depot supply for professional builders.  indeed, supply is the piece of the company that critics most attack. mr. blake was its architect.  mr. nardelli and his giant paycheck are gone, and so is his oft-criticized imperious style. but the ills that dog the company still remain: how to rebuild its reputation among home-renovating consumers, improve customer service and increase the number of shoppers at home depot stores.  and to lift the sagging stock price, which fell for a second day yesterday, mr. blake needs to sell his story to wall street, particularly the concept of why a wholesale business catering to professional builders goes hand-in-hand with one that focuses on the individual consumer. ''either management needs to learn how to sell the story or begin telling a different story,'' said patricia edwards, a senior vice president of wentworth, hauser & violich, an investment firm that owns home depot shares.  home depot has said that the two businesses combined would have greater clout with suppliers. but margins in the commercial business are much lower than those in retail, and many analysts have complained that management is siphoning resources from the core stores to finance a business that is less profitable.  home depot supply already accounts for about 12 percent of home depot's $90 billion in sales, and home depot executives say that it will be a $25 billion business by 2010.  mr. blake must somehow persuade analysts of the value of the commercial business. but he has a handicap that also plagued his predecessor: experience that is high on operations skills, but low on merchandising acumen.  ''frank blake won't be as divisive or controversial as far as personality goes, but he is not a radical departure,'' said danielle e. fox, an analyst at merrill lynch with a buy rating on home depot shares.  retail experts worry about the similarities. ''home depot is profitable and growing, and moving into supply was exactly the right thing to do,'' said george whalin, president of retail management consultants. ''but blake is not a retail visionary, and too many of the merchants that made home depot great are gone. he has to surround himself with people who can explain both the art and the science of retailing.''  home depot must also breathe new life into its stores, accelerate its program to modernize them, and make the product displays more inviting for browsers.  measured by sales at stores open more than a year, lowe's, the prime competitor, has long outpaced home depot. lowe's stores are generally newer and spiffier. but more important, some retail specialists say, they offer a better mix of products and better service.  walter j. salmon, who teaches executive programs in retailing at the harvard business school, suggests that home depot adopt the lowe's system of category management, a system in which managers are responsible for everything for a product line, from inventory to advertising to service. ''the category managers make it easier for lowe's to respond to the unique needs that customers have for different kinds of products and services,'' he said.  still, even category managers could not ease the strains on store work forces that have simply been stretched too thin. home depot employees complain that mr. nardelli, in his zeal for controlling costs and centralizing decision-making, cut too many experienced sales workers.  ''all of us felt that the raises we should have gotten were going into nardelli's pocket,'' said one hourly worker at a brooklyn home depot, where the news of mr. nardelli's departure played to wide applause.  the woman, who feared to attach her name to criticism, said that mr. nardelli had brought in inexperienced workers, replacing many of the retired plumbers, electricians and such, who had taken up second careers in sales at home depot.  ''i used to be able to find an expert to answer any customer's questions,'' she said. ''but he dumbed down the work force, and the customer service has gone way down.''  home depot executives declined to elaborate on strategic details this week. but in an interview that predated mr. nardelli's ouster, carol e. tome, the chief financial officer, said the company had committed another $350 million to its store modernization program.  ''we're investing in merchandise and labor; we've added self-checkout; we're rewarding associates for customer service; we're doing everything our customers say they want,'' she said. ''it may not translate into sales right away, but it absolutely bodes well for the long term.''  analysts are divided on the stock. according to thomson financial, 10 analysts have buy recommendations on the shares, and 13 have holds or sells, with no changes since mr. nardelli stepped down. home depot's shares ended 2006 down 2.6 percent.  rumors are swirling that home depot will be bought by a private equity firm, or will break itself up. but few investors are banking on those outcomes.  ''this is a gigantic company whose costs have been squeezed out,'' said timothy m. ghriskey, chief investment officer at solaris asset management, which owns home depot shares. ''it has to spend money to fix up stores, not cut more costs. so i don't think a buyout will happen.''  to be fair, lowe's, whose shares dropped by 7.2 percent in 2006, is no longer a universal wall street darling either: 11 analysts recommend the stock, and 11 rate it hold or sell. still, retail specialists praise lowe's management for continuing to focus primarily on retail sales, while home depot executives have steadily focused the corporate spotlight on the commercial side.  home depot argues that the $200 billion do-it-yourself market is mature. professional builders represent a $410 billion market that is wide open for new players. the business operates out of big warehouses on low-priced real estate. while return on sales is lower than for retail, return on capital is higher.  ''if we only played in the do-it-yourself retail space, we'd have no room to grow,'' ms. tome said in the recent interview.  