exile on sesame street   alternadad  by neal pollack.  illustrated. 290 pp. pantheon books. $23.95.  depending on whether you're a fan or not, neal pollack is either blessed or cursed with the gene for boundless self-promotion. so it's no surprise that, having become a father, the writer of ''the neal pollack anthology of american literature'' and the rock novel ''never mind the pollacks'' and the front man of the band the neal pollack invasion has written a memoir about the experience. the surprise is that ''alternadad'' isn't entitled ''what to expect when you are expecting neal pollack's baby.''  with ''alternadad,'' pollack (a k a ''daddy-doo'') hurls himself into the mosh pit of new fathers who have written books depicting the perils and pleasures of the experience. in pollack's case he offers both a critique and a celebration of the blossoming subculture of hipster parents suiting up their mini-mes in johnny cash onesies and slapping ''my other ride is a nova'' bumper stickers on their maclaren strollers, as well as issuing ''a call for a new style of parenting.''  the alternative style of parenting pollack and his wife, regina, subscribe to is built on the desire to raise a kid -- a totally deck kid -- without actually having to change, or give up any of, your pre-baby lifestyle. but is such a thing possible?  um, sure -- kind of. or at least for pollack, who does concede that fatherhood calls for a few sacrifices, such as forgoing smoking weed to instead inhale it via a ''silver surfer'' vaporizer, going out for happy-hour drinks only two or three times a week and missing some episodes of ''the daily show.'' not surprisingly, regina, once the creator of ''fine art with erotic themes'' shoulders the majority of the baby-wrangling.  in the age-old tradition of new parents, the two argue over money, obsess over day care options, and mom swaps sex with dad for a couple hours of alone-time. the hilarious and emotional all-family brouhaha that erupts over the topic of circumcision will resonate with many, as will pollack's description of the conflicted feelings all parents have at one time or another.  ''i loved being a daddy. of course, at other moments, i kind of hated being a daddy. but that, as i was learning, comes with the daddy territory.''  after all, baby elijah, a k a the ''new roommate,'' doesn't kick in rent, monopolizes the idiot box and needs his bottom wiped at least three times a day. on the plus side, as pollack points out, ''he could sing 'the itsy bitsy spider' on cue and was very soft and cuddly.''  if fatherhood doesn't exactly make pollack ''grow up,'' he does mature, and it's not just passing up the second day of the ''austin city limits'' outdoor concert so he can run to target for a plastic potty training seat. the responsibilities of fatherhood awaken in pollack a passion to better his dodgy neighborhood, and this gives his slight though often amusingly cranky memoir some ballast.  childless readers who fear the un-cooling effects of parenthood will be relieved to learn kids, born slam dancers, really dig the ramones, and will be heartened to see that pollack, despite drinking chai with soymilk and listening to npr, hasn't become mr. rogers in a black sabbath t-shirt. some readers with children will chuckle empathetically at the couple's travails. yep, our kid stuck rocks up his nose too!  others won't. hold on, mr. sperminator! you impregnated your wife on the first try? your kid never got sick during the first 500 days of his life? and you're still having sex? what are you whining about?!  though let's be real here, most parents of a 2-year-old won't be reading ''alternadad,'' because (unlike pollack, whose son took only three nights to adjust to sleeping alone and most mornings lies in until 6:30) few possess the time or brain to read, let alone take cues from pollack on how to home-school their kid in rock music.  which isn't to say young elijah doesn't exhaust his parents. a cherubic, potty-mouthed charmer, he amorously mounts toys, furniture and teacake, the family cat. he smashes things for sport and is expelled from nursery school for being an unrepentant biter. but assault on small children and destruction of property aside, what concerns pollack most is that his son be happy, dig music and be cool. an obsession that hopefully isn't destined to turn the boy into the reincarnation of wayne newton. although perhaps that wouldn't be the worst thing.  as pollack says: ''while i knew i'd never take my son fishing like, say, the dad in 'a river runs through it,' i also knew for certain that he'd never be a stranger to me. i'd created a clone of myself, only better looking.''  prepare yourself. coming soon: the elijah pollack invasion!  elissa schappell is editor at large of tin house magazine, a contributing editor at vanity fair and the author of ''use me,'' a novel.  