dupont drops plan for nerve gas wastewater   bringing an abrupt end to a three-year fight between environmentalists and federal officials, the dupont company announced on friday that it would not participate in an army plan to dispose of wastewater from neutralized vx nerve gas by dumping it into the delaware river.  the decision was a victory for environmentalists who questioned how placing wastewater from the neutralized form of the deadly nerve agent would affect the river. created for use by the military, vx is considered one of the world's most toxic chemicals. exposure to its active form can kill within minutes.  the army plan involved bringing vx wastewater from a chemical treatment center in newport, ind., to a dupont plant in deepwater, n.j.  but, citing what was expected to be a long and contentious approval process by state environmental regulators, officials at e. i. du pont de nemours & company said they would not take part in the effort.  ''during our three-year evaluation of the newport proposal, it has become increasingly clear to us that the approval process will be lengthy and arduous,'' nicholas c. fanandakis, a vice president and general manager at dupont, said in a statement. ''therefore, we believe it is in the best interests of new jersey and dupont not to proceed.''  the decision was hailed by elected officials and environmentalists on both sides of the delaware, including gov. jon s. corzine of new jersey, who had questioned the plan in 2004 while he was a member of the united states senate.  ''it's now official,'' mr. corzine said in a statement. ''vx will never be dumped in the delaware river or any other new jersey waterway. this is a decisive victory for the people of new jersey. vx nerve agent is one of the world's most deadly chemical compounds, and dumping it in a river never made any sense.''  mr. corzine credited the state's congressional delegation, including representative robert e. andrews, with helping to bring about the company's decision.  mr. andrews said that he and other members of the delegation had recently commissioned a report by the federal government accountability office, to be released this month, to examine the soundness of the army's proposal.  ''i believe that forthcoming report played a role in dupont's very commendable decision,'' mr. andrews said in a telephone interview.  mr. fanandakis said that dupont abandoned the project despite endorsements for it by the federal centers for disease control and prevention and the environmental protection agency.  a spokesman for the army's chemical materials agency said that it would continue to review other options for disposing of the neutralized vx gas.  mickey morales, an army spokesman, said in a statement that although federal officials were disappointed, they appreciated dupont's work ''in this effort to rid our nation of the threat associated with continued storage of these obsolete chemical weapons.''  dupont and the army had been working together for the last few years on the plan to dispose of the waste. because dupont had not formally agreed to take on the project, the two sides had not entered into a contract, and no money related to the disposal of the waste was lost because of dupont's decision.  the plan under consideration would have shipped waste from the army's newport chemical depot in indiana to the dupont plant, near the delaware memorial bridge in south jersey.  workers at the depot neutralize the nerve gas in a process that includes mixing it with hot water and sodium hydroxide to form a nonlethal, but still caustic, material known as hydrolysate. some compare its potency to that of household cleaning products.  the army plan called for dupont to remove any remaining harmful chemicals from the hydrolysate before dumping it into the delaware. mr. morales said that the army had neutralized little more than a third of its total stockpile of 1,269 tons of vx gas, and that the depot in indiana was equipped to handle all of the hydrolysate wastewater expected to be produced.  environmentalists had received assurances that the water would not be harmful to the delaware, but continued to question the army plan. late last month, a coalition of environmental groups from pennsylvania, new jersey, delaware and kentucky filed suit against the army.  on friday, environmentalists in new jersey and pennsylvania welcomed the dupont decision.  ''this is a great day for the river and the people of new jersey, delaware and the states that the nerve agent waste would have been trucked through,'' said maya van rossum of the delaware riverkeeper network, a plaintiff in the suit. ''this is the right decision by dupont.''  jeff tittel, executive director of the new jersey chapter of the sierra club, said: ''they had a lot of nerve to dump on new jersey. i'm glad they realized this was a bad idea.''  