in vacuum of silence, coughlin sits tight   the day after their first-round exit from the playoffs, giants players were on the lower level of giants stadium, meeting with their coaches, perhaps for the last time. upstairs, in the ground-level offices, the team's management was addressing issues that would affect the franchise's future.  the giants made no decision on whether to retain coach tom coughlin. and in their quest to fill their vacant general-manager position, the giants were left one intriguing candidate fewer.  scott pioli, who helped build the new england patriots into a three-time super bowl champion as the vice president for player personnel, declined to interview with the giants. the giants had requested and received permission from the patriots to speak with pioli.  ''after careful consideration, and for personal reasons, i am continuing in my current role with the new england patriots,'' pioli said in a statement released by the patriots.  the giants are expected to make a decision on coughlin's status in the next couple of days, probably before they hire a general manager to replace ernie accorsi, who is retiring.  the giants have interviewed the former redskins and texans general manager charley casserly, and other outside candidates will probably be considered. they have interviewed four in-house candidates, including the personnel director, jerry reese, who received accorsi's recommendation.  if coughlin is retained, the new general manager would inherit him, at least for a season. if coughlin is fired, the new general manager would immediately embark on a coaching search.  the giants considered themselves super bowl contenders until the end, even after they converted a 6-2 start into an 8-8 finish and a by-the-fingernails slot in the playoffs. on a rainy sunday night in philadelphia, with a 23-20 loss, the giants' collapse was doused in lasting disappointment.  coughlin did not speak with reporters monday, which he typically does the day after a game. the uncertainty of the franchise's direction, and the silence from the team's management and coaches, left the players to dissect the mood.  none were in a better position to understand the emotions of the players and the embattled coach than chris snee.  snee plays a rare hybrid position with the giants: offensive guard and son-in-law to the head coach.  snee and the former katie coughlin have two young sons. so as snee's teammates talked about coughlin, snee talked about his father-in-law, a grandfather to his children.  ''it's tough any time you have a coach, and you know how much time he puts in,'' snee said. ''you know how this is just, like, killing him inside to see such a talented team fall apart. it is tough to see, regardless of the relationship.''  many players left giants stadium monday morning without speaking to reporters. none who spoke publicly criticized coughlin. they gracefully took responsibility for the team's graceless fall, though none could explain why it occurred.  they mostly blamed a mix of injuries to key players, including defensive end michael strahan, receiver amani toomer and tackle luke petitgout, as well as a difficult schedule and an inexplicable inability to snap out of their doldrums in november and december.  several players played down reports that coughlin had lost the interest and control of the team. while coughlin, 60, is hardly a revered figure, and his strict rules grew tiresome long before the season began, there was less sniping from players in the second half.  ''i don't know if people aren't saying it because i'm around, but i really haven't heard all this negativity towards him,'' snee said. ''i don't know where all those reports are coming from. he's a demanding coach, but as far as i've understood and observed, he was respected for the most part.''  players had not been asked their thoughts on coughlin by the team president, john mara, whose family owns half the team, or steve and jonathan tisch, brothers whose families own the other half.  ''i'm going to have a conversation with john mara, i'm sure, in the next few days,'' said running back tiki barber, who played his last game sunday. ''i'll have a discussion with jonathan tisch and we'll see. my input is just an opinion. this organization has a lot of tough decisions to make.''  barber did not say what he planned to tell the owners about coughlin. snee did not expect to be asked, but knew what he would say.  ''i would say that we are the ones that go out there and weren't performing in the second half of the season,'' snee said. ''that's the reason why we're not playing anymore, the fact that we didn't go out and play the way we expected to play. it's on us.''  snee's relationship with coughlin is complex and evolving. snee was drafted in the second round of the 2004 draft, about six months after the birth of dylan. snee and katie coughlin were not married, and tom coughlin was not happy.  when it was their turn, the giants viewed snee as the best player available.  the coach-player relationship helped force the healing of an uneasy personal one.  ''chris had already been through the worst of my husband,'' coughlin's wife, judy, said in 2004. ''he had to earn his way into our family.''  snee and katie coughlin soon married, and the family has grown -- in size and in closeness. snee said he had seen no signs that the past few weeks were especially taxing on coughlin.  ''you know him -- he's as tough as they come,'' he said. ''if it did affect him, he didn't show it.''  snee also said coughlin has offered no indication that he knows his job status. in his meeting with the team, coughlin sounded like a man expecting to return.  ''there were no ifs involved,'' snee said. ''he said, 'take two months off and i'll see you in march.' so i'll see him in march.''  not until march?  ''i take a little break after the season,'' snee said, laughing. ''i take a couple weeks off. i'll see him in february maybe.''  extra points  a day after running back tiki barber played his last game, simon spotlight entertainment, a division of simon & schuster, announced that it would publish his autobiography. it is scheduled for release in september.  pro football  