inside an empire, the power shifts   here's the epitome of a safe bet: whenever the next zagat survey for new york city restaurants comes out, gramercy tavern and union square cafe, the danny meyer mainstays, will be rated most popular. and in the survey after that, they'll rule. they always do. they're like a pair of preternaturally blessed prom queens in a high school where senior year never ends.  but if you want as much radiance -- as much pleasure -- as you can find in a meyer restaurant, your gaze should fall elsewhere. when did you last look at eleven madison park?  if the answer is more than a year ago, look again. in early 2006 a new chef, daniel humm, took over the kitchen, and the food at last lives up to the setting, the most regal in the meyer coterie. for inspired, opulent cooking, like a crazily intense suckling pig entree for the ages, eleven madison is the meyer destination of the here and now.  unless, that is, you're in a less formal mood. then you should set out for the modern, but here's the crucial, counterintuitive part: head for the cheap seats. the modern is divided into a fussy dining room and a more freewheeling bar area, where the food is less expensive, though not really and truly cheap.  the bar room doesn't have the dining room's view of the museum of modern art's sculpture garden, but it does have a more accessible, straightforward menu of dishes so satisfying that the trade-off is worth it. the tarte flambée, with its whisper of a crust and its confetti of bacon slivers, cinches the deal all on its own. who needs picasso when you've got a pizza like this?  in the meyer world right now, the most validated, consecrated theaters aren't necessarily the most rewarding. eleven madison and the modern's bar room are the proof. although i've spent more time recently in these two places than in the others, i've covered enough meyer territory over the last two years to be convinced that they're the standouts.  i prefer them to tabla, to union square cafe and definitely to gramercy tavern, whose luster had dimmed some even before the chef tom colicchio officially severed his ties in august. it's anyone's guess how it will emerge from its current state of transition, which isn't pretty. during a meal there last month a fillet of cod was a mealy catastrophe. servers tried to deliver another table's entrees to ours, then tried to deliver the same desserts twice.  and i prefer the modern's bar room to its ostensibly better, glossier half. after giving the restaurant as a whole two stars following its opening in early 2005, i repeatedly found myself drawn back to the bar room, at first just worried, then persuaded, that i'd shortchanged it.  the modern's distinct faces have very different appeals, a situation echoed at the city's many other multiple-personality restaurants, and it's time to acknowledge that for some of these restaurants, one summary judgment cannot do justice to two unequal parts.  if the dining room is a stately epic, the bar room is an unpretentious character study. it has a shorter running time, fewer showy star turns, a less lavish budget for truffles. its dishes state their cases with one or two central ingredients, one or two salient effects.  a warm veal and goat cheese terrine was just that: alternating bands of luscious meat and creamy cheese, coming together in such a rich, deeply flavored way that you surrendered to it not by taking ever-bigger bites, but by taking ever-smaller ones. a little goes such a long way.  that sentence could be the bar room's motto. its roughly 30 dishes, presented in three tidy menu columns, are all portioned somewhere between a normal appetizer and an abnormally stinting entree, most around $15.  the bar room adheres to an increasingly popular small-plates approach, intended to give diners more tastes of more things and more control over their meals. and it aces that approach perhaps better than any restaurant around town, its menu striking an ideal balance between relatively conventional french starters or snacks (an elegant liverwurst, a textbook foie gras torchon, steak tartare with the upgrade of a quail egg) and dishes that nudge you closer to a full-fledged dinner (grilled scallops amid beets and toasted almonds, pliant roasted garlic gnocchi interspersed with crispy nuggets of sweetbreads).  some small-plates menus make you feel that you're being exiled to an island of sorry leftovers, asked to swoon over salumi, or subjected like gastronomic guinea pigs to experiments a chef would never try on an entree-size canvas. the bar room's menu makes you feel that you're eating in an easy -- but no less privileged -- fashion.  while the alsatian-born executive chef, gabriel kreuther, seems to lead with his head in the dining room, he definitely leads with his heart in the bar room, where several dishes -- including a fat, juicy alsatian sausage with pickled turnip -- hit notes of hearty rusticity.  there's a tighter crush of people in the bar room, a louder conversational hum, and this conviviality acts as an essential antidote to any chilliness in the restaurant's sleek contemporary style and subdued palette. so do a row of red chairs near the bar, red shirts on servers and a glowing photograph of a luminous forest that takes up an entire wall. the bar room has pivotal blasts of color that the dining room largely lacks.  in terms of setting, eleven madison park, which opened in 1998, has a grandeur -- marble floors and walls, a ceiling at least two stories high -- that's the envy of almost any other restaurant.  i gave eleven madison two stars in february 2005, and while i normally wouldn't review a restaurant again so soon, mr. humm's food -- not the new table settings, not the tweaked lighting -- made me do it. i can't have beef tenderloin in a bordelaise sauce this dense with marrow -- this druggy -- and stay mum. i can't cut into such impeccably roasted duck -- glazed smartly, but not too sweetly, with lavender and honey -- and shut up about it. that would be a dereliction of duty. it would be just plain mean.  mr. humm, 30, was born and reared in switzerland and made his reputation at campton place in san francisco. under him the food at eleven madison has become more french and more precious. that change won't be to every diner's liking. but meals here now hit highs they never came close to in the past.  take that amazing -- absolutely amazing -- suckling pig. it comes as a brick of deboned, tightly packed, meltingly tender meat that's been poached in duck fat. the meat is bordered by a strip of crackling skin that seems to defy the laws of nature and science. can anything really be so crunchy and light while also being so fatty and heavy?  mr. humm performs tricks big and small, new and old. swirls of venezuelan cocoa provided a sharp, bitter, surprising and entirely apt foil for a torchon of foie gras. another bold call, another complete success: the sweet, rich chestnuts in a late november entree of poached lobster with butternut squash. to an appetizer of uncooked hamachi with pickled butternut squash, mr. humm added toasted pumpkinseeds and pumpkinseed oil. he had clearly made a decision: if he was going to embrace late autumn, he might as well hug it for all it was worth.  sometimes he got carried away. did a different lobster entree, on a different night, need not one but two tableside anointments? while the first of them, a tangerine-flavored chicken reduction, gave the dish a gorgeous perfume, the second, a camomile foam, was pure affectation.  portions can be picayune, and desserts are something of a question mark, which is to say that the restaurant's superb pastry chef, nicole kaplan, quit around thanksgiving, handing the reins to her second in command, alison johnson. while ms. kaplan was still in charge during some of my recent meals, her work wasn't as dazzling as in the past. maybe she already had a foot out the door.  but every time i left eleven madison park, it was with at least one dish, and usually several, lingering in my thoughts and prompting me to rave to somebody the next day. that's not the case with most restaurants, and that hasn't been my experience in recent years at gramercy tavern or union square cafe. they may have the more steadfast retinues of loyal suitors. but the crowns rest uneasily -- and perhaps unjustly -- on their heads.  bar room at the modern  *** [rating: three stars]  9 west 53rd street, midtown; (212) 333-1220.  atmosphere -- a gleaming contemporary room in which one long wall is formed by a gorgeous, glowing photograph of a lush forest.  sound level -- loud when crowded.  recommended dishes -- liverwurst; veal and goat cheese terrine; tarte flambée; mushroom soup; scallops with beets and almonds; alsatian sausage; gnocchi with sweetbreads; poussin; salmon; cheesecake; hazelnut dacquoise; citrus carpaccio.  wine list -- a vast international selection, with many moderately priced bottles and well-chosen wines by the glass.  price range -- all dishes, none the size of full entrees, $10 to $19. desserts, $9 to $15.  hours -- 11:30 a.m. to 10:30 p.m. monday through thursday; to 11 p.m. friday and saturday, and 9:30 p.m. sunday.  reservations -- a third of the roughly 100 seats are first come first served; for the others, call at least two weeks ahead for prime times.  credit cards -- all major cards.  wheelchair access -- entrance, tables and accessible restrooms all on street level.  what the stars mean:  (none) poor to satisfactory  * good  ** very good  *** excellent  **** extraordinary  ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. menu listings and prices are subject to change.  past reviews from the times, with additional capsule reviews by times critics:  nytimes.com/dining  eleven madison park  *** [rating: three stars]  11 madison avenue (24th street); (212) 889-0905.  atmosphere -- a marble-rich high-ceilinged space combines with banquette seats for a feeling at once regal and warm.  sound level -- loud in spots and at times, but not painfully so.  recommended dishes -- marinated hamachi; parsnip velouté with prawns; heirloom beets with goat cheese; salmon with fennel; halibut; poached lobster with chestnuts; suckling pig confit; tenderloin with bordelaise sauce; duck with lavender and honey; pumpkin cheesecake with gingerbread; chocolate soufflé.  wine list -- extensive, impressive and mostly french and american.  price range -- lunch appetizers, $12 to $24; entrees, $24 to $33; desserts, $12. dinner three-course prix fixe, $76; four courses, $88; chef's tasting menu, $120.  hours -- lunch or brunch from 11:30 a.m. to 2 p.m. seven days a week. dinner from 5:30 to 10 p.m. sunday through thursday, to 10:30 p.m. friday and saturday. bar with limited menu open from 11:30 a.m. to 10 p.m. sunday through thursday, to 10:30 p.m. friday and saturday.  reservations -- for prime dinner times, call at least three weeks ahead.  credit cards -- all major cards.  wheelchair access -- restrooms and many tables at street level.  restaurants  