'don't ask, don't tell'? no, sir!   to the editor:  re ''second thoughts on gays in the military,'' by gen. john m. shalikashvili, a former chairman of the joint chiefs of staff (op-ed, jan. 2):  i am on my second yearlong tour in iraq, the first having ended 15 months ago. in my opinion, troops here want only someone next to them who is dependable in a firefight, knows first aid and keeps a good morale. we don't care if that person is male, female, gay, straight, white, black, cheats on his wife or her husband, is catholic or jewish, rich or poor.  when you live in close quarters in combat over a long period, all you care about is whether the person knows his job and is trustworthy.  with all that is going on here, it amazes me that ''gays in the military'' is still being debated by those out of uniform.  charles mitchell  baghdad, jan. 2, 2007  to the editor:  gen. john m. shalikashvili writes that in the mid-90s, he supported the ''don't ask, don't tell'' policy because he believed that openness would have lowered morale, hurt recruitment and undermined cohesion.  but now that the army is strained beyond belief, he believes that ''we must welcome the service of any american who is willing and able to do the job.''  it would be great progress to end the ''don't ask, don't tell'' era, but as a gay man, i'm less than grateful for general shalikashvili's heartwarming invitation. he now welcomes the day when ''gay men and lesbians will no longer have to conceal who they are.''  apparently, that was previously acceptable.  abuse of gay people in the armed forces is rampant, and for years people have had no recourse because they feared dismissal. now that the army needs recruits for a violent, unpopular war, we are more than welcome.  no thanks.  andrew hiller  brooklyn, jan. 2, 2007  to the editor:  in explaining his change of position on the ''don't ask, don't tell'' policy, gen. john m. shalikashvili correctly observes that dozens of other countries, including most of our nato and coalition allies, now ''let gays serve openly, with none reporting morale or recruitment problems.''  nonetheless, the pentagon continues to say that the policy is necessary to preserve ''unit cohesion.'' this argument is an insult to the professionalism of the united states military.  stripped of euphemism, the unit cohesion rationale suggests that straight service members would not be capable of doing their jobs and completing the military mission if they served alongside gay people who have gone public. this argument, always implausible, is now an embarrassment.  i believe that our men and women in uniform are as professional as their counterparts in canada, britain and france. is the pentagon ready to say the same?  tobias barrington wolff  philadelphia, jan. 2, 2007  the writer is a visiting law professor at the university of pennsylvania.  to the editor:  forgive me my cynicism, but i find it incredibly laughable that with the bush administration stuck neck-deep in the iraq quagmire, and the armed services facing a shortage of recruits, it is time to reconsider ''allowing'' gay people to serve their country.  perhaps i might take gen. john m. shalikashvili's opinion more seriously if he had mentioned my right to marry my partner.  patricia esgate  south piermont, n.y., jan. 2, 2007  to the editor:  congratulations to gen. john m. shalikashvili! his view on discrimination reflects a national change. in various sectors of american life, the second-class status of gay people is becoming less prevalent.  but a typical gay person chooses to remain closeted rather than to cope with homophobia. hypocrisy and inequality usually describe life in america for a gay person. for those of us born in the 1930s with military experience, we observed, or learned in conversations as veterans, that career men and recruits secretly engaged in consensual sex. this fact exists in spite of our insistence to the contrary.  so a change from homophobia to tolerance would be advantageous to our national defense and to gay people.  bob geary  portland, ore., jan. 2, 2007  to the editor:  in 1975, len matlovich and i were the first to challenge the ban on gays in the military. he challenged the regulations, and i challenged the statutory ban in the uniform code of military justice, and both of us had the same lawyers.  then, the ultimate issue was less the soldiers' morale than image. if the united states had gays in uniform, then (as the logic went) our enemies would perceive the country as weak, perverted and less than masculine. from a recruiting perspective, ma and pa would be less willing to allow johnny to be signed up for fear of his being seduced.  today, the same logic applies, but more so since homosexuality is considered a complete scandal in the muslim world, often punished by death. gays should, of course, be allowed into service, yet those who support the ban will point to how islamists will mock the american military as immoral and worthy of jihad.  jay hatheway  stoughton, wis., jan. 3, 2007  to the editor:  gen. john m. shalikashvili presents many reasons that led him to say, ''i now believe that if gay men and lesbians served openly in the united states military, they would not undermine the efficacy of the armed forces.''  but he then urges congress to be cautious in fighting to lift the ban on openly gay service members, considering it still a divisive, low-priority issue. despite his research supporting the inclusion of gays, he's simply replacing ''don't ask, don't tell'' with ''yeah, but not yet.''  sally k. chrisman  princeton, n.j., jan. 2, 2007  to the editor:  it's hard to fault gen. john m. shalikashvili's call for a reassessment of gays in the military. even britain, which officially banned gays until it was forced by a european court to admit them, reports no problems.  as for the bugaboo threat to morale, if you're pinned down by enemy fire and joined by a gay soldier in your foxhole, the last (and least) of your fears is an indelicate overture.  i remember watching a piece about a danish platoon that had just spent a week on maneuvers with its openly gay captain. when asked if it had made them uncomfortable to be at such close quarters sharing a tent, one soldier said: ''we don't mind that he's gay. what we mind is that he smokes.''  peter brodie  palo alto, calif., jan. 2, 2007  