looking down the road that leads across the u.s.a.   sooner or later the pickup will be packed and the dogs loaded. we'll roll down the driveway and around the corner and onto the highway. with any luck it will still be early in the morning. the horses will be standing over a bale of hay, and the chickens and geese and ducks will be wondering why they weren't let out of the poultry yard. the dogs, too, will have some questions, especially as the day of driving grows longer and longer and we don't seem to be getting to the vet or the dog sitter's house.  by next week this time, we will be well down the road to southern california again, angling across the country however winter lets us.  i don't know how it came to seem so natural to load up and set out. my parents certainly had the habit. my dad especially has always liked the thought of being packed and ready to go -- and then going at first light. in the early '90s, lindy and i hauled the dogs and horses west every summer, and when we got there we found ourselves among people who made a living hauling horses all across the country.  for these people, five days in any one spot was a good, long time. but if you asked around, it was almost as easy to find people who had never been out of the county, born and raised practically within earshot of where they still lived.  i try to imagine what it would have been like driving cross-country about the time i was born -- 1952. i find that i cannot. once, when i was 7 or 8, i rode home from my grandparents' house in my grandparents' car -- 100 miles with my grandfather behind the wheel. his top speed was 35 miles an hour. it nearly killed me.  i wanted to be anywhere but the back seat of that old dodge plodding down the highway. now, of course, i would love to see all over again what i must have seen on that trip, the hogs in the fields, the creek-bottom pastures, the windmills and farmhouses. iowa was not yet a tyranny of soybeans and corn.  i am struck this time by the change in how i imagine the trip across the country. it has become so easy to look down the road. the last time we made this trip -- two years ago -- i spent what seemed like weeks staring at the road atlas, pondering the mysteries of the american highway system. we set off with a clear sense of how we were going to go -- south-southeast out of the winter and then due west -- only to be pushed off course by a major ice storm in arkansas.  the weather is still the major variable. now, instead of the road atlas, i find myself contemplating the national weather service web site -- the page displaying a map, updated every five minutes, of all the weather warnings, watches, alerts and advisories across the country. right now, the only good weather slot across the west is near el paso.  just this morning i ran through the whole trip on the g.p.s., mile by mile, turn by turn. i plotted out some driving distances on google maps, wondering how long we'll want to drive each day.  i scouted a couple of web sites that list dog-friendly lodgings along the way. between the g.p.s. and the blackberry, i realize that we're driving west this time in a cloud of information -- the exact opposite, i suppose, of that trip with my grandparents, when all the information worth gleaning would have come in conversation with the two old people in the front seat, born in the late 1880s after all, and with the world that lay beyond the highway ditches.  editorial observer  