three philosophies, three big gains   mutual funds made money across the board in the last quarter of 2006, in small- and large-cap stocks, and in growth and value shares. some top-performing fund managers recently talked about some of their stocks and offered their thoughts about the year ahead.  small stocks, big gains  small stocks led to big returns for the $78 million pacific advisors small cap fund, up 15.6 percent in the fourth quarter. the market capitalization for the 35 or so stocks in the portfolio averages $500 million.  the manager, george a. henning, 59, says he looks for ''companies that are market leaders in their business, undervalued and have a good catalyst for future growth.'' because he aims to hold stocks three to five years, he says, he buys what he calls ''less speculative stocks.''  he attributed the fund's fourth-quarter performance to a good overall economy. ''as the economy continues to move along, our stocks continue to perform well,'' he said. the fund carries a 5.75 percent front-end load, or sales charge.  one of its stars was elkcorp, a company based in dallas that mr. henning called the ''premier roofing company in the country.'' it became a takeover candidate, he said, when its share price fell because of slow sales during the light hurricane season last year. elkcorp, which had agreed to be acquired for $38 a share by the carlyle group, is now weighing a bid from the building materials corporation of america at $40 a share. elkcorp rose 51.6 percent in the quarter.  another winner was terra industries, an agricultural and industrial chemical company in sioux city, iowa. sales in its ammonium nitrate fertilizer business have strengthened, mr. henning said, as prices of imported european ammonium nitrate have risen. the surge in domestic ethanol production has also contributed, he said, because ammonium nitrate is used in growing corn. the shares rose 55.4 percent.  the fund also made money in toreador resources, an oil and gas exploration and production company in dallas. its stock price dropped in the early fall on uncertainty about production levels in offshore wells, he said, but bounced back later in the year when it released positive reports about its preliminary findings. its shares rose 43.9 percent.  looking ahead, he says he is positive about stocks of all sizes. while share prices may initially drop after a strong year-end gain, he said, ''good growth may come in the second half of 2007 because many companies have good balance sheets.''  finding megatrends  fast-growing companies drove the returns of the $160 million eaton vance growth fund, up 14.3 percent in the quarter. the manager, arieh coll, 43, calls it a ''growth at a reasonable price'' portfolio. he seeks companies with annual earnings growth rates of 25 percent or more, or companies he sees as poised for rapid growth. the fund has a 5.75 percent front-end load.  to pick the fund's 85 stocks, mr. coll aims to identify megatrends in the economy, then looks for industries and companies that might benefit from them. in the fourth quarter, these were two commodity trends: rising prices for uranium, used in nuclear power plants, and for gold.  one of the fund's better performers was sxr uranium one, a south african company whose shares trade on the toronto and johannesburg exchanges. sxr, a uranium and gold exploration and development company, owns properties in canada, australia and south africa. he said the company should begin production in its australian and south african mines next year.  ''sxr is constructing two mines that are scheduled to open in 2007,'' he said. ''production costs are $15 a pound, so its earnings should start to rise rapidly.'' uranium prices doubled, to $72 a pound, last year.  the company's shares rose 92.1 percent in the quarter.  the fund also profited from gammon lake resources, a canadian gold exploration and mining company that works primarily in mexico. the shares, traded on the american stock exchange, rose 42.5 percent.  ''ocampo, the company's biggest mexican mine, increased its production in the fourth quarter, a signal that everything's o.k. at that mine,'' mr. coll said.  another winner was celgene, the biotechnology company in summit, n.j. celgene, which produces cancer drugs, recently began marketing revlimid, used for patients with multiple myeloma. ''sales are rising faster than expected,'' mr. coll said. ''doctors are adopting the drug quickly because clinical data has proved its efficacy.'' celgene shares rose 32.9 percent in the quarter.  this year, mr. coll expects interest rates to decline, which should be good for the stock market, but he anticipates slower economic growth.  a boost from commodities  large value stocks propelled the $600 million john hancock large cap equity fund, which returned 10.5 percent in the quarter. the lead manager, timothy keefe, 44, says he picks the fund's approximately 50 stocks ''using a very disciplined approach to identify mispriced companies.'' the market capitalization averages $13 billion to $14 billion. the fund has a 5 percent front-end load.  mr. keefe says the fund profited in the fourth quarter from several commodities stocks. ''some of the investments i made earlier in the year paid off in less than a year, which is unusual,'' he said.  one was silver standard resources, a canadian silver exploration and development company. its shares, traded on nasdaq, rose 39.5 percent. the company is a ''pure asset play,'' mr. keefe said. ''it's transitioning from a company that holds silver assets to a silver producer,'' he said. ''this will result in an upgrade in how the shares are valued.''  the fund also made money in agnico-eagle mines, a gold exploration and development company in toronto. he began buying shares in 2003, when it ''had a lot of difficulties with its biggest, best mine.'' because of these difficulties, he added, ''its outstanding gold reserves were being underrecognized by the market.'' its shares returned 32.5 percent.  another winner was bunge, a worldwide agricultural products company now based in white plains. its share price recovered from a drop in the summer, when difficulties with its brazilian soybean suppliers created uncertainty about its short-term earnings, mr. keefe said. he expects the company's profit to rise in 2007 in tandem with rising soybean prices. in the quarter, shares returned 25.4 percent.  he expects a volatile stock market in 2007, which he sees as providing valuable opportunities.  ''there are a lot of crosscurrents in the market with the u.s. dollar, interest rates and disagreements about how fast the economy is growing,'' he said.  mutual funds report  