things looking up for knicks and coach   isiah thomas and larry brown will cross paths in a few days -- if not literally, then at least by proxy, via their respective teams. less than seven months after being fired as the knicks' coach, brown was hired as an executive for the philadelphia 76ers, who visit madison square garden on wednesday.  this odd bit of happenstance is well timed, with thomas just hitting a critical juncture in his quest for ''significant progress'' -- a standard that specifically requires him to beat brown's 23-59 record as coach last season.  last week, the knicks sank to 13-21, the same record they had under brown one year ago. it was a bad sign for thomas, who will be fired as coach and team president if the knicks finish as miserably as they did last season.  but the intersection of won-lost records was temporary. thomas pulled ahead in the virtual race with two big victories to finish the week, and it is probable that his winning percentage is about to spike upward.  the knicks (15-21) have completed the toughest portion of their schedule and have survived their toughest test -- playing with a depleted roster for the past four weeks. they remain in contention for the atlantic division title and the playoff berth that comes with it.  two important players, quentin richardson and nate robinson, are set to return wednesday. if ever the knicks appeared primed for a resurgence, it is now.  ''i'm hoping that's the case,'' thomas said friday night, after a 111-93 rout of the supersonics in seattle. that victory came on the heels of a 99-81 defeat of portland and gave the knicks a 6-4 record since their brawl with denver.  ''we're starting to play good basketball,'' thomas said. ''i just like our attitude and our approach to things. i like our temperament, the toughness that we're playing with mentally.''  thomas would not forecast a .500 record or a playoff run. but both appear possible.  the knicks packed a league-high 36 games in the first 66 days of the season. they now downshift, with 46 games spread over the last 102 days. half of those games will be on the road, but most of them are one-game trips -- and two are in new jersey. the knicks' longest remaining trip is three games.  they have only five road games remaining against the superior western conference. thirty-one of their final 46 games are against the eastern conference. they have 11 games against their own division, which is the lowest number in the league.  after initially struggling at home, the knicks have won four games in a row at the garden, and five of their past six. and after going 5-11 to start the season, the knicks have gone 10-10 since nov. 28.  at this time last year, the knicks had already peaked, with a six-game winning streak that got them to 13-21. they promptly collapsed. stephon marbury was lost to a shoulder injury, and the knicks dropped their next six games. they also had losing streaks of 10 games, 6, 9 and 5 over the final three months under brown.  under thomas, the knicks have been more resilient. they have yet to lose more than three games in a row, despite losing a string of key players -- richardson, robinson, channing frye, jared jeffries and steve francis -- to injuries or suspensions.  the most striking difference from last season, however -- and the one that should make the greatest difference in the final months -- is the emergence of center eddy curry as the focal point of the offense.  in his last three games, curry has scored 73 points on 27-of-35 shooting. his .771 shooting percentage is the n.b.a.'s highest over a three-game span, among players with at least 35 attempts, since san antonio's david robinson shot .800 (32 of 40) in january 1998.  the knicks are 10-8 when curry scores at least 20 points and have won the last six games when he has hit that mark. they are 6-2 when curry scores 25 or more points. there is no longer any ambiguity in the game plan each night. opponents are now forced to double-team curry in the post, creating opportunities for everyone else. after initially struggling to adapt, curry learned to make quicker passes and quicker moves. and he will be the greatest beneficiary when richardson, the knicks' best 3-point shooter, returns wednesday.  ''it's a different game when teams have to double-team him,'' jamal crawford said of curry. ''he gets the credit for changing the game for us.''  pro basketball  