jets' coaching blueprint may appeal to dolphins   the miami dolphins are considering brian schottenheimer, the jets' offensive coordinator, for their head-coaching position left vacant when nick saban departed for alabama. yesterday they interviewed schottenheimer, who is 33 years old, has never been a head coach and just finished his first season as a coordinator.  schottenheimer, one of a dozen candidates whom the dolphins have interviewed, could be written off as some kind of divisional dalliance by the dolphins, if not for one nagging detail.  eric mangini was in his early 30s, had no head-coaching experience at the high school, college or professional levels, and was fresh off his first season as a coordinator for the new england patriots when the jets hired him to replace herman edwards last january.  after mangini coached the jets to a 10-6 regular-season record, which included two victories against the 6-10 dolphins, and a playoff game against the patriots, the dolphins could be forgiven for cribbing from their rival's coaching blueprint.  the national football league has as many copycats as it does fat-cat owners. no tree goes unpicked once it starts bearing fruit, and the jets' offense under schottenheimer was deliciously innovative.  he employed a kaleidoscope of formations, shifts and motions to confound defenses and conceal that the jets had two rookies on the offensive line, no curtis martin in the backfield, and a quarterback, chad pennington, who was more cerebral than strong-armed.  schottenheimer won mangini over in his job interview when he said his offensive philosophy was to tailor his system to fit the talent on the team and to best attack each week's opponent.  ''brian is very creative,'' mangini said in october, ''and i talked about that when i hired him, and that's what i liked.''  the dolphins have seen schottenheimer's ability to improvise. in the first meeting of the teams, in october, the jets' receivers started out running a lot of slant patterns, and the miami defensive backs were sitting on those routes. in the third quarter, receiver laveranues coles proposed to schottenheimer that they try a deep route.  fine, said schottenheimer, who drew up a slant-and-go that resulted in a 58-yard touchdown pass from pennington to coles that helped propel the jets to a 20-17 victory.  ''he listens,'' coles said last week when asked about schottenheimer. ''sometimes coordinators don't listen to their players or take their input. but he makes sure he listens.'' coles added, ''he tries to get the ball into guys' hands wherever they feel comfortable, and that's a credit to him.''  schottenheimer did not reply to a message left on his cellphone yesterday seeking comment. he spent six seasons in the n.f.l. learning under his father, marty, the last four in san diego as the chargers' quarterbacks coach. but he was also heavily influenced by steve spurrier, for whom he played at florida.  many gators fans recognized some of the jets' more innovative formations and creative gadget plays as remnants from the 1996 national championship season, when schottenheimer was the backup to quarterback danny wuerffel.  his playbook can be as tough to digest as a side of beef. pennington, who is like an assistant coach on the field, said there were plays he had to look at two or three times before he understood them. if the plays were that confusing to a football savant like pennington, imagine what they must have looked like to opposing defensive backs.  ''brian did a great job this year, like all of our coaches did,'' general manager mike tannenbaum said in a teleconference yesterday with reporters. ''given his background and given who he has worked for, he is deserving of the opportunity to interview for this job, and that is a credit to him. as an organization, where we stand, we will see what happens if he decides to take that job if it is offered to him.''  besides schottenheimer, other coaches whom the dolphins have interviewed include the detroit offensive coordinator, mike martz, a former head coach and a creative mind whose offense in st. louis was called the greatest show on turf, and the giants' defensive coordinator, tim lewis.  tannenbaum was asked how he would feel if schottenheimer ended up coaching a division rival. ''on the one hand, i would be happy personally for coach schottenheimer,'' he said. ''he has done a great job for us and worked hard. if and when he would leave this organization, we would have to work hard to replace him. if it is within the division, that is just another obstacle we would have to deal with.''  pro football  