in despair, eagles turn to westbrook to help carry them   at halftime sunday, the score was not knotted, but running back brian westbrook's stomach was. the cramps would not dissipate, but neither would westbrook's determination to keep playing.  as the giants' tiki barber was preparing to retire, westbrook came into playoff prominence for philadelphia. he skittered 49 yards for a second-quarter touchdown, then rushed for four first downs on the eagles' final drive to set up the winning 38-yard field goal in a 23-20 victory.  ''i wasn't feeling very good,'' westbrook said of his intestinal discomfort after rushing 20 times for 141 yards. but, he added, ''i wouldn't miss being out there.''  much of his success came on what philadelphia calls an outside zone play. right tackle jon runyan seals off the inside, and fullback thomas tapeh occupies the outside linebacker, leaving westbrook one on one with a safety or another linebacker. on the final drive in particular, runyan said, the giants kept blitzing and westbrook ran right through the blitz.  ''you have to get positive yards on first down,'' runyan said. ''it makes it easy for you. the defense doesn't know what you are doing. i don't think we had a third down on that drive until the field goal.''  it was hard to imagine it after westbrook ran through and around the giants, but there have long been questions here about him. not about his ability to run or catch the ball, but about his ability to stay healthy.  philadelphia threw the football at a rate unmatched in n.f.l. history -- 58.4 percent of the time -- in coach andy reid's eighth season in philadelphia. the main reason was the lively arm of quarterback donovan mcnabb. but, many suspect, reid also did not trust that westbrook could stay healthy enough to carry a punishing load at running back.  in any case, desperation forced reid's hand.  when mcnabb tore a ligament in his knee in november, the eagles tore up their game plan. lost was their big-play passing attack. to protect the replacement quarterback, jeff garcia, the eagles grew somewhat cautious. balance replaced ostentation.  philadelphia began running as much as it passed in winning five consecutive games to end the regular season and to win the national football conference east. and the eagles kept running during sunday's wild-card playoff victory against the giants.  ''he was very patient, and let things develop in front of him, and hit it,'' reid said of westbrook. ''it's not speed to the hole; it's speed through the hole. he's developed a good feel for that through the years.''  before the game, giants cornerback r. w. mcquarters compared westbrook to a young marshall faulk, meaning that westbrook was threatening and resourceful at both running and catching the ball. it was no hyperbole. westbrook led all n.f.l. running backs this season by averaging 6 yards a touch.  ''brian westbrook is one of the few elite players in this league,'' said marty mornhinweg, the eagles' offensive coordinator.  on sunday, westbrook also returned punts, and sliced through a porous giants coverage team for a 65-yard return to the end zone that was nullified by a penalty for an illegal block in the back.  but westbrook's most impressive achievement this season has been running the ball. he gained a career-high 1,217 yards in the regular season and became the first eagle to rush for at least 1,000 yards while averaging 5 yards a carry.  until now, there has been frequent and legitimate concern about his durability at 5 feet 8 inches, 203 pounds. he missed the playoffs after the 2003 season with a torn triceps tendon in his left arm. a year ago, his season ended prematurely because of a sprained foot. earlier this season, westbrook was bothered by a balky knee, and rumors spread here -- inaccurately -- that he might need surgery.  but he has been resilient and reliable since mcnabb became injured, averaging about seven more carries a game.  ''it's a percentage thing,'' runyan said of westbrook. ''you give it to him, and he's going to do something with it. he's staying healthy and we're seeing what the guy can do.''  after the eagles struggled early on sunday, westbrook sprinted around the right side from the giants' 49-yard line early in the second quarter. defensive end adrian awasom dived at westbrook's feet, but could not bring him down. safety will demps's effort was also futile, as westbrook stutter-stepped one way, then went the other, jogging into the end zone to tie the score at 7-7.  then, on the final drive, he exhausted the clock, and the giants' chances.  ''it was a critical situation, and big-time players step up when you need them the most,'' westbrook said.  pro football  