small and fast blaze destroys four houses on malibu beach   an unusually fast and furious brush fire destroyed four large seaside homes in malibu monday night and damaged at least two others, fire officials said.  the fire began near a bluff-side park around 5 p.m. and raced down a hill toward the houses and the beach, burning 20 acres.  though tiny in comparison with southern california wildfires that have burned areas the size of counties, the fire drew attention for its speed, consuming a number of homes within a half hour, and its burning in a community known as much for the rich and famous as disastrous fires, floods and mudslides.  ''this was just on us immediately,'' jeff jennings, the mayor pro tem, told knx-am radio.  local television stations broadcast images of towering flames chewing through roofs and collapsing walls and fire trucks spraying blackened remnants that hinted at the elaborate architecture.  in one image, a tower befitting a castle spewed flame from all sides and in another the frame of a large dome suddenly sunk into an inferno below. billowing smoke wafted over lapping ocean waves.  there were no reports of injuries.  about 300 firefighters attacked the blaze, which was fed by wind gusts of 30 miles per hour and greater on an unusually warm evening. firefighters quickly extinguished the burning brush but fought the flames in the houses well into the evening.  the police shut down the pacific coast highway, near the fire, blocking traffic for miles. there were no reports of deaths or injuries.  it was not known who owned or lived in the homes, on or near malibu canyon road, but news reports quoted real estate agents as saying they were worth several million dollars and that they offered commanding views of the ocean.  inspector sam padilla of the los angeles county fire department said it was fortunate the fire had begun close to the water, making it easier for firefighters to get to it and sparing homes in the rugged hills.  ''if it keeps going it will burn into the sand,'' he said.  a fire in november 1993 in malibu near the same area killed three people and destroyed a few hundred homes.  