three recent meals point the way to fish in red wine sauce   fish served with red wine has long stopped being a culinary faux pas. but for this pairing i wanted the fish to be in red wine, not just with it.  just days after we tasted the alluring 2003 wines from st.-Émilion, i was at a dinner party where bottles of fine bordeaux were poured.  one of the dishes served with them was a classic matelote, prepared by ronan cardorel, who works for daniel boulud. a matelote is a stew in which eel is cooked in a wine sauce with fingerling potatoes, button mushrooms and bacon lardons. though red wine fish dishes are served all over france, matelotes are typical of the southwest, near the bordeaux region.  then, dining at alain ducasse at the essex house one night, the menu included a matelote of thai snapper in red wine.  shortly thereafter, at gordon ramsay at the london, line-caught turbot in st.-Émilion sauce was on the menu. that clinched it. how could i resist the notion of pairing our earthy, complex 2003 st.-Émilions with fish in red wine sauce?  i was surprised to find turbot in a couple of markets, both canadian wild (fillets) and french farm-raised (whole). neil ferguson, gordon ramsay's chef de cuisine, said sea bass fillets would be a fine stand-in.  in reproducing the ramsay recipe, i simplified it somewhat, leaving out the salsify that garnished the fish.  nevertheless, the dish requires the full attention of the cook the whole time, with nothing suitable for advance preparation.  though you do not have to use a st.-Émilion for the sauce, a bordeaux-style wine, especially one with a generous component of merlot, is particularly appropriate. the same goes for your choice to pour at the table.  turbot poached in st.-Émilion  adapted from gordon ramsay at the london  time: 1 hour  8 medium-size yukon gold potatoes, about 1 pound  salt  7 tablespoons crème fraîche  8 tablespoons unsalted butter, preferably high-fat european style, diced  freshly ground black pepper  3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil  16 pearl onions, peeled  1 large shallot, finely chopped  2 cups st.-Émilion or other dry red wine, preferably merlot  2 cups fish stock  1 pound turbot or sea bass fillets, skinned, in four pieces  1 tablespoon chopped flat-leaf parsley leaves.  1.  place potatoes in boiling salted water and cook until tender, about 15 minutes. drain, peel and mash in a ricer. return to pan, heat briefly and add 5 tablespoons crème fraîche and 1 1/2 tablespoons butter. season with salt and pepper and set aside in pan, covered.  2.  heat 2 tablespoons oil in a small skillet, add onions and sauté over medium heat until lightly browned and tender. set aside, covered.  3.  heat remaining oil in a wide saucepan or a sauté pan that can hold fish in a single layer. add shallots and sauté over low heat 5 minutes. add wine and stock and bring to a simmer. slip fish pieces into pan. poach 3 to 4 minutes, until just firm. remove fish, draining well. place on a warm plate and cover to keep warm.  4.  boil cooking liquid until reduced to about 1 cup. whisk in remaining crème fraîche and season to taste with salt and pepper. over low heat add remaining butter bit by bit, whisking it in. sauce will thicken somewhat and turn glossy.  5.  reheat potato purée and spoon into center of each of 4 dinner plates. place a piece of fish on top and place onions around. gently reheat sauce and spoon over each portion. sprinkle with parsley and serve.  yield: 4 servings.  pairings  