mcgwire unlikely for hall of fame   when the results of baseball's hall of fame balloting are announced at 2 p.m. today, cal ripken and tony gwynn will surely be smiling. goose gossage and jim rice have a chance to join them. but mark mcgwire is not likely to exhibit that same happy emotion.  ripken, who played in a record 2,632 consecutive games for the baltimore orioles, and gwynn, who won eight batting titles with the san diego padres, and perhaps someone else will be rewarded for their superb careers. but this election will also be remembered for what happens with mcgwire. he hit 583 homers, including what was then a record 70 in 1998, but he has been suspected of using steroids and that has damaged his candidacy.  in multiple newspaper and internet polls, the voters, who are 10-year members of the baseball writers' association of america, have offered indications that mcgwire would probably not get the 75 percent needed for election.  this is the first year on the ballot for ripken, gwynn and mcgwire.  many writers who did not vote for mcgwire said they were influenced by the suspicion that he used steroids. when mcgwire was questioned about steroids at a congressional hearing on march 17, 2005, he repeatedly said, ''i'm not here to discuss the past.''  some writers believe that mcgwire's silence in washington was an implicit admission that he had used steroids. writers are instructed to rate a candidate for the hall of fame on his record, playing ability, contributions to a team, character, integrity and sportsmanship.  ''it's not as much about his numbers as his unwillingness to explain himself after his appearance before congress,'' said john shea of the san francisco chronicle, one of several voters who discussed their stance yesterday. ''it's tough to vote for mcgwire when asked to consider the integrity and character of a guy who won't refute that he broke the law to cheat the game.''  mark gonzales of the chicago tribune took a similar stance. ''i believed he needed to clarify his past, but failed to do so,'' he said. ''i would have considered voting for him had he specified whether or not he took steroids.''  unlike pete rose, who has admitted betting on baseball and has never been included on a hall of fame ballot, mcgwire has not admitted using steroids. during mcgwire's 16-year career with the oakland athletics and the st. louis cardinals, baseball did not have a drug policy and he undoubtedly faced pitchers who used steroids. it is illegal to take steroids without a prescription.  jack etkin of the rocky mountain news noted that mcgwire had 1,626 hits, a modest sum for a potential hall of famer, and called him a mostly one-dimensional player. but etkin said his decision not to cast a vote for mcgwire did not mean he would always exclude him.  ''while a player's numbers never change, how they're seen through the prism of history does,'' etkin said. ''i felt that, with mcgwire, more information might come out that could bring some clarity to the use of steroids by him and others. that might not be the case. but i'm not comfortable with giving a player the highest honor possible, an honor that can never be withdrawn, when so many questions surround a player like they do in mcgwire's case.''  unlike etkin, phil rogers of the chicago tribune, who voted for nine players, does not envision reviewing mcgwire's status.  ''i can't imagine ever voting for him,'' rogers said. ''he's been linked too directly to steroid use.''  tony massarotti of the boston herald said he did not vote for mcgwire because his candidacy is based on the very thing that is questionable about his candidacy: his home run total. mcgwire hit 277 homers in his first 3,659 at-bats, but pounded 306 in his last 2,528 at-bats.  whatever happens with mcgwire could affect other players who have been suspected of using steroids. but massarotti said he saw a clear distinction between mcgwire and barry bonds, who has denied knowingly using steroids but is a focus of two steroid investigations and who could break hank aaron's career home run record this season.  ''for what it's worth, this isn't a philosophical question as much as it's a baseball question,'' massarotti said. ''in my opinion, barry bonds was a hall of famer before his steroid use began, which inspires me to regard him as a yes. but, when it comes to mcgwire, i believe that the steroids made him a hall of fame talent, and that's where i draw the line.''  baseball  