it's like nothing, really   everything is relative.  this may be such a cliché as to be all but meaningless, but it may be truer than you think. when things are not relative, we can't say, know or grasp what they are. our minds don't know how to identify them, how to describe them. why else has the word ''like'' become an all-purpose teenage interjection of approximation and uncertainty?  if you do not buy the idea that analogies are the cornerstone of consciousness, you can start small and accept that they are fundamental to ''special topics in calamity physics'' (viking), the debut novel last year by marisha pessl. the book's youthful narrator, blue, draws so many analogies in trying to convey the confusing world she sees, it's as if she's trying to set a world record.  ms. pessl does not pepper her speech as zealously with similes and metaphors, saving her more imaginative turns of phrase for the printed page -- she is working on her second book -- but that is not to say she does not have colorful moments. in fact, they are literally colorful, courtesy of the lavish rembrandt oil-paint set that her husband, nic caiano, a hedge fund manager, gave her last year.  the paint set is the top-of-the-line model, the extra-fine oil artist's box with a 39-tube spectrum of colors, 6 different painting mediums, 10 brushes (5 sable and 5 hog bristle), palette knives and a palette (with old-fashioned thumbholes), all in a portable walnut box. everything but the smock and beret.  ''there was some label on it saying that this is for the disciplined, advanced, professional painter,'' ms. pessl said, ''and i'm just about the opposite of that.''  at least, that is the hope. as much as she enjoys art-making -- several of her drawings punctuate her novel -- she is not looking to append the words ''slash artist'' to ''novelist'' on her résumé.  ''i have no training whatsoever,'' she said. ''and i have no theory. it seems to me in the contemporary art world right now you really have to have an agenda to be an artist, and i have no agenda.''  as much as her sable brushes mark up a canvas, their primary function is to sweep out her mind in a way that other pastimes, like exercise, do not. ''painting is wordless,'' she said. ''it's so nice to have the silence, to just express things visually.''  though she has painted off and on since childhood, for years using a messy cardboard box filled with acrylic paints, the deluxe rembrandt box lends the activity a sense of delicious dilettantism, recalling the first half of the 20th century, when painting in oils was a sophisticated avocation of the leisure class (a couple of her grandparents among them).  ''it's incredibly glamorous,'' she said. ''any color is possible. and there's some sense of wonder that you're working with the same materials as picasso and rembrandt. you think, 'that's all they had and look what they did.' ''  the act of writing may be establishing and describing how things relate, but painting for ms. pessl is like, thankfully, nothing. ''it's sort of cliché, but plotting a novel is like mapping out a treasure hunt,'' she said, ''nothing can be haphazard. you're beholden to the reader. but when you're painting for yourself, you have no one to please. it's like floating down a river that just takes you wherever it goes. as active as you are in it, it's completely passive.''  you see? even nothingness is relative.  possessed  