campaign spotlight: best buy calls for new venture   look for in advertising next week on tues., jan. 16, rather than mon., jan. 15, in honor of the dr. king holiday.  the phrase "best buy mobile" now means more than just someplace in alabama to buy flat-screen tv sets, digital cameras and refrigerators.  that is because the retail chain best buy is testing the concept of stores, under the best buy mobile name, devoted specifically to selling cellphones and service plans. nine best buy mobile stores have been opened, all in manhattan, in conjunction with carphone warehouse, a british cellular retailer whose stores are providing the template for the test.  if the stores are deemed successful, plans call for a rollout of the best buy mobile concept in other markets.  four of the nine stores are inside existing best buy stores, while the remaining five are stand-alone units. the stores, which range in size from 1,000 to 1,500 square feet, are located in neighborhoods like chelsea, union square, the upper east side and the upper west side. they are complemented by a web site (bestbuymobile.com) and a toll-free ordering line.  a campaign to promote the new stores, which carries the theme "your phone, your way," is being created by clemmow hornby inge, a london agency that is the carphone warehouse agency. it is the first time the agency has produced work for the united states, and it may augur expansion into this country.  the campaign includes posters; ads on phone kiosks near the stores; free, 42-page monthly buyers' guides that are given out in and near and stores; and the web site. there is of course also extensive advertising inside the stores, in the form of signs and displays. the budget for the campaign is estimated at $1 million.  the campaign is intended to play up what best buy and clemmow hornby hope will distinguish best buy mobile from the many other cellphone stores in urban neighborhoods, shopping malls and other locations: rather than being devoted to a single brand like cingular wireless or verizon wireless, best buy mobile sells products and services under eight brand names and promises its employees are impartial because they are not paid commissions.  the brands carried at best buy mobile stores are amp'd mobile; boost mobile; cingular; gophone, the prepaid service sold by cingular; inpulse, another prepaid service; sprint; verizon; and virgin mobile.  one ad asks, "how can you choose to be different without choice?" another ad asserts, "choice is the mother of individuality." a third ad asks: "the difference between huge choice and confusion? simple, impartial advice."  the campaign is indicative of efforts being made by retailers to gain a competitive advantage in lucrative but crowded categories as consumers demonstrate more than ever their willingness to shop till they drop that is, drop one retail brand for another.  although "best buy has been in the cellphone business for some time," says scott moore, marketing director at best buy mobile in minneapolis, the decision was made to rethink its approach to the market because "we are becoming a more customer-centric organization."  in considering the idea to sell multiple phone brands instead of carrying only one, best buy turned to carphone warehouse, which "has a proven model" that puts "real choice and real service in one place," mr. moore says.  manhattan was chosen for the pilot program, he adds, because "it's a good cellphone market in terms of who are our target is, the urban trendsetter, with a target age of 25 to 35, who is more likely to be buying new phones more frequently."  "we did a lot of customer research," mr. moore says, which included "spending a day in new york experiencing what it's like shopping for a cellphone."  that led to the development of the strategy to focus the ads "about you as an individual," he adds, and how the benefits of choice provide "a better way to buy a cellphone."  tristia clarke, group marketing director at carphone warehouse in london, introduced the best buy mobile executives to clemmow hornby, which is the carphone warehouse across europe as well as in britain, for not only mobile phones but also broadband and fixed-line phone services.  clemmow hornby has "the understanding" of the cellphone market, ms. clarke says, and recognizes that "people love their phones" but are dissatisfied with the buying and service processes and want "tailored, individual advice."  beginning last august, employees and executives of best buy, carphone warehouse and clemmow hornby met at an apartment on spring street in lower manhattan to plan the introduction of best buy mobile.  "we know a lot about mobile-phone retailing, but we need to understand how that works with best buy and in the united states," says johnny hornby, partner at clemmow hornby.  the result? "it was amazing to us," mr. hornby says. "your country is the home of choice, but seemed to offer so little in mobile."  by contrast, "you walk into a carphone warehouse and there's a sea of different phones, different networks," he adds. "it feels like there's a huge opportunity to provide that choice."  the clemmow hornby staff in new york is a mix of londoners and new yorkers, mr. hornby says, with "a creative team rotating between here and there" and two or three permanent employees based at an office downtown.  the best buy mobile campaign features photographs of men and women of all races, ethnicities and ages, suggesting the composition of new york "the gorgeous mosaic," as a former mayor, david n. dinkins, called it.  although london also has a multicultural population, "all those people are genuine new yorkers," mr. hornby says. "our creatives and photographers are walking around new york and taking shots of people."  the presentation of the disparate faces is meant to convey that "best buy mobile understands everyone's different, none more so than in new york," he adds.  as for opening an office in new york for clemmow hornby, "that will be led by the success of the venture," mr. hornby says, "rather than our ambitions."  "the question is to see if this is something that becomes a bigger and wider rollout," he adds. "if we had the opportunity to continue to be involved in the campaign, we'd love to take it."  carphone warehouse has a special place in the history of clemmow hornby, an agency known for its creative prowess that also works for marketers like british gas, the daily telegraph newspaper and toyota. the reason? carphone warehouse was the first client for clemmow hornby when it opened in july 2001.  indeed, for the first six months of the agency's existence, mr. hornby recalls, its office was inside the carphone warehouse headquarters until he and his partners found space of their own.  -----  if you like in advertising, be sure to read the advertising column that appears monday through friday in the business day section of the new york times newspaper.  