ballot first-timers could keep repeaters out of hall of fame   conventional wisdom doesn't have a vote, but it says that cal ripken and tony gwynn will be elected to the hall of fame this week. history says that no one else will be.  of the 20 players elected in the past 14 years, only two repeat candidates made it in years when first-timers on the ballot were elected. five other repeat candidates were elected in years when no first-timers were. eleven players were elected in their first year on the ballot without repeat candidates being elected.  over all, of the 60 repeat candidates who have been elected, only 12 gained entry in years when first-timers were elected. the other 48 were unfettered by first-timers.  for some reason, players who will obviously be elected in their first try overshadow other candidates to the point that voters are blinded to repeat candidates. it's not enough to honor the absolute best players with first-time election, but voters don't want to crowd them on their induction day by adding anyone else to their ceremony.  it happened with reggie jackson in 1993; steve carlton in '94; mike schmidt in '95; nolan ryan, george brett and robin yount in '99; dave winfield and kirby puckett in 2001; ozzie smith in '02; and paul molitor and dennis eckersley in '04.  when ryan, brett and yount were elected in 1999, 15 of the 16 players who had been on the ballot the year before drew lower vote totals. the only candidate who didn't was bob boone, whose total rose to 27 from 26.  the general decline occurred even though, according to a study by jack o'connell, the secretary-treasurer of the baseball writers' association of america, 20 percent of the 497 voters voted for the maximum 10 players and 67 percent voted for more than 5 players.  when eddie murray was elected as a first-timer in 2003, gary carter, who was in his sixth year on the ballot, was also elected. wade boggs, a first-timer in 2005, was joined by ryne sandberg, making his third attempt.  phil niekro (fifth time), don sutton (fifth), carlton fisk (second), tony pérez (ninth) and bruce sutter (13th) were elected in years when no first-timers were.  what does all of this mean for jim rice, rich gossage and andre dawson in tuesday's announcement? better luck next time.  not counting players who were eventually elected -- carter, sandberg, sutter -- the three have consistently been the top unelected vote-getters the past five years. rice was the top unelected vote-getter for two years before that stretch, and gossage was among the unelected leaders for those two years.  last year, rice and gossage had their best shots at election, each receiving 65 percent of the vote, but rice fell 53 votes short and gossage 54. sutter was elected last year with 400 votes when 390 out of a record 520 were needed.  for sutter, it was a long grind. he overcame what seems like a voter bias against relief pitchers. voters apparently don't give saves -- or the role of closer -- significant weight in their deliberations. voters are 10-year members of the writers association. players have a maximum of 15 years on the writers' ballot.  sutter was nowhere near election in his earlier years on the ballot. his vote total went down the year ryan, brett and yount were elected. but his percentage of votes rose each of the next seven years until he reached 77 percent last year. seventy-five percent is needed for election.  sutter's experience should be encouraging to a deservedly disgruntled gossage, whose vote total of 336 a year ago was double the 166 votes he received his first year on the ballot, 2000. his total was stagnant for three years, '02 to '04, but in 2005 he shot from 206 (41 percent) to 285 (55 percent). gossage hadn't become any better; the voters had become smarter.  if not for the presence of ripken and gwynn on this year's ballot, gossage could conceivably have made the final leap this year. rice, too.  in his 12 years on the ballot, rice has suffered a couple of voting dips, but his vote total and percentage have risen each of the past three years. the 337 voters who marked him on their ballots last year were 200 more than voted for him in 1995, his first year on the ballot.  sutter also received 137 votes that year. he had the same number the next year while rice had 166. sutter didn't overtake rice until 2003.  dawson has seen his vote total rise in each of the four years he has been on the ballot since he received 214 votes as a rookie candidate in 2002. in two of the years, 2003 and '04, he received exactly 50 percent. last year he reached 61 percent, failing to make it by 73 votes.  two pitchers, bert blyleven and jack morris, have made impressive strides recently, with blyleven going from 70 votes in his second year (1999) to 277 last year, and morris going from 97 in 2002, his third year, to 214 a year ago. both, however, still have a long way to go to gain election.  another pitcher, tommy john, hasn't generated enough movement in his 12 years on the ballot before this year to warrant optimism. he reached his high-water mark last year with 154 votes.  steve garvey, on the ballot for the last time this year, has never generated momentum. last year's 135 votes were far fewer than the 196 he had in 1995.  don mattingly's vote totals for the six years he has been on the ballot telegraph that he will never make it. he received 145 votes his first year and 64 last year.  lightning strikes twice  gil meche, a pitcher in the major leagues for six years, has done nothing close to what ron guidry accomplished, but he signed with seattle this winter for five years and $55 million. guidry never came close to that kind of contract. but meche and guidry do have something in common.  meche was born in lafayette, la., on sept. 8, 1978, the day before guidry, also a lafayette native, pitched the first of his two consecutive two-hit shutouts against the red sox in one of the game's great clutch pitching performances.  the shutouts were the highlight of the yankees' comeback against the red sox, a rally that resulted in a playoff for the division title, which guidry also pitched and won.  steal this book  ron washington, the new manager of the texas rangers, has probably never been accused of being a baseball rebel, but he was portrayed in ''moneyball,'' the michael lewis book about billy beane and the oakland athletics, as speaking rebellious thoughts.  lewis recreates a batting-practice scene with washington and ray durham, a newly acquired second baseman and accomplished base-stealer, who had been told not to steal. the athletics disdained stolen bases because they didn't like giving away outs.  if somebody runs and is thrown out, lewis quotes washington as telling durham, ''you got all kinds of gurus who tell you that you just took yourself out of the inning.''  juiced balls, the sequel  yet another challenger has come forward to question the legitimacy of the major leagues' baseballs. a cleveland company that uses computer imaging, universal medical systems, claims it has studied baseballs from 1998, including the one mark mcgwire hit for his 70th home run, and found them to have a larger rubberized core and a synthetic rubber ring, contrary to specifications.  major league baseball denies that the balls in 1998 were made differently.  david zavagno, the president of universal medical, said it took ct scans of the mcgwire ball and 15 other balls from mcgwire's home run contest with sammy sosa. the balls, he said, came from their owner, todd macfarlane, the creator of spawn comic books, and were scanned in 2001.  this latest challenge can easily be put to a test. universal medical could buy the mcgwire ball from mcfarlane, who paid $3.2 million for it. universal medical could then stage a major television production and cut open the ball to see what is inside.  zavagno says he does not plan to buy the ball to cut it open.  ''if you are ill and go to the hospital and they say you have liver cancer or a tumor,'' he said, ''you don't have to open up the person to see the cancer. you can see it with your own eyes on the image.''  but if zavagno wants to prove that his scans are right, he will have to put the ball on display and demonstrate its contents in a lesson of show and tell.  on baseball  correction:  january 15, 2007, monday  a report in the on baseball column on jan. 7 about gil meche and ron guidry, two pitchers from different eras but the same hometown, lafayette, la., misstated the team that signed meche to a five-year, $55 million contract this off-season. it is the kansas city royals, not the seattle mariners.  