barber leaves his mark on giants and moves on to a new career   tiki barber watched helplessly from the sideline as david akers attempted a game-winning field goal during the giants' wild-card game sunday. as the ball sailed through the uprights, giving the philadelphia eagles a 23-20 victory, the giants' season and barber's 10-year career had come to a close.  barber, wearing a giants baseball cap, immediately trotted along the 42 and congratulated some of the players on the eagles whom he had played against over the years.  when he emerged from the locker room about an hour later, dressed in a suit, he was greeted with hugs and kisses from family members and friends.  the entire time, barber looked composed, a man at peace with his decision to retire for a career in broadcast journalism.  ''i'm going to miss the things that i've become accustomed to in 10 years,'' barber said. ''sitting in the meetings with my running-back guys, going out on the football field and having fun playing a kids game and making a great living doing it. yeah, i will miss that. but i think the sadness will be for quiet moments when i can sit and recollect.''  barber did his best to help the giants advance, rushing for 137 yards on 26 carries and catching two passes for 15 yards. he was the focal point of an offense that sputtered at times but looked potent at the start and the end of the game.  the highlight for barber came in the second quarter, when he ran 41 yards to the eagles' 3. the giants went to barber on the next two plays but gained only 1 yard. they tied the score, 10-10, on jay feely's 20-yard field goal.  the giants were hoping barber would work the kind of magic he performed eight days ago, when he rushed for a franchise record 234 yards in their season finale in washington, helping them slip into the playoffs. coach tom coughlin fired the offensive coordinator john hufnagel the week before.  despite his gaudy numbers, barber was not the most effective running back in the game sunday. brian westbrook rushed for 141 yards and a touchdown. westbrook was the first player barber greeted after the game.  the mood in the locker room after the game was predictably grim. but it felt more somber because of barber's retirement, which he revealed in mid-october. barber's teammates said glowing things about him, and the eagles' owner, jeffrey lurie, made a point of getting to barber and offering some kind words.  ''it will be very sad to not see him put that giants uniform on again,'' said coughlin, who may not return for the final year of his four-year contract.  after the giants were beaten by the carolina panthers at home in the first round of the playoffs last season, barber criticized coughlin, saying the giants were outcoached. this time, barber was more supportive.  ''coach coughlin has done great things in his three years here,'' said barber, who rushed for 10,449 yards and 55 touchdowns in his career. ''in particular last week, you see situations going askew. as a head coach, you have to make very difficult decisions. and he made a very difficult one by replacing john hufnagel two weekends ago. and that's what you have to judge him on.''  the giants will look to replace one of the most productive players in franchise history. they will seek talent through the draft, possibly make trades and determine whether brandon jacobs, barber's bruising backup, will be able to replace him.  as quarterback eli manning left the locker room, he gave barber a pat on the backside and kept on walking. when addressing reporters, he did his best to sound upbeat when asked about replacing barber.  ''obviously we're losing our guy, our workhouse, the guy we give the ball to a lot,'' manning said. ''so obviously it's going affect some thing, but we've just got to move on and other people have got to get better.''  barber said he did not have any regrets about retiring. barber's brother and tampa bay buccaneers defensive back, ronde, echoed that, saying, ''i think he'll be proud of the way he left it.''  tiki barber went into the equipment room adjacent to the locker room before leaving lincoln financial field. he grabbed a black marker, and like players before him, signed and dated the concrete wall.  ''it's a sport, it's a game,'' barber said. ''it's something i've loved and relished doing going back to when i was 10 years old. and now it's done.''  pro football  