can foreign markets beat the u.s. again?   the best place to invest in 2006 was just about anyplace but the united states. of the 24 stock markets in developed countries tracked by morgan stanley capital international, only two, japan's and new zealand's, failed to match the 15.8 percent total return of standard & poor's 500-stock index.  most emerging markets did better, too. many had a stunning year, with china, argentina, indonesia and russia up more than 50 percent.  it was the second consecutive year of outperformance for overseas markets, helped by more reasonable valuations, a shrinking dollar -- which increases the value to americans of assets denominated in other currencies -- and economic growth that strengthened in many countries as it abated in the united states.  can foreign markets achieve the threepeat? fund managers who specialize in international equities warn that it will be difficult, because foreign stocks are not as cheap, compared with american stocks, as they were before the run of outperformance began. they are trying to keep the winning streak going by exercising far more caution and selectivity in their investments than was necessary for the last few years.  ''without a doubt it's harder to find good values than one, two or three years ago,'' said sarah ketterer, chief executive and co-chief investment officer of causeway capital management in los angeles. ''we may very well see lower returns'' this year, she warned.  or we may not -- which, she said, is why investors would be unwise to abandon foreign stocks. anyone who surveyed the landscape a year ago and reasoned that the strong outperformance overseas had set up the domestic market for a superior run would have been wrong.  ''no one can call a top or bottom in any market,'' ms. ketterer said. ''there isn't any sign of danger on the horizon, at least as far as interest rates are concerned. that takes pressure off companies and improves operating results. there could be another one, two or six good years left.''  thomas mengel, manager of the ivy international value fund, is hoping for at least one. he sees ''a year of decent returns'' as long as the environment for economic growth and interest rates stays benign.  such a backdrop cannot be assured, of course, and with valuations no longer as reasonable as they were, he is seeking the safety of companies that have strong balance sheets and are restructuring operations to be more efficient.  mr. mengel is concentrating his search in europe, which has the benefit of being at the right point of the growth cycle. the economy is expanding faster there than it is in the united states, profit margins are improving, and business confidence is at multiyear highs.  david herro, chief investment officer for international equities at harris associates, based in chicago, is also focusing on stable, defensive issues. he is a fan of ''busted blue chips,'' his sobriquet for giant multinationals that have been largely shunned by investors this decade.  ''this is a slice of the market which i still think is very attractive,'' said mr. herro, who manages international funds sold under the oakmark brand. ''look at valuations and what you're getting for what you're paying. these are good quality businesses at the right prices.''  finding companies in emerging markets, especially in asia, that fit this description is no small feat after the whopping gains that many achieved last year. some fund managers are using a buy-'em-where-they-ain't strategy, directing investments to stocks, sectors and countries that have remained comparatively untouched by the rally.  mark headley, president of matthews international capital management in san francisco, a fund marketer specializing in asia, has been using that approach. ''china and india have been deluged with hype,'' he said. ''it's time to be very cautious and trim back some of the winners. not everything is in a bubble, but you're definitely paying a premium price'' in those two markets.  mr. headley singled out chinese banks, several of which have been privatized in the last couple of years through high-profile share listings. ''i'd be very cautious,'' he said. he pointed to histories of bad loans at major chinese banks, as well as to price-to-earnings multiples that are double those of institutions in the united states and europe.  he noted that investors who align their portfolios with benchmark indexes might have no choice but to own some of these stocks, and he expressed sympathy. ''the more they go up, the more they have to own them'' to maintain index weightings, he said. ''we're going to see some very painful pullbacks.''  mr. headley expects to stay pain-free by doing business in countries that have been largely ignored, like malaysia and thailand.  the malaysian market ''kind of missed the last five years,'' he said, alluding to the decision by many investors, including himself, to avoid the market after the government introduced capital controls in response to the 1990s financial crisis.  thailand has just imposed restrictions to cope with speculative flows into its currency, the baht. investors took the news badly, sending stocks down about 15 percent in a day. mr. headley, however, is not deterred. ''thailand is the cheapest market in asia, and we're pretty fully invested there,'' he said. one of his favorite holdings is advanced info service, a mobile phone service provider with a p/e ratio in the low teens and a dividend yield above 7.5 percent.  among his other diverse investments are s1, a south korean security company; the joint corporation, a japanese condominium developer, and bank rakyat indonesia, a microfinance bank providing very small loans through thousands of village offices. its stock is ''expensive right now,'' he conceded, ''but the story is really unique and different.''  mr. herro prefers megafinance, as confirmed by his positions in credit suisse and ubs, which he said he likes for their private banking and asset management businesses. his other large holdings include the drug makers glaxo smithkline and novartis and the british food and drink companies diageo and cadbury schweppes.  he also has a stake in daimlerchrysler, crediting it with its reorganization efforts. the stock is undervalued, he said, as investors fixate on chrysler's woes and ignore its strength in commercial vehicles.  in asia, mr. herro has stakes in sk telecom in south korea and two japanese companies, daiwa securities and the semiconductor maker rohm.  ''if you look at these companies, one thing they've got in common is low valuations and decent profitability,'' he said, noting daimlerchrysler as the exception.  ms. ketterer did not mention the carmaker, but she likes german stocks because, ''for the first time in history they are embarking on major restructuring,'' she said.  she declared herself ''very enthusiastic'' about siemens, the german conglomerate. it ''has been a perpetual laggard, but that's what's so interesting,'' she said. ''there is a commitment to improving the business.''  ms. ketterer also likes france télécom, which, she said, has undergone a transformation. like many european phone companies, she added, it paid too much for licenses to provide third-generation services and went deeply into debt.  the company ''behaves more like a utility now,'' she said. ''cash-flow generation is fantastic,'' she added, ''more than enough for shareholders and to pay for expansion.''  mr. mengel, the ivy fund manager, likes companies that have always behaved like utilities, including e.on and rwe in germany and suez of france. other favorites include banca intesa in italy and orix financial services in japan.  after the strong performance of international stocks, he says he believes in safety first, but not safety only. many companies in which he has invested are based in the developed world, but they generate a significant portion of their sales in emerging-market economies.  some examples are the swiss cement maker holcim, which does extensive business in latin america and eastern europe, the swiss watchmaker swatch and the french luxury-goods conglomerate lvmh moët hennessy louis vuitton.  ''these companies are showing decent growth in mature countries,'' mr. mengel said. ''but because they have more and more sales in emerging markets, they're becoming pretty interesting. we're capturing part of the growth in emerging markets in a conservative way.''  mutual funds report  