where they stand on iraq   as the nation awaits president bush's speech on wednesday night outlining his new approach to iraq, a sampling of announced or likely 2008 presidential candidates are staking out positions on a spectrum from hawk to dove.  john m. broder  republicans  senator john mccain of arizona  2002 invasion: voted to authorize use of force.  troop increase: supports increase as long as it is large enough to assure success and sustained enough to finish the job.  withdrawal: opposes deadlines for the american mission. has called for continued support for iraqi authorities until they reach a political settlement.  mitt romney, former governor of massachussetts  2002 invasion: supported the invasion.  troop increase: has not commented specifically.  withdrawal: says the united states should not withdraw forces ''before iraq is secure.''  democrats  senator hillary rodham clinton of new york  2002 invasion: voted to authorize use of force. now says her vote was based on flawed information.  troop increase: does not support.  withdrawal: supports a phased withdrawal of troops, with some remaining in the region.  senator joseph r. biden jr. of delaware  2002 invasion: voted to authorize use of force.  troop increase: says it would be a ''tragic mistake.''  withdrawal: advocates phased withdrawal. supports a partition of iraq into shiite, sunni and kurdish regions, with a limited central government to handle oil allocation and border security.  senator barack obama of illinois  2002 invasion: was not yet in the senate. says he would have voted against it.  troop increase: does not support.  withdrawal: supports a gradual withdrawal. cautions that a too-rapid departure could lead to a spike in civilian deaths.  john edwards, former senator from north carolina  2002 invasion: voted to authorize use of force. says he now regrets it.  troop increase: does not support.  withdrawal: advocates the start of immediate withdrawal of as many as 40,000 troops and rapid turnover of responsibilities to the iraqis.  political action: at issue  