people and accounts of note   maria antonelli, a partner at the star group, cherry hill, n.j., was promoted to managing partner. she continues as senior vice president and general manager at starshipley, the wilmington, del., office of the star group.  chad boettcher joined nike, beaverton, ore., as director for corporate responsibility and community affairs for the united states. he had been director for strategic partnership and public affairs at mtv, new york, part of viacom.  erin cunningham joined the via group, portland, me., as an account manager. she had been a retail business planner at cole haan, yarmouth, me., part of nike.  josh dammers rejoined the meredith corporation, new york, as national advertising director at the meredith special interest media division. he succeeds brian kightlinger, who was recently promoted to publisher of midwest living magazine. mr. dammers had been national advertising director at condé nast bridal media, new york, part of the condé nast publications division of advance publications, and before that was eastern sales manager for a meredith magazine, better homes and gardens.  the marina del rey, calif., office of deutsch, a unit of the interpublic group of companies, promoted three account directors. adam graves and erin roalstad were promoted to senior vice presidents from vice presidents. and bridgett silva, an account director at the ideutsch division, was promoted to vice president.  michael j. fanuele joined the new york office of euro rscg worldwide, owned by havas, as managing director for strategy, working with another executive with the same title, don hogle. mr. fanuele had been chief strategic officer at walrus, new york, an agency he helped to found, and before that worked at agencies like jwt and mad dogs and englishmen.  chris henderson joined colle & mcvoy, minneapolis, part of mdc partners, as interactive creative director, a new post, working with patty henderson (no relation), the agency's interactive director. mr. henderson had been executive creative director at olson, minneapolis, where tom fugleberg, creative director, has been promoted to succeed him.  hypr, new york, was renamed digennaro communications, which is adding two employees, belle lenz and theresa piti to the current staff of samantha digennaro and kristin wilcha.  meghan mcdonnell, a senior consultant at pile & company, boston, was named a vice president.  william murray joined the public relations society of america, new york, as president and chief operating officer, posts that had most recently been held by catherine bolton, who left in late 2005. mr. murray had most recently been president at william murray & associates and before that was executive vice president and co-chief operating officer at the motion picture association.  scott pierce joined vnu business media, new york, part of the vnu group, as vice president for the travel group, a new post, overseeing properties like business travel news and the corporate travel world exhibition. mr. pierce had most recently been president and chief operating officer at the american hotel and lodging educational institute, orlando, fla., and before that held senior posts related to travel properties at advanstar communications and reed business.  rowen warren, new york, was renamed fly communications, as part of changes that include the promotion of r. may lee to chief executive.  tracy schroder joined pja advertising and marketing, boston, as an associate creative director. she had been a freelance designer and art director at toth brand imaging, concord, mass., and before that worked at partners & simons, boston, and allen & gerritsen, watertown, mass.  jeffrey smith joined sfgt, philadelphia, as director for business strategies, a new post. he had been marketing director at the alpha shirt company, trevose, pa.  sotherby homes, dallas, which builds houses in the dallas market, named level two, dallas, as its agency to develop advertising, a web site and collateral materials. the account had been handled by the munday morning creative group, dallas. spending has not been determined.  sunglass hut, part of luxottica retail, mason, ohio, a division of the luxottica group, chose jwt, new york, part of the wpp group, to handle its account. spending was estimated at $3 million. sunglass hut had not recently had an agency of record.  tony telloni joined burson-marsteller to oversee new york operations as new york market leader. he succeeds patrick ford, who was promoted last january to united states chief executive and had been leading the new york office in addition to handling those new duties. mr. telloni had been senior vice president and deputy general manager for the new york consumer brands division at edelman, part of daniel j. edelman inc. burson-marsteller is part of the young & rubicam brands unit of the wpp group.  dennis j. tompkins joined the public affairs group at eric mower & associates, albany, n.y., as a senior counselor. he had been media relations manager for the new york state united teachers and before that was the press secretary to h. carl mccall when mr. mccall served as the new york state comptroller.  unilever is sponsoring a contest asking consumers to create a 30-second commercial for a new product, dove cream oil body wash, to appear during the telecast of the academy awards, which is scheduled for feb. 25 on abc. the contest is being promoted with e-mail messages, a web site (dovecreamoil.com) and appearances by sara ramirez, a member of the cast of the abc series ''grey's anatomy.'' there are three contests in the same vein, known as consumer-generated content, seeking spots for super bowl xli, to be broadcast by cbs on feb. 4; those contests are sponsored by chevrolet, doritos and the national football league. the super bowl and oscars are often the two most-watched tv shows of the year, underlining the growing interest among marketers in consumer-generated content.  trina uzee joined tm advertising, irving, tex., part of the interpublic group of companies, as interactive associate creative director. she succeeds todd connelley, who was recently promoted to interactive creative director. ms. uzee had been creative director at imc2, dallas.  edwin watts golf, fort walton beach, fla., selected blattner brunner, pittsburgh, as agency of record. spending was estimated at more than $10 million. the initial assignment will be to develop a brand campaign for the company's 65 stores, catalog business and web site (edwinwattsgolf.com). edwin watts golf previously had no agency of record, handling most of its advertising work internally.  edward v. wise, president at cline davis & mann, new york, part of the omnicom group, was promoted to chairman and chief executive. he assumes duties from jack slonaker, chairman and chief operating officer, who retired in november to pursue other personal interests. carol disanto, client services director, was promoted to succeed mr. wise as president.  penny s. woods joined the chicago sales department of parade as an account executive. she had held a similar post at the parade competitor, usa weekend, owned by the gannett company. parade is part of advance publications.  the wpp group, london, is further expanding into areas beyond conventional advertising by investing in media rights capital, a company that helps finance movies. terms were not disclosed. martin sorrell, chief executive at wpp, likens the deal to investments wpp has made in spot runner, an online service that helps small businesses advertise on television, and the weinstein company, the studio started by harvey and robert weinstein. media rights recently licensed ''bruno'' -- the comedian sacha baron cohen's follow-up film to ''borat'' -- to nbc universal for $42.5 million.  yesawich, pepperdine, brown & russell (ypb&r), orlando, fla., promoted three employees to vice presidents. they are matthew gallagher, creative director; carrie kleifgen, production; and bill leonard, web production.  webdenda  