a teacher after all   both my parents were teachers, and they saw teaching as the noblest profession. they never thought their only daughter would end up running a business. and it took a long time before they were proud of me for doing so.  i was born in visalia, calif., in the middle of a farming community in the san joaquin valley. my mom taught physical education, and i grew up with this sense that you have to take care of your body as well as your mind. snacking meant fruits and vegetables; steamed vegetables were a way of life; and if you ate ice cream on sunday, you made sure to exercise more on monday.  my dad did his four-year army stint as a trainer, then got his teaching credentials and taught high school and, later, college. he tried selling reader's digest books in salt lake city, but he really missed teaching. a year later, we were back in california and he was teaching again. he taught american history and civics, and his hope was that i would be a teacher and maybe even run for office.  back then it was unusual to be an only child, and it was unusual to have a working mom. they didn't spoil me, but they took me to the theater and other places my friends' parents could not afford. i was proud that both my parents were teachers, and i always wanted to emulate them.  i remember, even when i was very young, my father would teach me a new word every morning, and make me promise to use it at least four times that day. and even when i didn't have homework, if they were working on lesson plans, i'd read a book or write a report.  my parents divorced when i was in the seventh grade, and i spent most of my high school years living with my father. money was tight, and when i was 15 i got a job serving food at a local ihop, then later busing tables at a fancy steakhouse.  i loved the hospitality business, and i slowly lost any desire to be a teacher. i remember going to class with my mom, seeing how unruly the kids were and thinking, ''this is so much effort for so little money.''  i got a scholarship to the university of california at santa barbara, but i wasn't happy there. it was 1973; students were concentrating more on protesting than education. so i transferred to san diego state. i still had an idea i should teach, so i compromised in a sense: i was pre-med, majoring in pathology audiology, and i was going to be a speech therapist.  but it was all so regimented; they seemed to think there was just one way to teach speech. one of my professors persuaded me to sit in on a couple of communications classes, and i got hooked.  i switched my major to marketing communications. i figured as a businesswoman, i could still educate and transfer knowledge, but i'd make a better living. my parents were incredibly disappointed. my father kept shaking his head, saying, ''we raised you to believe that money isn't the most important thing.'' i said, ''it's not, but i want to make a better living than you made.''  when i graduated i got a marketing job at braniff management, and later at applebee's and at taco bell. and my dad kept saying, ''julia, you're going to eventually leave this rat race and teach, right?'' i kept trying to explain that managing was teaching, too. but he wouldn't buy it.  so, one day, when i was a zone vice president at taco bell, i invited him to shadow me while i worked. we went to a taco bell, and he listened to me give advice, do some coaching, talk to the staff about how they dealt with customers. we went to another, and he heard me talk to them about their internal systems. he'd hear me call each one by name, talk to them about their futures. and he'd see them beam when i praised them.  when the day was over, we went for a cocktail, and finally he said, ''you do teach, you do coach, and i really am proud of you.'' my dad died three years ago, but i still tear up when i talk about this. i'm so glad that he realized that i did find my passion, just as he had found his.  julia a. stewart  chairwoman and c.e.o. of ihop  birth date  aug. 4, 1955  home  pasadena. calif. ''i can see the rose bowl games from my backyard.''  hobbies  cooking, especially roast lamb with a homemade rub, and wine, especially harlan cabernet from california.  office space: the boss  