news summary   international a3-9  latest iraq plan creates timeline to ease tensions  president bush's new iraq policy will establish a series of goals that the iraqi government will be expected to meet to try to ease sectarian tensions and stabilize the country politically and economically, senior administration officials said.  a1  lt. gen. raymond t. odierno, the new american operational commander in iraq, said that even with the additional american troops likely to be deployed in baghdad under president bush's new war strategy, it may take another ''two or three years'' for american and iraqi forces to gain the upper hand in the war. a9  the bush administration's selection of adm. william j. fallon, a career naval aviator, to be the top commander of american military forces across the middle east is, at first glance, unusual. he would be the first naval officer to command the region.  a8  archbishop resigns in poland  the newly appointed archbishop of warsaw, stanislaw wielgus, abruptly resigned at a mass meant to celebrate his new position after having admitted that he had worked with poland's communist-era secret police.  a1  thailand unsettled by bombings  a string of lethal bombs that disrupted new year's celebrations in bangkok has signaled the start of a difficult year for thailand as entrenched elites struggle for control of the country's future. it is still unclear who set the bombs, which killed 3 people and wounded more than 40. a3  taliban resumes attacks  two babies, their mother and a grandmother were killed in a roadside bombing in eastern afghanistan, said the provincial police chief of khost. three others in the car were wounded. in a separate attack, gunmen killed a high school headmaster in helmand, an interior ministry spokesman said.  a9  fatah holds anniversary rally  the fatah faction of the palestinian authority president, mahmoud abbas, held a rally in gaza city, marking the group's 42nd anniversary after days of bloody clashes with the rival hamas movement. tens of thousands of fatah supporters made it one of the largest fatah rallies in gaza in many years.  a9  science/health  fever in kenya kills 62  a growing outbreak of rift valley fever has killed at least 62 people in northeastern kenya since last month, and health officials fear that it could become much more widespread. most people do not get very sick, but some develop a brain infection or a hemorrhagic fever, which causes shock and bleeding and can be rapidly fatal.  a4  national a12-17  rangel set to begin committee leadership  representative charles b. rangel, democrat of new york, has taken chairmanship of the committee on ways and means. over the next two years, the committee will play a central role in defining and financing the democratic party's agenda after 12 years out of power.  a1  obesity report cards  the practice of schools reporting students' body mass index scores to parents was just one tactic in a war on childhood obesity. but now, inspired by notable results in a few well-financed programs, several states have begun b.m.i. programs, turning the reports into a new rite of childhood.  a1  rebounding from storms  the 70-mile-an-hour winds that hit the seattle area caused huge evergreen trees to fall onto power lines, houses, cars and roads. now some tree experts have begun an informal counseling campaign intended to restore trust among residents, eager to cut down future risks. a12  search for new harvard chief  only the members of harvard university's presidential search committee know for certain the way in which they are leaning in the search to replace lawrence h. summers, left, who was nudged to resign. many in academia speculate that the university may choose to put a woman in charge.  a12  tax benefits for the rich  according to a new congressional study, families earning more than $1 million a year saw their federal tax rates drop more than any other group. the study reinforced that while president bush's tax cuts reduced rates for people at every income level, they offered by far the biggest benefits to people at the very top.  a16  obituaries b7  ruthanna boris  a versatile dancer and choreographer who was the first american ballerina to be a star of one of the prestigious ballets russes troupes of the 1940s, she was 88.  b7  new york/region b1-6  assembly democrats pose spitzer's first challenge  just days after being sworn in, gov. eliot spitzer is facing his first major political challenge -- and it comesfrom assembly democrats. the initial flashpoint is over mr. spitzer's demand that in replacing comptroller alan g. hevesi, who resigned as part of his guilty plea for defrauding the state, the legislature should select an independent outsider with financial expertise.  b1  underground sport  the underground combat league stages bouts in new york city that belong to a class of sport sometimes called mixed martial arts, sometimes called ultimate fighting. there are few rules and the events are against the law, officials say. the league's fighters are allowed to strike most parts of their opponent's bodies with full force, prompting many new york lawmakers to liken the sport to human cockfighting.  b1  two killed in newark  two men were killed in a midday gun battle in a newark housing project less than 24 hours before mayor cory a. booker was scheduled to reveal a new initiative against drugs and violent crime.  b1  subway station feud nears end  a truce has been called in the battle between form and function that erupted late last year over plans for the fulton street transit center, a new transportation hub in lower manhattan. b1  neediest cases  b6  sportsmonday d1-8  jets and giants are out  in their 23-20 loss to the philadelphia eagles in their first-round playoff game, the giants took an early lead then squandered scoring chances. the jets' 37-16 loss to the patriots hinged on a third-quarter fumble. d1  arts e1-10  new dance company in city  choreographer christopher wheeldon has shaken up the settled landscape of ballet in new york by announcing plans to form a classical dance company. e1  business day c1-10  convergence in a cellphone  apple computer is expected to unveil an apple phone that could be the first of a new generation of devices that are closer to personal computers in pocket form, underscoring the growing convergence of many types of communication.  c1  toyota getting bolder  with the introduction of bigger and more luxurious vehicles at this week's international auto show, toyota is moving into markets long dominated by its american and european rivals in what analysts see as an important sign of its future direction.  c1  online news is scaling up  in a time when many newspapers are cutting their staff and scaling back their washington coverage, the politico, an online news venture that starts in two weeks, is solely dedicated to covering national politics and is hiring reporters from what were once secure print jobs.  c1  satellite tv in a box  the television producer rick rosner, frustrated at not being able to get television reception while shooting on location, has developed a 25-pound portable satellite and television system. it will be unveiled by directv at the consumer electronics show in las vegas.  c1  business digest c2  editorial a18-19  editorials: testing the testers; congress and your security; mr. schwarzenegger's modest idea; joe economics.  columns: bob herbert, paul krugman.  bridge e8  crossword e6  metro diary b2  tv listings e9  weather b8  