irreconcilable interiors: when mates don't match   sandi slone and bruce ehrmann have been a love story for 25 years. she is a painter, he is a newspaper and television reporter turned real estate broker. they met in harvard square one afternoon -- she had a show nearby, he was meeting a friend -- and they have been together ever since. where she is dainty and precise, he is expansive, voluble and quick to self-criticism. their rapport is terrific, an affectionate, nick-and-nora-style back-and-forth, honed and polished to a glittering sheen.  lately, however, there has been this one point of contention, a bit of a roadblock. since 1987, ms. slone and mr. ehrmann have been living in a rough-and-tumble artist's loft on the top floor of an old warehouse in tribeca. they purchased the roof rights when they bought the place all those years ago. and for years they struggled: there weren't even proper floors or a ceiling when they first moved in. they added walls and a nice bathroom as their bank accounts allowed, living in what ms. slone called a ''provisional'' but perfectly happy style.  then mr. ehrmann became a real estate broker -- he's now a vice president at stribling & associates, working mostly in the marketing of luxury developments -- and their fortunes, along with their neighborhood, began to change. by last year, they suddenly had the means to expand, to literally move up in their world, and build another room on the roof. but whose room?  mr. ehrmann, after years of living in his wife's studio, was desperate for his own private, paint-free aerie. and ms. slone, after years of living on top of her own work, craved a separate work space, with its own entrance so collectors might come for a showing, and, as she explained, ''i wouldn't have to ask bruce to move his shoes out of the front hall, and so when we had guests over for dinner and i'm in the middle of work, which is very intense and very private, they can't just walk out of the bathroom and see it all.''  uh-oh, there it is. the impasse. the boulder in the path. the point at which a couple pursuing a renovation or decorating project disagree, and each partner veers onto his or her own road, the high road, driving quickly and emphatically far, far away from each other.  a few days ago, mr. ehrmann and ms. slone were on the phone together, each on a different extension, explaining the situation. ''the conversation ranges from the genuine need to discuss the impasse in a nonthreatening way, to come to a resolution,'' mr. ehrmann said, ''to statements like, 'i can't stay in this relationship, i need to go rent an apartment, i'm going to tribeca tower.' '' and ms. slone broke in. ''honey,'' she said, ''that's not a bad idea.''  like moving, childbirth and death, renovation is one of the biggies: a huge stressor in a relationship. how a couple handles it tends to mirror or even amplify what's going on between them, particularly the problems, blowing up slights to the size of a macy's thanksgiving day parade balloon.  third parties are frequently entangled. contractors, architects and decorators become skilled at listening and conflict resolution.  ''i don't want to be a marriage counselor, i wasn't trained to be one,'' said nancy corzine, a high-end decorator whose work can be seen from los angeles to manhattan. ''but the personalities come out, they can't help it.''  ''and of course it's about power,'' she continued, ''who has the ultimate ownership of the home. my job is to move it along. i won't let there be an impasse, because i don't get paid until it's done. if you're smart, you learn that she says one thing and means another, and you know who you have to please. the checkbook is the answer.''  rob rogers, a principal at rogers marvel architects in new york, remembers with a wince a time during the last decade when the firm's work was primarily residential -- and marital.  ''there was the couple our office nicknamed the bickersons,'' he said, ''and the time we were so worn out we replaced the sign on our door with rma marriage counselors in preparation for an evening session.'' the great lesson he learned, mr. rogers said, was to try to get clients who had lived together for some period of time, or at least to make sure a new couple had hashed out some pretty basic issues.  ''the bickersons were a young married couple and hadn't been married for long,'' mr. rogers said. ''there were so many challenges, so many things they'd never discussed before, like two sinks or one. and then there's this public discussion of their toilet habits. or, would you ever have a dog? another couple we had could never agree, even if we put lots and lots of solutions on the table. everything started out great, and then we'd get hung up. all of a sudden there are references to other situations. we'd be discussing the organization of the playroom and a line would be crossed and you'd hear, 'well you could tell the kids to put their stuff away,' and i'd go 'oh boy!' ''  mr. rogers would offer design solutions to what had devolved into a regular mister-and-missis, suggesting, for example, low shelves and drawers so children might put their own stuff away, he explained, ''or how about an adjacent closet that you can snow-shovel everything into?''  did it work? can design move a boulder? sometimes, he said.  ''we also learned not to serve wine at evening meetings,'' mr. rogers said. ''overall we find doing amazing residences for bachelors is really appealing.''  like priests and rabbis, divorce lawyers tend to see the impasses rather late in the game. ''marriage is very hard work, and it changes every single day,'' said harriet newman cohen, a successful manhattan divorce lawyer with three decades of experience. ''and renovation is very like a marriage; it's very exciting in the beginning, both partners have high expectations, but it's hard work and it creates a lot of financial stress. there will be rubble. they will be breathing dust. everyone gets very irritated.''  in renovating, or even decorating, she continued, couples ''have to make all those choices, and he and she are not going to have exactly the same taste. one is an artist, perhaps, and everything has to be perfect and so nothing gets chosen, while the other partner can't understand why they alone of all their friends can't manage to put a house together when everyone else can.''  ms. cohen described one renovation gone terribly awry, when a couple began to build a huge house in a wealthy town in new jersey. the marriage began to falter, and every disagreement found its way into the construction. a series of contractors were fired; the final one just before the roof was to be built. the couple split, a divorce agreement began to be worked out in the courts, and the huge, unfinished house sprawled, black tarps spread over its roofless top floor -- at once a nasty sore on the smooth skin of its fancy neighborhood and a vivid exposition of the collapse of a marriage.  ''you can't sell a house in the middle of a divorce, and who wants a roofless house, anyway?'' ms. cohen said. ''these things can affect more than just a couple and any children.''  symbolically, of course, a home is as potent as money in a relationship. ''home is all about security, safety, expression and belonging,'' said margaret shapiro, an assistant director at the council for relationships, the oldest association of marriage counselors in the country, based in philadelphia. ''that's the inside part, and the outside part is what you present to the world. it represents a lot of dreams and hopes and how you're going to nurture your family. and where people get tangled up is, they can have very different ideas about what that means.''  ms. shapiro, whose practice is 25 years old, recounted a recent impasse between a couple she was seeing. the wife was intent on redesigning a family room and the husband wanted to put every dime into their retirement.  ''he was working very hard, hoping to retire earlier and spend more time with the family,'' ms. shapiro explained, while the wife was working minimally. ''their three kids were about to be teenagers, and she wanted to make a place where the family could really be together during this period, not spend a gazillion dollars but maybe buy a big sofa and a nice tv. they were trying hard, but i could see they hadn't talked to each other about why their ideas were important. she was pretty calm, but he was very upset, very emotional.''  as it turned out, his father had worked until he was 75 and dropped dead. the wife's back story was nearly as poignant: she hadn't had a family experience when she was young, ms. shapiro said, ''where everybody was together.''  ''they both had these terrific, valid reasons,'' ms. shapiro continued, ''and when they could slow down and see that both things were important, they were able to make both things work. she agreed to work more, so the retirement pot wasn't all his, and he agreed to do the family room now. when people are trying to convince each other and want to win, it's really difficult to have a dialogue and hear the other person and take it in.''  even the smallest choices can lead to an impasse. leslie smith is a private investigator and paralegal; she and her boyfriend, andy arkley, a software designer, bought a midcentury ranch-ish house in seattle together a few years ago, and cheerfully set about redoing it, mostly with paint -- wild colors like scarlet and black and lime green -- and with perfect amity.  it is all very shipshape and nearly done, except that the melted bead hanging lamp designed by margaret carleton, a rhode island artist, a gift from mr. arkley's sister, remains unhung. he wants it wired to an existing switch; she wants to find it just the right spot, and then wire it in later. oddly, they both seem to have the same point of view -- that the piece is really special and warrants careful positioning -- but go a bit blind and deaf in the conversation.  ''his thing is, how do you turn it on, and i don't care,'' ms. smith said. ''i don't know what his block is, because it seems like we're coming from the same place. we have to choose a spot regardless of whether it's wired to a switch or not. it's like the coffee table that i refinished. i mean, i just painted and poly-ed it, but he puts his feet on it. i'm like, 'please don't put your feet on it,' and he says, 'well, you finished it really well.' he doesn't hear what i'm really saying, which is that i worked really hard on something.''  and the feet feel like an insult?  ''yes,'' ms. smith said.  mr. arkley explained in an e-mail that he just wants to ''de-awkwardize'' an awkward piece, meaning the lamp, and that he expects it will be hung soon. he didn't get into the table.  jeanne marie olson and aaron olson have been married for five years and renovating an old chicago bungalow for nearly four (its progress, or sometimes lack thereof, is chronicled on their blog, houseinprogress.net). both have master's degrees in organizational development and have taught seminars on how to make organizations work more effectively for an outsourcing company. in their work and at home, the arduous and extensive renovation of which is strictly d.i.y., they're big on a technique called ''chunking up,'' borrowed from a self-help movement known as neuro-linguistic programming.  ''chunking up is about going meta, elevating yourself to look at the action and its result,'' ms. olson explained. ''it's taking yourself out of the very personal, emotionally charged interaction and examining something from a higher perspective. you keep asking questions, like when i wanted to put a window in an alcove upstairs and aaron didn't like the way it looked, the way i'd drawn it. the question becomes, what does the window do for me? well, for me it was about more light. we figured out a way to make skylights, and then i could let go of the window i'd drawn.''  knowing from the get-go that renovations can be marriage shredders, ms. olson said, ''we figured out ways for interactions to be more pleasant. we chose five things that were important to us in the renovation and made sure we didn't impinge on those things. we don't put each other down. we try not to make it personal. we don't use 'you' language.''  ''one thing i always ask myself is, 'is this really about the light fixture or something more?' '' she continued. ''if there are unresolved issues in the relationship. ''  her voice trailed off and then she described the time when, pregnant with their daughter, grace, now a year old, she was unable to put up the drywall herself. ''it had to be contracted out, and i wanted it to be five-eighths-inch, to match the depth of the plaster,'' said ms. olson, who is the technical one in this partnership, the one who takes apart the dishwasher and puts it back together, the one to whom the thickness of drywall is of utmost importance. ''but the contractor thought i was nuts and kept going to aaron. so that didn't get negotiated into the final work. which made me very, very angry. i felt like the two boys had made the decision without understanding me. and for a long time after that, any decision we had to make i would get really defensive about.''  she has since dropped that bone, after explaining to her husband that she was still shaking off the effects of what she imagined to be condescension and collusion between him and the contractor.  ''and he got it,'' she said.  ms. slone and mr. ehrmann have recently rolled their own boulder away, sort of. it is telling -- a testament to a long, resilient partnership -- that when they hired their architect, alexis kraft, of kraft studio in park slope, brooklyn, to design their new room, they didn't prescribe one thing or another.  ''it was his study or her studio or a master bedroom,'' mr. kraft said wonderingly of clients who work like artists, as interested in the process as the result. or maybe they were just buying time. in any case, mr. kraft drew all three, and they discussed all three for over a year and a half.  the final drawing, completed just recently, shows a painting studio.  ''i was shocked to think, well, we've resolved it,'' mr. ehrmann said, ''but we have, even though right now i feel longing and remorse. it costs less to build a studio than a finished living space, and also there was no way to make a separate entrance for sandi's studio if we kept it downstairs. however, the real reason i maintain that we resolved the impasse is that time is no longer on our side. life actually has a terminus. we could reside in the impasse for the rest of our lives.''  ms. slone said gently: ''no. we couldn't. that's no fun at all.''  talk to her (or him)  margaret shapiro of the council for relationships offered this script for hammering out design disagreements using ideas gleaned from a program developed by dr. howard markman, director of the center for marital and family studies at the university of denver:  if a topic keeps coming up and never seems resolved, something is not being heard. take 30 minutes of uninterrupted time to have a different kind of conversation about this subject.  partner no. 1 might say, ''what are you trying to tell me about this that i am not understanding?'' or, ''why is the (family room renovation, new couch, unhung light fixture) so important to you? i'm missing something.'' partner no. 2 has five uninterrupted minutes to explain, using only ''i'' sentences. no questions or sentences starting with ''you'' are allowed.  partner no. 1 then explains what he or she heard, without rebutting or starting his or her own thoughts. (partner no. 2 should feel understood, though not necessarily agreed with, before switching turns.)  then reverse.  the goal is for each partner to understand the other's point of view, not to win the argument.  penelope green  