for parents, new ways to controlthe action   by now most consumers have probably seen the television commercials from apple computer pitting a trim, slightly shaggy hipster, meant to represent that company's macintosh line, against a pudgy guy in a bad suit, meant to represent personal computers running microsoft's windows operating system.  the main thrust of the ads seems to be that macintoshes are for people who want to have fun (or who simply are fun), while windows pcs are for people who wouldn't know a good time if it hit them in the funny bone.  it is a conceit that nearly inverts reality. that's because when most people want some interactive electronic entertainment, they don't rush off to make a photo album (a task at which macs excel). instead they do something more obviously synonymous with fun: they play a game. and for all of the playstations in the world, windows pcs are by far the planet's most popular game system. by contrast even apple's biggest fanboys concede that ''macintosh gaming'' is practically an oxymoron.  the fun gap is set to get even bigger later this month when microsoft makes the latest version of windows, called vista, available to consumers. after decades of treating gamers as the vaguely disreputable (if pleasantly profitable) outcasts of the windows family, gates & company has done an about-face and made enhanced support for gaming one of vista's main selling points.  it may very well work. i have spent hundreds of hours over the last six months playing on and with various iterations of vista (i upgraded to the final retail version a couple of weeks ago), and it delivers the most powerful, robust and, yes, fun entertainment experience i have had on a computer since i got a commodore 64 in my basement playroom almost 25 years ago.  now if you're a serious gamer, you do not need to run out and upgrade to vista right away; the new features that will most appeal to you will not be available until later this year (more about those in a bit), and in some cases you might be perfectly fine sticking with windows xp until 2008 or beyond.  but some of the most powerful new features in vista are not for hard-core players at all. instead they are aimed at casual players and, most important, at families. it is not overreaching to say that if you have young children who play computer games or use the internet you are basically remiss if you do not upgrade to vista as soon as possible.  what am i talking about with such a sweeping statement? i'm talking about parental controls. with vista, parents for the first time have powerful, easy-to-use, practically unhackable tools to control and monitor just about everything their children do with the home computer, online and off.  sure, there have been third-party watchdog programs out there for years. but they are often clunky, difficult to configure and simply by virtue of being third-party programs can be easy for tech-savvy youngsters to get around. with vista, microsoft has for the first time built a robust set of parental controls directly into the operating system, not just for gaming but also for web browsing, file downloading and instant messaging.  so let's say you want to let your child play games that have been rated t for teen by the entertainment software rating board (like, say, world of warcraft), but not games that have been rated m for mature (like, say, f.e.a.r.). just a few clicks.  want even finer control? maybe you're fine with fantasy violence but not with simulated gambling. vista lets you easily decide what your children can play based on dozens of ''content descriptors.'' now your child can play the lord of the rings: the battle for middle earth ii but not stacked with daniel negreanu. (similar settings for web browsing would block most poker sites.) as a parent you can also block games altogether and also set hours of the day when the computer may not be used at all.  the system isn't perfect. i found a few, mostly older games that slipped through the cracks. games distributed by online services like valve's steam network generally were not caught by the parental controls. but in general vista is an immense leap forward for parental oversight (and consequently, one might add, accountability).  but enough hand holding. what if you're a halfway-serious adult gamer? as underwhelming as it sounds, the most important point is that there is basically no reason not to upgrade (except cost, of course, which can run to a few hundred dollars). i poked and prodded for compatibility problems and couldn't find them in any meaningful way.  more specifically, i wrote an article last summer slamming microsoft because the beta version of vista i was using at the time did not properly recognize the flat-panel widescreen monitors that have become so popular. at the time i said vista was as frustrating as a six-speed lamborghini that won't shift into top gear. i am happy to report that vista now plays quite nicely with my widescreen 24-inch dell monitor, and that i have not seen widespread reports of problems elsewhere.  that said, for hard-core gamers the two main reasons to upgrade aren't fully fledged yet. the first is directx 10, the new version of windows' underlying graphics technology. dx10 is included in vista and is sure to deliver the glossiest, grooviest, just plain most gorgeous game graphics anywhere, but the first games to take advantage of the new system, like crysis (from the makers of the acclaimed shooter farcry) and age of conan: hyborian adventures are still at least a few months off.  even more important than directx 10 is that the live online service and community that has made the xbox 360 such a hit in the console market is coming to vista later this year. at his keynote address at the consumer electronics show in las vegas last night, bill gates was scheduled to demonstrate how a vista user could play the card game uno over the live network against an xbox 360 player. that's obviously a simple example, but at its booth in las vegas microsoft also plans to show off the top-end science-fiction game shadowrun with pc and xbox 360 users facing off against one another.  for decades computer gamers and console gamers have been one people separated by a common pastime (to mangle a phrase). if live can actually let them play with and against one another, that could be the most far-reaching gaming development of 2007.  but even without that, vista is a strong step forward for computer gaming, particularly for families, and puts windows even further ahead of the hipsters from cupertino.  now if only microsoft could do something about that cheap suit.  video games  