stern likes his new censor: himself   howard stern, who today marks his first anniversary on satellite radio, wasted little time over that period before setting off on an expedition deep into the wild, forested territories of a medium patrolled by neither the federal communications commission nor, apparently, his own employer.  listeners who have paid $12.95 a month to hear him on sirius satellite radio have been treated to uncensored aural experiences like a standing bit in which he persuades a porn star or centerfold model (typically naked, sometimes in tandem) to climb onto a vibrating, mechanical contraption known as the sybian. he (and they) then provide play-by-play commentary on their apparently escalating enjoyment -- all over the roar of a motor as loud as a leaf blower's.  fans who, upon hearing these and other scenes described to them, have been seized by a desire to see what's going on can do so too, for an additional $9.99 to $13.99 a month via mr. stern's on-demand television channel, which is available on many cable and satellite television systems.  but one does not need to see mr. stern, or his supporting cast of producers and technicians and various hangers-on (long known to listeners of his former radio show as the ''whack pack''), to hear them talk freely about topics like their apparent fondness for less conventional sexual practices -- the very topics that once drew mr. stern steep f.c.c. fines -- punctuated with locker-room language so colorful that it might make george carlin blush.  ''it's free-form, free-flowing, one big party,'' mr. stern said in an interview on friday, in a tiny corner office adjacent to his studio in midtown manhattan that was virtually bare except for photos of his steady girlfriend, beth ostrosky, and two large bottles of purel, the hand cleanser. ''we're talking about the stuff you can't talk about. the show on terrestrial radio in the last 10 years had been so watered down,'' he said. ''now it's only great because of the freedom.''  still, however obvious mr. stern's enthusiasm, his argument prompts an immediate question: having mined so much of his humor in the past from his frustration at butting up against seemingly insurmountable boundaries (variously thrown up by the f.c.c., and, before that, his wife, alison, from whom he is now divorced), can he be as entertaining when no one is telling him that anything is off limits?  mr. stern says that he can, and that he has already been.  ''i don't know what it is in particular with my career,'' mr. stern said, sprawling in an easy chair, his 6-foot-5 frame clad in leather jacket, stone-washed jeans and black work boots. ''they wouldn't say that about chris rock, that chris rock shouldn't be in clubs, he should be on tv, because he would have restraint. for some reason people or critics latch onto this idea that i needed the f.c.c. in order to be funny. which is ludicrous. i'm not funny because of the f.c.c.''  and yet mr. stern acknowledged that with no one else seeking to put the brakes on his show, it has occasionally fallen to him, in a vacuum, to do so. ''there are times now when i'm the guy saying, 'that went too far,' which is a new role,'' he said.  pressed for an example, he recalled a regular staff meeting on a recent thursday in which one cast member had made the following request: that mr. stern, as both the microphones and cameras rolled, knock him out with chloroform, strip him naked and replace his clothes.  ''i said, 'i'm not sure chloroform is legal,' '' mr. stern recalled saying. '' 'i don't know if it kills you.' i said, 'wait a second, i'm not going there.' ''  the material that has passed mr. stern's own personal litmus test -- including the broadcast of a version of the children's game ring toss, only this one involving meat balls and women's bare bottoms -- is being heard by a much smaller audience than mr. stern had before departing free radio in the fall of 2005.  where once mr. stern could boast of reaching 12 million listeners a day, sirius's overall subscriber base, while growing dramatically, is half that. at the same time mr. stern has relinquished his role on the front lines of the battle against government encroachment on free speech because the f.c.c. has no jurisdiction over satellite radio.  asked if he missed being heard by so many or being talked about quite so much, mr. stern said that he was delighting in being part of ''a start-up business.'' still, he sounded almost hopeful that his critics had not gone away.  ''we're still up against the wall,'' he said. ''there isn't a day we don't have a television report where someone says i'm a piece of garbage. there are so many angry mobs out there to have my head.''  a moment later, though, he said he would not miss the fights of the past, over issues like whether there was a place for indecency and foul language on the public airwaves.  ''i never got into it to be the poster boy for the fight against the f.c.c.,'' he added, while acknowledging that he had stoked that very image by marketing a series of tapes from his show that he titled ''crucified by the f.c.c.''  ''i was really uncomfortable with this notion that i was going on the radio and sticking my thumb in the eye of senator brownback,'' he said, referring to one of his bêtes noires, senator sam brownback, a republican from kansas. ''these people, these senators'' -- he paused to utter an expletive -- ''they were all sitting there like i was a personal attack on them, like i was doing this to defy mom and apple pie and corrupt our children.''  ''i'm a comedian,'' he said. ''i just wanted to make people laugh in the morning.''  that may be. but asked if, now, there is at times little that distinguishes his show from that of the soft-core ''girls gone wild'' video series (or even ''midnight blue,'' the longtime, soft-core chestnut of new york city public access television that had al goldstein as its host), mr. stern, of course, blanched yet again.  ''i never thought al goldstein or 'girls gone wild' was funny,'' he said. ''they're salacious. but i don't find any humor in 'girls gone wild.' ''  ''i'm not trying to tell you to come to satellite to hear a girl sit on the sybian,'' he said. ''i'm telling you to come because the show is funny.''  as an example mr. stern relished how he had persuaded a guest known only as ''rappin' granny'' -- she was approaching 90, he said -- to mount the sybian, fully clothed and with her cane, to describe how it felt.  ''granny, can i increase?'' he asked her, in reference to the power of the vibrations she was apparently feeling.  when she nodded, he instructed a producer, ''take it up to her age.''  on friday he said he considered the segment a ''human interest'' feature, because it had led to a somewhat sober on-air discussion with her about ''her generation and sex.''  ''she didn't know a thing about her private parts,'' he said. ''it's great radio. you can't do it on terrestrial.''  if he has any concern about how many people are tuning in to hear or see such bits, mr. stern can surely take comfort in thoughts of his bank account these days, though, there again, he said, ''i didn't do this for the money.'' as it stands, he is paid $100 million a year by sirius, which is meant to cover not just his salary but those of his staff, and to produce programming on two like-minded satellite radio channels, known as howard 100 and howard 101.  though sirius's stock price has plunged in the last year -- to $3.76 yesterday from $6.57 on the day he started -- he has instead sought to emphasize another number, the increase in the company's subscriber base over that same year: to 6 million from 3.3 million, a net gain 2.7 million, or 82 percent. (in demand, a private company that distributes his pay television channel, has not released subscription figures.)  asked if he would ever entertain returning to free radio when his contract is up in four years, mr. stern, who turns 53 friday, said he would not.  ''i swear to you on a stack of bibles,'' he said. ''load me with truth serum. i would never go back to terrestrial radio. this is it for me. this is where i will end my broadcast career.''  