igawa's bronx arrival met with tempered expectations   the yankees celebrated the arrival of a new left-handed strikeout king yesterday. his first name is pronounced k, as in the letter for strikeout on a scorecard, and he led the japan central league in strikeouts in three of the last five seasons.  he is kei igawa, and to his chagrin, he will not be teammates with randy johnson, who holds the major league record for strikeouts by a left-hander. igawa greeted reporters at an introductory news conference at yankee stadium yesterday, and johnson will do the same today in arizona after his trade to the diamondbacks.  ''of course, mr. johnson is known as the top lefty in major league baseball,'' igawa said through an interpreter, offering no apologies to johan santana. ''if he's gone, it will be a great sadness that i won't be able to pitch with him.''  there was little sign of johnson at yankee stadium yesterday. his jersey was not on sale at the team store, though a lineup card from a game he pitched against pittsburgh in 2005 was on sale for $750. in the stadium club, where igawa met the news media, a small johnson bobblehead doll smiled awkwardly from a glass case.  otherwise, the johnson era has been all but scrubbed from the bronx, though the yankees do play host to the diamondbacks for an interleague series in june. igawa is not exactly replacing him in the rotation, but he is filling a spot johnson could have held.  andy pettitte, whose meet-and-greet takes place thursday at the stadium, slides into johnson's spot at the front of the yankees' rotation. igawa assumes jaret wright's spot at the back. despite igawa's success in japan, the yankees are not billing him as a star.  ''we've had some looks on him for the last four years, and he's not matsuzaka,'' said general manager brian cashman, referring to daisuke matsuzaka, the starter who is expected to lead the boston red sox' rotation.  ''matsuzaka's a front-end of the rotation type of starter. i think we've been very honest in saying that we're looking at kei to help us solidify the back of the rotation. they're dissimilar pitchers; we don't want to confuse our fan base. but we think he can be a successful pitcher here in the major leagues.''  the yankees bid $33 million for the rights to matsuzaka, but the red sox won with a $51.1 million bid. sensing the rising cost of japanese talent, the yankees then bid aggressively for igawa, and their $26,000,194 figure was the highest.  the last three digits in the bid represent igawa's strikeout total last season. jean afterman, the yankees' assistant general manager, suggested the yankees add it to their bidding number.  afterman once worked with the agent don nomura in representing hideki irabu, who was a disappointment for the yankees from 1997 through 1999. the yankees expect igawa to fit in better. he will have a japanese teammate, outfielder hideki matsui, and each player will have his own translator.  ''he's smart and he's focused,'' afterman said, then pointed to a lectern, ''and obviously, he's a good study.''  igawa had just answered a few questions at the lectern after opening with a statement in english that he had practiced for two days. he thanked cashman and the principal owner george steinbrenner, who authorized igawa's five-year, $20 million contract but did not attend the news conference.  ''i will give you my best as a yankee,'' igawa said. ''i will do my best to win a championship for this great city.''  igawa, who will wear no. 29, had a 75-43 record over the last five seasons. matsuzaka was 63-33 in the same span. but matsuzaka throws much harder and fits the profile of an ace in any league. igawa succeeded in japan with a variety of pitches and an aggressive approach.  cashman said the yankees' scouts clocked his fastball as low as 87 miles an hour and as high as 92, and they noted his exceptional changeup. he will not blow hitters away, cashman said, yet he is not a soft-tosser.  ''he's somewhere in between,'' cashman said. ''i think 'pitch-ability' is a proper word. he knows how to pitch, he knows what he's doing. our guys believe he can pitch to lefties and righties, he's not afraid to pitch inside, and he's obviously had a track record of success.''  igawa conformed to the yankees' grooming rules, cutting his hair before arriving at the news conference. it was still a bit long -- but neat -- and he said it was roughly the length he started with last season.  by leaving japan through the posting system, before unrestricted free agency, igawa could have had his rights bought by any team. but he sounded thrilled that the yankees secured him, even if he cannot pitch with johnson.  ''nine years ago, as soon as i signed to play professionally, i had the desire that one day, i would pitch in the big leagues,'' igawa said through an interpreter. ''of course, the new york yankees were the team i hoped for. now, the lifelong dream has come true. i'm just in awe right now.''  baseball  