where's that cabernet? check the virtual cellar   james charlton owns about 400 bottles of wine, and he is beginning to lose track of his collection, which is split between his home in new york and his weekend retreat in connecticut. so mr. charlton is considering a modern alternative to rummaging through wine racks and reading bottle labels: software that would let him keep tabs on his chardonnays and cabernets from a computer.  wine management software can produce an instant, detailed inventory of a collection and sort it, for instance, by grower, region or drink-by date. newer programs can also provide wine scores and ratings, tasting notes from other drinkers, and, for those with an interest in wine as an investment, current market values.  because most wine software programs are now web-based, collectors can check on the contents of their virtual cellars by way of their treos, laptops or other web-enabled devices when they are far from their desks, avoiding mistakes like duplicate purchases during trips to the wine shop. at home, they can use the software for business or pleasure -- to produce gain-loss statements when they are updating their wine insurance coverage, for example, or to create restaurant-style wine menus for dinner guests.  to enjoy the convenience of a database, though, wine lovers must put up with the inconvenience of keying in the names of their wines and the number of each type when they buy them, and removing those entries after the bottles are emptied.  if the software has a well-stocked database, it will recognize the names of many wines after a few keystrokes and finish off the entry automatically, reducing the time spent. bar code labels and scanners can also speed up the job of adding and removing wines from inventory.  some wine management software is free -- for instance, the system offered by vinfolio, a web-based company in san francisco (www.vinfolio.com) that makes its money selling wine and related services like storage. for $2.50 a bottle, the company will even inventory the wine cellars of people who want to use the software, called vincellar, but who do not want to spend time keying in the data that describes their collections.  george chammas, who lives in hillsborough, calif., has more than 3,000 bottles of wine. he hired vinfolio to come to his home, scanners and digital cameras in hand, to photograph the labels of bottles in his collection and to tag each with bar code identification.  he now uses vinfolio's software to keep track of his cellar. he particularly appreciates the feature that estimates current worth, based on recent auctions. ''this gives you a way to track the value of your wines,'' he said, ''especially these days, as prices have gone up a lot.''  vinfolio offers several services for keeping online inventories current. instead of entering purchase data each time they visit a wine shop, for example, customers can fax or send the information by e-mail to the company, and the details will be imported into their vincellar accounts. the cost is $1 per unique wine. (a unique wine is determined not by the number of bottles but by the type and vintage of wine -- for instance, two cases of ridge zinfandel paso robles 1992.)  new customers who have been maintaining their own spreadsheets can have the information transferred to the service at no charge, so long as the data is in microsoft excel format and uses vinfolio's customized template, said jeannie lacombe, a collector services manager at vinfolio. ''send us the spreadsheet and we will upload it to your account,'' ms. lacombe said. ''the first time is free.'' after that, the cost is 25 cents per line item, with a $25 minimum.  rick j. jackson uses vinfolio's cellar management software in part because it is easily linked with storage services that the company offers. mr. jackson owns a town house in philadelphia that has a cellar, but it is too small to hold his wine collection, which is now about 500 bottles. so when he buys wines on the west coast, typically in california, he stores them with vinfolio.  then, when he wants the wine to be shipped east to his home, the transfer requires only a click or two at the computer. the software takes care of the rest of the details after confirming the transfer by e-mail. he also values vincellar's information on recommended drink-by dates. ''this way i'm sure none of the wines pass maturity without my consuming them,'' he said. he has also sold wines through vinfolio.  cellartracker, another extensive, web-based wine management system, (www.cellartracker.com) includes among its features notes and reviews by participating wine lovers. ''you can see what thousands of people are drinking, when they think the wine is ready, or when it's over the hill,'' said eric levine, creator of the site, which is based in seattle. cellartracker has a collection of about 223,500 wine reviews; 25,000 of them were submitted in december alone.  ''we get about 500 new reviews each day posted by the community,'' he said. ''it's an army of wine tasters.'' people using the site as their virtual cellar now have a total of about 4.1 million bottles stored there, he said. one version of the wine management software is free; to add features like a valuation service, users are asked to make a voluntary contribution, usually between $30 and $100. the site is supported by contributions and advertising.  john jenkins, of cary, n.c., handles the 1,000 bottles in his collection with wine management software and a scanner that reads manufacturers' bar codes, both bought from intelliscanner (for a total of about $300) at www.intelliscanner.com).  the company also sells scanners to keep track of other goods like books, games and groceries. mr. jenkins originally used a spreadsheet program, but he prefers the new system. ''i can scan for a week and then go to the computer and update'' inventory quickly, he said, by downloading information directly from the scanner.  despite the many wine management programs on the market, mr. charlton, whose wine collections in new york city and connecticut continue to grow, is still hesitant about choosing one. he is worried that using one of the programs could eliminate one of the great joys of a wine cellar.  ''it might spoil the fun of rummaging through my collection,'' he said, ''and being completely delighted by an unexpected find.''  novelties e-mail: novelties@nytimes.com.  