mayor's ultra-secure hot line gets some cold sales calls   it seems like a throwback to the cold war, a time when red telephones with direct lines to moscow and leather briefcases with nuclear codes were grave symbols of international anxiety.  at a senate hearing on tuesday, mayor michael r. bloomberg disclosed that he has a secure phone at his upper east side town house, equipped with encoders to prevent wiretapping and ready for use in a major emergency.  the problem is, sometimes he gets other kinds of calls on the line. from insurance salespeople, for instance.  the revelation was the most unexpected moment in a hearing before the senate homeland security and governmental affairs committee.  mr. bloomberg was answering a question from senator norm coleman, republican of minnesota, about the ability of police and fire officials to communicate with one another in emergencies when he suddenly said, ''i will say that when i became mayor, i was given a very important secure phone that is in the kitchen of my house, so that if i wanted to talk to the air national guard and shoot down a plane, i just press a button.''  many observers -- and even some senators -- in the crowded third-floor hearing room in the dirksen senate office building seemed startled. a low murmur spread through the room.  was the mayor making a deadpan joke? was he serious?  a little of both, it turns out.  the mayor's secure telephone was installed after he took office in 2002, in the kitchen on the lower level of his home, his office later said. there is no direct line to the military, and the line about the air national guard was a joke, an aide said.  at a news conference after his testimony, the mayor tried to clarify his remarks about the phone.  ''it's never been used, and i hope never is used,'' he said. ''i think the city has a lot of these phones. they're regular phones; they just have a secure device that encodes on either end. but it's a regular telephone, so if you don't sign up for the service of, 'do not call me during meal times,' you get lots of calls.''  the number is unlisted, so the solicitation calls were probably made by telemarketers who had dialed numbers at random, he surmised.  when he is not at city hall, the mayor takes most calls about city business on his cellphone, he said.  asked if the secure phone was installed in response to the 9/11 attack, mr. bloomberg replied, ''the secure phone was installed in response to me getting elected mayor.''  he added, ''it is not red, and it has never been used other than to answer an occasional call for, did i want to subscribe to a ridiculous magazine, buy an insurance policy or some other such particular thing.''  david j. farber, a computer science professor at carnegie mellon university and a former chief technologist of the federal communications commission, said secure phones like the one in mr. bloomberg's house were not uncommon and could be bought commercially.  such phones, according to dr. farber, have encryption keys, which ensure that calls made to other secure phones will be secure. the conversation is digitized, encrypted and sent over the phone line as data -- similar to internet-based phone services like skype. but if the person using a secure phone is talking to a person with a regular phone, the conversation is not secure.  this is not the first time mr. bloomberg's phone habits have drawn attention. in july 2005, he disclosed that he had a listed phone number at his house and that constituents with complaints occasionally called him there.  correction:  january 11, 2007, thursday  because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a secure telephone that mayor michael r. bloomberg uses in his manhattan town house rendered incorrectly a quotation from him. the mayor said he had occasionally received calls on the secure line asking ''did i want to subscribe to a particular magazine, buy an insurance policy or some other such ridiculous thing.'' he did not say the callers asked ''did i want to subscribe to a ridiculous magazine, buy an insurance policy or some other such particular thing.''  