a beloved play gets the star treatment in china, finally   ''secret love in peach blossom land,'' by the playwright and director stan lai, may be the most popular contemporary play in china. here on the mainland it has been performed hundreds of times since its 1986 premiere by mr. lai's performance workshop in taipei, taiwan, and is now a standard of university theatrical troupes.  the 1992 film version is widely available on dvd, as are taped versions of live performances, even though all these live and videotaped performances were made without mr. lai's permission.  but now, to celebrate its 20th anniversary, ''secret love in peach blossom land'' is enjoying its first mainland china production authorized by its creator, and a tour to boot.  with a star-filled cast, it is causing a sensation. the play has been performed here (where it ended a second run on sunday), and in shanghai and xian. next are shenzhen, chongqing, hong kong and other cities before the production returns to shanghai. tickets have been so hard to get that scalpers and students have resorted to producing counterfeits bearing seat numbers in nonexistent rows.  ''the response has been a bit overwhelming,'' mr. lai said. ''and, i may sound arrogant, but kind of to be expected.''  ''secret love in peach blossom land'' is actually two plays in one. what binds them is an artful, often hilarious conceit: a mistake that has led a theater to schedule simultaneous dress rehearsals for both shows.  one play, ''secret love,'' is a serious drama that opens in 1948 shanghai as the young lovers jiang binliu and yun zhifan (played by huang lei and yuan quan) bid each other a temporary farewell in a misty moonlit park. images of war still torment jiang. his homeland in northeast china has been devastated by the japanese invasion, but yun tries to persuade him to forget the past, brightly telling him, ''a new china is on the way.''  fast-forward nearly four decades to when jiang is lying terminally ill in a taipei hospital room as his devoted but unloved taiwanese wife looks on. he is brooding about the past, desperate before he dies to see yun, from whom he was separated after fleeing the communist takeover of china in 1949.  the second play, ''peach blossom land,'' is a farcical interpretation of a well-known fourth-century story about a lost fisherman who stumbles into a utopian land filled with blossoming peach trees, where all people live in harmony because they have no historical memory. in this version, however, the fisherman (played by yu entai) is a hapless cuckold, and the first people he meets in the mythical peach blossom land look exactly like his wife (played by xie na) and her lover (performed by he ling and tian yu on alternating nights).  he gradually succumbs to their absurd utopian lifestyle: dressing in white, catching injured butterflies ''to return to their mothers'' and taking care to step lightly so as not to hurt the grass. but he eventually leaves in the hope of persuading his estranged wife to return with him.  forced to share the same stage, the directors and casts of ''secret love'' and ''peach blossom land'' argue over who needs the rehearsal space more, criticize one another's performances, remove one another's props and ultimately divide the stage in half and perform at the same time.  on opening night of the second beijing run, these shared scenes prompted such loud laughter that it was sometimes hard to hear the actors. slowly, the plays merge, as their performers complete one other's lines and common themes emerge. by the end, jiang finds yun, and the laughter gives way to sobs as the audience is left to contemplate the burdens of memory, history, longing, love and the power of theater itself.  ''secret love in peach blossom land'' was first performed in taiwan when that island was still under martial law. contact with mainland china had just begun after nearly 40 years of rigid separation. the time was full of anxiety and emotion, as many of the two million mainlanders who had escaped to taiwan sought to re-establish contact with those left behind in china. while some reunions led to joy and renewal, others collapsed in bitterness over wasted years, unbridgeable experiences and economic disparities.  both comic and tragic, the play defies categorization, and this is one reason, mr. lai said, for its tremendous success in china.  ''there are too many labels here,'' he said. ''is it high art? is it popular art? is it big theater? is it small theater?''  he added: ''even creativity is labeled. china needs a liberation of creative forces.''  mr. lai, a visiting professor at stanford university, has written a book, ''on creativity,'' published in china by citic press. in it he argues that creativity can be taught and outlines methods for doing just that. he also frequently teaches and lectures on the subject around china. ''there are huge cities here with only one theater,'' he lamented.  as for the plays performed in those scant theaters, mr. lai said that too few were written in china, and that creativity was often lacking because so many people were busy trying to mount the next broadway-style hit or were not making anything at all.  ''i was once teaching a class here,'' he said, referring to china, ''and i challenged the students. i said: 'with the opening up of china, i thought there'd be so many great playwrights and directors. where are they?' one student answered, 'we're waiting for the communist party to die.' but the truth is, i think that's an alibi. our play was very taboo in taiwan when we made it. the stage is a place where anything goes. have you been liberated to the point where you can see this?''  