on his own now, mara ponders two tough calls   the giants' president, john mara, typically affable and approachable, increasingly avoided reporters as the team's season deteriorated. he knew that tough decisions were coming, and that he was about to begin shaping his true legacy.  for days, if not weeks, mara has mulled the most important decisions of his career. what makes them more difficult is that he is doing so without his father.  before wellington mara died in october 2005, every key move that john mara made -- from hiring tom coughlin as coach in 2004 to raising ticket prices -- needed his father's approval. john mara ran the team's day-to-day operations for years; his father, who co-owned the franchise for 75 years, provided the steady hand from the office that john mara now uses.  yesterday passed without word about the intentions of mara, whose family co-owns the team, and the brothers steve and jonathan tisch, whose family owns the other half.  the giants are deciding whether to retain coughlin, and who would take his place if they fire him. they must decide on a general manager to replace the retiring ernie accorsi. they must determine which move should be made first, or if they should be made simultaneously.  most teams allow a general manager to choose a coach, but the giants are likely to decide coughlin's fate first. they do not want to leave coughlin, his assistants and their families in limbo.  one possibility is that the decisions about coughlin and the general manager will be announced together, as early as today, a likely possibility if the giants promote one of their four internal general-manager candidates.  after the giants' 23-20 playoff loss to the philadelphia eagles on sunday, mara said he would have ''something to say in the middle of the week.'' the passing of time would seem a good sign for coughlin and a bad one for his assistant coaches.  if coughlin -- 25-23 in three seasons, and 0-2 in the playoffs -- is fired, there is little reason it will not happen quickly. if he keeps his job, it is likely that giants ownership will require him to shuffle his assistants, a reasonable cause for the delay.  coughlin's contract runs through next season. if he returns, he will probably receive a short extension, mostly to help hire assistants who otherwise may be hesitant to work for a coach in the final year of a contract.  with each passing hour, the spotlight on the giants burns brighter, as fans and reporters look for the proverbial puffs of smoke to rise from the team's offices on the north side of giants stadium.  none of it can be easy on mara, a soft-spoken 52-year-old with an aversion to attention. just a couple of months ago, he had no reason to anticipate these decisions. the giants were 6-2, and accorsi's replacement seemed likely to come from within. by all signs, the franchise was moving in the proper direction.  mara sat in his office during an october interview with the new york times. it took 10 months after his father died for mara to bring himself to move in. he left everything virtually unchanged.  mara joked about his credentials for his job. he picked the right parents, he said, and had the ''good sense to be born first.'' he said he guided the giants largely by considering what his father would do.  ''i always think that way,'' mara said. ''i agreed on most things, but not necessarily everything. it is a little bit of a different age that we're in right now, but i'm always conscious of what his standards were.''  it is probably why mara is reluctant to keep coughlin twisting in uncertainty until a general manager is found. but the decision on coughlin is complex on many levels, not the least of which was wellington mara's approval in the decision to hire coughlin three years ago.  it was john mara and accorsi, not wellington mara, who interviewed coughlin then, after the team fired jim fassel. they also interviewed the n.f.l. assistants charlie weis, romeo crennel and lovie smith, who went on to become head coaches elsewhere.  ''there were certain decisions you didn't dare make unless you consulted him first and got his o.k.,'' john mara said of his father, in october. ''the hiring of tom coughlin was one of those.''  but john mara is being forced to make different decisions than his father faced. he already helped negotiate the deals that will culminate in a $1.2 billion stadium that the giants and jets will share at the meadowlands, a stadium his father did not think was entirely necessary. he knows that the tenures of coaches and players are growing shorter, in line with the attention span of fans.  ''he was always a big proponent of re-signing our own players,'' mara said. ''we differed on that. there were certain players i felt over the years that he could have let go, and he, emotionally, never wanted to do that.''  john mara is haunted by the memory of seeing his father hanged in effigy by unhappy fans at giants stadium in the lean seasons of the 1970s. it has spooked him from the spotlight and driven him to build a champion.  yet john mara has never been the focus of public criticism. this season, coughlin was the popular target of animosity when things soured. accorsi has also taken some hits for the team he assembled.  mara has avoided that. it is about to change. he has spent most of the past two days in his office, talking to the tisches, figuring out his options, deciding what to do. the mara and tisch families each hold one vote on significant decisions, and it is unclear what would happen if they disagreed.  outside giants stadium, there does not seem to be a majority opinion. no matter what decisions are made, criticism will come from many directions. and it will increase if they appear to be the wrong ones in the next few months or years.  from the office of his father, john mara is about to begin shaping his legacy.  pro football  