where's the party? in emerging markets   bond investors seldom find themselves reveling in fancy, stocklike gains. but those who have been buying the debt of brazil, russia and other emerging-market countries have been having just such a celebration.  the several dozen mutual funds specializing in emerging-market bonds -- corporate as well as government -- led all categories of fixed-income investment in 2006, climbing 11.1 percent, according to morningstar, the fund tracker.  in fact, the bonds of this diverse group of countries, once shunned as prone to default or in need of rescue, generated one of the fattest returns of any class of financial assets, including emerging-market stocks and the standard & poor's 500-stock index, over the last 10 years, according to emerging portfolio fund research in boston.  ''it's been an extraordinary run,'' one reflecting a ''perfect good storm,'' said mark venezia, portfolio manager of the eaton vance strategic income fund and eaton vance's director of global fixed-income.  the rebound began from a very low point, after mexico's devaluation of the peso in december 1994; the currency plunged 50 percent in a week. the resulting contagion set off a crisis of confidence in argentina that accelerated a restructuring of that country's banking system. there were other scares, involving asian countries in 1997 and russia the next year, but eventually many governments restored order to the currency markets, introducing fiscal discipline and allowing their crisis-prone fixed currencies to float.  more recently, booming world demand for commodities -- an example being china's explosive growth producing a bonanza for chile, which supplies copper -- and low united states interest rates have added to the appeal of emerging-market debt.  traditionally, said brad durham, a managing director at emerging portfolio fund research, which specializes in investment flows, ''you're supposed to sell emerging markets when the fed starts raising rates,'' which it did in mid-2004. but these markets ''soldiered through,'' he said, ''primarily due to the fact that they've become a lot less vulnerable to the growth cycle.''  michael j. conelius, portfolio manager of the t. rowe price emerging markets bond fund in baltimore, concurred. ''emerging countries have come a long way,'' he said. ''the main things, in terms of fiscal discipline and paying down debt, are all still in place, so the average credit quality is getting better.''  ratings upgrades outnumbered downgrades in 2006 by about 10 to 1 for the third consecutive year, mr. conelius added. the upgrades reflect the widely shared view that emerging markets are in their best fiscal shape since before this asset class got off the ground in the mid-1980s.  ''a lot of governments and policy makers are acting much more responsibly,'' mr. durham said.  as a result, the broad market for emerging-market debt has developed to the point that a crisis in thailand last month -- the government introduced, then eased, controls on capital to prevent speculative inflows from pushing the baht too high -- caused scarcely a ripple. neither did a disputed election in mexico or a restructuring by belize, in the only default of the year.  investors poured a record $6.2 billion into emerging-market debt last year, compared with $5.7 billion in 2005, $1.9 billion in 2004, $3.1 billion in 2003 and $672 million in 2002, according to mr. durham's firm. from 1995 through 2001, they reduced such holdings.  prices are now high enough that many specialists have become cautious, particularly about debt denominated in dollars. average yields on the j. p. morgan emerging markets bond index plus (embi+) were driven down at year-end to 1.66 percentage points above those of united states treasury securities, with brazil's risk premium slipping just before christmas to less than two points for the first time on record.  ''the downside from an investor's standpoint is that the bonds are more and more expensive,'' mr. conelius said. ''so the first thing i would say to a potential investor is that while the countries are in better shape, don't expect the strong returns that you've had or you've seen in the past several years because that's just not sustainable. they're safer credits and they're going to perform more like safer credits, so just reset your expectations in terms of return.''  mr. venezia of eaton vance, though acknowledging that prices could rise for another year or so, put it this way: ''there's an asymmetry of risk here. you can make a little but you can lose a lot.'' emerging markets are so flush that governments have had the wherewithal to buy back external bonds and to float new loans at home.  ''they're able to shift their borrowing to the domestic market and their own currency,'' said curtis mewbourne, co-head of emerging market business at pimco, the bond specialist based in newport beach, calif.  indeed, local market debt -- as opposed to sovereign debt -- is the fastest-growing part of the business and includes issues of corporations in emerging markets. ''it's probably overtaken dollar debt as the preferred form of issuance of emerging-market countries,'' mr. venezia said.  the appeal is clear. ''you're getting higher interest rates in many of these countries, and you're getting diversification away from the u.s. dollar,'' which has been weak lately, mr. mewbourne said. this is quite a change for securities that only a decade ago could scarcely be marketed.  in fact, the payoff in many cases is high enough to rival that of the stock market.  ''in some ways this is an equity substitute almost, a kind of safe way to move some money offshore and get a higher return,'' mr. mewbourne said. most american investors, he contended, are overconcentrated in their own country's securities and could benefit from more foreign exposure.  experts say the only practical way for ordinary or even well-heeled individuals to gain access to the market for emerging debt, which can involve complex administrative and tax issues, is through mutual funds. but there is a wide variety of fund options. pimco, for example offers a somewhat risky local-market fund that returned about 12 percent last year, a traditional dollar-denominated sovereign fund that returned about 10 percent and a low-risk diversified global income fund that returned about 8 percent. the income fund contains mainly corporate bonds, with only a portion from emerging markets.  this points to the need for prospective investors to choose judiciously. ''you can't just pick out a mutual fund that has the words 'emerging market fixed income' in it,'' mr. venezia cautioned. ''you have to really study them'' to see what the portfolios include.  and some emerging-market securities remain highly speculative. ''the average fund has large weightings in some pretty scary markets,'' mr. durham said: for example, close to 8 percent in argentina, which had a return of 51 percent last year, triple that of any other component of the embi+, but had a huge default in 2001.  and at least two managers -- t. rowe price and franklin templeton -- are making a sizable bet on, of all places, iraq.  ''this is a huge long-term opportunity,'' mr. conelius said, acknowledging that his is a decidedly contrarian view. ''there is such untapped economic potential and wealth in that country and things could hardly get worse.'' because of previous default, debt is low and can be serviced each year with just two days of oil exports, mr. conelius figures. the market premium for iraq's debt is about 5.25 percentage points above that of united states treasuries, making it a seemingly better credit than the debt of ecuador, which has said it wants to restructure.  but that is still far too risky for mr. durham. he noted that iraq's debt accounted for about one-half of 1 percent of average emerging-market bond fund portfolios, and called even that ''a massive overweight.''  mutual funds report  