seahawks don't want good luck to run out   pete hunter was working as a loan officer 10 days ago, which is somewhat appropriate, considering that his new employer seems to be playing on borrowed time.  the seattle seahawks made the playoffs this season with a 9-7 record, were host to a first-round game by winning the worst division in the n.f.l., and advanced to the second round because dallas cowboys quarterback tony romo came down with an untimely case of butterfingers.  if the seahawks were still in the american football conference, they would probably not have made the playoffs. if they were in any division other than the national football conference west, they would not have earned a home playoff game. and if romo had not dropped the snap on a potentially game-winning field-goal attempt saturday night, they would probably be cleaning out their lockers.  no one is confusing this seattle team for the version that went to the super bowl last season. back then, the seahawks were all about their two offensive stars: quarterback matt hasselbeck and tailback shaun alexander. now they are summed up by a secondary that has been together for about a week.  seattle has signed three defensive backs since christmas, none of whom were playing football.  hunter was calculating monthly payments at a mortgage company in dallas. john howell was guiding elk-hunting tours in the great plains. rich gardner was pumping iron at a gym in nashville.  terrell owens, the cowboys' celebrated receiver, referred to the new seahawks defensive backs as ''guys off the street.''  hunter, whose home in texas overlooks the cowboys' practice field, proved to be a worthy adversary. he made his first tackle in more than two years saturday night. then he pounced on a fumble. finally, he went up with owens to break up a desperation pass and seal a 21-20 victory.  when the ball hit the turf, hunter became nearly as emotional as owens and romo, but for a much different reason.  ''many days i wanted to give up,'' he said. ''many days i questioned myself. 'why am i still running? why am i still lifting weights? why am i putting my body through this? no one is going to call.' but the minute i say i'm going to give up, i get the call. i'm in the playoffs, thrown in the fire. you can't write the story any better.''  if seattle manages to slip through another round of the playoffs, hunter, howell and gardner could become cult heroes. but the odds are stacked against them, mainly because the seahawks have been fighting injuries and inconsistency since august.  seattle's biggest strength is its home-field advantage, and even that will be missing this week.  the seahawks are headed to chicago, and they cannot count on rainstorms, false-start penalties or bungled holds.  when alexander offered his analysis of the cowboys' botched field goal saturday night, he gave all the credit to the screaming masses at qwest field. he basically handed them the game ball.  ''the 12th man knocked it down,'' he said.  it was as good an explanation as any. romo has always been known as an excellent holder. the snap was fine. the field goal did not have to be rushed. it was a 19-yarder, no longer than an extra point. place-kicker martin gramatica had made field goals from 50 yards and 29 yards in the game.  but romo bobbled the ball, tried to run and was caught around the cleats by seattle's jordan babineaux, a safety who has been playing cornerback because of injuries to his teammates.  romo fell a yard short of a first down, 2 yards short of a touchdown.  ''desperate measures call for desperate times,'' babineaux said.  everyone sounded a little mixed up. owens, who is famous for undermining his quarterbacks, immediately ran to comfort romo. he explained that they would be back in this position again, perhaps next season, fighting for a championship.  just like that, owens answered one key question about the future. he wants to return to dallas, whether or not the cowboys want him. owens played much of this season with an injured hand, dropped 15 passes and brought all of his usual theatrics to the locker room.  bill parcells, the cowboys' coach, was less open than owens about next season. parcells, who seems to mull retirement annually, did not want to list his pros and cons in a news conference.  ''i'm not giving a state of the union right now,'' he said.  while parcells and owens must soon start meeting with agents and talking about contracts, hunter must reschedule a test he was supposed to take to become a united states immigration agent.  hunter scheduled the test when he was working as a loan officer and had weekends off. now, he must explain to the government that something has come up. he cannot patrol the border just yet. he is still needed in seattle.  pro football  