bloomberg picks pataki official to run city's welfare agency   mayor michael r. bloomberg appointed former gov. george e. pataki's social services commissioner yesterday to run the city's enormous welfare agency, naming robert doar, who is considered conservative on some welfare issues.  mr. doar, who had been commissioner of the state office of temporary and disability assistance, which supervises local social service agencies, will replace verna eggleston, the long-serving commissioner of the city's human resources administration, who announced her resignation at the end of last year.  gov. eliot spitzer picked ms. eggleston's chief of staff, david a. hansell, for mr. doar's job a few days before christmas.  in announcing mr. doar's appointment, mr. bloomberg said he was choosing someone who could ''hit the ground running'' at a critical time for the agency, which serves three million new yorkers and has been charged with carrying out elements of mr. bloomberg's high-profile antipoverty program.  ''he knows that the band-aid-style policies that trapped families and adults in a cycle of dependency won't work,'' mr. bloomberg said.  mr. doar's thinking appears to be in line with the administration's emphasis on work as the key to alleviating poverty.  asked what his main priority would be, mr. doar told reporters that after many years of focusing on moving people off welfare, the next challenge lay in making sure that those people and others in low-wage jobs ''have access to the whole array of supports for low-income working people that are available to them, whether it's food stamps or health care coverage or child care subsidies or the earned-income tax credit.''  outside of the bloomberg administration, news of the appointment met with praise, and some advocates described mr. doar as competent, dedicated and straightforward, even if they did not always agree with him.  ''it shows that the mayor is taking this seriously, that he's appointed a serious person,'' said joel berg, executive director of the new york city coalition against hunger.  mr. berg criticized mr. doar for supporting a proposal under mr. pataki, ultimately rejected by the legislature, to penalize entire families, including children, when the adults fail to comply with public assistance program rules. but mr. berg credited mr. doar with increasing statewide access to food stamps and with working to find common ground with advocates.  city councilman bill de blasio, who has worked closely with the human resources administration as chairman of the general welfare committee, said, ''from what i've seen, he's a good choice and certainly understands the relationship with the state, which is crucial.'' he added that the city's relationship with the state would become even more important in dealing with new federal welfare regulations and diminishing budgets.  calling mr. doar knowledgeable and someone who took a ''healthy approach to the truth,'' mr. de blasio said, ''he actually answered questions at hearings, he didn't pull any punches, and i saw some actual results because he was a key player in streamlining access to food stamps.''  mr. doar, 45, has worked in both the public and private sectors. a proponent of focusing on fathers as well as mothers in welfare reform, he served in a number of positions at the state social services agency before becoming its commissioner in 2003, including a job overseeing its child support enforcement unit. his father, john, came to prominence as an assistant attorney general in the justice department during the civil rights movement of the 1960s and was counsel to the house judiciary committee investigating watergate.  