free taxi new year's eve? sure, if you could find one   a few westchester revelers found that finding a free taxi ride on new year's eve was harder than, well, finding a taxi on new year's eve.  heineken usa's fourth annual safe call program in white plains got mixed reviews last weekend. twenty-five city bars and restaurants signed on to provide information and vouchers to patrons, fliers on the program were handed out at the train station and heineken was joined by the mayor in pushing the program.  but for some people, finding a free taxi was much more complicated than the marketing campaign suggested. last year about 30 people took the free rides; this year, only two taxi drivers had turned in vouchers as of thursday. and heineken said it fielded at least two complaints last week from people who tried to use the taxi vouchers but could not.  ''it was more challenging than we would like it to have been,'' said tamara moore, the director of communications for heineken usa.  ana picciano, 28, said she and her husband, chris, left their 18-month-old twin daughters with a sitter at home in yonkers to celebrate a rare new year's eve out. but when she called a toll-free number for the taxi program around 1 a.m., she was disconnected five times.  none of the three staff members she questioned at the nightclub coughlan's knew what she was talking about, and, she said, the closest police officers were less than helpful.  it took her 30 minutes to hail a cab for the $40 ride home.  one problem, ms. moore said, was that coughlan's did not participate in the program. the owner, daniel j. coughlan, said his staff knew about the program and thought the cab companies had the voucher forms.  brian mcgroarty, the manager of the james joyce public house on mamaroneck avenue, said his bartenders gave out at least 15 free taxi vouchers sunday night.  ''it worked out very well for us,'' mr. mcgroarty said. ''we got rid of all of our vouchers and had no complaints.''  don tighe, owner of tighe's tavern on martine avenue, agreed.  ''some people used them,'' he said. ''it's a good idea. it's too bad it isn't every weekend.''  erin duggan  the week  