stadium deal has created unlikely team in giants and jets   in 1965, the giants had the first pick of the national football league draft. with it, they selected tucker frederickson, a blond, square-jawed and decorous running back from auburn university in alabama, an all-american in every way.  that same day, the rival american football league conducted its draft, and with their first pick the jets turned to the university of alabama and chose joe namath, a dark-haired rogue with a world of talent, a dossier of demerits and an impish grin.  today, the giants and the jets take the field for playoff games on the same day, another chapter in their more than 40-year symbiotic relationship as contemporaries in the world's biggest sports marketplace.  they are two very different sports franchises, led by men, on the field and in the owners' boxes, with contrasting management styles. they are entities with distinct cultures -- the giants more entrenched and the jets more flamboyant. generally, they are followed by fan bases dissimilar in nature.  yet they are habitually linked and should be for generations to come. while the giants and the jets have shared a publicly owned stadium since 1984, they are in the final stages of completing the plans to privately finance a $1.3 billion joint stadium in the meadowlands sports complex that would open in 2010. the once bitter rivals of the 1960s and 1970s are close business partners, even as they approach that collaboration from disparate vantage points.  the giants co-owner john mara, who remembers when a 1969 giants-jets preseason game brought scores of fistfights in the stands and vicious hitting on the field, said the earliest talks about the new stadium also resulted in tense, heated meetings between the teams.  ''but we've worked it out,'' mara said. ''the relationship is better than it ever has been.''  the jets' owner, woody johnson, agreed, though he conceded that the teams remained unswerving competitors.  ''you have a battle for the hearts and minds of the people in the community,'' johnson said friday in a telephone interview. ''that's a natural rivalry and that's what the fans want. it is the natural state of two businesses in the same town. but we've come together for the new stadium.''  the manifest differences between the franchises, however, do not seem to have been obscured by the unprecedented agreement to construct one stadium for two n.f.l. teams.  ''their ambitions may have merged to build a stadium, but their identities are going to continue to diverge more and more,'' said marc ganis, a sports industry consultant based in chicago who advises n.f.l. teams. ''it is part of their makeup to be at odds. the giants are more traditional and the jets more futuristic. look at their recent coaching choices. the jets were comfortable hiring a 34-year-old with no head-coaching experience in eric mangini. with tom coughlin, the giants went for the older, experienced coach who was known as a disciplinarian.  ''it does not mean one is going to be more successful on or off the field. but it is a reflection of their disparities.''  giants and jets officials responded to such an appraisal, not surprisingly, with differing opinions.  ''our history is rooted in 1969, namath and the super bowl,'' said jay cross, the jets' president. ''we're a young, scrappy broadway team that wants to be seen as an energetic, youthful and progressive franchise. we don't do that in contrast to someone else.''  cross added, ''we recognize the giants are the senior team.''  mara, whose grandfather bought the giants for $500 in 1925, disagreed with the perception that his team's philosophy was staid or dated.  ''we are certainly traditional,'' mara said, ''but building a $1.3 billion stadium is not the mark of a staid or conservative organization. the 2004 trade for eli manning is hardly the mark of an organization that is stodgy or not willing to take a risk. we have been, for better or worse, one of the most aggressive teams in the free-agent market. we have done some pretty bold things.  ''yes, we're not going to have vertical stripes on our uniforms, have cheerleaders on the field or be selling a lingerie calendar on our web site like some teams, but there are other ways to be bold and aggressive.''  new jersey officials involved in the stadium talks in the past two years said they saw clear differences in the approaches of giants and jets management.  for starters, since the giants had opened talks with the state and designed a new meadowlands stadium as the jets were busy with their failed five-year struggle to put a stadium on manhattan's west side, the jets' entry into the new jersey negotiations in mid-2005 was not smooth.  the giants were not receptive to jets proposals that the new new jersey stadium be made more neutral for each team. the biggest sticking point was the inclusion of giants offices and practice fields attached to the stadium.  paul fader, the lawyer who helped negotiate the stadium deal for richard j. codey, then the acting governor, said: ''the giants said: 'we never tried to leave; we're the ones who committed to stay here. why should we have to make any concessions?' there were some tough sessions. it was edgy. nothing unprofessional was said, but the conversation was pointed.''  the jets stood their ground. on friday, johnson said, ''the stadium had to look and feel neutral.''  the jets, feeling like second-class citizens at giants stadium for the past 22 years, knew the negative impact a large giants practice facility would have on jets fans. eventually, the giants agreed to move their practice facilities to a remote location in the sports complex. the jets will practice and have their offices several miles away in florham park, n.j.  ''you saw many other differences in how the giants and jets went about things,'' said george r. zoffinger, the chief executive of the new jersey sports and exposition authority, which oversees the meadowlands complex. ''the giants truly cared about the football aspects of the stadium. the jets had a broader view of where they could make money off the ancillary uses of the facility. they had the ideas for retail, real estate, signage, sponsorships.''  carl goldberg, chairman of the sports authority, said: ''the jets came to the table with a lot of work already done on the technology of how to make the most of a flexible modern stadium. at the same time, there had to be room for appreciating what the giants meant to the history of this facility. giants stadium would not exist for either team these last few decades without wellington mara.''  wellington mara, john's father, was among the first sports franchise owners to relocate his team to a suburb when his giants moved from yankee stadium in 1973 and settled in northern new jersey in 1976.  fader said he sometimes felt the giants-jets meetings unfolded along stereotypical lines.  ''people say the typical giants fan wears plain pants and comes from connecticut,'' said fader, who called himself a giants fan. ''the typical jets fan comes from long island and wears a t-shirt. well, the giants came to meetings in suits and were more staid. i felt the jets had a younger presence and were a little more informal. there were very different styles.  ''the jets, for example, initially wanted a 90,000-seat stadium. that's a big, raucous place. the giants said the extra 10,000 seats would make the stadium too high and that the extra 10,000 seats would be too far from the field and not be a good seat anyway. both were thinking of their fans, just differently.''  the new stadium is expected to have 68,000 general admission seats, 9,000 premium seats, 200 luxury suites for 5,000 fans, as well as 100,000 square feet of conference space, a football hall of fame, football-themed restaurants and 40,000 square feet for giants and jets team stores. an additional 500,000 square feet of retail, restaurant and broadcast facilities is planned, along with several tailgate zones.  the new stadium will accomplish something else for the old new york football rivals: it may make them the most valuable franchises in the united states.  ''both teams will easily be worth more than $1.2 billion,'' said mike ozanian, a senior editor at forbes magazine, which estimated the giants' current worth at $890 million and the jets' at $876 million. ''that could put the giants and jets atop the n.f.l. what they'll be able to get for corporate sponsorships at that new stadium will blow people away.''  little wonder the relationship between the giants and the jets is more amiable than ever.  when the giants play today at philadelphia and the jets visit new england, it will be only the second time the giants and the jets have played on the same day in the n.f.l. postseason. in late december 1981, the giants upset the eagles in philadelphia, 27-21. the jets lost to buffalo, 31-27, at home in shea stadium.  neither mara nor johnson said he would be rooting for his neighborhood rival today. they did not say they were rooting against the other, either. they had a telephone conversation friday during which they exchanged good-luck wishes.  the teams are scheduled to play each other next season. it is clear that remnants of the competitive tensions of the 1960s have not entirely dissipated.  ''now, next season, if both teams are playing well,'' mara said, ''that will be a big game.''  pro football  correction:  january 16, 2007, tuesday  the credit for a picture in some copies of sportssunday on jan. 7 with an article about a collaboration between the giants and the jets on a new stadium misspelled the photographer's surname. the picture of john mara, the giants co-owner, was by evan pinkus, not pincus.  