clip-ons are back. fondling allowed.   there was a time when young women wanted to be their mothers. now it appears they want to be their grandmothers. the latest evidence? the resurrection of grandma's favorite touch: great big button earrings.  de rigueur from the 1920s to the '60s, bigger-than-a-silver-dollar earrings have seldom been seen in recent decades except on newscasters, southern belles and new england aristocrats over 70. today young designers like lisa salzer of lulu frost, dana lorenz of fenton and alexis bittar are taking cues from fulco di verdura -- who designed attention-grabbing clip-ons for coco chanel, babe paley and jacqueline kennedy -- and kenneth jay lane, the master of big faux gems.  ''when i first started designing in the early '60s, the women i knew didn't have pierced ears,'' mr. lane said. ''the ones who did were considered gypsies. then all girls became gypsies.''  now girls want as many options as the market (or the jewelry box) will bear. ''earrings are still the most important thing a woman puts on,'' said ward landrigan, who now owns verdura and was once director of the new york jewelry department at sotheby's. ''it used to be that going out without them was like being naked.''  but sudden moves will shake clip-ons free. so to wear them, you must assume a first-lady-like poise. hold your chin up and keep your movements serene. the clip-on is also a good prop, more attractive than a cigarette or cellphone. tilting your head to the side, inching a clip off your ear as you answer the phone, is a classicly flirtatious act, like dabbing wrists with perfume or slipping into high heels. it's more lauren bacall than paris hilton (though the time-honored joan collins-ish gesture of stormily removing both clips in anticipation of an all-out catfight has its allure, too).  to carry off these baubles in style, mr. landrigan has this advice: ''pull your lobe from the edge away from your face and clip the earring where the lobe meets the jaw line. this makes your cheekbones do most of the work, taking weight off the lobe so it won't stretch.''  and mr. lane shares an old girl scout trick: ''take a dab of spirit gum or eyelash glue and dot the back of the ear clip with it. then you can dance, do somersaults, whatever you please.''  fine points  