a playwright's horror show of cultural and racial identity   thomas bradshaw, the button-pushing writer of the new drama ''purity,'' has become something of a downtown darling. time out new york called him a playwright to watch; paper magazine named him one of the most beautiful people of 2006; and margo jefferson in this newspaper hailed his last play, ''prophet,'' as a ''satire with a vengeance.''  mr. bradshaw has acquired such accolades, at least in part, because of his reputation as a provocateur not afraid of being politically incorrect (one of his plays is titled ''strom thurmond is not a racist'') or confronting an audience. his ''purity'' lures you with a goofy, comic touch, and he and the game, energetic cast can make your laughs catch in your throat. the play can also make you cringe with scenes like the onstage rape of a young girl. but in shaking his audience to attention, he seems to forget what, if anything, he wanted to say in the first place.  ''purity'' plows ground similar to the territory explored in spike lee's 2000 film, ''bamboozled,'' exposing the self-hatred and racism of upper-middle-class african-americans who will sacrifice anything to enter white society. vernon (an intentionally wooden james scruggs), a columbia university literature professor with a cocaine habit, is a prime example. he despises his new colleague, carl (albert christmas), an african-american studies professor, for having the temerity to call ''the autobiography of malcolm x'' his favorite book, for wearing kente cloth and for talking about the history of slavery. in one sequence vernon imagines himself a slave owner sipping mint juleps and whipping carl.  mr. bradshaw is broaching the subject of black-on-black racism, but instead of making audiences confront their own prejudices, he lets them off the hook by turning vernon into a joke and a moral monster. early in the play, vernon and his white colleague dave (daniel manley, who has an appealing chris farley quality) take a trip to ecuador and pay a man to let them ''rent'' his 9-year-old daughter.  another playwright would allude to what follows. not mr. bradshaw. the men take turns raping the girl, whose attack is staged in slow and graphic detail by yehuda duenyas. it's a brutal scene that doesn't make you think so much as make you stop thinking.  vernon seems so ridiculously repugnant that the whole play comes off as more of an ugly fantasy than a cutting satire. instead of inviting his audience to identify with vernon before showing his true colors -- which is what, say, neil labute would do -- mr. bradshaw simplifies the moral landscape and turns ''purity'' into another horror show.  ''purity'' continues through jan. 23 at performance space 122, 150 first avenue, at ninth street, east village; (212) 352-3101 or ps122.org.  theater review  