mall reit warns that it might be forced into bankruptcy   the mills corporation, the real estate investment trust known for off-price malls in outlying suburbs that combine entertainment and shopping, said yesterday that it was running out of cash and might be forced to seek bankruptcy protection, putting its shareholders at risk of losing their investment.  in a filing with the securities and exchange commission, the company, based in chevy chase, md., also disclosed for the first time that an internal audit had found ''errors caused by possible misconduct by former accounting and asset management personnel of the company.''  mills, which owns all or part of 38 malls across the country, including sawgrass mills near fort lauderdale, fla., and potomac mills in prince william county, va., has replaced its entire management team during the last year.  wall street reacted sharply to the latest disclosures. mills shares declined 22 percent, to $14.82.  mills faces a march 31 deadline, postponed from dec. 31, to repay a $1 billion loan from goldman sachs. the deadline could be put off again, but analysts said another extension would be costly to shareholders.  mills executives did not respond to a request for comment.  mills's problems have been mounting for the last two years as the company tried to expand rapidly by starting projects in europe and buying traditional malls, like the huge del amo fashion center in the los angeles suburb of torrance and the southdale center in the minneapolis suburb of edina.  but the biggest drain of all was meadowlands xanadu, the 2.2-million-square-foot shopping-and-entertainment center being built on 104 leased acres surrounding the continental arena in northern new jersey. in november, mills transferred control over the project to a joint venture led by colony capital, a private investment firm based in los angeles, and said it was writing off $635 million to $655 million in losses.  barry vinocur, editor of realty stock review, a newsletter, said mills stockholders lost $10 a share on meadowlands xanadu alone.  although the company did not identify those suspected of engaging in misconduct, benjamin yang, an analyst at green street advisors, a newport beach, calif., research company, pointed out that the filing provided insight into the corporate culture at mills. the internal audit, prepared with the assistance of the law firm of gibson, dunn & crutcher, said that the ''overall culture and 'tone at the top' were heavily focused on meeting external and internal financial expectations'' and that adequate controls did not exist.  according to the filing, the number of errors that may be characterized as misconduct was ''relatively small.'' but if fraud was committed, mills's value would drop even further because of shareholder lawsuits, mr. yang said. ''you've got to believe there are some lawyers who are salivating over this,'' he said.  mills has options aside from seeking bankruptcy protection, including selling individual assets or the company as a whole. but mills, which recently sold its european assets, has not filed financial statements since the third quarter of 2005, making it impossible to calculate how much it is worth, mr. vinocur said.  with the departure of so many executives, it is likely that the malls themselves are not performing as well as they used to, mr. yang said. ''you have to keep these properties leased up,'' he said.  among the executives who left was the man considered the guiding spirit behind its creative approach to shopping malls, laurence c. siegel, who had been chief executive. but mr. siegel, who remains on the mills board, is still involved in meadowlands xanadu. a spokeswoman for the project described his role as ''the senior executive in charge of day-to-day development.''  officials of the new jersey sports and exposition authority, which is overseeing the project, said yesterday that they were untroubled by the disclosure about possible misconduct at mills. ''it doesn't really affect us at all,'' said george r. zoffinger, the president of the authority.  