russia considers alternatives to the oil pipeline through belarus   an unyielding president vladimir v. putin on tuesday raised the possibility of diverting oil transit routes away from belarus, a day after moscow cut off pipeline deliveries of crude oil headed to customers in eastern and central europe through the country.  such a change, which would be years in the making, would cut belarus out of any role in the transshipment of oil to europe without offering the customers any immediate assurance that their supplies were reliable.  the two-day cutoff has affected supplies to ukraine, germany, poland, hungary, the czech republic and slovakia. it is the second stoppage of russian energy supplies to european countries since last winter, when natural gas shipments were shut down briefly during a gas pricing dispute between russia and ukraine.  in a meeting with his cabinet ministers, mr. putin also urged the government to discuss with russian companies ''the possibility of scaling down the extraction of oil, given problems in transiting crude across belarus.'' that indicated that russia might not have sufficient storage for oil that was being produced but not exported.  with the new year, russia began charging belarus $100 per thousand cubic meters of gas, more than double the old rate of $46. it also imposed a duty of $180 a ton on oil that officials said belarus was obtaining at subsidized rates and reselling on world markets. in response, belarus imposed a transshipment fee of $45 a ton on oil going through belarus in the druzhba pipeline to europe.  on monday, officials in moscow accused belarus of siphoning off about 79,000 tons -- roughly half a million barrels -- of russian oil bound for europe, then shut down the pipeline entirely.  normally the 2,500-mile pipeline pumps 1.2 million barrels a day to eastern and central europe, with one arm running to poland and germany and the other to ukraine, hungary, slovakia and the czech republic.  in general terms, mr. putin told his cabinet members to do whatever was necessary to guarantee the interests of russian companies as well as the interests of the countries dependent on russian energy supplies.  he also said the government must continue negotiations with russia's ''belarussian partners,'' but it is unclear when those talks will begin. russian officials have begun formulating their starting positions, but german o. gref, russia's trade minister, told reporters tuesday evening that moscow would start talks only after belarus had lifted transit duties and resumed oil transit.  russia's intransigence irritated european leaders, including chancellor angela merkel of germany, who said it was ''not acceptable'' for energy suppliers to cut off shipments without consultation, and who renewed her call for diversification of supplies.  but few analysts expected the standoff to last more than a few days. ''belarus's reserves of cheap oil will last a few days, a week at most,'' yaroslav romanchuk, an economist in belarus, told the associated press. ''after that, it will have to buy oil taking into account russian export duties.''  in a news conference, the russian industry and energy minister, viktor b. khristenko, said that in time russia would be able to reroute oil around belarus, possibly by increasing the capacity of the baltic pipeline system or hurrying the completion of the east siberia-pacific ocean pipeline. in the short term, he said, russia might have to ship more oil by rail and river. ''if these measures aren't enough, it could be necessary to reduce oil output,'' he said.  