transactions   baseball  american league  detroit tigers--agreed to terms with lhp bobby seay and of timo perez on minor league contracts.  los angeles angels--named bobby magallanes manager of arkansas of the texas league; ever magallanes manager of cedar rapids of the midwest league; tyrone boykin manager of tempe of the arizona league; kernan ronan roving pitching instructor; todd takayoshi roving hitting instructor; and tom gregorio roving catching instructor.  oakland athletics--agreed to terms with inf antonio perez on a one-year contract and inf lou merloni on a minor league contract.  toronto blue jays--promoted bart given to vice president for baseball operations and alex anthopoulos to assistant general manager.  n.b.a.  n.b.a.--promoted peter farnsworth to senior vice president, business development.  detroit pistons--assigned f amir johnson to sioux falls of the nbadl.  los angeles clippers--signed f luke jackson to a 10-day contract.  n.f.l.  jacksonville jaguars--named dirk koetter offensive coordinator and joe decamillis special teams coordinator.  jets--signed de darrell adams, db alfonso hodge, te joe kowalewski, dl matt mcchesney and dl keyonta marshall to reserve-future contracts.  pittsburgh steelers--signed de shaun nua and dt scott paxson to reserve-future contracts.  tampa bay buccaneers--named raheem morris defensive backs coach.  washington redskins--re-signed c ethan albright.  n.h.l.  boston bruins--recalled g hannu toivonen and d jonathan sigalet from providence of the ahl. assigned g philippe sauve to providence.  calgary flames--recalled lw eric godard from omaha of the ahl. assigned rw carsen germyn to omaha.  chicago blackhawks--assigned rw brandon bochenski and c colin fraser to norfolk of the ahl.  edmonton oilers--recalled lw patrick thoresen from wilkes-barre/scranton of the ahl. assigned f jean-francois jacques and f marc pouliot to wilkes-barre/scranton.  rangers--assigned c jarkko immonen to hartford of the ahl.  phoenix coyotes--traded d dennis seidenberg to carolina for c kevyn adams.  st. louis blues--recalled f d.j. king from peoria of the ahl.  college  charlotte--announced sophomore basketball g michael gerrity transferred from pepperdine and will be eligible to play in the  second semester of the 2007-08 season.  drexel--named lisa wambold assistant softball coach.  florida state--named jimbo fisher offensive coordinator.  georgia tech--announced wr calvin johnson will forgo his senior year to enter the nfl draft.  kansas state--announced the resignation of rod cole, strength and conditioning coach, to take the same position at texas a&m.  miami--announced lb jon beason will forgo his senior season to enter the nfl draft.  michigan--announced dt alan branch will forgo his senior year to enter the nfl draft.  oregon state--announced junior men's basketball c c.j. giles will transfer from kansas.  pittsburgh--announced freshman dl mckenzie mathews left the school.  south carolina--signed dave odom, men's basketball coach, to a two-year contract extension through the 2009-10 season.  southern california--announced sophomore wr damian williams transferred from arkansas.  tennessee tech--named john palermo defensive coordinator.  