hidden stories and unsung songs, all for $8   some write every day, others at spare moments. some have braved the sting of rejection. others have squirreled prose away in notebooks they thought the world would never see. all have felt that overpowering impulse to etch on paper the stories that shaped or unhinged their lives, their reveries and their regrets.  ruth obernbreit-glass wanted to set down the story of her father, a jew who fled nazi austria as a young man and appears to have wound up in the arms of a woman named carmen in the ''paradise'' of a farm in the dominican republic, the only country that would take him in. amy ralston seife wanted to concoct a restless suburban wife -- ''shallow, superficial, narcissistic, despicable,'' as she said -- who is threatening to divorce her husband, though ms. seife has had to remind more than a few people that her story is fiction. ruth seldin lived with her twin sister's suicide for 30 years and needed to set that sunday in may on paper. her reminiscence, with passages addressed directly to her dead sister, is called ''defying gravity.''  ''if she had asked,'' she writes of the matter-of-fact morgue clerk, ''i would have said that your misery was a part of you, a second skin, that you emerged from the womb we shared for nine months already wearing it.''  these writers are contributors to a new literary journal hatched in a cheeveresque county better known in literature for its hollow-souled conformity than for its capacity for invention and whimsy. but john cheever flourished here, and cynthia ozick and billy collins, a former poet laureate, flourish here now, and westchester is home as well to hundreds of weekend and weekday writers whose careers, family obligations, twists of destiny or not quite fashionable voices mean they are, in the words of gray's elegy, ''born to blush unseen.''  no longer. the inaugural winter 2007 issue of the westchester review has 188 pages of poems and stories from 45 writers representing 21 towns and villages, and it is now available for $8 at nine county bookshops as well as on amazon.com. the editors hope to turn out one issue a year as a collection of the county's literary gems, or at least those that do not make it into the new yorker.  ''i think people have a lot of unspoken songs in them,'' joann duncan terdiman, the review's publisher, said. ''we're multifaceted human beings. we have a lot inside us that doesn't get tapped.''  when those songs are heard, it is particularly sweet when neighbors do the listening. after all, the journal evolved out of a long-running workshop taught by louise albert in her white plains home. one member is judith naomi fish of white plains, a onetime librarian and teacher.  ''for me, what writing is about is taking something that intrigues me, maybe bothers me, and being able to construct something new around it, something with elements i feel i can have some control over,'' she said. her story, ''philo 205,'' is about a college student who watches two friends being seduced by a casanova of an ethics professor yet holds herself back. it is a reconstruction of an experience at brooklyn college.  several workshop members wanted to gather their writing in a magazine, but not much happened until an entrepreneur, ms. terdiman, a manager of estate sales, lent her spark.  ''writers are very interior people, and they don't always have the skills to go the next step,'' she said.  the founders posted fliers and received almost 300 submissions, including from published writers like kevin pilkington and stephanie kaplan cohen. they raised $5,000 to cover printing 3,000 copies.  one of the more comic entries came from ms. seife, a mother of three who worked on wall street. her bratty narrator, maxine, mangles expressions, saying it takes ''two to tangle'' and longing for ''ben and jeffrey's'' ice cream. as ms. seife said: ''her carelessness with language reflects her carelessness with other people's feelings.''  rod carlson, a vietnam veteran, submitted a story about a hardened former gunnery sergeant from white plains, tom mccabe, who confronts robert mcnamara, the former defense secretary, as he is signing books in a bookstore. the veterans in his story suffer from flashbacks to battles they fought in.  ''flashbacks aren't dreams or nightmares,'' mr. carlson writes. ''in a flashback you are really there. you feel it, taste it, see it, hear it, the rounds and explosions, the yells and the screams.''  ms. obernbreit-glass, a former hospital art therapist, said the key to unlocking her father's story came when she discovered love letters in spanish after his death. taking a spanish course allowed her to translate the letters, and she learned there had been a carmen in her father's life. hence ''paradise 1943.''  ''when you write about sex, it's a good way to start something -- that gets people's attention,'' she said.  spoken like a seasoned craftsman.  e-mail: joeberg@nytimes.com  