will this bull ever retire?   if 2006 proved anything, it's that aging bull markets don't have to die simply because they're old, or that they must quietly fade away.  given enough of a dose of economic growth, corporate profits and cheap capital, a bull market that's more than four years old -- as this one is -- can still rage on like a young buck.  that was certainly what mutual fund investors discovered last year. emboldened by an economy that proved resilient in the face of federal reserve interest-rate increases, high oil prices and a cooling housing market, the average general domestic stock fund gained 12.8 percent last year.  among all stock funds that invest in domestic equities, including single-sector portfolios, the average gain was even better: 13.4 percent, according to morningstar, the mutual fund tracker.  to be sure, this was shy of the return of 15.8 percent for the standard & poor's 500-index of blue-chip stocks, which had its best year since 2003. but it was a surprising improvement from 2005, when domestic stock funds gained 7.7 percent, on average, and looked to be tiring.  many people on wall street say the market's momentum could last well into this year. and in at least one respect, history is on the market's side. since 1945, the s.& p. 500 has never declined in the third year of a presidential term, according to sam stovall, chief investment strategist at s.& p. and the average gain for equities during these years has been 18 percent.  as has been the case throughout this decade, the equity markets caught a much-needed second wind in the fourth quarter, which drove the dow jones industrial average and the russell 2000 index of small stocks to record levels late last year.  according to morningstar, the average domestic stock fund surged 6.9 percent in the quarter, marking the sixth consecutive year-end rally for stocks.  what propelled stock prices higher this time? for starters, data released late in the year ''put to rest all the extraneous worries about the economy,'' said james swanson, chief investment strategist at mfs investment management in boston.  in the spring, concerns that the federal reserve may have done too good of a job of slowing the economy threatened to tame the bull market. in fact, a growing number of economists began to worry about the possibility of a recession on the horizon.  as a result, stocks ran into a proverbial wall of worry in the spring and early summer. from may 5 to june 13, the s.& p. 500 slumped 7.7 percent, its worst slide since the bear market earlier this decade. for the entire second quarter, the average domestic stock fund lost 2.8 percent.  but as it turned out, the economy -- and consumers, for that matter -- proved stronger than expected. moreover, oil prices stabilized and the fed all but said that it was done raising short-term interest rates for now.  ''once investors were no longer worried about recession, they were willing to jump back on the risk train,'' said thomas w. mcdowell, chief executive and chief investment officer at rice hall james, an investment management firm in san diego.  he's not kidding. in the fourth quarter, investors, whom many analysts thought would embrace relatively conservative assets like blue-chip domestic stocks, went back to their speculative ways.  and they were rewarded handsomely for their risk taking.  within the fixed-income world, for example, the average emerging-market bond fund rose 4.9 percent in the fourth quarter and 11.1 percent for the year. high-yield bond funds did nearly as well, posting quarterly gains of 4.2 percent and annual returns of 10.3 percent. by comparison, the average bond fund that invests in long-term debt issued by the united states government rose just 0.1 percent in the quarter and 0.6 percent for the year.  the picture was much the same in the equity markets.  the average diversified emerging-market stock fund, for example, soared 17.4 percent in the quarter and finished the year up 32.6 percent, according to morningstar. the best-performing fund category was latin american stock portfolios, which posted gains of 21.5 percent for the quarter and 45.2 percent for 2006.  on the domestic front, many of the same sectors that have been leading the markets in recent years dominated again in 2006. precious-metals funds, for instance, rallied 32.2 percent for the year and are now up 33.7 percent, annualized, over the last five years. real estate and utilities portfolios also soared, posting average gains last year of 34 percent and 25.5 percent, respectively. and thanks in part to the recent wave of mergers and acquisitions, financial sector funds rose 16.4 percent, on average.  despite predictions that this would be the year when large-cap domestic stock funds returned to dominance, small-cap stock funds again led the domestic markets among general domestic stock funds.  according to morningstar, the average small-cap growth fund advanced 11.1 percent last year, versus 7.3 percent for the average large-cap growth portfolio. and while large-cap value funds outperformed their small-cap counterparts for the full year, they trailed small-cap value funds in the fourth quarter.  ''this appetite for risk has me a little worried,'' mr. swanson said. he asserted that investors aren't simply expecting a so-called soft landing in the economy -- in other words, the avoidance of a recession. ''the market is bracing for the plane to circle and take off again -- and i think that's too optimistic,'' he said.  another reason that speculative investments are doing so well is that despite 17 interest-rate increases since june 2004, ample liquidity continues to slosh around the global financial markets.  ''right now, there's still too much money chasing too few financial assets,'' said stuart a. schweitzer, global markets strategist at j. p. morgan asset and wealth management.  james w. paulsen, chief investment strategist at wells capital management in minneapolis, agreed. ''this is the only time in postwar history where a recovery has taken place without any rise in long-term borrowing costs,'' he said.  he noted that yields on 10-year treasury notes were virtually unchanged from june 2004, when the fed began its tightening cycle in an effort to slow the economy and tame inflation.  until this changes, mr. paulsen argues that the markets will continue to be led by small-cap stocks that are economically cyclical.  he is in the minority. a vast majority of money managers and market strategists are banking that investors will regain interest in large-cap stocks as attention turns to the slowing economy and corporate profit growth later in the year.  indeed, a recent survey of money managers by the russell investment group showed that investors were more bullish on large-cap growth and large-cap value stocks than they were on small-cap growth and small-cap value shares.  and in general, investors are anticipating a fifth consecutive positive year for equities. yet bull markets rarely survive to this age. in fact, of the last 14 bull markets in domestic equities, only four lasted five years or longer. and the average bull lived only 3.7 years, according to investech research.  according to the russell survey, 8 in 10 investors believe that domestic stocks will have another positive year in 2007. and a third are predicting gains of at least 10 percent, in part because of a slowing-but-still growing economy and a possible rate cut by the federal reserve.  but all of this bullishness has some market watchers nervous. ''there's certainly less pessimism today about 2007 that there was a year ago,'' mr. paulsen said. while that may be good news for investor confidence, he added, ''it means the risks in the market are higher.''  for instance, what if corporate profit growth -- estimated at 15.5 percent last year, versus 13.7 percent in 2005 -- slows more than expected? mr. schweitzer points out that six months ago, wall street analysts were expecting corporate profits among s.& p. 500 companies to jump 10.5 to 10.75 percent in 2007. ''now, the latest forecasts are for growth of a little more than 9 percent,'' he said. while this is none too shabby, ''the ebbing of corporate profit growth expectations may continue in 2007 and unsettle investors,'' he said.  at the very least, mr. schweitzer said, the worrisome degree of optimism among investors means that ''the chances of a bumpy ride on wall street are quite high.''  mutual funds report  