all the sensitive noses show just how a city has changed   basic science can explain how the latest mystery odor spread so far so fast on both sides of the hudson river on monday, but it cannot easily determine the source of the sulfurous smell. nor can science account for the public panic and lingering suspicions, because those responses largely stem from fears and expectations.  officials in new york and new jersey continued yesterday to check for potential sources of whatever it was that caused the smell that led to the partial shutdown of path service and brought thousands of telephone complaints.  but even with advanced technology, experts said tracking down the source of a smell is difficult, especially if the incident is as short-lived as monday's, which lasted about two hours.  paul j. lioy, deputy director of the environmental and occupational health sciences institute at rutgers, said that a thermal inversion on monday morning made it impossible to trace the smell back along the direction of the prevailing wind, which is standard in investigating the source of a smell. an odor is basically a chemical in the air, and the rate of its dispersal depends on its molecular weight and factors like wind speed and direction and how it is released. for example, a chemical that is heated becomes more buoyant and will disperse more thoroughly.  the air over the metropolitan region on monday was constantly changing direction until about 10:30 a.m., which was about the time that most of the smell dissipated. besides swirling the odor in different directions, the inversion acted ''like a container that keeps a giant lid on the area,'' dr. lioy said. ''that increases the likelihood that even low-level emissions will be detected,'' by sensitive noses but not necessarily mechanical air monitors.  the smell seemed most closely related to natural gas and the unmistakable odor of the chemical mercaptan that is added to gas so that leaks can be detected. mercaptan is considered one of the strongest of smells, and just the tiniest amount of it -- about 2 parts per billion -- can be detected by most people. by contrast, ammonia has an odor threshold of 17 parts per million.  but even though what was in the air monday smelled like gas, there is no proof that it was gas; no major gas leak has been reported. many of the air monitors set up around the city by city, state and federal agencies are able to detect some specific poisons that might be used in a terrorist attack, or common pollutants like sulfur dioxide, but not mercaptan.  some monitors, however, do capture random compounds that happen to be in the air. preliminary results from the those monitors were ''fairly inconclusive,'' said charles g. sturcken, a spokesman for the city's department of environmental protection.  that leaves officials grasping for explanations.  ''it was just a leak someplace, from some chemical plant perhaps,'' said mayor michael r. bloomberg, who was in washington yesterday. ''it might not even have been of natural gas.''  of course, this was not the first time the region has been beset by unexpected smells. in october 2005, new york smelled like maple syrup. no source was identified then, and there was no panic.  ''the maple syrup odor in 2005 was weird, but nobody associated it with anything bad,'' said leslie b. vosshall, the director of the laboratory of neurogenetics and behavior (a k a the smell lab) at rockefeller university, where she studies the human sense of smell. ''then it was all sunday morning, pancakes, vermont and canada. but monday the smell was associated with buildings being flattened by gas explosions.''  dr. vosshall said that since the terror attacks of sept. 11, 2001, people have become more attuned to possible dangers in the environment, which helps explain the concern during monday's incident.  but the environment of the new york region has also changed dramatically over the years. in the 1950s, the city and its surroundings might have been described the same way that author john steinbeck described cannery row in monterey, calif., which he called ''a poem, a stink, a grating noise.''  today, said eric a. goldstein, a senior lawyer at the natural resources defense council, traditional air pollution has been reduced so much that strong odors stand out.  ''in the past you might have had incidents like this and you couldn't even distinguish the new smell from among all the pollutants,'' mr. goldstein said. ''now the air is a cleaner slate.''  