common sense, 34 years later   if one of your new year's resolutions is to improve your personal finances, here's a suggestion: instead of picking up one of the scores of new works now flooding into bookstores, reread an old one: ''a random walk down wall street'' (norton, $29.95) which has just been updated.  this time around, the author, burton g. malkiel, an economics professor at princeton, has added a more detailed discussion of investment strategies for retirement and a discussion of research in behavioral finance, but his core message is still the same: you can't predict the market, no matter what approach you use.  ''investors,'' he says, ''would be far better off buying and holding an index fund than attempting to buy and sell individual securities or actively managed funds.''  mr. malkiel wrote that manyyears ago, in the book's first edition in 1973 -- the one now in stores is the ninth -- and he is even more convinced of that idea today, because ''there is a six-figure gain to prove it.''  ''an investor with $10,000 at the start of 1969 who invested in a standard & poor's 500-stock index fund would have had a portfolio worth $422,000 by 2006, assuming that all dividends were reinvested,'' mr. malkiel writes. ''a second investor who instead purchased shares in the average actively managed fund would have seen his investment grow to $284,000.''  that, he says, proves both the advantage of index funds and his underlying premise, which is expressed in the book's title. stock prices, mr. malkiel says, follow a random walk, ''one in which future steps or directions cannot be predicted on the basis of past actions.''  this means that ''investment advisory services, earnings predictions and complicated chart patterns are useless,'' he says.  his recommendation is to buy stocks and to hold on for the long term. history shows that you will be rewarded: over time, earnings and dividends tend to increase, driving prices higher.  if this investment strategy is so simple and effective, why doesn't everyone follow it?  mr. malkiel spends a lot of time discussing where investors go wrong. and whether he is writing about individual investors who rushed to buy tulips in the 17th century, bought anything ending in ''-tronics'' in the 1960s or the nifty 50 list of blue-chip stocks in the 1970s, or inflated the internet bubble in the 1990s, the explanation is the same.  at some point, investors decide that the old rules no longer apply and that the path to riches will come from this brand new thing. the approach works for a while, as seemingly everyone rushes out to buy flowers or internet stocks -- at higher and higher prices. then comes the jolt: the investment underperforms and the fad ends -- badly.  investing in the next new thing can be dismissed as simple speculation, but mr. malkiel doesn't hold much truck with more traditional forms of investing, either. ''neither technical analysis nor fundamental analysis,'' he says, ''seems to yield consistent benefits.''  he says the problem with technical analysis, which analyzes the past price movements of stocks to predict the future, is that people tend to find patterns where none exist.  ''human nature likes order: people find it hard to accept the notion of randomness,'' mr. malkiel writes. ''no matter what the laws of chance might tell us, we search for patterns among random events wherever they might occur.''  while he is slightly more charitable when it comes to people who believe in fundamental analysis, examining a company's operations to predict how much it will earn in the future. but he says he is still not ready to endorse it, and for many reasons. they range from the effect that unpredictable events like a terrorist attack can have on future earnings to his opinion that ''many security analysts are not particularly perceptive, critical or competent.''  for proof, he points to the performance of mutual funds. they have access to the best fundamental analysts in the business. if fundamental analysis truly worked, mr. malkiel wonders, why do most actively managed funds fail to outperform the index they are judged against?  as he makes his arguments, the tone is sprightly. ''the s.e.c. can warn a fool, but it cannot prevent him from parting with his money,'' mr. malkiel writes. later, he says that ''comparing the internet bubble to the tulip-bulb craze is undoubtedly unfair to the flowers.''  still, there are nits to pick. mr. malkiel seems reluctant to cut material from early editions and so, at 400 pages, the book feels longer than it needs to be. he keeps multiple examples where fewer would do. for instance, while the story of the zzzz best carpet-cleaning company, a highflier of the 1980s that turned out to be far less than met the eye, is certainly a cautionary tale, it may not be worth two full pages today.  but the biggest quibble is with mr. malkiel's tendency to hedge his basic argument. this comment is typical: ''although it is abundantly clear that the pros do not consistently beat the averages, i must admit that exceptions exist.'' and he concedes that stock prices are not completely random, because they are influenced by fads and other variables. still, he contends that ''the ability to best the average consistently is most rare.''  meaning, of course, that some people can do it. and though the book champions indexing, he offers a strategy to follow if you do want to pick your own stocks: search for companies that look as if they can sustain above-average earnings growth for five years; never pay more for a stock than ''can be reasonably justified by a firm foundation'' of its value; look for stocks that other investors will find appealing -- so you can find a ready buyer when it is time to sell -- and trade as little as possible.  his not-so-convincing rationale for providing these rules is that he knows most investors will find indexing dull and will feel compelled to actively manage part of their money, so he is trying to minimize their risk.  still, mr. malkiel makes a compelling case for buying stocks and holding on. as we enter a new year, such a reminder can't be a bad thing.  mutual funds report: off the shelf  