other voices: when the facts need more checking   re ''truth, justice, abortion and the times magazine'' (dec. 31):  i see the problems with the april 9 jack hitt article as part of a larger problem facing reporters. editors want the killer example. it's not enough to write an article that provides, as you describe mr. hitt's article, ''a broad and intriguing look'' at a subject. for a reporter to get on the front page, or for a freelancer to get in the magazine, he or she needs the fist-slamming anecdote.  the question is, would mr. hitt's piece have gotten in the new york times without the drama of the 30-year jail sentence? would the times have purchased ''a broad and intriguing look'' on any subject, for that matter, that didn't have either celebrity, outrage or some kind of goodness-gracious hook?  every reporter knows this drill. you find an interesting story that is, like all things interesting, also complicated. you describe this complex story to editors, who inevitably ask, often blankly, ''where are the real people?'' so reporters hit the phones looking for just the right example and the stories roll out with the strained anecdotal leads that push any fact or explanation on past the jump.  editors say this kind of narrative diversion is what readers want. it's interesting (to me, at least) that most of the journalistic scandals come down to reporters creating ''real people.''  bill bishop  austin, tex., jan. 1, 2007  the writer is a former reporter for the austin american-statesman.  i was startled to read that the times magazine's editor distrusted a legal opinion from el salvador because he, personally, believes that ''el salvador's judicial system is terribly politicized.''  has it ever occurred to him, or to any of the other editors involved in this embarrassment, that it is because the times's reportorial and editing system is itself ''terribly politicized,'' that is, terribly one-sided, that this misreporting occurred?  fred danzig  eastchester, n.y., dec. 31, 2006  there is a relatively simple way to cut down on the type of attribution -- or lack of attribution -- errors you mention.  most journalists today write on word-processing programs that have the capability to insert comments, footnotes or endnotes anywhere in a story.  editors should require that reporters provide one of these insertions after every paragraph, stating how they know what they just wrote. such notes could include u.r.l.'s, references to specific pages in a reporter's notebook, reference documents (for example, the court transcript you referred to) -- anything that would allow the reporter and editors to backtrack from the manuscript and judge the veracity of the content or conclusions.  i would encourage making as much of this type of sourcing as possible available to online readers so they can judge for themselves, especially when public sites and documents are referenced.  tom johnson  santa fe, n.m., jan. 2, 2007  the writer is a co-founder of the institute for analytic journalism.  the april 9 times magazine article about the criminalization of abortion in el salvador is a very important document. what does the maternal mortality and morbidity rate mean? it is one way of measuring the health of a society in that dimension so that it can be compared with others.  it also implies that every time there is a pregnancy, wanted or not, a woman's health and her very life are at risk. there is no comparable paternal mortality or morbidity rate. therefore it should be only a woman's choice to carry or not carry a child each and every time.  if carmen climaco performed infanticide, the lesson should be that abortion should be legal, which would have allowed her to abort the fetus earlier. it also seems possible that the so-called autopsy findings were manipulated or fudged for political, social or other reasons. without photos and verified pathology findings, it's hard to know.  i agree that ''bulletproof'' journalism is ideal. but it is also important to expose the effects of draconian laws on individuals.  enid klauber, m.d.  tampa, fla., dec. 31, 2006  you identify jack hitt, the author of the magazine article you discuss, as a ''freelancer.'' while this may be technically correct (he isn't a full-time staff member of the times), it at the very least might mislead the reader about his place as one of the most admired and scrupulous magazine writers in america today.  before mr. hitt became a contributing writer at the times magazine, he spent over a decade writing lengthy, award-winning articles for commercial and literary magazines. he is a producer of the radio program ''this american life,'' and was for many years an editor at harper's magazine. he is the author of one book, and the editor of several others.  i do not claim to know the details of the dispute you wrote about. what i do know is that it should be considered in the context of mr. hitt's entire career.  robert s. boynton  new york, jan. 2, 2007  the writer is an associate professor and the director of the magazine writing program, new york university department of journalism.  in the interests of full disclosure, i am passionately anti-abortion, for the simple reason that it's a morally indefensible act. i suspect that the times's defense of abortion on demand is based on its belief that morality is ''personal,'' which, in essence, means that there is no morality.  i want to congratulate you on your exposé of shoddy, inaccurate and biased journalism (the times does have the right to be illogical and biased on its editorial page). i anxiously await from the standards editor something more than the ''not ready to . . . order up a correction'' cited in your column. otherwise, i'll assume that shoddiness, inaccuracy and bias are the standards.  lawrence longua  rockville centre, n.y., dec. 31, 2006  [note from the public editor: an editors' note about the article appears in today's paper.]  letters to the public editor  