television that's rude, crude, hilarious and only on the web   spending eight hours in residence on comedy central's motherload, the ''thousands of funny and free videos'' now offered on the channel's web site, closed the case on something that's been confusing me.  the web shows on motherload, comedycentral.com/motherload, hum along in a way that suggests that smart people plus money minus tv constraints do make superbly compact, absurd and dirty video. ''baxter & mcguire'' and ''guacamole'' are extremely funny. and don't spend another minute of your life on the web without seeing erin bradley's three precious episodes of ''strindberg & helium'' in the ''jump cuts'' series, on which august strindberg philosophizes suicidally as a giddy balloon cheers him on in a strangled falsetto.  jon stewart or stephen colbert clips, which play elsewhere on the site, never hurt anyone. but that's not what i'm confused about.  bars are where i first encountered the problem. in short, television isn't as distracting as it used to be. it's a small tragedy of our age that video, which was once a siren to submit to, is becoming a nag to ignore.  a wall-mounted television set, playing anything from nil-nil soccer matches to ''according to jim'' marathons, used to cause me to miss crucial moments in meaningful conversations. the rolling light of analog television was like that: it held the eyes. like beer, you could count on it to fulfill its promise to relax, console and divert.  but then the extinction of cathode-ray tubes began, bars swapped out their heavy boxes for digital flat screens, and suddenly you couldn't give away your old set on craigslist. tube television may one day acquire new fans, as vinyl has done: connoisseurs may decide that the rolling image -- the one that was supposed to leave you stupefied or hyperactive (no one could decide which) -- was warm and soothing in a way that digital, especially the retina-slicing high-def, somehow fails to be.  yes, you heard it here first. flat show-off sets look great in the sony store, but in bars and even at home they're easy to turn away from and shamefully easy to turn off. on the day i checked into comedycentral.com, with its discordant graphic styles, clown-colored ads, egg-yolk-yellow background and general i-exist-to-pester-you design scheme, i was dangerously unmesmerized by the digital video. as a brooklyn-based illustrator i know put it, ''i'll watch motherload when it stops hurting my eyes.''  discomfort was part of my experience too. i kept stopping episodes, starting new ones, cursing the preshow ads, pausing, causing buffering and loading glitches, pretending they weren't my fault and calling up e-mail to blot it all out.  i opened new windows when the site was funny, which was often. and that's the serious disappointment of ''motherload,'' and so much professional online video. the programming is faster, smarter and funnier than conventional television, but it also exists to please. it's puppyish, in fact, darting around with its slobbery, panting, inelegant style, doing anything to win our affection. do you like this? is this hip? how about vegetables that talk, or testicles with eyes, or jokes about breasts, or dumb celebrities, or dumb foreign policy, or how jesus smokes pot? are you shocked? or how about we say a funny word like anus? anus anus anus.  and if you don't like dirty words, how about we bleep them out and joke instead about political correctness? or so-called ''young'' people, and how curious it is that they say ''phat'' and ''you was mad funny up in here'' (tom cotter, comedian)? or we can kid the white women, and how mad funny it is that they can go through lesbian phases, when if a guy has sex once with a man he's a sissy for life (todd lynn, comedian)?  without counting, i take comedy central's word that there are thousands of videos on motherload. right now in the potage of postage-stamp-size images that affront the user, the most visible videos are by stand-up comics. users are asked to rank them in an arcane voting system that seems like an overthought and frankly patronizing way to ''involve the user'' and keep her mired in the site. i skipped it. though i picked favorites anyway: godfrey, handsome ty barnett and todd lynn (of the ''gay phase'' series).  mr. barnett begins with jokes about girdles and how they're part of the same deception women fault men for. he imagines a showdown between a man and a woman after a night together. ''but i thought you were single!'' she says. he replies, deadpan, ''i thought you were slim.'' the delivery's right on.  but there's no time to relax into that because there are at least 1,999 more videos to watch, including head-scratchers like ''balloon heads,'' ''monsters'' and ''samurai love god.'' these three shows lack focus, as well as visceral or iconic imagery like the anatomy in ''baxter & mcguire,'' which is set inside a man's pants, and the unchanging face of strindberg, in ''strindberg & helium,'' which looks like the munch portrait of the writer.  ultimately, motherload's aesthetic is just omni. throw it all up there, in every color, set it to music, turn up the volume, slip ads into it, surround it with type and see if anyone watches. so far -- to judge from the message boards, at least -- few are.  this is sad. all this razzle-dazzle and so little love. but scattershot sycophancy, in those nagging digital pixels especially, does get annoying. there's nothing relaxing about having to choose among thousands of videos, fast-forward, rewind, vote or rate or create a playlist, and keep on clicking. it's almost enough to make you long for the days of the fat, wood-paneled living room despot, the only moving image in the room, who used to sit center stage and command, watch me or else.  online  