room service, draw me a bath   it used to be that free sample-size bottles of shampoo and conditioner, soap and a sewing kit were enough to make a guest giddy upon entering a hotel room. then came the partnerships between hotels and high-end brands -- molton brown, l'occitane, remède -- that had guests salivating and fighting back thoughts of raiding the housekeeper's cart.  lately, though, decadence has been upped yet another notch.  the hotel bathroom has been evolving, part of a general trend in an industry that is constantly trying to attract new and repeat customers by adding ever more amenities. at many of the more ambitious hotels, rooms are larger. mattresses are more accommodating and bedding is more lush. and now bathrooms are being souped up with whirlpool tubs and five-head rain showers while serving as the setting for a range of new services.  lavish and extravagant bathroom programs are a new source of revenue for hotels. these days, minibars can be found not only in the bedroom, but in the bathroom. at some upscale hotels, bath butlers and soap sommeliers are at guests' beck and call, and spa-worthy products are on hand right in the room.  the mosaic hotel in beverly hills, calif., invites guests to browse among 25 products offered at its elaborate in-room spa bars. guests can treat themselves to a $36 pumpkin-flavored face peel, $52 solange a-3 alpha lipoic lifting eye cream or their best-selling product, $18 blanx toothpaste. need a last-minute gift? bulgari eau parfume lotion is at your well-manicured fingertips, for $52.  ''we're in beverly hills,'' brendan carlin, the hotel's general manager, said. ''people are here to get enhancements.''  mr. carlin said he thought up the spa bar three years ago to increase in-room minibar sales. ''since conception, we've doubled our in-room sales,'' he said. ''we make about $60,000 a year in revenue, and there's very little cost associated with it.'' according to e-mail messages that included the hotel's financial spreadsheets, 20 percent of the guests purchase spa products.  of the 12 items found in the beauty bar of the chamberlain west hollywood, most unusual are the bluewick soy-wax candles, $24; green tea incense, $14; and baxter of california face wash for men, $13. after the bar was added in july, revenue increased a dollar an occupied room within the first month, david lemmond, the hotel's general manager, said.  the hotel industry does not yet track sales at spa bars. but in interviews, managers of hotels that offer spa bars said interest is rising and sales are steady. in most cases, they said, they sell the products at retail prices, without large markups.  ''people interested in spa amenities or treatments tend to stay longer at properties, are more liberal in their purchase of amenities, are less price resistant and hence overall much more profitable than the traditional luxury traveler,'' said gregory j. furman, the founder and the chairman of the luxury marketing council. ''hotels are noting this, and thus are expanding and making their spa and pampering packages more sophisticated.''  the range of products offered goes well beyond those provisions that travelers may have forgotten to pack.  at shutters hotel on the beach in santa monica, calif., for instance, you can buy a $45 hairbrush or an $18 cosabella thong. the hotel's beach and bath chest contains 17 therapeutic products displayed in a medicine cabinet that has been turned into a beauty bar.  these indulgences are not reserved for beachside resorts. the hotel monaco in downtown denver treats female guests to what it calls the oh my goddess program. amenities range from a $25 faux mink sleeping mask to a $45 astara facial kit, which includes a green papaya mask and antioxidant skin protection cream.  ''forty-seven percent of our guests are women, and that number has increased tremendously with regard to women traveling on their own,'' said caroline czirr, the director of sales and marketing for the hotel. ''we wanted to make their time on the road more pleasurable by enhancing the pampering experience.''  along with the beauty bar, female guests will find, at turn down, eye cream or lip balm on their pillows, rather than a mere mint.  some hotels offer a soap menu. the shoreham, on west 55th street in manhattan, has a menu from which guests can order a variety of aveda soaps. the bath-size soaps are free and delivered to the room by housekeeping.  at the regent south beach in florida, which opened dec. 1, a butler delivers a basket containing five or six soaps to the room. soap menus are not confined to the united states: the rome cavalieri hilton provides a choice of 15 bars.  guests staying two or more nights at the abigail stoneman inn, a five-room bed and breakfast in newport, r.i., can choose among 30 soaps while drinking any of 22 different waters or teas. a handmade block of lavender-infused soap can be paired with a lavender earl grey tea.  ''our rooms come with whirlpool tubs or steam baths,'' said win baker, the owner, whose guests tend to be new yorkers or bostonians in their late 20s to mid-30s. ''women pick out the soaps and waters, but many couples take a bath together. there's the health element while still being erotic and beautifully sophisticated.''  the number of hotels with butler-drawn baths on their amenity lists is surprisingly high. the conrad chicago, the cliffs resort in shell beach, calif., and hilton fort lauderdale beach resort (to open this year) all have themed and custom-prepared baths. most packages include music, scented candles, dessert, chocolate-covered strawberries, rose petals and champagne -- even caviar or fresh fruit smoothies. plus, there is the sexy man or woman in butler attire to get you in the mood.  ''bath butlers have become more popular since travel is so stressful now,'' said vivian deuschl, the vice president of communications for the ritz-carlton chain, which adopted the concept 15 years ago at its hong kong hotel. ''traveling isn't fun anymore, so pampering yourself once you've gotten to your hotel becomes your goal.'' each of the chain's 62 hotels offers a bath butler menu with a theme appropriate to the area and property.  like room prices, rates for butlers vary. at the white barn inn in kennebunkport, me., the double bubble champagne bath costs $34.50. the milk bath at the ritz-carlton on central park south in new york -- which includes aromatic bath teas, bath salts, shower lotion, candles, chilled baileys irish cream and white chocolate truffles -- can run $100 or more.  for some these extravagances are a splurge, an added element of luxury. for others they are an escape, a little reminder that they are on vacation.  ''there's been a huge rise of connoisseurship and the wanting to know about luxury,'' said mr. furman of the luxury marketing council. ''one of the byproducts of having these services is being able to share the story of your high-end experience. it gives people something to talk about.''  a soak to remember  rachel lang said she is happy when she is drawing a bath and laying out the luxuries that symbolize pure enjoyment. who isn't? but what is unusual is that she does it for total strangers.  ''people want to be taken care of while experiencing something they can't get at home,'' said ms. lang, 36, the spa director at the hotel gansevoort in the meatpacking district of manhattan and its only bath butler. but not for long -- she is training other staff members to do the job.  the hotel added the service in august to cater better to gen x travelers, she said.  decked out in a silk asian-inspired uniform created for the hotel by hugo boss, ms. lang sees her bath duties as a relief from her work as spa director.  ''it's one of the few parts of my day that's relaxing,'' she said. ''i'm touching the water, lighting the candles, talking in a calm, reassuring and quiet voice.'' it can be infectious, she added. ''clients mirror you. if i exude calm, then they will feel calm.''  ms. lang prepares for the bath by first interviewing the guest over the phone to choose one of the packages on the hotel menu. baths include a choice of sensory oils, flower petals, music, candles, a loofah, champagne and slippers. bathers are given a goody bag containing some of the products to take home.  most guests choose the himalayan salt purifying bath, $65. ''it draws out impurities and hydrates the skin,'' ms. lang said.  having drawn the bath and poured the wine, she discreetly retires, leaving the client to disrobe and soak in luxuriant peace. no, she does not scrub backs or stand by with fluffy towels.  though no one has yet asked her to join in, ms. lang said she wouldn't be surprised if someone did. ''it's new york, nothing's unheard of,'' she said.  alix strauss  skin deep  