even mangini and belichick can adjust only so much   on wednesday morning, according to quarterback tom brady, bill belichick delivered a detailed synopsis of the jets to his new england patriots. it explored the strengths, weaknesses and tendencies of an opponent he knows intimately and yet in some ways is only beginning to acquaint himself with.  belichick has made his reputation by being a master of adjustment, a coach whose teams are constantly evolving and rarely make the same mistake twice. since joining the patriots in 2000 and initiating a dynastic run that includes three super bowl victories, he has never faced the same opponent three times in one season, as he will sunday, when the patriots play host to the jets in an american football conference first-round playoff game.  the coach he is facing -- his apparently estranged protégé, eric mangini -- learned from belichick the importance of malleability, which will make it that much more difficult for players on both teams to know what to expect.  ''there's a piece of bill in all of us,'' said iowa coach kirk ferentz, a belichick protégé who also worked with mangini. ''but eric is extremely intelligent. he sizes things up pretty well for himself.''  beyond the persistent questions of whether mangini and belichick are still friends, beyond the attempts to interpret the themes in everything from their comments regarding each other to their postgame handshakes, the intrigue lies in what tactics two men who pride themselves on preparation will throw at each other.  ''even when eric was here, he was a smart coach,'' patriots defensive end richard seymour said of mangini, who was new england's defensive coordinator last season. ''he was aware which way the wind was blowing. we understand that he's a smart guy, and he's going to pay attention to detail. and so is our coach.''  in mangini's second game as a head coach, on sept. 17, the patriots jumped to a 24-0 lead and held on to win, 24-17, on a sunny 84-degree day at giants stadium. in their second meeting, on nov. 12, on a rainy day at gillette stadium in foxborough, mass., the jets won, 17-14. the jets blitzed brady nearly 30 times, sacked him 4 times, forced a costly interception, and seemed to succeed in doing the near impossible: catching brady off guard.  ''they are a multiple-front team, multiple blitzers,'' brady said. ''everyone's involved -- corners, safeties, linebackers. they create a bunch of negative plays.''  but the chances of that strategy working again are minuscule, jets linebacker victor hobson said. since that game, the jets' defense has developed into one of the n.f.l.'s better units (the jets have allowed 12.8 points a game while going 6-2 since the bye week), but the patriots' passing game also improved in the final weeks of the regular season.  ''i think you have to go into the week understanding there are going to be some things you practice that show up, and there are going to be some things that have no reference, and there are going to be some things that happen that you have to adjust to,'' mangini said. ''you have a plan for what could happen. but really, on the next series, it could change.''  because of the timing of the three games, because they have been spread through the season, belichick said, both teams will have analyzed the film of nearly every game the other has played. at some point, then, the wealth of information can become overwhelming, even for two coaches who appear to thrive on the cerebral aspects of the game.  ''you can learn something from everything, but you do have to be careful about overanalyzing and having too much information,'' belichick said. ''you have to boil it down to something and figure out what you want to do and how you want to approach it. you can't worry about every single thing that's happened all year, because there are too many things to worry about.''  the jets say they are taking the same approach. but in the end, ferentz said, each team will play to its strength.  ''the bigger the stage, and the bigger the game, and the more you tend to tweak things, you can end up getting off track,'' he said. ''i think it would be unusual if there were any great surprises.''  pro football  