gambler shakes up land of tutus and leotards   the settled landscape of ballet in new york -- dominated by the balanchine-robbins shrine at new york city ballet and the bouquet of latin and slavic stars at american ballet theater -- has been shaken by a minor earthquake.  it comes in the form of christopher wheeldon, the 33-year-old wunderkind choreographer. he announced plans last week to form a classical dance company, creating a new potential magnet for donors, ticket subscribers and dancers. it will be called morphoses, the wheeldon company, with a home in new york and a residency in london.  in adopting this mission mr. wheeldon has taken an enormous risk, abandoning the comfortable role of resident choreographer at city ballet for a venture with unknown prospects. at the same time, in a world of relatively few big-name ballet choreographers, mr. wheeldon's announcement has prompted comparisons with giants in the field -- like george balanchine, the co-founder of city ballet with lincoln kirstein, or serge diaghilev, the impresario behind the legendary ballets russes.  ''if you think about the ballets russes in monte carlo, or even the beginnings of city ballet, there are always a couple of people who have made it possible,'' said alistair spalding, the executive and artistic director of sadler's wells theater in london, which plans to commission works from morphoses and serve as its host for a week in september.  a reservoir of good will and respect and a soaring reputation have thrust an extraordinary opportunity into the young mr. wheeldon's hands.  ''he's got the momentum,'' said jennifer goodale, the vice president for contributions at altria group, one of the most important corporate financers of dance. ''he's got the star power. if anyone can do it, he's the one. is it going to shake up the scene a little? yes, and good for him.''  while most modern dance companies are based on the vision of an individual, like merce cunningham or alvin ailey, it is rare for a classical ballet choreographer to create a company in his own image.  ''i think what we're really looking at is christopher trying to create a new tradition,'' said damian woetzel, a city ballet principal who, as executive director of the vail international dance festival in colorado, has hired him for this summer.  yet mr. wheeldon faces a major challenge: how to pay for a company in a world where arts institutions are in a permanent state of beating the money bushes.  ''the real question is: can he raise enough money to do what he wants to do?'' said robert weiss, the director of carolina ballet and a former city ballet principal. ''my experience is that people will give you a lot initially, but then it tends to wane.''  altria, the parent company of philip morris and kraft, is already in the process of scaling back its giving. ms. goodale acknowledged that mr. wheeldon would be competing for any money that flowed to city ballet.  she added: ''is there room for both? sure. there has to be a way that all of this fits in the landscape of dance. otherwise where's the energy? where's the innovation? where's the challenge? having that friendly competition is a good thing.''  so far one large corporation in new york has shown a ''little bit of interest'' in providing funds, and individuals countable on one hand have indicated they would like to help, mr. wheeldon said. the contacts he has acquired in choreographing around the world are also likely to contribute.  mr. wheeldon and his administrative right arm, lourdes lopez, a friend and former city ballet principal who used to run the george balanchine foundation, are starting out small: a dozen performances or so next summer and fall at the vail festival, city center in new york and sadler's wells. the dancers on these programs will mainly be stars of city ballet and the royal ballet in london whom mr. wheeldon has worked with before. the theaters are paying for the performances.  mr. wheeldon stressed that the personnel were not the core of his new company. several said in interviews that they had no thoughts of leaving city ballet for morphoses. ''i love working with him, but i don't know how permanent this company is,'' said edwaard liang, a city ballet soloist.  mr. wheeldon's plans are ambitious. once the company raises funds, establishes a board and is ready to offer contracts, it will hold auditions for about 20 dancers to work a 34- or 36-week season, ms. lopez said. it hopes to have tours in europe and the united states. a booking agent in london has begun looking for performance spaces.  most of his potential competitors in the dance world stick to the line that more dance is only for the good. they say they do not worry about competition from mr. wheeldon, because his repertory is different. they say there are enough donor dollars to go around.  ''if you look at the dance boom from the 70s and 80s, energy begets energy,'' said kevin mckenzie, the artistic director of american ballet theater. ''the more educated an audience becomes, the more they are willing to cross-pollinate.''  he said it was too early to ''wring our hands'' about whether a wheeldon company would eat into ballet theater's donor base. ''in the end i think that people will give to what they want to give to,'' mr. mckenzie said. ''if they're giving to things that are good, they'll give to two things that are good. new york city ballet and a.b.t. are very different animals. he'll just be a third animal.''  peter martins, city ballet's ballet master in chief, said mr. wheeldon's step was part of a natural evolution. mr. martins brought him aboard as resident choreographer and has been described as supportive over the years.  ''this is supposed to be the dance capital of the world,'' he said. ''i suppose there's room for one more.''  in several interviews mr. wheeldon took great pains to say he felt not a whit of competition with the other companies.  ''this is really not about politics, it's about art,'' he said. ''it's about creating excitement and a new buzz for dance in new york city. it's certainly not my intention in any way to undermine, or cause destruction.''  he has no plans, for example, to present story-length ballets. his purpose, he said, was to present his own pieces and new works by young and foreign choreographers. he wants to create a collaborative atmosphere with dancers, work with artists from other fields, like theater and photography, and extend dance's reach on the internet.  ''we will be trying to appeal to a fresh audience, a young audience,'' he said. ''dance, ballet, is sexy. sex is so much a part of our culture, especially youth culture. we can tastefully touch on that and show people that ballet is not just about tutus and leotards but about the sensuality of young bodies moving.''  he acknowledged that comparisons with city ballet and ballet theater were inevitable.  ''yes, there is going to be overlap,'' he said. ''it's possible with morphoses we may have interest in funders who are involved with both city ballet and american ballet theater. it will be up to their discretion whether to fund us or not. we're going to need to raise a great deal of money.'' as for filling seats, he said, ''we would, of course, love to have some of the audience that a.b.t. and city ballet have as well.''  he also dismissed comparisons with choreographers like balanchine.  ''everyone is looking for the person who is 'the one,' '' he said. ''i'm certainly not looking at myself as that one person. i'm a talented choreographer, but i'm certainly not the groundbreaker that george balanchine was.''  correction:  january 9, 2007, tuesday  a picture caption in the arts yesterday with an article about christopher wheeldon's new new york-based classical dance company and its possible impact on new york city ballet and american ballet theater referred imprecisely to the ballerina alexandra ansanelli, who was shown in a performance with city ballet. while she was with that company when the picture was taken, in 2002, she is now a member of the royal ballet in london.  