the breakfast wars   last wednesday at a starbucks in times square, katie voss, a nursing student, was drinking one of the chain's new coffee creations, a cinnamon-flavored low-fat latte. ms. voss, who was visiting from maryland, said she visits starbucks every day -- up to three times a day, in fact -- but rarely eats anything.  ''i've been burned too many times by that pastry case,'' she said.  neither of the whole-grain, trans-fat-free pastries -- a cinnamon loaf and a banana muffin -- that starbucks introduced that day were sufficiently alluring to change her mind.  ''i try to fill up on coffee here,'' she said, ''so i won't be tempted to get an egg mcmuffin before lunch.''  in the frenzy of grab-and-go breakfast that seizes the nation each morning, the trek from starbucks (for coffee) to mcdonald's or another destination (for food) has become a familiar one. even as starbucks has developed a mass following for its dark, super-roasted coffee and its iced, frothed, blended and flavored offspring, the company has struggled to get its food up to par.  ''it's a good thing for starbucks that coffee is a big part of the breakfast decision,'' said tom miner, a principal in technomic, a food service industry research firm. ''but most americans spend no more than three minutes shopping for breakfast, which doesn't leave time for two stops.''  thus, the latest move by starbucks is a big one: challenging mcdonald's by introducing hot egg-and-cheese sandwiches on english muffins, just as mcdonald's is promoting its new higher quality coffee.  the breakfast sandwiches, with upscale ingredients like peppered bacon and sun-dried tomatoes, are being gradually rolled out across the country as part of a concerted -- and some say long overdue -- effort by starbucks to improve its food. ''we are going to be all about premium and upscale ingredients, bold and layered flavors,'' said kathleen kennedy, the chain's recently hired director for food research and development.  until now, starbucks has managed to maintain the fast-food industry's most consistent revenue growth per store -- at least 5 percent each year since 1991 -- partly by avoiding the messy and expensive business of cooking, said joe buckley, a restaurant industry analyst at bear stearns. although the company appeals to customers with talk of high-quality ingredients, carefully trained baristas and a european cafe ambience, the stores were built to make coffee, not food; they have about the same cooking facilities as a 7-eleven.  in trying to elevate the quality of the food, starbucks faces a particular challenge, mr. buckley said.  ''starbucks customers have a very high-quality perception of the coffee,'' he said. ''that pushes their expectations very high for everything in the store.''  the anguish of unmet expectations might explain the disappointment -- ranging from resignation to conspiracy theories -- that pours forth from some starbucks regulars. there are many who like the food, especially the popular biscotti. (there are even a few who prefer the food to the coffee, which detractors call ''bitter'' and ''undrinkable.'')  but many regulars sound like sarah sinclair, a mother of three in providence, r.i., who said: ''i adore the coffee, but the croissants are literally the worst on the planet.''  or carolyn helmke, a transportation planner in palo alto, calif.: ''i am convinced that starbucks has made a conscious decision that it doesn't matter how bad their food is because people will buy it anyway,'' she said.  ms. kennedy and others at the company acknowledge that until recently the food was always secondary to the coffee, and that there is work to be done. ''what we're rolling out now is just the beginning of the revolution,'' she said.  when the chain began its rapid expansion in the 1990s, the food offerings varied widely in selection and quality, and mr. miner said that starbucks may still be recovering from those initial impressions. also, a starbucks is not always a starbucks: when it is in an airport or a barnes & noble bookstore, for example, the company may not control what food is sold there.  but even the food in ''company'' stores has been inconsistent. pastries were long bought from regional bakeries; only recently has the company nailed down its own recipes and established a pumpkin muffin that tastes the same from san diego to boston, with minor variations.  ''one region might have a more dialed-up pumpkin flavor depending on what we know about local tastes,'' said tom barr, who is charged with overseeing the new starbucks food program. ''now they are all made the way we want them.''  signaling the company's intent to publicize its revolution, pastries in some stores were recently tagged with cheery stickers proclaiming ''new recipe.''  the bakery items are still produced at about 50 different bakeries, and shipped daily to the stores. some items, especially seasonal ones like the wintry cranberry bliss bar and new ones like last week's five fruit banana muffins, are made in one or two locations, shipped frozen, and simply thawed before serving.  although ingredients and flavor are stressed by starbucks in describing the new food program, technology like nitrogen freezing, used to preserve the texture and flavor of baked goods, is the key to executing it.  to produce hot breakfast sandwiches without building a kitchen in every store, starbucks has made a huge investment in new high-speed, high-heat ovens. the ovens, developed by companies including turbochef, combine microwave and convection technology and can be used both for cooking (a chocolate cake, turbochef claims, can be baked in 1 minute and 15 seconds) and for reheating.  according to ms. kennedy, starbucks plans to use them not only for the egg sandwiches, which are assembled and frozen off-site, but to provide warmed scones and hot lunch sandwiches as well.  ms. kennedy's food research and development team is charged with fulfilling the new motto printed on the sandwich wrappers: ''great coffee deserves great food.'' that means food that suits the starbucks psychographic: warm chocolate croissants, tarragon chicken salad, possibly even the return of quiche. it also means nodding to nutrition trends with items like cheese-and-fruit boxes and whole-grain pastries.  ''because of the coffee, our customers look to us for culinary challenges,'' mr. barr said. ''they want flavor, but they also expect a certain kind of thoughtfulness.''  although the starbucks sandwiches are unmistakable mcmuffin clones, re-engineered for the starbucks demographic, ''thoughtfulness'' put cheddar and fontina instead of american cheese on top of the egg.  the stakes get a little higher each morning in the fast-serve breakfast business. for the last two years, breakfast has been the fastest-growing sector of the fast food industry. in consumer research conducted last year, the research company mintel found that more than a quarter of americans who eat breakfast do so away from home -- i.e. in the car, at a desk or in a restaurant. that number has been going up steadily for 25 years, as american eating habits have incorporated longer work hours, longer commutes and drive-through windows.  and according to tom miner, ''the food has to be fast, it has to be handheld, and no. 1 across the board is egg and cheese on a bread carrier.''  since the egg mcmuffin was first test marketed in 1971, mcdonald's has held a solid lead over all its competitors. the mcgriddle, introduced in 2003, was a howling success that consolidated the chain's position at the top of the breakfast heap. but now the sharks are circling, sensing opportunity. ''everyone is watching the breakfast category,'' mr. miner said.  taco bell and wendy's are also test marketing breakfast menus, and burger king upgraded its coffee last year, introducing a fuller-bodied bk joe, brewed from arabica beans (instead of the cheaper robusta that is most common) in both regular and extra-caffeine ''turbo'' strengths.  in 2006, mcdonald's also rolled out a darker-roast arabica coffee line nationwide, replacing the 60 different blends that the chain used to brew. ''we're going after their business, absolutely,'' said don thompson, president of mcdonald's usa.  upgrading the coffee was an easy fix for mcdonald's. but for starbucks, the road to a complete breakfast has been longer -- and more emotional. ''nothing is more disappointing to us than when a customer comes in and can't find something to eat,'' mr. barr said. ''we are determined to serve food our coffee can be proud of.''  so, although starbucks has only 5,700 united states stores to mcdonald's 13,800, the fight for the american breakfast is on. that stroll from starbucks to mcdonald's has been targeted at both ends. don thompson said that mcdonald's has nothing to fear from the starbucks breakfast sandwiches. ''we're back there cracking eggs and frying bacon,'' he said. ''there is nothing like hot, freshly cooked food, and our customers appreciate that.''  maybe.  last wednesday, at a starbucks on the upper west side of manhattan, a teacher named rachel friedman bought a pale, chilled egg sandwich garnished with spinach and ricotta-herb spread for lunch. after the barista stuck it in the speed oven for 60 seconds, the english muffin was brown and crisp, the cheese had melted and the egg was steaming hot.  ''i have tried most of the sandwiches, and the melted cheese is what really makes them good,'' she said. ''but the egg makes me nervous. how do they cook it so fast?''  in fact, the eggs for all the starbucks breakfast sandwiches served in the united states are cooked at just two locations, stuffed into sandwiches, and kept frozen for up to two days before being reheated in the speed oven. ''it's a fine technology,'' admitted mr. thompson of mcdonald's. ''we won't use it, but it's surprisingly good.''  also surprisingly good is the speed oven's ability to produce a browned, crisp crust -- something that forever eludes food heated in a microwave oven.  in samples from around new york city last week, both the starbucks sandwiches and egg mcmuffins offered the virtues of any good egg sandwich: the salty, savory contrast of soft egg, molten cheese and chewy bread. both the ham and the sausage patty at starbucks were meatier and less greasy than the meats at mcdonald's, and there was surprisingly little difference in the taste of the eggs -- both had almost no flavor.  as the starbucks sandwiches cooled, the texture changed noticeably (as is often the case with microwaved sandwiches), leaving tough bread and bacon, rubbery cheese and spongy egg.  ''starbucks is making a big bet on those ovens,'' mr. miner said. about 20 percent of its stores now have the ovens. ''they are not cheap, and it's a big hulking thing to put on the counter, not to mention training your staff to use it.'' at one manhattan starbucks last friday, workers were so busy heating sandwiches that the store actually ran out of drip coffee.  ''they haven't fully integrated it yet,'' mr. miner said. but when and if they do, he added, the speed oven has the potential to really change fast food.  his other prediction for the american breakfast? ''in seattle, where they really drink a crazy amount of coffee, we are seeing the breakfast cookie -- it's bigger, less sweet and more fiber, like eating just the top of a new york muffin,'' said mr. miner, who is based in chicago.  a new york muffin? is that like a new york minute?  ''it's an industry term,'' he said. ''everyone knows that new york has the biggest muffins, but no one knows why.''  there might be room at the breakfast table for everyone. some customers, especially those who don't necessarily care about ambience, wi-fi access and whole grains in their pastries, will always remain loyal to mcdonald's.  paul roeder, a college student from omaha, says that his love for the mcgriddle could never end. ''you have to admit it's a perfect food, with all the major food groups except for hash browns,'' he said last wednesday, strolling through times square after a breakfast of two mcgriddles: egg, cheese and bacon encased in a ''bun'' of maple-flavored pancakes.  coffee, however, is a separate matter.  ''i still have to go to starbucks for that,'' he added.  