nets overcome their off-court distractions   the nets have won four of five games, they are back atop the atlantic division and vince carter scored 32 points against his former team.  the nets (15-19) beat the toronto raptors, 101-86, at continental arena tuesday night, and got a fine effort from jason kidd, who fell two rebounds short of a triple-double, with 10 points and 14 assists.  earlier in the day, kidd was the focus of events beyond the court after filing for divorce from his wife, joumana. ''there are really no distractions,'' he said after the game. ''this is my job, this is my livelihood. so anything personal stays personal and anything that's related to my job stays within my job.''  the nets moved a half game ahead of the raptors (15-20) for first place in the atlantic division, in which all five teams have losing records.  when the season started last november, not too many people would have picked this game to be a division battle. the nets have won four of the last five division titles, and the raptors have a young team that has not accomplished much since carter left toronto more than two years ago.  but the raptors have had some impressive performances against top-flight teams this season, including a 2-point loss to the phoenix suns last week. their future could be bright in part because of their 7-foot rookie forward, andrea bargnani, who hit 4 of 7 shots from 3-point range and led the raptors with 22 points.  although bargnani got his looks, the nets held forward chris bosh, the raptors' best player, to 12 points. bosh was playing in only his fourth game after missing 12 with a bruised bone in his right foot. the nets also held toronto's starting point guard, t. j. ford, scoreless on 0-for-8 shooting from the field.  nets forward mikki moore, who scored 12 points and had 8 rebounds, said stopping bosh was a team effort.  ''everybody shrunk the floor,'' he said. ''we talked. we communicated.''  the all-around effort, especially on defense, has often been absent for the nets this season, and it has been one of the biggest culprits in their lackadaisical start.  the nets' fortitude was most evident in the way they sprang back from what could have been a game-changing run by the raptors.  after the nets took a 15-0 lead to start the game, the raptors pulled ahead with a 22-2 run that spanned parts of the first and second quarters and lasted nearly eight minutes. the nets missed 10 of 11 shots during the stretch and had 6 turnovers.  the nets answered by giving up only 38 points in the second half. they paid more attention to bargnani, the first pick in last year's draft, and held him to 6 points after halftime.  ''we're not exactly where we want to be,'' said nets forward richard jefferson, who scored 21 points. ''we understand now that we've dug ourselves a hole. it's a matter now of playing above and beyond to get out of the hole. this was a step in the right direction.''  carter seemed intent on setting the tone against the team he played with for more than six seasons. the last time the nets played the raptors in toronto, carter scored only 12 points in a nets loss. he had 14 points in the first quarter tuesday night.  perhaps carter came out with a message from the nets power forward cliff robinson in mind. before the game, carter said, robinson told the team that it needed to bounce back from a defeat, much the way it did last season. the nets were coming off a loss to the cavaliers in cleveland on saturday night.  ''by him saying that, it kind of put something in the minds of the guys who are here,'' carter said. ''we really game out with guns blazing.''  rebounds  cliff robinson did not play in the second half because of a back strain that he sustained while bending over earlier in the day. robinson, who was playing in only his third game after a month and a half absence because of an injured left knee, said he should be ready for thursday night's game against the bulls.  the nets' rookie power forward josh boone, who did not play saturday night after incurring his third migraine headache in three months, said he would have a precautionary magnetic resonance imaging exam in a few weeks.  pro basketball  