house democrats may aid corruption inquiry   the new democratic house leaders are negotiating with federal prosecutors about complying with subpoenas related to former representative randy cunningham's corrupt sale of military contracts, potentially accelerating a dormant inquiry.  the subpoenas, disclosed late last month in the congressional record, request documents from the house appropriations, intelligence and armed services committees and demand a response by jan. 11.  mr. cunningham, a california republican, pleaded guilty more than a year ago to steering tens of millions of dollars in federal money to military contractors in exchange for over $2.4 million in bribes, using his position on the house military spending panel to insert special provisions for contracts into military bills.  all these provisions required involvement by the panel's chairmen and staff as well as military or intelligence officials, so the investigation has the potential to ensnare others. a recent internal report by the house intelligence committee, for example, concluded that committee staff had supported mr. cunningham's requests despite many ''red flags.''  the subpoenas are also freighted with constitutional issues, pitting an executive branch investigation against congress's claims of immunity and confidentiality for its official business.  the federal prosecutors, based in san diego, sought for months without success to reach agreement with the former house republican leaders to obtain the documents without subpoenas. the subpoenas coincide with the takeover of the house by democrats, who campaigned on a promise to replace corruption with honesty and openness. the democrats also have less incentive to protect the republican former committee chairmen and staff members.  people informed about the talks over the subpoenas say the prosecutors may extend the subpoena deadline while they try again to work out an agreement to disclose relevant documents.  ''the house is actively working with the department of justice to resolve this issue,'' said jennifer crider, a spokeswoman for representative nancy pelosi, the california democrat sworn in last week as speaker of the house.  