after a detour, nakamura, 19, is back to his winning ways   it looks as if hikaru nakamura, at 19 the country's youngest grandmaster, is beginning to reassert himself.  through the first half of 2006, nakamura, who won the united states championship in 2004, when he was 16, seemed adrift, turning in lackluster results, at least by his standards. his world ranking dropped to 78 from 42 between april and july. and after the world open in july, where he finished in a 10-way tie for 10th, he did not play in a tournament for months.  part of the reason for his disappearance was that nakamura enrolled at dickinson college in pennsylvania. in itself, his choice was curious. dickinson is not a powerhouse in chess, unlike the university of texas at dallas, which won the pan-american intercollegiate championship last weekend.  sunil weeramantry, nakamura's stepfather, said nakamura had a full scholarship to the dallas university, but opted for dickinson, where he has only a partial scholarship, to get away from chess.  ''his mind was on going to college,'' weeramantry said. he added that nakamura really wanted to go to someplace where ''he could focus on anything else'' but chess.  but over the thanksgiving weekend, nakamura went home to white plains and announced that he was ready to play again.  over that weekend, nakamura played in the national congress in philadelphia and won. three weeks later, he won the monthly st. john's masters tournament at the marshall chess club in manhattan. in late december, he captured sole first place in the north american open in las vegas. on jan. 2, he left for ukraine to play in a rapid tournament against some of the world's best players.  weeramantry said he noticed a change in philadelphia. ''the interesting thing i saw in philadelphia was that he was totally focused,'' he said. ''one of the comments he made after philadelphia was, 'well, i guess i haven't lost it.' ''  he certainly was in command in his sixth-round demolition of vadim milov, of switzerland, at the north american open.  the opening was a paulsen variation of the sicilian defense.  milov's 8  d6 was rare, as black usually plays 8  bc5, positioning the dark-square bishop outside his pawn chain. his next move, 9  g6, was new, intending to fianchetto the bishop and give it some scope.  milov might have tried 15  b4 to give himself some counterplay on the queenside. instead, 15  bb7 developed a piece, but it did not seem to be part of a concrete plan.  after 19 g3, black might have tried 19  ef. it would have ceded white the center, but the e and f pawns would be hard to mobilize and would have offered black targets to attack. after 21 f5, white's attack down the f file began to be dangerous.  after 28 nd7, the game might have continued 28  qd7 29 qe4 qc6 30 qe3 d4 31 qf3 e4 32 qh5 qb6 33 f6, when black cannot avoid mate or major material loss.  chess  