mysteries of the brain and the science of sleep, brought to life in a barn   amber powers, 13, thought about sleep only when she didn't get enough, which was most of the time. a trip to a remote barn here, however, left her spending many of her waking hours mulling over the time she spends sleeping.  the barn's owner, dr. j. allan hobson, a psychiatry professor and sleep researcher at harvard medical school, has converted part of it into a small, interactive sleep museum that students visit after four weeks of lessons on brain function and sleep. dr. hobson is working with the caledonia north school district in the northeast corner of the state to develop a sleep curriculum that he hopes to eventually distribute nationwide to different grade levels.  the museum is a resurrection of dreamstage, a multimedia exhibition on sleep and dreams that dr. hobson took on an international tour from 1977 to 1982.  the museum includes a sleep chamber, a small, windowed room where subjects sleep as their brain rhythms are recorded; a preserved brain; and multimedia presentations about the brain and dreams. it is also, in many ways, a showcase for the brain as a work of art, with scientists' detailed sketches and a framed painting of a human brain.  dr. hobson, 73, said the museum ''won't truly be a public institution,'' but rather an opportunity for students to supplement classroom lessons with a three-dimensional view of the brain and its activities, helping them grasp its complexity and its functions.  the idea of preparing students with lessons before they visit came during dreamstage. dr. hobson said most students arrived with minimal knowledge of the brain and left without a full appreciation of it.  ''the school visits were all poorly organized,'' he said. ''they'd get out of the yellow buses like locusts and push every button to see if things moved. they didn't understand everything. i said, 'these kids should be coming to the museum after they've had a unit on a subject like sleep.' ''  about two years ago, dr. hobson, who bought a farm in caledonia county in the 1960s, took the idea to scott graham, the superintendent of the caledonia north school district. mr. graham immediately agreed to go along with the experiment and allowed two middle school science teachers, lois michaud and alison chadboard, to develop a curriculum with dr. hobson.  ''our kids hadn't had anything about the brain previous to this,'' ms. michaud said. ''the question was, how do we have them experience what allan is trying to get them to understand, that during sleep there is a lot of stuff going on in your brain?  ''there is a lot going on,'' she added, ''and so we had them do activities like keep a sleep log, but with no dream stuff because it might not be appropriate to talk about in school. they could say they had a dream but not talk about the content, and how they went to sleep, whether they stayed asleep and how they felt the next day.''  the goal was to get students to demonstrate an understanding of how bodily systems are connected and how that plays out during sleep. students were also expected to learn what happens when the sleep cycle is disrupted and how the body adapts to changes in its equilibrium, like sleep deprivation.  the four-week lesson starts with a two-week introduction to the brain and its structure and what functions are controlled by different parts of the brain. students become familiar with neurotransmitters and how they affect mood and hunger, and with dendrites, fibers that receive and transfer information.  the following weeks focus on the sleep cycle. students learn that they sleep so much because growth hormone is secreted during sleep, and if they do not sleep they will have shorter attention spans and use calories less efficiently. the lesson also covers disorders like narcolepsy and sleep apnea and their consequences.  students also learn about dreams, and they are encouraged to discuss three theories about why people dream: to reorganize and refresh the brain; to help people remember things; and, freud's notion, to help people work out unsolved problems. students also explore the psychology of dreams, including possible reasons for nightmares and dream content, but they are urged not to analyze one another's dreams.  ms. michaud and ms. chadboard selected students to visit the barn, where they climbed into the sleep chamber and viewed sketches of the brain and frame-by-frame photos of people sleeping. they peppered dr. hobson with questions at a discussion in a silo he has converted into a five-story library that holds thousands of slides and books.  dr. hobson said the visit was exactly what he had imagined -- students with a working knowledge of the brain, sleep and dreams excited to watch interviews of sleep subjects and analyze their dreams. they asked dozens of questions, including the theoretical, like how animals dream, and the personal, like how dr. hobson got into the field.  ''allan gave them permission to just take out of it whatever they could,'' ms. michaud said, ''and i think each kid did in their own way take something very different out of it.''  amber powers said she enjoyed learning about the intricacies of the brain.  ''the thing i found interesting was that i saw a lot of pictures of different brain stems, things done by hand, very detailed drawings done with a camel-hair brush. a couple of them almost looked like frogs, they were so detailed,'' she said. ''it was really cool to see the sleep chamber where these experiments took place and the monitors that showed the waves of the brain in different stages of sleep. you could really see how they differed.''  she said the lessons showed her that she was sleeping a few hours less than the 11 hours recommended for a 13-year-old. her sleep journal showed that she played with her cats, getting hyped up before bed, or watched television and was unable to turn it off. she has since started reading or doing other relaxing activities to help her slow down before bedtime.  school officials said dr. hobson was giving students in this rural part of the state an opportunity to see in their backyard things that usually require a trip to a city.  ''it was kind of like, wow, this kind of thing is going on right here; i thought this kind of thing happened in big cities,'' amber said. ''it was really neat that all of this is in a barn.''  