unbalanced schedule leaves many unhappy   after only a year and a half with a new scheduling arrangement, the n.h.l. is considering another change.  in the current setup, each eastern conference team does not play 5 of the 15 teams in the western conference. moreover, an eastern team will play in a western city once every three seasons.  fans in the west are complaining because they seldom see young stars like sidney crosby, evgeni malkin and alexander ovechkin, who play on eastern teams. and canadian television executives are upset that the canucks, the flames and the oilers will not play the canadiens, the senators and the maple leafs next season.  at the board of governors meetings last month, officials explored the idea of realigning the divisions and changing the schedule so that each team plays every other team at least once a season.  one idea was to have each conference consist of two divisions with seven or eight teams, rather than the current three divisions with five teams. the issue will be discussed further in february.  on wednesday, fans signed on to nhl.com's fan faceoff panel were asked to fill out an extensive online questionnaire on the current schedule and possible alternatives.  the league's uncertainty is nothing new. the current schedule, with its emphasis on increased play within divisions and between regional rivals, was devised in the wake of the 2004-5 lockout. it was a response to the complaints from team officials, television executives and alienated fans that there were too many games against faraway teams that fans did not care about, and too much fatiguing and costly air travel for players.  the fact that no satisfactory schedule has emerged may be indicative of a deeper problem.  ''if you look at the discussion of realignment in a broader context, the question that comes up is, 'is there too much hockey content?' '' said paul swangard, managing director of the warsaw sports marketing center at the university of oregon. ''there are a lot of levers the league can pull to affect content. you could have fewer games or fewer teams.''  there was speculation at the time of the lockout that the n.h.l. would contract by one or more teams, but commissioner gary bettman discounted the idea.  swangard, alluding to this season's lower attendance figures, low television ratings in the united states and a handful of financially troubled franchises, said one alternative to reducing the number of teams or to altering the schedule ''might be that the owners eventually decide to reduce the number of games, to make each game more meaningful and draw more fan interest.''  european champions cup  the european champions cup, the showcase event on the continent's club calendar, will run from thursday through sunday in st. petersburg, russia. its format is succinct: the 2006 champions of europe's top six leagues are seeded into two divisions. each team plays the other two in its group once, then the two group winners meet in a gold-medal match.  this is the third european champions cup, all in st. petersburg. the first, in 2005, was won by the russian champion, avangard omsk, on an overtime goal scored by jaromir jagr. in 2006, the russian champion won again: dynamo moscow in a penalty shootout. the tournament will not be televised in north america, but it can be followed live on the international ice hockey federation's web site, iihf.com.  the tournament teams are older than most n.h.l. franchises, as is true for most clubs in europe. the newest is ak bars kazan, founded in 1956; the oldest, sparta prague, dates to 1903.  here are the teams in the division named for aleksandr ragulin, the former soviet defenseman:  hpk hameenlinna -- the hockey playing knights won the finnish championship last april. now in second place in the sm-liiga, hpk made a curious signing last month, adding the enforcer billy tibbetts. a boston native, tibbetts served a jail term from 1996 to 1999 and has been suspended from the n.h.l. and at least two minor leagues for brawling or gross misconduct.  sparta prague -- sparta won the czech title last year by beating its city rival, slavia prague. now in fourth place in the czech extraliga, sparta is led by last year's playoff star and this year's league-leading scorer, center jaroslav hlinka.  mshk zilina -- zilina has slumped since winning the championship of slovakia in 2006. now in ninth place in the 10-team slovak extraliga, zilina is given little chance in the tournament.  here are the teams in the division named for ivan hlinka, the former czech forward and coach:  ak bars kazan -- the team from the tatar capital, it made an all-out push for the russian championship in 2005 to mark the city's 1,000th anniversary, signing 15 locked-out n.h.l. players and spending a reported $65 million in salaries. that bid failed, but last year ak bars won the title by going 12-1 in the playoffs with a mostly russian lineup. this season, it is in first place in the superliga with a high-powered offense led by the former penguin alexei morozov.  hc lugano -- fourth in the nationalliga a, lugano won the swiss championship last year, in one series rallying from a three-games-to-none deficit. its blue line features defensemen jason strudwick, who played for the rangers last season, and dick tarnstrom.  farjestads bk -- fbk's run to the swedish championship was highlighted by two last-minute goals in a game 7 semifinal victory over hv71 jonkoping. second in the elitserien, fbk has many n.h.l. veterans in its lineup, including defenseman fredrik olausson.  hockey: sunday shootout  