giants' choice: sense or sentimentality   the most symbolic moment of the giants' season came in the second half sunday evening in philadelphia, when jeremy shockey hurried over to tom coughlin on the sideline, yanked his headset receiver and shouted something in his ear.  coach, can you hear me now?  one of the television announcers commented that not many players in the n.f.l. could get away with disrupting the boss's in-game radio transmission. but who it was and what was said mattered less than what was comically conveyed: labored communication, the primary reason the giants devolved from a 6-2 super bowl aspirant to an 8-8, one-and-done playoff team that couldn't deal with injuries and other adversity and is acutely in need of organizational redirection as well a head coaching change.  begin with the front office, with a replacement for the retiring general manager ernie accorsi. should ownership promote from within? or, scott pioli's disinterest notwithstanding, hire someone with no stake in accorsi's signature career move, in the eli manning investment, if it becomes necessary to take the ball from this sincere but thus far uninspiring quarterback's hands?  should the giants, for the sake of continuity, anoint another architect from accorsi's staff, currently on a run of six years without a playoff victory and which, in that period since the jim fassel-coached super bowl team, has a regular-season record of 46-50?  or should they come to the rational conclusion that this team has been a study in dogged mediocrity in the 16 years since bill parcells left (128-127-1, with three playoff victories)? should they recognize that this is the perfect opportunity to get someone from outside the family to help in the search to put a new coaching face on the franchise who, unlike coughlin, won't bristle from breakfast to bedtime?  minute by minute on his giants watch, coughlin has ticked to a personality wound too tight for this territory, his agenda set less on dealing with human beings than with the enforcement of inflexible doctrine. over the course of three turbulent seasons, players called him out and eventually tuned him out. the giants became disorganized and dysfunctional, the opposite of what coughlin was hired by wellington mara to make them.  somehow, the misadventures always occurred despite coughlin's claims that his team was skillfully prepared, armed with an estimable game plan. he always made sure to say he was accountable, usually after blaming the players for whatever went wrong.  ''there you go again,'' he lectured a reporter after the 23-20 defeat to the eagles, for daring to question him after another game lost because of an inability to capitalize on first-and-goal chances and the kind of early field position a more opportunistic team would have used to stake itself to a 14- or 17-point lead. another game squandered in part because of untimely penalties and a new playoff wrinkle, the burning of two timeouts that could have prevented the eagles from killing all but three seconds of the game clock before david akers put the giants out of their misery with his 38-yard field goal.  ''if you'd had the timeouts, you'd have been better off,'' coughlin said. ''the great lesson is not to waste your timeouts.''  ''your timeouts,'' which meant the players' timeouts. not ours. not coughlin's. there he went again -- failing to acknowledge that the many states of confusion the giants were in this season must ultimately reflect on the coach more than any single player. at least that was how it worked when fassel's team couldn't snap the ball straight at the end of a ruinous 2003 playoff game in san francisco, couldn't squib-kick it straight against parcells and the cowboys at giants stadium several months later.  coughlin spared reporters the entire season's retrospective yesterday, possibly waiting for management to publicly support his return for another. just as well. listening to him through a string of post-mortems has occasionally made me think how nice it will be when joe torre is back with us, handling questions in the dugout the way his shortstop fields lazy infield practice grounders, sipping his tea with his yankees cap tilted back on his head, far away from a podium and those ubiquitous team banners interspersed with the name of a sponsor.  the interrogations are part of the deal everywhere, but especially in this cacophonous news media market. some cope with it better than others. coughlin isn't the first football coach to bare his teeth at giants stadium. parcells did it with the best of them, but it always came across -- to me, at least -- as partly an act. not so with coughlin, though. his chronic cantankerousness has felt more authentic. but more important than what critics think is that his players seem to have been rubbed the same way.  players aren't always right. larry brown wasn't to blame for everything with last season's knicks, but the mitigating issue was that he lost the team and wasn't getting it back. if the giants don't like coughlin, should the giants keep him with one year left on his contract, as a lame duck? should they grant him an extension after what they've just watched?  should they be guided by sentimentality, hold onto coughlin because he was mara's last hire? or should they be on the telephone, taking their shot at charlie weis, who could quickly say, no thank you, i'm a man of my word, notre dame is home?  what then? how about what the jets did this time last year? find a fresh new communicator who is hungry and smart and ready to raise the bar that coughlin lowered, leaving a team that started out with super bowl hopes in a sad state of limbo.  sports of the times e-mail: hjaraton@nytimes.com  