arts, briefly   nobel laureate faults turkey on artists  the nobel prize-winning author orhan pamuk served for a day as editor in chief of radikal, one of turkey's liberal newspapers, and in yesterday's issue criticized the country's oppression of artists and intellectuals, agence france-presse reported. in his cover article mr. pamuk, 54, right, the 2006 nobel laureate in literature, invoked the name of the renowned turkish poet nazim hikmet, who was prosecuted at home for leftist views, was declared a traitor and died in exile in russia in 1963 after his works were banned in turkey. mr. pamuk himself was regarded as a traitor in nationalist circles and stood trial on charges of ''insulting turkish identity'' when his remarks to a swiss magazine last year were interpreted as acknowledging ottoman turkish killing of armenians in 1915. the subject is taboo in turkey. the case was dropped on a technicality. mr. pamuk, who has a degree in journalism but never worked as a journalist, was given free rein in editing radikal, which is celebrating its 10th anniversary by featuring celebrity guest editors.  jeffrey archer reappraises judas  why did judas betray jesus? because he was disillusioned by jesus' refusal to throw the romans out of the jewish homeland. and what's more, judas didn't hang himself. who says so? jeffrey archer, the best-selling british novelist (and disgraced politician), in a new book written with the australian biblical scholar francis moloney, reuters reported. in their collaboration, ''the gospel according to judas,'' scheduled for worldwide publication on march 22, these authors use judas's son, benjamin, as the narrator of the story of the man who is said to have betrayed jesus for 30 pieces of silver before hanging himself in shame. desmond tutu, the south african archbishop, who recorded an audio version of the book, said, ''it sounds just like the kind of thing someone's son would do to try and rehabilitate their father's name.'' mr. archer, above, who was deputy chairman of the conservative party in britain before he was jailed after lying in a libel trial, said: ''it is a gospel, not a short story and not a novel. it is 22,000 words in length.'' mr. archer said of judas: ''unquestionably he wanted the messiah to ride into jerusalem in front of a triumphant army and defeat the romans. but that was never christ's purpose, as he kept telling his disciples. when he arrives on a donkey, that for judas is the proof that he isn't the messiah.'' mr. archer added: ''when it comes to controversy, what will be fascinating is the united states. this is going to cause an amazing amount of debate.''  angelina jolie as madonna  while on the subject of biblical figures, picture angelina jolie as the virgin mary, hovering with her children over a wal-mart checkout line. if this boggles the imagination, reality is available in the form of a painting titled ''blessed art thou,'' exhibited during the weekend at art miami, an annual exposition of modern and contemporary works, the associated press reported. the painting, above, priced at $50,000 by chelsea galleria in miami, is the creation of kate kretz, 43, a north carolina artist who has painted for 20 years without attracting the sort of attention generated by ''blessed art thou.'' the acrylic and oil on linen depicts ms. jolie in the clouds, holding her newborn daughter, shiloh, while her other children, maddox and zahara, cling to her skirt. below them is the wal-mart scene. ms. kretz said the painting addresses ''the celebrity worship cycle.'' she said she chose ms. jolie ''because of her unavoidable presence in the media, the worldwide anticipation of her child, her 'unattainable' beauty and the good she is doing in the world through her example, which adds another layer to the already complicated questions surrounding her status.'' ms. kretz said, ''my intention was to ask a question and get people to think.''  malawi issues madonna's report card  how does malawi rate madonna as mama? o.k. so far, reuters reported. adrina mchiela, the principal secretary in the malawi ministry of women and child welfare, said, ''we have been monitoring her, and so far we see a loving mother in madonna, and david is very fine.'' she was referring to david banda (right with madonna), the motherless 1-year-old malawian boy who is in madonna's custody in england under an interim adoption order that has stirred some opposition within malawi. ''the father should not be worried,'' ms. mchiela said. the father, yohane banda, said last week that he wanted to talk to madonna to learn how his child was faring. cyrus jeke, the deputy director for child welfare in the ministry, said a senior government official had been assigned, with the assistance of the british government, to monitor david's life in london with madonna and her husband, the filmmaker guy ritchie.  'museum' and 'happyness' extend their reign  ''night at the museum'' and ''the pursuit of happyness'' extended their domination of the nation's movie box offices for a third consecutive weekend, according to estimates released yesterday by the box-office tracking company screenline. taking the no. 1 ranking, ''night at the museum'' (fox), the comedy starring ben stiller, above, as a museum guard, grossed $24 million in its third week in release, bringing its total to $164 million. with will smith as the hero of its up-from-poverty story, ''the pursuit of happyness'' (sony) piled up $13 million in its fourth week, to reach $159.9 million. third place went to ''children of men'' (universal), alfonso cuarón's futuristic political thriller, which attracted $10.2 million. fourth place and $9.7 million were taken by a newcomer, ''freedom writers'' (paramount), starring hilary swank as an inspirational high school teacher. rounding out the top five and achieving the best per-screen average, $10,358, among the leading films was the musical ''dreamgirls'' (paramount) with $8.8 million, for a total of $54.4 million in its fourth week in release.  indian film offends afghanistan  afghanistan has banned ''kabul express,'' an indian-made film dealing with the collapse of the taliban, in response to protests from the ethnic hazara minority, described in the movie as ''the most dangerous tribe'' in afghanistan, agence france-presse reported. the ministry of information and culture said on saturday that the government film directorate had prohibited the purchase, sale and showing of ''kabul express,'' even though it has yet to be released in afghanistan. but it is available in pirated copies. the 90-minute film, referring to the hazaras as murderers, rapists and thieves, tells the story of two indian journalists, covering the fall of the taliban regime in 2001, who are abducted by a pakistani military officer fighting alongside the taliban. in a statement denouncing the film, the culture ministry said it ''has scenes, dialogues and behaviors which are insulting to a tribe and in fact to all our nation.'' it said camera art, the company that made the film, and the director, kabir khan, had apologized and agreed to ''edit out irritating and insulting scenes.''  