caramoor receives grant for latin music initiative   the caramoor center for music and the arts in katonah has received a $500,000 grant from the new york state music fund for a two-year initiative that will make latin american music widely available through new commissions, family concerts and radio broadcasts of live recorded performances at caramoor.  michael barrett, caramoor's chief executive and general director, said that a cornerstone of the initiative, called sonidos latinos, or latin sounds, was the appointment of paquito d'rivera as the 2007-8 caramoor composer-in-residence. mr. d'rivera, a grammy award winner and a recipient of the national medal of the arts, is a clarinetist and saxophonist and a versatile composer of jazz, classical and traditional cuban music.  mr. d'rivera and marco granados, a venezuelan-born composer and flutist who heads un mundo ensemble, will each be commissioned to compose new works that will have their premieres at caramoor this summer, mr. barrett said.  mr. barrett said the initiative arose from the changing population of north america as new immigrants continue to arrive from places like brazil, guatemala, costa rico, chile, argentina, venezuela, mexico and cuba. ''each of these cultures has a fantastic musical tradition,'' he said. ''each has its own stories of the influence of european culture on their indigenous music, and now, with latin cultures blending into north america, a new chapter of the development and influence of latin music is being written.'' he said sonidos latinos would spotlight the influence of latin music on our own society.  the new york state music fund was established as a result of recent settlements in the payola, or ''pay to play,'' investigations of leading music companies by the office of the former state attorney general, eliot spitzer, now the governor. the companies, which include entercom communications, emi music north america, sony bmg music entertainment, cbs radio, warner music group and universal music group, are expected to pay a total of $36 million into the fund, which is administered by rockefeller philanthropy advisors and was developed to make contemporary music of all types more available and accessible to diverse audiences.  a total of $19 million was awarded to 218 nonprofit groups in this second cycle of grants. other westchester recipients included the conservatory of music at purchase college, which was awarded $80,000 to commission new works by the cuban-american composer tania león and the puerto rican composer ray santos, both of whom will be artists-in-residence this year. the westchester arts council received $115,000 for the triple hill music festival, to be held in mount vernon from april through july. the festival will highlight the contributions of african-americans to the american music scene.  roberta hershenson  