hard times for innovative school   a school is a fragile thing. that's particularly so if it is small, homegrown and designed by an educator with an idiosyncratic vision.  crossroads middle school was started 16 years ago by ann wiener, who squeezed 200 students into the fifth-floor attic of an old renaissance castle of an elementary school on west 109th street. the school was an effort to fashion an unorthodox public alternative to the upper west side's chaotic junior high schools, and it tried unconventional approaches like mixing sixth, seventh and eighth graders in the same classes and having children defend report cards at parent-teacher conferences. textbooks were given less emphasis than syllabuses devised by teachers, and in-depth projects were favored over surveys, and the building of a sarcophagus rather than an overview of egyptian history.  reading and math scores were below the citywide average, but many of the school's students were from poor homes and a larger than average number had learning disabilities. the school also did not spend weeks on test preparation as so many schools now do. still, graduates went on to strong high schools like beacon, mott hall and the museum school.  dionne gadsden, a parent of a crossroads eighth grader, said ms. wiener made students who might have been rejected by more highly ranked schools ''feel good about themselves and be successful -- they were not throwaway kids.''  while so-called progressive schools are not to everyone's taste, crossroads worked for its particular mix of children. then, in august 2005, ms. wiener retired. and ever since, the school has been in what many parents and former teachers consider a meltdown.  eleven of the 12 teachers have quit, some from retirements and career switches, others out of dissatisfaction with changes in the school. crossroads is on its third principal, the quirky programs that defined the school have been lopped off, and at least half a dozen parents pulled their children out before graduation.  ''there's nothing left of the history of what crossroads was,'' said ellen rafel, a guidance counselor until september.  jonathan torres left in october in the middle of seventh grade, because, he said, ''many kids were throwing spitballs and chairs.'' he continued: ''i learned nothing there. all the kids were talking, and they got away with it.'' his mother, luz laureano, said that the school no longer told her when her son failed to do homework and that it was not stopping other students from teasing him. ''the sense of family'' she had always felt when she visited the school was lost, she said.  what has happened at crossroads offers a cautionary tale about unconventional schools, and how their success often depends on new leaders sharing the founders' philosophy and the support of higher-ups. if those buttresses are not there, the delicate framework can crumble.  seymour fliegel, president of the center for educational innovation-public education association, who has started scores of small schools, said progressive schools work only when everybody is ''marching to the same drummer.'' that is why garth harries, chief executive of the city department of education's office of new schools, who coordinates the 184 schools opened as the bloomberg's administration's signature reform, advises existing schools to make sure they cultivate future leaders in accord with their founders' ideas. small schools, he said, ''are smaller places where the ripple effect of a mistake can more quickly damage the environment.''  the current principal of crossroads, rodney murphy, did not let this writer visit the school. according to david cantor, a spokesman for the education department, mr. murphy said he was ''trying to get stability'' back.  ms. wiener, now 73, is a fiercely dedicated educator who daily climbed five flights of stairs to work 12-hour days. she assembled a team of like-minded teachers who also put in extra hours. she admitted students on interviews and portfolios of work, not on the basis of test scores, and assigned each child an adviser who was required to meet with groups of students twice a week.  ''there was a magic about ann -- she got us to buy into things,'' said patricia sebastian, a crossroads humanities teacher who left in september because, she said, the school's identity was being whittled away.  at least one teacher said ms. wiener ran too loose a ship, with students escaping penalties if they talked disrespectfully or roamed halls. ''they were well intentioned, but to me there was limited structure,'' said akisa omulepu, who trained teachers as a math coach. still, it was a telling measure that in a neighborhood where many middle-class white parents send children to private schools, crossroads, where most students are black and hispanic, annually drew some white students as well.  ms. wiener, who now coaches principals as an education department consultant, said in an interview that she retired because ''it's hard running a school, and i felt i didn't have the energy.'' but, she added, referring to officials in region 10, which embraces the west side, harlem and washington heights, ''it's clear that those who were in charge decided they wanted the school to go in a different direction.''  it's ''fair to say,'' she added, that a renewed emphasis on testing as a result of the federal no child left behind law also created pressure to change the character of the school.  former teachers at the school said a region 10 instructional superintendent, roser salavert, disapproved of ending classes at midday friday for three-hour staff meetings, and did not like students spending class time on adviser meetings. ''they didn't quite get us,'' ms. rafel said.  ms. salavert said she was following chancellor's regulations.  some parents and staff members contend that after ms. wiener, the first new principal, joseph f. rand, nibbled away at some of her approaches by substituting the region 10 curriculum for crossroads teacher-designed curricula. mr. rand said he was following the region's demands.  when students took the english-language arts test a year ago, only 27.6 percent reached proficiency level, a drop from 31.9 percent in 2005, ms. wiener's last year. mr. rand pointed out that scores in math increased to 46 percent proficient, from 35.8 percent.  but to parents and teachers, in a school like crossroads, tests, with their four-level proficiency scale, never captured its quality or the affection parents and children had for it. ''you can't ask me to take the 1s and 2s that nobody wants to teach and then penalize me when everybody is not at level 4,'' ms. sebastian said.  the talents needed to lead an offbeat school are not as transferable as those required to lead a conventional one; mr. rand's superiors could have done far more to make sure he grasped crossroads' philosophy. ms. salavert said she did that, but mr. rand himself said the transition was not well handled.  ''without an understanding of the school, things fall apart,'' he said. ''i had no idea what crossroads stood for. i had never gone to crossroads prior to aug. 31 and had little time to talk to the outgoing principal.''  then mr. rand left, too, to become director of seven bronx schools for suspended students. the region appointed mr. murphy, who had spent the previous year leading a small west side school that closed. crossroads still had two wiener-era teachers left, but, teachers said, mr. murphy reprimanded one, naima beckles, for not posting his monthly proverbs and for othersuch lapses, and she left. jamilah clark, a mother of an eighth grader, said classrooms were now more crowded and unruly.  ''kids are scared, angry and confused,'' she said. ''i'm an adult, and i'm confused about what's going on in the building.''  on education e-mail: joeberg@nytimes.com  