warsaw's enclave of villas   warsaw is densely covered with communist-era housing projects, so finding a village-like setting just minutes from the bustling city center seems like an unattainable dream. but the city has its surprises, like saska kepa, a green enclave of villas across the vistula river from downtown.  kai schoenhals, an american restaurant owner, knew instantly that he was lucky to find a place in saska kepa. he arrived in poland in the early 1990s, drawn by the opportunities of a young free-market economy. after several years of shuttling between california and poland, he finally settled in warsaw and married katarzyna figura, a polish actress.  when the couple found the house in saska kepa in 2003, it was filled with kitschy furnishings and had a backyard full of weeds. but they knew it would suit a family perfectly.  ''kids are the center for us and there is no better place for them,'' said mr. schoenhals, whose two daughters are now 2 and 4. ''it has a garden facing south, beautiful light, it's safe and quiet. you would never believe you are in the city.''  they say it is important that their neighbors -- apart from some foreigners like the indonesian ambassador -- are ordinary people who have lived in the area for decades. ''it's a normal neighborhood,'' mr. schoenhals said. ''and we want to keep it real for our kids. we don't want to live in a ghetto for the rich.''  narrow streets lined with villas, many of them fine examples of pre-war modernism; branches of lilac hanging over the sidewalk; and corner shops selling homemade food are all among the charms of saska kepa. ''people don't move out from here,'' said the schoenhalses' neighbor, krystyna heybowicz-gieros, who has lived in saska kepa for more than 50 years. ''they don't sell their houses, they pass them in a will.''  iwona osik, a real estate agent at the afrykanska agency in warsaw, agrees that houses in saska kepa rarely make it to the market.  in general, residential prices in poland have been soaring, propelled by the growing economy and falling interest rates. they also have been driven up by foreign buyers who invested heavily in polish real estate before the country's admission to the european union in 2004 on the expectation that property values would increase -- and they have.  according to the rednet property consultancy, prices of warsaw apartments rose almost 50 percent in 2006 and are expected to continue to grow this year, although at a slower rate. analysts expect houses will increase in value even faster than apartments as land in the city is becoming more costly.  a friend told mr. schoenhals that a 350-square-meter, or almost 3,770-square-foot, house was for sale in saska kepa. but while the decision to buy was quick, the paperwork took almost half a year to complete. as an american, mr. schoenhals needed permission from the polish internal affairs ministry to buy land, and he said he found dealing with local officials ''a mess.''  the two-story house was built by a furrier in the 1950s. with seven bedrooms and a pool in the backyard, it was lavish by communist standards. in the 1990s, a beer company bought the property to house clients. the company renovated the home with 84 halogen lights and large marble tiles in the living room that made the house feel ''like a car showroom,'' mr. schoenhals said.  now the house is furnished with 19th-century chests and dressers that the couple bought at antique fairs, turning it into more of a country residence.  renovation was ''a delicate puzzle'' that took several engineers to solve, mr. schoenhals said. the living room, which totals 80 square meters, or a little more than 860 square feet, has a sloping ceiling supported by an intricate web of beams. there were few windows, and the couple added additional ones to let in more light. they also had a fireplace repositioned so it faced the garden.  warsaw's cold winters made mr. schoenhals give up on the idea of restoring the swimming pool, so the couple settled for an inflatable pool, an outdoor shower and a sandbox for the children.  recently, the family had an unpleasant surprise when construction began on a six-story apartment building just one house away. local law allows only two-story buildings in the neighborhood. nevertheless, the building's construction is continuing. ''we will build a wall of green here,'' mr. schoenhals said.''that's as much as we can do.''  the house came with a bar in the basement, which mr. schoenhals found useful while testing drinks for his restaurants. but his favorite spot is the fireplace area, which is surrounded by bags of walnuts collected from a tree in the garden.  ''like a true polish man, i made a walnut nalewka,'' said mr. schoenhals, displaying a case full of small bottles filled with brown liquor that he wants to send to his family in the states. ''i just need to design labels.''  