the neediest cases; reaching for help, a mother regains dignity and a stable family life   most of her last six years, patricia ramos says, have been a torturous trip through poverty and degradation. but, she says, she and her two children are now on an upward path.  in 2001, ms. ramos, now 36, had been living in miami for four years with the first of her two sons, enrique rivera, who is now 17. they were comfortable on her $32,000-a-year salary as a room service manager at a large hotel, she said recently.  ms. ramos, a high school dropout from the bronx, became a single mother at 19. she worked at sales, cashier and receptionist jobs, she said, until moving to miami with enrique in 1997, to live near her divorced mother.  while in miami, she recounted, she learned that one of her five sisters -- she also has four brothers -- had tested positive for the virus that causes aids. she said she had been very close with this sister and decided to return to new york to help care for her and her three young children.  ms. ramos said she gave up her job and apartment and flew to new york with enrique, who was then 12 -- only to find that days earlier, her sister had moved with her children from her east harlem apartment without telling her mother and siblings and without leaving a forwarding address.  it took several months for ms. ramos to learn that her sister had moved to puerto rico. ''i believe she left because she was ashamed'' of her situation, ms. ramos said.  but ms. ramos's own ordeal was just beginning.  she was living with another sister in queens while they were seeking the missing sister. after they learned her whereabouts, ms. ramos could not return to miami, she said. she had no money for the trip, having exhausted her savings, she said. and even if she had had the money, she said, she did not want to face what she was convinced would be her mother's disapproval because, while in new york, she had become pregnant.  the baby's father was a man who ''didn't want to take responsibility,'' ms. ramos said. after the boy, lucas machado, was born, his father's sister took ms. ramos and her children into her home for three months. then ms. ramos moved in with a friend who was among squatters living in an abandoned building in east harlem.  ''but it was dangerous and nasty,'' she said, and after several months, she and the children moved in with another friend who was living legally in another building.  the condition, though, was that ms. ramos and her children could not be in the apartment while the friend was at work.  so in cold weather, while enrique attended a junior high school, she and lucas, in his stroller, spent the days ''riding back and forth'' in the subway, ms. ramos recalled.  after several months of this, she knew she had to find a decent place to live. yet she had not worked in new york; her lack of a permanent address, and of self-confidence, had kept her from finding even ''a dinky job,'' she said.  at the suggestion of the friend she had lived with in the abandoned building, she went to work for an escort service where the friend was working. ms. ramos's financial situation sharply improved as she averaged $1,000 to $2,000 a week for what she described in the interview as selling her body. she could now rent a small apartment in the bronx.  enrique, then 15, ''was wondering where i got the money,'' she said, and she felt she had to tell him. ''i told him this was what i had to do to take care of him and his brother,'' she said. ''he said, 'mom, you don't have to do this.' i told him it was temporary, and not to be ashamed of me.'' inwardly, however, she despised what she was doing, she said.  but she stayed with the escort service for a year, leaving after a customer robbed and threatened to kill her. several months later, without income to pay the rent, she and the boys were evicted.  this time, ms. ramos sought help outside her circle of friends, and she and the children spent the next eight months in a city homeless shelter.  despite its unpleasantness, this turned out to be the start of her climb back. the welfare program eventually sent her to an employment program run by catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund. that program referred her for a file clerk job at a real estate management company in manhattan. she was hired last may, and was soon promoted to a job in the payroll unit paying $370 a week.  a job developer in the catholic charities program, diana rivera, said she had found ms. ramos determined to obtain work and ''maintain her family.''  about the time she was hired, ms. ramos found an apartment in the south bronx. the welfare program pays about half the $820 monthly rent, and catholic charities used $500 from the neediest cases to buy two beds.  interviewed in the apartment -- where enrique, now in high school, and lucas, a kindergartener, awaited dinner -- ms. ramos said she wanted all the details of her story publicly disclosed so that others might learn what she belatedly did: that ''there's help out there, and you don't have to sell your body'' to survive.  previously recorded: $4,697,117.83  recorded thursday: $1,085,148.71  total: $5,782,266.54  last year to date: $5,467,648.56  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  