ncr says it will spin off its data management business   investors drove up the stock of the ncr corporation, the largest maker of automated teller machines and airport check-in kiosks, yesterday after the company said it would spin off its data management business, teradata, in what it expects to be a tax-free deal.  shares of ncr rose as much as 7.1 percent, to $45.42, before falling back to close at $43.79, an increase of $1.39, or 3.3 percent, over friday's close. about 5.7 million shares changed hands, more than five times the recent average volume of trading. ncr's highest close in the last year was nov. 21, when shares reached $44.58.  teradata accounts for almost a fourth of ncr's annual revenue of more than $6 billion. but when it is split off in six to nine months, analysts said, it is likely to account for more than half the company's value because of its potential to grow faster than the equipment and servicing that ncr will retain.  william r. nuti, who has been chief executive since august 2005, said the fundamental reason for splitting the company was that ''ncr has, within the company today, two very different kinds of business opportunities.''  ncr's employment contracts with mr. nuti and some other senior executives include change-of-control provisions that can cause their stock options to vest immediately.  if the split occurs before aug. 7 and vesting restrictions are removed, mr. nuti could pocket slightly more than $8 million, based on yesterday's closing price. removing restrictions on 63,750 shares of stock given to him when he was hired would give him stock worth almost $2.8 million, and exercising 587,500 shares at a strike price of $34.91 each would produce a gross profit of more than $5.2 million.  john hourigan, the ncr spokesman, said he had asked ncr lawyers whether these provisions would apply when teradata was spun off. ''none of those decisions has been made yet,'' mr. hourigan said.  ncr, based in dayton, ohio, started 122 years ago as national cash register. for decades it dominated the business of taking in cash through its mechanical and, later, electronic registers, but it has since focused on the business of dispensing cash through a.t.m.'s.  several analysts speculated that after the spinoff, teradata might be acquired by a larger player in the data warehousing business.  teradata has only about 8 percent of the $18 billion data warehousing market, in which oracle, sap and i.b.m. are larger.  mr. nuti said there were two widely used architectures for data warehousing. the more popular strategy, which accounts for $14 billion in annual revenue, involves keeping many duplicate files in multiple locations, he said.  teradata, mr. nuti said, is the largest participant in the $4 billion industry of enterprise data management, in which one set of files binds all records together in one spot. ''we believe our approach scales better and is much more efficient,'' he said.  in ncr's older business of point-of-sale and transaction devices, such as the kiosks people use to get boarding passes at airports and the readers that let people check themselves out at supermarkets, he predicted significant growth.  ''those people age 19 and 30, the demographic of the future, don't know of any other world than the self-service online world,'' he said.  