job skills | dec. 31-jan.6   moving down  the news -- john d. negroponte, the nation's director of national intelligence, was nominated to be deputy secretary of state and fill a position that has been vacant for months. mr. negroponte would be expected to play a leading role in shaping policy in iraq, now under revision.  behind the news -- in agreeing to trade a cabinet-level job to be second-in-command to condoleezza rice, mr. negroponte raised more issues than he resolved. leaders in congress reacted angrily, contending that he walked off a job he didn't like, jeopardizing his office's work, including a soon-to-be-completed national intelligence estimate on iraq's chances of surviving as a unified, independent country. critics questioned the administration's commitment to the new intelligence bureaucracy that mr. negroponte helped create as its first director, which president bush described as the most significant restructuring of american spy agencies in half a century.  getting noticed  the news -- ban ki-moon, the new secretary general of the united nations, started work and immediately invited controversy by declining to criticize the execution of saddam hussein. mr. ban, who had suggested publicly that he intended to bring new caution to the role of the secretary general, took a stance that appeared to contradict united nations policy opposing the death penalty as a violation of human rights.  behind the news -- mr. ban's initial effort to thread his way through the varying views of the united nations' member states seemed to start on the wrong foot, suggesting that the transition of the former foreign minister of south korea from diplomat to leader of the united nations was a work in progress. the death penalty is legal in south korea. michele montas, mr. ban's new spokeswoman, said he was not changing policy, but adding his own ''nuance.'' ms. montas is the widow of jean dominique, a broadcaster killed in haiti in 2000.  cashing out  the news -- robert l. nardelli, chief executive of home depot, resigned abruptly in the midst of criticism over his performance and his compensation. mr. nardelli will receive a $210 million exit package, despite complaints from shareholders about home depot's stagnant stock price and missteps in the marketplace.  behind the news -- under mr. nardelli, home depot shifted its focus from do-it-yourself customers to trade professionals. rivals like lowe's picked up a growing share of consumers during his six-year tenure, which shareholders said was characterized by an arrogant management style. mr. nardelli is the latest casualty of investors' impatience with executives whose kingly rewards yield few apparent returns in stock price or profit, what critics call ''pay-for-failure.'' but mr. nardelli's $210 million handshake underscored the reality of agitation for change: shareholders still pick up the costs of getting executives to go away.  hitting gold  the news -- the johnny depp star vehicle ''pirates of the caribbean: dead man's chest'' topped the box office in 2006, at $423 million. mr. depp's gonzo-pirate turn slashed several records to ribbons in its first three days, becoming one of the most successful openings in hollywood movie history.  behind the news -- in a highly charged election year and with news of an escalating war in iraq in full view, escapism proved to be entertainment's winning card. comedy, animation and adventure films, like ''ice age: the meltdown'' and ''casino royale,'' trumped movies with a message like ''blood diamond,'' which had the advantage of a major star, leonardo dicaprio. hollywood's success in 2005 with more challenging fare like ''syriana'' and ''crash,'' which won the academy award for best picture last year, seemed to be a formula already out of date.  scoring big  the news -- nick saban resigned as head coach of the miami dolphins -- after months of denying that he would -- to become the university of alabama's new coach. the decision, according to various reports, made him the highest-paid coach in college football, with an eight-year deal worth more than $30 million.  behind the news -- the move set off worries of a dangerous escalation in coaches' salaries. congress, now examining the tax-exempt status of the national collegiate athletic association, is already asking why salaries are so high -- often higher than those of professors and even college presidents. mr. saban won a national championship at louisiana state university but had mixed results in his two years at miami. departing after a 6-10 season, he left behind a legacy of ill will and a sense of betrayal, among players and fans. he may be crying all the way to the bank.  the week  