the invasion of the alpha male democrat   nancy pelosi's carefully crafted introduction to the american people last week seemed to reinforce some stereotypes of the so-called mommy party. on the day she made history as the first woman to be elected speaker, she appeared on the house floor, surrounded by children and bedecked in pearls.  but even as this nurturing image dominated the news, the swearing-in ceremony on thursday was notable for another milestone in gender politics: the return of the alpha male democrat.  the members of this new faction, which helped the democrats expand into majority status, stand out not for their ideology or racial background but for their carefully cultivated masculinity.  ''as much as the policy positions is the background and character of these democrats,'' says john lapp, the former executive director of the democratic congressional campaign committee who helped recruit this new breed of candidate. ''so we went to c.i.a. agents, f.b.i. agents, n.f.l. quarterbacks, sheriffs, iraq war vets. these are red-blooded americans who are tough.''  mr. lapp even coined a term to describe these manly -- and they are all men -- pols: ''the macho dems.''  the return of democratic manliness was no accident; it was a carefully planned strategy. but now that the macho dems are walking the halls of congress, it remains to be seen whether they will create as many problems for democrats as they solved. after all, these new democrats have heterodox political views that could complicate democratic caucus politics, and their success may raise uncomfortable questions for those democrats who don't pass the new macho test.  the architects of this strategy, representative rahm emanuel, mr. lapp's boss, as well as senator charles schumer, are well-known political pit bulls. mr. emanuel won his congressional seat by navigating the ward politics of chicago's old-fashioned political machine.  he is missing half of one finger -- his aides refer to him as ''nine point five'' -- and swears enough to make a soprano blush. senator schumer is so aggressive and demanding that he has a reputation as one of the most difficult people in the senate to work for. both men, who have been elevated to leadership positions in the new congress, are throwbacks to the era when tough-guy democrats were urban ethnic politicians, like dan rostenkowski and tip o'neill.  when mr. emanuel and mr. schumer set out to find candidates to run in the red states and districts of the 2006 electoral battleground they sought their own rural and exurban doppelgängers.  the fruits of those efforts arrived in washington last week. take, for example, three house freshman from pennsylvania. patrick murphy, the son of a philadelphia police officer, was a west point professor, a prosecutor and an iraq war veteran before he ran for congress. chris carney was a lieutenant commander in the navy reserves. joe sestak is a former navy vice admiral whose last job was commanding 15,000 sailors and dozens of ships and aircraft for operations in afghanistan.  ''joe sestak -- that guy's muscular!'' says mr. lapp. ''he's a vice admiral. i've told him to spend a lot of time going on the national talk shows. he can really do a service changing the mold and the way the democratic party is viewed.''  other house members include minnesota's tim walz, an army national guardsman; brad ellsworth, an indiana sheriff; and heath shuler, a former n.f.l. quarterback from north carolina.  biography, it can be argued, counts more than substance. for example, mr. shuler's web site includes more information about his high-school football career (106 touchdowns) than his post-football career (selling real estate).  in the senate, mr. schumer's tough-guy caucus includes jon tester, a husky montana farmer with a buzz-cut, and jim webb, the former marine from virginia who turned his son's combat boots into an effective electoral prop. upon arriving in washington, he promptly picked a fight with president bush at a white house reception.  the roots of the macho dem strategy can be found in the party's 2004 losses when democrats decided that their post-9/11 candidates needed to exude strength above all else.  ''presidential politics, but also the rest of national political leadership, has a lot to do with the understandable desire of voters for leadership, strength, clarity and sureness,'' says jim jordan, john kerry's first presidential campaign manager. ''frankly, in the post-vietnam era, democrats have come up short by those measures too frequently.''  adds the democratic strategist james carville, ''the fact that the party has come across as less -- i don't want to say less masculine -- but certainly less aggressive than republicans, is true.''  but there may be serious risks for the democrats' embrace of an electoral philosophy based less on bold ideas than on bold biography. for one, the macho dem strategy is inherently pro-male. and democrats have historically relied on a gender gap advantage -- with women. if they tilt in the other direction, does that gap disappear?  as tom edsall recently pointed out in a guest column on the new york times op-ed page, despite ms. pelosi's historic ascension, 2006 was a bad year for democratic women. nine of the party's top 11 male house candidates won, while only 1 of the organization's top 11 female candidates prevailed.  it's a paradoxical conclusion to an election that was followed by ms. pelosi's ascension to speaker and hillary clinton's dominance of presidential political predictions. just as these female faces are solidifying the perception of the democrats as the party of women -- the gender gap still exists -- the macho dems are adding a dash of testosterone, which could add some cultural frisson to the party.  sure, some macho dems express support for, say, abortion rights but one gets the sense that ensuring roe's preservation may not be one of their highest priorities in coming to the senate. it's hard to imagine them at the next emily's list fund-raiser.  ideologically, many macho dems are culturally conservative and economically liberal -- making them odd ducks in a party that since the clinton years has been defined by cultural liberalism and rubinomics.  ''you can argue it will cause more problems because there will be more cross currents,'' says mr. carville. ''a lot of these guys are economically pretty populist -- webb and tester -- more so than the clintonites like myself.''  then again, president bush and the iraq war serve as unifying force for democrats that may militate against these cross currents.  more interesting may be the implications of the macho dem theory for the 2008 presidential campaign. if a party measures its candidates by whether they wear a uniform, carry a gun or simply look tough -- does it invite the public and press to apply that standard to all the party's leaders?  the leading presidential candidates -- barack obama and hillary clinton -- may not score that high on the alpha meter. and in the past, when democrats believed their candidate was a true hero -- well, just remember how the republican party was able to portray john kerry. it could be a warning sign for democrats: live by the macho dem creed, die by it.  the nation: gung ho ryan lizza is a senior editor at the new republic and a correspondent for gq.  