addai moves colts' backfield to forefront of the offense   the emergence of running back joseph addai has helped the indianapolis colts overcome the loss of edgerrin james.  when james signed as a free agent with the arizona cardinals last march, the colts faced a problem. james rushed for at least 1,200 yards in five of his seven seasons with the colts, and they needed someone to replace not only his running but his pass blocking for quarterback peyton manning.  that was a lot to ask of a rookie, but addai provided the answer. quietly and efficiently, addai, drafted no. 30 over all by the colts last april out of louisiana state, rushed for 1,081 yards this season, more than the three running backs drafted ahead of him: reggie bush, drafted no. 2 by the new orleans saints; laurence maroney (no. 21) of the new england patriots; and deangelo williams (no. 27) of the carolina panthers.  during the colts' 23-8 playoff victory against the kansas city chiefs on saturday, addai showed he could respond to postseason pressure, rushing for 122 yards on 25 carries and scoring the colts' first touchdown, on a 6-yard run.  some would call addai a surprise. his coach, tony dungy, and the colts' president, bill polian, do not.  ''we knew it was going to be a good draft for running backs,'' dungy said during his news conference sunday. ''we felt pretty confident that we would be able to get a good back in the first round. we liked maroney, we liked maurice drew, we liked deangelo williams, we liked joseph. we felt like we were going to get one of those backs, and they all would bring something to the table. but honestly, when you look at everything that we do, joseph was most like edgerrin of all of those guys.  ''we had a long debate the night before the draft: if everybody was there, who would we take? bill was really a joseph addai guy. we felt good that our running back situation was going to be in good hands.''  the colts made a shrewd draft-day decision, considering that addai never rushed for more than 1,000 yards during any college season. his best season came as a senior, when he ran for 911 yards. sharing carries with other running backs kept him from amassing more impressive numbers.  since arriving in indianapolis, addai has had little trouble impressing teammates. addai picked up the colts' complicated offensive system quickly, tutored by the veteran running back dominic rhodes.  after saturday's game, manning said: ''he and dominic have allowed us to run the same plays and be as complex with our offense and our system as we have been in the nine years that i have been here. that is a real credit to both guys, especially a rookie running back.''  a 23-year-old native of houston, addai fits into the colts' low-key locker room. he is quiet and defers to offensive stars like manning and wide receiver marvin harrison.  addai acknowledged that he was nervous before his first playoff game, but he handled the pressure well.  ''before the game i was pretty amped up, but when the game started, i settled and was able to relax,'' he said.  addai had leg cramps during the fourth quarter, but he said he did not expect any lingering problems.  ''coach dungy does real good in saving our bodies in practice,'' addai said. ''i try to take advantage of that.''  during the regular season, dungy started rhodes and brought addai into the game off the bench. but on saturday, dungy played a hunch and started addai.  ''we just felt like this was the time to do it,'' dungy said. ''we wanted to get some runs early in the game. i think we'll do the same thing this week. it worked pretty well for us.''  dungy acknowledged that it might be harder for addai to rush for 100 yards against the ravens, the colts' next playoff opponent, saturday in baltimore.  ''they play very aggressive, they load the box up, they want not to allow you to run,'' dungy said of the ravens. ''we've got to find ways to run. but we'll need to make big plays in the passing game.''  with addai in the backfield, however, the colts have a running game that must be respected. manning is still the catalyst who powers the offense, but addai is emerging as someone who can carry the running game.  ''we never felt any time that i've been here that our running game wasn't going to be good,'' dungy said. ''dominic and joseph have done a great job all year. we just never really worried about that. you have to be able to run in the postseason. and when people give us looks like we got yesterday, when they were really trying to take away the deep passing game, we feel very confident that we're going to be able to run.''  pro football  