in the old neighborhood: old problems, new life   imagine trying to make a pg-rated ''wire.'' that's the tall order assumed by the producers of ''lincoln heights,'' an abc family drama about a middle-class black family moving into a former crack house.  being on abc family ties the show's hands: no obscenity, nudity, sex, gore or crudeness. mean streets on a family channel are likely to translate to stick-ups and shouting matches, the latter-day equivalent of stealing hubcaps, which used to be name-checked when kids needed a lesson about hoodlums and peer pressure.  abc family, after all, was started by pat robertson in 1977. and although television's foster kid has morphed through the years from cbn cable to the family channel to fox family to abc family, it's still obliged by mr. robertson's post-cbn stipulation to keep ''family'' in its name and show his ''700 club'' twice each weekday: new episodes in the morning, reruns at night. for the cohesiveness, the sensibility of the tough-looking ''lincoln heights'' has to work somehow with church and family.  it's a minor marvel, then, that this show isn't a complete wreck. the pop morality play you might expect fails early on to assert itself, and the clean language doesn't seem artificial.  screenwriters have become so adept at writing around speech codes that they are able to win authenticity for characters without four letter words; on ''lincoln heights,'' tay sutton (mishon ratliff), a small but rangy boy, makes his entrance commenting on his sister's breasts. it's an innocuous line, but it's delivered brother to sister, which gives it fair shock value. he needn't say an unwholesome thing for the rest of the episode, and we still buy him as a tough-enough kid.  the same is true with tay's mother, jenn sutton (nicki micheaux), who doesn't have to do evil, dress recklessly or set a bad example. she's already real in how little she wants to move to the ghetto with her husband, eddie (russell hornsby), to prove a point about revitalization. (eddie, a cop, grew up in lincoln heights; he's hoping to help make it safe by moving his family there.) jenn agrees to go with him to the onetime crack house -- she even buys him a book on renovation -- but fights him every inch of the way.  as do his children, for the most part, who have to adjust to a more dangerous school. the daughters, cassie (erica hubbard) and lizzie (rhyon brown), seem to be set up as catnip for the ''one tree hill'' ''oc'' types in the audience. and they succeed, especially cassie, who is ready for her teen vogue close-up. she even keeps a diary on the ''lincoln heights'' web site (abcfamily.go.com/lincolnheights) and by episode 2 has found a controversial but telegenic boyfriend, charles (robert adamson), who looks like a teen-show prototype, acquired straight from the factory. he's perfect.  in short ''lincoln heights'' is lightweight for hbo fans. but its police drama elements -- especially once real violence surfaces, and eddie gets into serious ethical and departmental trouble -- may confound viewers who like its ''cosby show'' factor. ''lincoln heights'' determinedly tries to maintain a balance, and refuses to drop the fluffy stuff or the cops-and-robbers stuff. that's impressive, and if there are any families left who watch television together, maybe they really will enjoy ''lincoln heights.''  lincoln heights  abc family, tonight at 7, eastern and pacific times; 6, central time.  kathleen mcghee-anderson, executive producer and show runner; kevin hooks, executive producer and director. produced by abc family/disney.  with: russell hornsby (eddie sutton), nicki micheaux (jenn sutton), erica hubbard (cassie sutton), mishon ratliff (tay sutton), rhyon brown (lizzie sutton), robert adamson (charles), michael reilly burke (kevin lund).  television review  