new operas at the met: what works?   the metropolitan opera has to be discouraged by the mostly negative critical reactions to ''the first emperor,'' tan dun's ambitious opera, which had its world premiere at the house on dec. 21. the good news for the met, though, is that its run, through jan. 25, is sold out, including this saturday's matinee, to be broadcast on radio and in high-definition screenings at more than 100 movie theaters around the world. could opera companies have better proof that today's audiences are hungry for new works?  ''the first emperor'' is the final installment of a three-opera commission project that the met began a decade ago, one of the most significant ventures of joseph volpe's tenure as general manager. john harbison's ''great gatsby'' arrived in december 1999 and returned in 2002. tobias picker's ''american tragedy'' had its premiere in december 2005.  so far the met's enterprising new general manager, peter gelb, has announced, among other plans, a major commission: a work by the composer osvaldo golijov, slated for 2010-11 season, though the subject is still under discussion. as the company moves ahead, it must be looking back at the volpe commissions. are there lessons to be learned?  on paper mr. tan's opera seemed to be the biggest departure for the company. the opening scene did not disappoint. as the orchestra emitted an ominous, swelling tremolo, wu hsing-kuo, a riveting singer from the peking opera tradition, playing the yin-yang master, began telling the story of qin, the first emperor of china. a battery of percussionists pounded ferocious rhythms on chinese drums. longtime metgoers must have thought that such exotic sounds would never come from that hallowed stage.  alas, once plácido domingo, as emperor qin, appeared, the chinese musical elements were overwhelmed by long stretches of tedious neo-puccini, pentatonic lyricism. there were some compelling instrumental episodes evocative of mr. tan's pulsating, oscar-winning film score for ''crouching tiger, hidden dragon.'' but whole spans of the opera seem to float in some nowhere land between a martial arts film fantasy and ''turandot.''  the score could be taken as a cautionary lesson about the challenges of combining music from different cultures. there seems to be an assumption today that the blending of eastern and western musical traditions is intrinsically interesting. is contemporary western opera in trouble? just inject a jolt of asian music. sounds good, except it depends on who is doing the mixing.  for example, the chinese-born american composer chen yi has created a body of work that draws from both traditions. but she is a formidable composer, a true modernist with an acute ear and keen imagination.  then there is yo-yo ma's silk road project, a bold and timely venture to explore the interconnections of asian, central asian and western culture along the historic silk road trading routes. though some genuinely intriguing new works have been created, the project has also generated compositions with little to recommend them aside from atmospheric colors and mystical allure.  the success of any new opera depends to a large degree on its theatrical viability. does the work hold the stage? is the dramatic pacing right? does it tell a story, create vivid characters?  these things matter. still, like many buffs, i go to the opera to hear great music. think of all the theatrically hapless operas with convoluted plots, like verdi's ''trovatore.'' yet ''il trovatore'' has such rich, subtle and emotionally penetrating music that, at least during a good performance, i am lulled into thinking a complex human drama is unfolding onstage.  which brings up the previous met commissions. you have to say that mr. picker knows how the opera genre works. with the librettist gene scheer, he created an effectively dramatic adaptation of theodore dreiser's monumental 1925 novel ''an american tragedy.'' mr. picker embraces opera as a populist art form and aims to please. he knows when not to linger on a plot twist, and when a character needs a defining-moment aria. this may represent an old-school attitude toward the genre. but there is still potential in these tried and true techniques.  yet mr. picker's essentially neo-romantic score was too safe for me, too melodramatic, too afraid to offend. though capably written, it paled in comparison with recent operas by fiery and challenging european composers like poul ruders, kaija saariaho and thomas adès. some would say that mr. adès's very personal adaptation of shakespeare's ''tempest'' was dramatically messy. but who cares when the music is so audacious? i also admire the operas of another brilliant composer, judith weir, a born dramatist. when is some american opera company going to award this british artist a major commission?  in retrospect mr. harbison's adaptation of f. scott fitzgerald's ''great gatsby'' seems by far the most distinguished of the three met commissions. perhaps just by taking on this landmark american novel mr. harbison set himself an impossible challenge. and it might have been a mistake for him to write his own libretto, though it effectively compresses the story and liberally quotes from the novel. still he might have benefited from being forced to contend with a strong librettist during the creative process.  for me, fitzgerald's characters come through touchingly in this opera. the evocation of the pop songs and dance music of the 1920s is ingenious: mr. harbison had murray horwitz write snappy song lyrics for which he composed his own riffs on jazz age pop tunes, subtly spiked with astringent modern harmonies. the music of ''the great gatsby'' is always elegant, mysterious and captivating.  while mr. gelb has been working out his extensive commissioning plans, he has spoken of the importance of the workshop process. in musical theater, new works are routinely tried out on the road and then revised during weeks of previews. opera would be wise to mimic this practice, mr. gelb has said.  but for a workshop to be valuable the project must have creators who know what they are doing. mr. tan had 10 years to plan and compose his opera. there was an extensive workshop early last year in shanghai. but no workshop could have corrected mr. tan's ill-conceived lyrical writing.  mr. gelb has been on the job for just over five months. his ambitious public outreach efforts and promising artistic plans are already making news. approaching mr. golijov for a commission makes sense. in another gelb initiative, the met and the lincoln center theater are jointly commissioning nine composers for works that could wind up on either institution's stage. though commissioning works is essential, as mr. gelb has rightly stated, it is just as important to bring to new york exciting operas introduced elsewhere.  i can't wait to experience again john adams's ''doctor atomic,'' which had its debut last season at the san francisco opera and is coming to the met in two seasons. mr. adams is making some adjustments to the score. you could consider that san francisco premiere production to be the ultimate workshop.  music  