amid oodles of ambience, a menu with vast appeal   diners looking for a big night out in westchester now have backals, an arriviste with good looks and city smarts that takes the place of the old heathcote tavern in scarsdale. with its broadly appealing menu, backals (pronounced ba-calls) is just as suitable for a little night out; it is one of the new hybrids that successfully blur the lines between special occasion and everyday dining. on a recent night, a couple held hands and nursed flutes of champagne, while nearby a family of five ordered $20 burgers all around.  arthur backal, a catering czar in new york city, and tony fortuna, who owns the lenox room on the upper east side, have worked some big rooms (at the st. regis, the plaza, the waldorf-astoria and tavern on the green), and backals, open just three months, shows huge confidence for such a young restaurant.  playing it safe, the menu nearly replicates that of the popular lenox room. the icons of contemporary fine dining are done well here: shrimp spring rolls are wonderfully brittle and flecked with mint. lusty crab cakes come with lobster aioli. braised short ribs are wine-fragrant and tender. there are reliable chestnuts, too: chilled shrimp cocktails, thick steaks and a good, garlicky caesar salad.  but the room's the thing. inside the stolid tudor building, the soaring main room is wrapped like an opera house with tiers and balconies. exuberant tangerine paint, crisp white trim and mahogany detailing, punctuated by philippe starck's pink translucent chairs, make the room pop. drifts of votive candles -- on stairways, sills and mantels -- add notes of romance and pageantry. it's all a little stagey, but fun, a happy mix of new england austerity and trump-inspired glitz.  which is not to say the food isn't worthy of attention. appetizers included a lovely, simple pizza, and at the other end of the spectrum, a perfectly cooked half lobster with silky lemon mayonnaise. sweet quartered beets were paired with blue cheese and brightly dressed chopped greens. i do not recommend the parfait of foie gras and chicken liver, which had a cloying sweetness at the edges, or the fried blue point oysters, void of ocean freshness.  best among entrees were grilled branzino with picholine olives and a juicy veal t-bone. i also liked the velvety salmon and the meaty grilled jumbo prawns. in a luxurious take on the classic, duck replaced beef in a rich bolognese over firm rigatoni. on the side of novelty, there was an echt wiener schnitzel, complete with lemon wedge and capers.  desserts are made by pros. the apple tart, decorated with a herringbone pattern of caramel, the caramelized banana parfait and the charming miniature cheesecake were all delicious.  but i do have a couple of beefs. on a busy saturday night, the entrees, served with a choice of side dish, seemed to be the work of a harried chef; although flavor wasn't sacrificed, lentils, green beans, french fries and broccoli rabe were piled unceremoniously beside their meat and fish partners (in marked contrast with the meticulously composed entrees of an earlier visit). was the kitchen feeling pressure from the sweet sixteen party on the third floor?  further, the multilayered service was efficient and welcoming, with one exception. on a friday night, with guests running behind, i called ahead to say we would be 15 to 20 minutes late. i was curtly told that our table would be held for no more than five minutes. my husband and i raced down i-684 to save the table, and then grumbled throughout dinner as the table next to ours stood empty. we mentioned this to the manager; he was deeply apologetic, saying it never should have happened and promising a bottle of wine on our next visit.  backals  2 weaver street  scarsdale  (914) 722-4508  very good  the space main room provides high drama; balcony tables feel like privileged perches; upholstered banquettes invite more casual dining in the mezzanine bar and lounge. wheelchair access to main room.  the crowd fairly dressy, youngish clientele. children are welcome, but the thrust is adult. one night, the disco beat kicked in too early, but it was turned down on request.  the bar the wine list is well-focused, with an attractive cluster of half bottles. for a memorable aperitif, try the melon-flavored 2005 etude pinot gris ($48). for a splurge, try the toasty 2004 kistler ''le noisetiers'' ($102). among reds, the 2001 heitz cellar napa valley cabernet sauvignon ($78) has classic varietal appeal.  the bill at dinner, appetizers $9 to $18, entrees $18 to $38, desserts, $8. major credit cards accepted.  what we like roasted beet salad, half lobster with lemon mayonnaise, pizza margherita, rigatoni with duck bolognese, salmon with miso-mustard glaze, grilled branzino, grilled jumbo prawns, veal t-bone, braised short rib, apple tart, banana parfait, cheesecake. sorbets.  if you go lunch lunch: monday through friday, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. dinner: monday through saturday, 5:30 to 10:30 p.m.; sunday, 5:30 to 9:30 p.m. brunch: sunday, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. reservations recommended. parking is below restaurant.  reviewed jan. 7, 2007.  dining/scarsdale  