for american investors, new paths to south africa   south africa is a nation of contradictions. crowded high-end malls, political stability and the country's designation as host of the 2010 world cup reflect a sense of optimism and progress. and yet 16 years after the end of apartheid, this nation of 45 million continues to grapple with widespread poverty and h.i.v., which affects about 12 percent of the population.  signs of the nation's growing prosperity as well as its continuing challenges are evident at the gleaming johannesburg stock exchange, whose bathrooms feature boxes with free condoms to stop the spread of aids.  founded in 1887, the johannesburg exchange is the 16th-largest stock market in the world, with a total capitalization of $598 billion. ''it stacks up with all the world's major stock markets,'' said jonathan auerbach, managing director of auerbach grayson, an international brokerage firm based in new york. ''it's fully transparent, and offers investors a great deal of liquidity.''  in recent years, while american investors have focused on emerging markets like china and india, ''south africa has generally been underweighted in emerging-market funds,'' said brad durham, managing director of emergingportfolio.com, a fund research company in cambridge, mass. at the end of november, global emerging-market equity funds, on average, had about an 8 percent weighting in south africa.  but investor interest is rising in the exchange's offerings. ''foreign investors account for between 20 and 30 percent of the ownership, and about half of the daily volume,'' said herman van papendorp, south africa equity strategist at citigroup in johannesburg. and american investors now have more opportunities to gain exposure to the market, beyond buying the american depository receipts of south african blue chips that trade on united states exchanges.  the ishares msci south africa index fund is an exchange-traded fund based on the msci south africa index, whose 50 holdings capture 85 percent of the market's capitalization. in 2006, the fund, with $419 million in assets, had inflows of $155 million, and rose  19.5 percent. it had an impressive three-year annualized return of nearly 30 percent.  ''the south african market has been very strong, due to economic growth and the continuing commodities boom,'' said jane leung, senior portfolio manager of ishares msci south africa index.  various actively managed mutual funds also offer exposure to the south african market. according to data from morningstar, 20 mutual funds based in the united states had 10 percent or more of their assets in south african companies last fall.  the franklin gold and precious metals fund, which had assets of $987 million as of nov. 31, had the highest concentration: 24.4 percent as of sept. 30, according to morningstar. ''the large south african weighting in the fund has less to do with my outlook on the country and more to do with my outlook on platinum and palladium,'' said steve land, who manages the fund.  south africa produces more than 75 percent of the world's platinum and 30 percent of its palladium. in the third quarter last year, significant holdings included the south african companies anglo platinum and impala platinum.  south africa is home to several large and globally competitive resource companies, said nicholas smithie, manager of the $1 billion mfs emerging markets equity fund. his holdings include sasol, an energy company that has developed methods to turn coal into liquid fuels. in an age of high gas prices, ''sasol has technology that is particularly valuable around the world,'' mr. smithie said.  companies in commodity sectors including gold, platinum and coal account for about 40 percent of the market capitalization of the johannesburg stock exchange. but the stock market has become more diversified in recent years. the commodities boom, along with the growing integration of the majority black population into the economy, has helped fuel consumer demand. for the last three years, the economy has expanded at a rate of 4.5 to 5 percent, according to citigroup.  ''we like south africa mainly for what we think is a continuing story of an emerging black middle class,'' said christopher smart, manager of the $500 million pioneer emerging markets fund, which devotes about 12 percent of its assets to south african stocks.  retailers have been benefiting from pent-up demand for durable consumer products like appliances and furniture. some banks have had success offering mortgages, auto loans and credit cards to consumers they once shunned. as of nov. 30, holdings of the pioneer emerging markets fund included the standard bank group and the financial services conglomerate firstrand.  mr. smithie of mfs said that his fund added positions in south african retailers in the fourth quarter. besides the commodities surge and the growth in consumer spending, analysts say, a third trend is benefiting large south african companies: their ability to expand into sub-saharan africa. as such, the south african market is becoming a proxy for much of the continent.  ''there are a number of south african companies now that have taken a position that they're going to be pan-african,'' mr. auerbach said. with their ability to tap into western capital and their experience operating on the continent, south african companies have significant advantages over rivals from europe and the united states. standard bank, for example, is acquiring banks throughout africa. mtn, a cellular phone company founded in 1994, has rapidly expanded into uganda, rwanda, swaziland, cameroon and nigeria. today, it counts more than 23 million subscribers in 11  countries.  as other african economies continue to benefit from the commodities boom, economic restructurings and investment from china, south africa's multinational companies are well positioned to grow. ''south africa's stock market has become a sort of a gateway to the rest of africa,'' said mr. durham of emergingportfolio.com.  the johannesburg exchange, itself a publicly held company, is aiming to expand its reach. its listings include eight companies from other african countries. ''we're trying to emerge as a hub for sub-saharan africa,'' said john burke, director of issuer services at the exchange.  in many ways, experts say, south africa offers american investors a high level of comfort. ''they have excellent corporate governance and an excellent legal system, and very good managements compared to a lot of other emerging markets,'' said mr. smart of the pioneer fund.  but as with other emerging markets, especially those with economies heavily influenced by commodity prices, south africa presents challenges. its currency, the rand, is volatile. and the young democracy faces its first real succession contest when president thabo mbeki steps down in 2009.  mr. smart says: ''it still remains an emerging market with all of the attendant risks.''  mutual funds report  