separatists admit to madrid airport attack but stand by cease-fire   the armed basque separatist organization eta said tuesday that the ''permanent cease-fire'' it announced last march was still in effect, even as it formally claimed responsibility for the deadly bomb attack on madrid's main airport terminal 10 days ago.  eta made its two-pronged declaration in a statement sent to gara, the pro-independence basque-language newspaper that is often used as a vehicle for eta communiqués.  ''eta affirms that the permanent cease-fire started on march 24, 2006, still stands,'' eta said in a long statement that was summarized by gara. ''it claims responsibility for the attack at barajas,'' the madrid airport. in the wake of the bombing, spain's socialist government said it had canceled the peace effort that began with eta after the cease-fire took effect, arguing that eta had miscalculated and that violence was incompatible with negotiation.  the view that there could be no truce with violence was reiterated tuesday by judge baltasar garzón, spain's most prominent investigative magistrate, who has spent nearly two decades looking into and building criminal cases against terrorist networks in spain.  ''eta gambled that if there were a terrorist attack, it would strike fear in the government and win concessions,'' judge garzón said in an interview. ''we would never give in to that kind of blackmail. eta terrorists don't seem to understand that. they do not yet accept that they are criminals.''  eta, which the state department and the european union have called a terrorist organization, said in its declaration that it had not intended to cause casualties in the attack, which killed two ecuadoreans and injured about two dozen people. it blamed the spanish authorities for not properly evacuating the five-story parking garage where it had parked a van full of explosives.  ''the aim of that armed action was not to cause victims,'' the eta statement said. it added that eta had made three telephone calls more than an hour before the attack, warning that it was impending, describing the explosives-filled van and giving its location.  eta also blamed spain's socialist government for ''placing obstacles'' in the democratic process, and asked it to end what eta called police and political pressure, the statement said.  prime minister josé luis rodríguez zapatero had made reaching a peace accord with eta after decades of violence one of his policy priorities. the attack on the parking lot of the state-of-the-art airport not only struck one of the country's most visible signs of progress and modernity but also unleashed a torrent of criticism of mr. zapatero by his political enemies, who accused him of weakness and naïveté.  when mr. zapatero inaugurated the new terminal -- the largest in europe -- with much fanfare early last year, he described it as a ''marvel'' that reflected spain's ''image of modernity.''  mr. garzón denied that the attack reflected a failure of intelligence or security by the authorities in spain or france, where eta also operates and where the van was stolen. ''it's very difficult to put an end to an organization like this that has had infrastructural and logistical support for 40 years,'' he said.  before the eta statement was made public on tuesday, the police arrested two people suspected of being eta members in southern france linked to the discovery of arms and explosives before and after the attack. they were the first arrests since the attack, although it was not known whether they had been involved.  