for today's daters, update on 'which twin has the toni?'   if you were ever of the mind that the character of jack on ''will & grace,'' in all his shallowness, ditzy thinking and affinity for musical theater, amounted to a minstrelsy of homosexual life so unsettling that it diluted the show's progressiveness to the intensity of a shirley temple, then you may find in ''gay, straight or taken?'' the seeds of genuine advancement for american civilization. this new reality series, which has its premiere on lifetime tonight, exists to dispute the idea that there is an infallible link between the connotations of someone's sexual orientation and the orientation itself. and however dopey the show is in actuality -- and it is awfully, awfully dopey -- who could not applaud its instincts?  each episode has a single young woman going on dates with three different men to figure out which one of them has a girlfriend, which one is straight and available, and which one is unavailable because he is not romantically inclined toward women. if she correctly identifies the unattached heterosexual contestant, then good for her: she gets to go on vacation with him. if not, then good for the man she picks, because he will be sent on a trip with whomever he wishes. the matter of whether or not the single straight man in question is attracted to the woman doing the selecting is utterly irrelevant here. apparently the only fair generalization to make about men is that they love frequent-flyer miles.  the first episode centers on a 27-year-old real estate broker, jenner, a woman whose androgynous name suggests a sophistication greater than she has. she doesn't know what to make of the men before her. what do you really do with a prospect who is a personal trainer, likes heavy metal and enjoys opera? can sexual orientation be determined from the neatness of one's car? jenner makes prejudicial assumptions as reflexively as a child reaches for candy, and we are meant to think of her as just as untrained.  the cult of the metrosexual hardly dismantled stereotypes (if anyone ever truly believed that it did); rather, it further bolstered them. the very notion that we come to loudly understand that heterosexual men can love their face cream is dependent on the view that that loving face cream is frivolously effeminate and that effeminate is ''gay.'' if a silly reality show can help us recognize that what we buy does not make us who we are, then all the best to it.  gay, straight or taken?  lifetime, tonight at 8, eastern and pacific times; 7, central time.  joe livecchi, executive producer. produced by endemol usa.  television review  