circuit in europe bedeviled by heat wave in the alps   another heat wave is wreaking havoc with the world cup skiing circuit this week, and this time warm temperatures melting the snow in the alps are threatening the most important races in the sport.  on tuesday, the french ski resort chamonix canceled the men's world cup races scheduled for jan. 20-21, after the international ski federation inspected the racetrack there.  the world cup calendar was upended as winter arrived late to the alps. temperatures dropped in late december, allowing resorts to make artificial snow and salvage races. but cancellations in january present a bigger problem because the classic events on the circuit are the sport's biggest revenue generators.  canceled races are also disastrous for the european tourism industry. classic races receive much broader television coverage in europe, and cancellations often lead recreational skiers to call off planned ski vacations.  the tour is currently in wengen, which hopes to play host to the 77th annual lauberhorn races this week.  rain and warm weather have been melting the carefully prepared track for days, and organizers are taking desperate measures to save the course. they are worried that the snow will be so waterlogged that it will be hazardous for racers as their skis dig deeply while traveling close to 90 miles an hour.  worst of all are the prospects for low-lying kitzbühel, austria, home of the hahnenkamm, scheduled for jan. 26-28. on monday, the mountain operators there cut off public access to the race slope to preserve what snow remains.  ''the snow is running away, but i am sure conditions will improve before next wednesday,'' said the hahnenkamm race chief, peter obernauer, by telephone. he said that conditions were particularly bad on the zielschuss, the final stretch of the course.  organizers fenced off much of the slushy course at wengen, blocking access to racers and coaches who would normally use tuesday to study the track.  organizers also put fertilizer in the snow to raise its freezing temperature. but the forecast was for temperatures to climb as high as 50 degrees at the finish of the course wednesday. even tuesday night, the temperatures were not expected to drop below 41 degrees on the upper part of the course.  the ski federation is trying to find another home for the races that were canceled in chamonix -- possibly val d'isère, france.  the rearranging could work to the advantage of the american team. in december, when some rescheduling left the world's best racers scrambling, the american men and women went on a winning streak.  ''that's often when the americans are best, because they've learned how to be flexible from being on the road,'' said tamara mckinney, who won 18 world cup races in the 1980s. ''the europeans are used to the home advantage.''  skiing  