bush's task: thrusting new strategy on 'a sovereign nation'   it's a refrain that president bush and his top deputies have uttered many times over:  ''iraq is a sovereign nation, and we stay because they have asked us to be there,'' secretary of state condoleezza rice said in october.  ''iraq is a sovereign nation which is conducting its own foreign policy,'' president bush said in november.  ''it's a sovereign nation; it's their system, they make those decisions,'' maj. gen. william b. caldwell iv, the american command's chief spokesman in iraq, said last week.  now, as president bush prepares to unveil his new strategy for iraq on wednesday night, the question is this: can american officials compel the iraqis to follow the new american plan?  ''let me put it this way: at the end of the day, we're going to have to do some forcing,'' said kenneth m. pollack, an expert on iraq at the saban center for middle east policy at the brookings institution.  ''we have to make it impossible,'' he said, for prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki ''not to do the right thing; for him to say, 'look, we have no choice, the americans are forcing us.' ''  but mr. pollack and other foreign policy experts said that may require american ultimatums that, thus far, the bush administration has been unwilling to issue.  taking american officials at their word, iraq has embraced its sovereignty. mr. maliki exercised it in october when he contradicted american officials who said the iraqi government had agreed to a timetable for security measures.  he exercised it again in november when he ordered united states forces to abandon checkpoints and roadblocks they had set up in baghdad to look for a missing american soldier. he did it one more time in the last days of 2006, when he ignored american requests that saddam hussein's execution be delayed until legal issues were cleared up.  the tension between american will and iraqi action -- or inaction -- has been growing ever since the united states transferred sovereignty back to iraq in 2004.  that has left the united states facing a paradox. an assertive iraqi government, responsible for security and for running the country, is needed if american troops are ever going to be able to hand over control to iraqi soldiers and leave. but an assertive iraqi government may not always do what it is told, which could result in an american script that the iraqis refuse to follow.  part of the problem is uncertainty over whether american and iraqi leaders even have the same objectives. the bush administration favors reconciliation, in the form of an iraqi government representative of the country's major ethnic and religious groups: shiites, sunni arabs and kurds.  but the heavy-handed approach taken by mr. maliki's shiite-dominated government toward mr. hussein's execution has raised questions about its commitment to reconciliation, some experts say.  brian katulis, director of democracy and public diplomacy with the center for american progress, a research and advocacy group, said he could not reconcile mr. maliki's approach, which caused outrage among iraq's sunnis, ''with his stated expression in favor of national unity.''  mr. bush's new iraq strategy also calls on mr. maliki to complement an expected american troop increase with an increase in iraqi troops. but already, administration officials acknowledge that doubts remain about whether the promised iraqi force, to be made up of kurdish militia units from northern iraq, will actually show up in baghdad committed to quelling sectarian fighting.  the united states has requested more iraqi troops in the past and then been disappointed. last summer, american military commanders asked for six iraqi battalions, as part of an effort aimed at quelling violence in baghdad.  but that effort foundered when the united states and iraqi authorities failed to marshal sufficient forces to hold neighborhoods after they were cleared of insurgents and militias.  ''i do think it's a very serious problem in iraq because so much of what we need done depends on the iraqis,'' said daniel p. serwer, the former diplomat who served as executive director of the bipartisan iraq study group.  to be sure, the united states is not without significant leverage -- 140,000 american troops -- to prod mr. maliki's and iraqi leaders to dance to the american tune.  zalmay khalilzad, the outgoing american ambassador to iraq, has often sought to warn iraq's leaders that american support is not unlimited. but that effort has not had much resonance, iraq experts say, in part because mr. bush has repeatedly assured the iraqi leadership that the united states will not desert iraq.  ''we're totally going to have to start being a little more arbitrary,'' said mr. pollack of the brookings institution. ''we hand them back sovereignty and now we continue to live by that charade.''  he said that with the exception of the radical anti-american cleric moktada al-sadr, most of the shiite militia leaders do not want to see the united states pull out of iraq, and that the united states should try to use that sentiment as a lever to push its agenda.  certainly, the bush administration could have forced the issue of mr. hussein's execution, to delay it; he was, after all, in american custody, and it was an american unit that turned him over to iraqi officials in the early hours of dec. 30.  ''my guess is if we really wanted to delay the execution of saddam, we could have done it,'' said mr. serwer, who is also a vice president at the united states institute of peace. but, mr. serwer said, ''you can't do that every day,'' or american officials would undercut their own protestations that iraq is sovereign.  the reach of war: news analysis  