a tax over their heads   low-income residents of connecticut towns, especially here in the northwest corner of the state, are finding it more and more difficult to afford the homes they've lived in for decades. a big part of the problem: property taxes.  unlike new york, connecticut has no county governments. as a result, its towns rely more heavily on property taxes than perhaps any others in the nation. this may be fine for new yorkers who are wealthy enough to invest in weekend homes within driving range of manhattan, but it creates a heavy financial burden on low-income families. this inequity could be greatly ameliorated if connecticut were to adopt a resident homeowner tax exemption like those already in place in other states, including massachusetts, texas, illinois and georgia.  a homeowner tax exemption is usually a fixed amount that is deducted from the assessment of every eligible property before its real estate tax is set. the initial impact of a connecticut town adopting a resident homeowner tax exemption would be to reduce the town's grand list, or tax base, by the total amount of the exemptions. then, because exemptions don't reduce the town's budget, the property tax rate must be raised to cover town expenses unless the state provides aid to compensate the town for the exemptions.  an across-the-board homeowner exemption would lower the relative burden of property taxes on lower-valued properties. because the owners of lower-valued properties also tend to have low incomes, much of the benefit from any homeowner tax exemption would flow to low-income homeowners.  the benefit can be enhanced by targeting the exemptions on residents with low incomes. this would be especially appropriate in connecticut because the state's income tax law already provides a tax credit of up to $500 to anyone who pays at least that much in real estate taxes. to benefit from this credit, a taxpayer must owe at least as much income tax as the credit. but families with incomes below $24,000 are exempt from income taxes, and thus get no benefit from the state's property tax credit. a targeted homeowner tax exemption would help compensate for this omission.  before connecticut towns could adopt a resident homeowner tax exemption, the state legislature would have to enact enabling legislation. there are many forms that such legislation might take, but the most feasible would be a law that allowed ''home rule,'' which essentially allows localities discretion in whether to accept a homeowner tax exemption. thus, a town could offer a homeowner tax exemption only if its residents voted to do so.  how would a homeowner tax exemption work in connecticut? as a test, i calculated how it might apply to cornwall, the small rural town where i live. i used data from the town's grand list and the mill rate, which is the property tax rate voted on by the town's finance board to support the town budget. cornwall has about 800 dwellings, about 600 occupied on a year-round basis and the others by weekenders. i assumed that a homeowner tax exemption of $50,000 would be targeted so as to apply only to the 150 lowest-assessed properties occupied year-round.  the exemption would cut the annual property tax on the median of these lowest-assessed properties in half, from just over $2,000 to about $1,000. it would cost the state about $150,000 to provide financial aid to cornwall to compensate for the benefit. however, if state aid was not forthcoming, the town would have to distribute the cost of the exemption among all taxpayers, which would mean a 3 percent increase in taxes.  cornwall has a property tax rate that is among the lowest in connecticut (just over 21 mills, or about 2 percent of the assessment). it also has a substantial number of generally well-off weekend and year-round residents who would probably not strongly oppose a 3 percent increase in their taxes. cornwall is a fairly typical town for the northwest corner of litchfield county, but other towns in the state might not choose to adopt a homeowner tax exemption, or might adopt it in a less targeted form -- that's why home rule is essential.  inevitably, rural towns across connecticut are going to continue to rely heavily on property taxes to meet their budget needs, and as a result low-income families are going to continue to suffer. giving the towns some independence by allowing them to implement a targeted homeowner tax exemption would help make rural towns more affordable for their more hard-pressed residents.  op-ed contributor david a. grossman is the president of the nova institute, a nonprofit consulting organization, and a former budget director of new york city.  