computers join actors in hybrids on screen   james cameron, the director whose ''titanic'' set a record for ticket sales around the world, will join 20th century fox in tackling a similarly ambitious and costly film, ''avatar,'' which will test new technologies on a scale unseen before in hollywood, the studio and the filmmaker said on monday.  the film, with a budget of about $200 million, is an original science fiction story that will be shown in 3d even in conventional theaters. the plot pits a human army against an alien army on a distant planet, bringing live actors and digital technology together to make a large cast of virtual creatures who convey emotion as authentically as humans.  earlier movies like ''the lord of the rings'' series did this on a limited scale, as in the digitally designed character gollum, whose performance came from the actor andy serkis, while others like ''the polar express'' have used live actors to drive animated images -- so-called motion capture technology.  but none has gone as far as ''avatar'' to create an entirely photorealistic world, complete with virtual characters, on the expected scale of the new film, mr. cameron said in a telephone interview.  ''this film is a true hybrid -- a full live-action shoot, with cg characters in cg and live environments,'' said mr. cameron, referring to computer-generated imagery. ''ideally, at the end of the of day, the audience has no idea which they're looking at.''  jim gianopulos, a co-chairman of fox filmed entertainment, said that he expected theaters to update their facilities to accommodate the 3d demands of the film. ''this will launch an entire new way of seeing and exhibiting movies,'' he said.  ''jim's not just a filmmaker,'' mr. gianopulos added, referring to mr. cameron. ''every one of his films have pushed the envelope in its aesthetic and in its technology.''  the making of ''titanic,'' mr. cameron's last full-blown hollywood feature, was the stuff of movie legend. released in 1997, the film went far over its planned cost to become the most expensive production that had then been made, creating stunning visual effects with a combination of live action and computer graphics. but it also went on to become a historic success, taking in a record- breaking $1.8 billion at the worldwide box office and winning 11 oscars, including the award for best picture.  mr. cameron said he had taken care to avoid the problems he encountered on that, his last gargantuan production, and was already four months into shooting some scenes by the time fox gave final approval to the project on monday. the shoot has been largely secret, in a building in the playa vista section of los angeles.  ''i've looked long and hard at 'titanic,' and other effects-related things i've done, where they've drifted budgetwise,'' he said. ''this has been designed from the ground up to avoid those pitfalls. will we have other pitfalls? yes, probably.''  mr. cameron has already devised revolutionary methods to shoot the film, and expects to create still more methods to bring to life the vision of a completely photo-realistic alien world.  for its aliens, ''avatar'' will present characters designed on the computer, but played by human actors. their bodies will be filmed using the latest evolution of motion-capture technology -- markers placed on the actor and tracked by a camera -- while the facial expressions will be tracked by tiny cameras on headsets that will record their performances to insert them into a virtual world.  the most important innovation thus far has been a camera, designed by mr. cameron and his computer experts, that allows the director to observe the performances of the actors-as-aliens, in the film's virtual environment, as it happens.  ''it's like a big, powerful game engine,'' he explained. ''if i want to fly through space, or change my perspective, i can. i can turn the whole scene into a living miniature and go through it on a 50 to 1 scale. it's pretty exciting.''  sam worthington, a young australian actor, has been named to play the lead, a paralyzed former marine 150 years in the future, who undergoes an experiment to exist as an avatar, another version of himself. the avatar is not paralyzed, but is an alien: 10 feet tall, and blue. zoe saldana, another relative unknown, has been chosen as the love interest.  ''we could do it with make-up, in a 'star trek' manner -- we could put rubber on his face -- but i wasn't interested in doing it that way,'' mr. cameron said. ''with the new tools, we can create a humanoid character that is anything we imagine it to be -- beautiful, elegant, graceful, powerful , evocative of us, but still with an emotional connection.''  mr. cameron is widely regarded as one of hollywood's foremost innovators, and he has been waiting to make the film, which he wrote more than a decade ago, while technology catches up to his vision. he began experimenting with these new filming techniques about 18 months ago, he said.  but he disputed the notion that the galloping pace of filmmaking technology has threatened the traditional role of actors or the emotional grip of a good story.  ''there's this sense of bifurcation, that really true artistic, cutting-edge filmmakers make these indie pictures, and that cg films are these clanking machines,'' he observed. ''i've tried to fight to inhabit both spaces. there's a way to take all these technical tools and have them come from a place where the artist is still running the film. it's not easy.''  while recognizing that it is was an expensive project, mr. gianopulos said that something like ''avatar'' was precisely what the theatrical movie business needed in a time of stiff competition from video games and lavish home entertainment systems.  ''what audiences are looking for, especially in the theater, is a unique experience,'' said mr. gianopulos, whose studio also distributed the ''star wars'' series by george lucas, though it does not own those films. it will fully own ''avatar.''  he added: ''there is nothing as unique as what this film will be, as spectacle, as a presentation of a completely original world, in its presentation and its technology.'' he said he expected the movie to become a series, and the actors were signed up to accommodate sequels.  the live-action shoot with actors will begin in april, with major effects being done by weta, the filmmaker peter jackson's new zealand-based effects company, which created the effects for his ''lord of the rings.'' the film is scheduled for release in summer 2009.  