duke president renews call for district attorney to leave case   the president of duke university renewed his call on monday for the district attorney to step aside from the sexual offense case against three former lacrosse players and give control to an independent party ''who can restore confidence in the fairness of the process.''  in an open letter to the duke community as a new semester began, the president, richard h. brodhead, reviewed recent events in the case and sought to explain the university's responses since last march, when a stripper accused three students of raping her at a lacrosse team party.  mr. brodhead said that from the early, confusing days of the case, the university had been guided by two principles: if true, the accusations were ''grave and should be taken very seriously.'' at the same time, ''our students had to be presumed innocent until proven guilty through the legal process.''  now, he wrote, in the wake of developments that have raised questions about the district attorney's handling of the case, the need for a fair legal process demands that he recuse himself.  early on, mr. brodhead recalled, the district attorney, michael b. nifong, said publicly that he was certain a rape had taken place. but on dec. 22, mr. nifong dropped the rape charges, saying the accuser was no longer sure what had penetrated her. he is proceeding with sexual offense and kidnapping charges, which carry equally stiff sentences.  given the certainty of the prosecutor's early statements, mr. brodhead said then and restated in his letter on monday, the decision to drop the rape charges called the entire case into question.  ''we entrust our conflicts to the law to provide a path to a fair resolution,'' mr. brodhead wrote. ''but to earn this faith from the public, those who work in the legal process must behave with elemental fairness and regard for the rights of those involved. we need and deserve for that faith to be restored.''  in recent weeks, mr. nifong has faced rising criticism and calls to step aside. at a court hearing in mid-december, it was revealed that he withheld potentially exculpatory dna evidence from the defendants' lawyers; he could face a charge of prosecutorial misconduct. two weeks later, the north carolina state bar filed ethics charges against him, saying he had made inflammatory statements about the team and had misled the public about evidence. and soon after, the north carolina conference of district attorneys suggested he recuse himself ''in the interest of justice.''  mr. nifong did not respond to requests for comment. previously, he has said he regretted some of his public statements. last week, after he was sworn in for a four-year term at a private ceremony, he said he intended to do the job for which he was elected.  over the course of the case, mr. brodhead himself has come under criticism from supporters of the lacrosse team for what they viewed as a failure to support the players' presumption of innocence.  mr. brodhead canceled the lacrosse season and sought the coach's resignation on april 4. he also set up five inquiries into the university and the lacrosse team. his letter on monday referred to the campus culture initiative, charged broadly with reviewing responsibility and respect across lines of sex, race and wealth.  the accuser is a local black woman and single mother of three, while the defendants are white.  last week, because of what mr. brodhead's letter called the ''new circumstances'' of the case, duke invited two defendants to return to school. they said they would consider it. the third defendant had already graduated.  