blood center warns of dangerously low supplies in region   the new york region's blood supply has dropped to a five-year low, prompting blood bank officials to warn yesterday of life-threatening shortages if donations do not increase.  the new york blood center -- the region's main blood bank -- was forced this week to limit hospitals' supplies of some less common blood types, and it says it could be days away from rationing more common types as well. the center collects and distributes most of the blood used in new york city, long island, northern new jersey and the hudson valley.  if the shortfall in donations persists for too much longer, hospitals could be unable to give needed transfusions to trauma patients or those having emergency surgery, said dr. robert l. jones, president and chief executive of the blood center.  ''it has happened before,'' he said, though not in recent years, ''and it could happen again.''  to keep up with demand, the region needs 2,000 blood donors a day. in recent weeks, according to the center's records, the average has been about 1,200.  the greater new york hospital association said that so far, none of its members had reported curtailing services because of the shortage. ''the first thing you'd see is postponing elective surgery, and we're not there yet, but it could be close,'' said kenneth e. raske, president of the group. ''everyone's aware that it's a real problem.''  it is not unusual for blood donation to fall during the holidays, but the drop was sharper late in 2006. officials said that because christmas and new year's day both fell on monday, many people extended their three-day weekends into four- and five-day breaks, which meant that fewer people showed up for workplace blood drives. some drives were canceled.  ordinarily, the blood center gets supplies from other parts of the country when its own reserves are low. but other regions experienced a similar holiday decline and have below-normal supplies, though most are better off than new york, dr. jones said.  the mysterious smell that pervaded much of the city on monday interrupted the expected january rebound in blood donation. workplace blood drives got only 30 percent of the expected turnout, as thousands of people evacuated their offices.  in recent years, the blood center has seen its stock of some blood types drop as low as a four- or five-day supply after the new year. this week, the supply of type o negative and type b negative -- found in about 10 percent of the population -- fell to less than two-days' worth, so the center restricted deliveries of those types. the situation with other types is not much better.  ''blood is perishable,'' dr. jones said. ''a whole blood donation is only good for 42 days. we have a pipeline that must be constantly replenished.''  historically, the new york region has struggled to meet its blood needs. it has more than its share of hospitals, so demand is high, and like most big cities, it has lower donation rates than small towns and rural areas.  dr. jones said the blood center had still not recovered fully from the sept. 11 attack on the world trade center in 2001, which led to the last comparable shortage, early in 2002.  ''in manhattan, 15 percent of our blood drives were held at the world trade center,'' he said. ''the companies there were very good about organizing. we even had our own donor room there.''  some of those companies were decimated and others left the region. even among those that stayed nearby, organizing blood drives became harder and more time-consuming because workers were often no longer all in one place.  but the current shortage is more troubling, officials say, because it cannot be traced to a single, catastrophic event.  the blood center has improved the computer systems used to control its inventory, stepped up efforts to recruit minorities who are statistically less likely to give, and tried to make blood donation more appealing by combining it with free screenings for problems like high blood pressure or cholesterol. but all of that has not kept pace with new obstacles that reflect the increasingly global nature of medical issues and of the region's population.  in 2002, the federal government curtailed importation of blood supplies from europe, an important source for the new york region, because of concerns about the human form of mad cow disease. for the same reason, people who have spent a significant amount of time in europe are barred from donating here.  more people than ever are prohibited from giving blood because they have traveled to areas of the world where malaria is common, or because they have been exposed to hepatitis, which is common among asian immigrants.  for information on donating blood in the region, call (800) 933-2566.  