in a crowded field, newcomer holds its own   you wouldn't think montclair needed still another mid-to-high-priced, bring-your-own-wine restaurant. when passionné opened last may, it joined blu, culinariane, epernay, raymond's and at least half a dozen others chasing the attention of this town's well-heeled, well-informed, wine-toting dining-out crowd.  but you would be wrong. although an underpopulated dining room one recent weeknight suggested that passionné had yet to generate the requisite montclair buzz, there is always room for the kind of serious, energetic and authentically french cooking suggested by the restaurant's name -- which, of course, means ''passionate.''  and if you were expecting that the chef-propriétaire would be a grizzled, seen-it-all émigré from paris and lyon by way of manhattan's bistros, you would be wrong there, too. michael carrino, all of 28, grew up in nutley and learned to cook in pizza palaces before graduating from the culinary institute of america and moving on to hotel kitchens in virginia and new york city. he always assumed his first solo venture would be italian, he said, but at cooking school, ''when i first learned about the french classics -- point, escoffier -- i fell in love.''  he means it. everything here but the excellent whole-grain bread (from gina's panificio, down the street) is made in the restaurant. mr. carrino, whose name proudly adorns the menu, adjusts it frequently with the seasons, and even within them. in the 10 days between our two visits, smithfield pork tenderloin got a fall-into-winter makeover, acquiring a smoky wrapper of bacon that enhanced both the juicy meat and an accompanying wild-mushroom risotto.  an appetizer of rillettes is a three-day production, in which pork is simmered for 12 hours with salted pork fat and spices (most prominently anise), then left at least 60 hours more to marinate, tenderize and deepen in flavor. i'm making the place sound like a french version of pig heaven. in fact, those are the only pork dishes on the menu, but nearly everything here has the richness and the assertive flavoring that defines good bistro food.  for another starter, coquilles st.-jacques, two large scallops were cooked just past translucency, then bathed in a creamy wine sauce under a mantle of seared gruyère -- a classic recipe, perfectly executed. a baked wild-mushroom tart also benefited from a cheese topping, but its outstanding feature was a crackling shell of buttered phyllo dough. tapenade packed the punch of three kinds of olives; frogs' legs were moist and garlicky; and the soup of the day, parsnip, was comfortingly sweet and mellow.  main courses held one serious disappointment, though i confess i wasn't surprised. beef wellington is a dish that should be given its gold watch, or maybe a golden parachute: restaurants find it just about impossible to avoid overcooking and overhandling a slab of beef with foie gras and mushrooms in puff pastry. passionné was no exception.  steak frites, which ought to be an easy layup here, suffered (though not fatally) from an excess of oil in the haystack of fries, and lobster crepes were so rich that the lobster barely made an impression. but other entrees were up to the standard of the pork loin, especially a special of thick, fabulously tender short ribs and an offering from the regular menu of lamb shank with baked, puréed acorn squash.  mr. carrino does a neat turn on the traditional moroccan-french tagine, making it with cod instead of chicken. the fish stands up stoutly to the gentle stewing, and an underpinning of couscous absorbs the mediterranean aromatics: black olives, lemon and spices like cardamom, cumin and turmeric.  desserts like passion-fruit crème brûlée and chocolate ganache cake are fine, if not out of the ordinary; my favorite was a tender pear turnover pleasingly scented with almond. but the real cap to a meal here -- if, like me, you've spent too many saturday evenings in busy dining rooms with hardwood floors and tin ceilings -- is the realization that you've managed to carry on a conversation without shouting or straining to hear.  there must be a secret, and there is: the undersides of all the chairs, mr. carrino told me, are fitted with sound-absorbent eggshell foam. you wouldn't think it would work. but once again, at this dark horse of a restaurant, you would be wrong.  passionné  77 walnut street  montclair  (973) 233-1006  www.restaurantpassionne.com  very good  the space two rooms with 52 seats in what were once adjoining storefronts, sparsely decorated but comfortable and quiet. beware of a step down to the larger dining room; that room and the restrooms are wheelchair-accessible via a side entrance.  the crowd adults in search of serious food.  the staff young and winsome.  the bar bring your own wine.  the bill brunch entrees, $7 to $12. dinner entrees, $23 to $26. credit cards: american express, visa, mastercard.  what we like wild-mushroom tart, tapenade, rillettes, soups, mussels, chicory salad; cod tagine, pork tenderloin, lamb shank, short ribs; pear turnover.  if you go dinner: tuesday through thursday, 5 to 10 p.m.; friday and saturday, 5 to 11 p.m. sunday brunch, 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. sunday dinner is scheduled to start next month. closed monday. reservations recommended; parking on the street or in the municipal lot on grove street.  reviewed jan. 7, 2007  dining/montclair  