a franchise in flux, a quarterback at a standstill   the question that will still not go away was asked for the first time this season on the eve of training camp, under a searing sun in albany.  what has quarterback eli manning, entering his third season, done to lead the giants to believe he will improve?  ''this is the 9,733rd time i've answered this question,'' said coach tom coughlin, exaggerating or, perhaps, counting the question every time it had run through his own head. ''what hasn't he done is maybe an easier way to do it.''  coughlin took the hard way, detailing manning's off-season regimen of studying every bit of game tape; spending countless hours with john hufnagel, the former offensive coordinator, and kevin gilbride, the quarterbacks coach; leading the team in weight-room and workout attendance; and generally being a sponge-like student and solid citizen.  the giants thought they did everything possible to turn manning into the franchise player they expect him to be. yet manning, by most tangible measures, ended 2006 looking no better than the quarterback who started 2005.  call it the eli factor. nearly everything the giants will do to try to improve this off-season -- hiring a general manager, pondering the future of coughlin, finding a new offensive coordinator and adding players -- will be done with an eye toward rescuing manning, who is stranded on the lengthening plateau of his own growth curve.  last week, leading into the giants' wild-card playoff game today in philadelphia, the questions from reporters to manning were laced with a central, short-term theme: can he handle the pressure -- from both the eagles' pass rush and the postseason glare?  that question will be answered soon enough. the lingering query is how the giants will create the elite quarterback they expected to have by now.  ''i've made some strides,'' manning said thursday when asked about his progress. ''i've played well at times and haven't at others. we've lost some players and some different things have happened, but i have to just continue to improve.''  yet manning's 2006 season was remarkably similar to 2005, his first full year as a starter. that is disconcerting for the giants. with their focus on manning, their peripheral vision cannot help but notice a string of other young quarterbacks -- not drafted with the first overall pick and without the surname of a famous quarterback -- soaring past him in intrigue, if not talent.  in the regular season in 2005, manning threw for 3,762 yards and 24 touchdowns with 17 interceptions. in 2006, he had 3,244 passing yards, 24 touchdowns and 18 interceptions.  his passer rating moved to 77.0, 18th in the n.f.l., from 75.9. his completion percentage rose to 57.7, 21st in the league, from 52.8, while the average length of his completed passes dropped to 10.8 yards, ranked 28th, from 12.8. put another way, manning completed seven more passes in 2006 than in 2005, for 518 fewer yards.  and, by the one measure that counts most -- victories -- manning and the giants dropped to 8-8 from 11-5.  general manager ernie accorsi, who pulled the draft-day trade with the san diego chargers for manning in 2004, and who is retiring when this season ends, still believes manning is a championship-caliber quarterback, the type of player to build around.  what matters is what accorsi's yet-to-be-named successor will think. or the next coach, if coughlin is dismissed.  ''every game that we play he learns and he grows,'' coughlin said of manning. ''he's very aware of what is done properly, what isn't, and he's always trying to improve on that. and certainly he's spending a lot of time and focus on that this week.''  today's game is manning's three-hour final exam, a chance to reshape his sagging reputation.  ''this game right here, how he plays, will determine how much heat he takes during the off-season,'' the reserve quarterback tim hasselbeck said.  manning's play dipped late in the 2005 season, ending with a dud of a performance in the playoffs. in a 23-0 first-round home loss to the carolina panthers, manning was 10 of 18 for 113 yards with no touchdowns and 3 interceptions. the swoon dogged him and motivated him in the off-season.  his play has been marginally more consistent in 2006. yet manning could not rescue the giants from their late-season slump, when they lost six of their last eight games.  ''i like eli manning,'' the nbc football analyst john madden said in a conference call thursday. ''i think he is the real deal and he's going to be a top quarterback.  ''he's not going to be peyton manning, but i think he's going to be a top quarterback. right now, it looks like his confidence level isn't up, he's not reading and getting the ball out of there quickly, his decisions aren't really sharp.''  then, with a nod toward today's game, madden added, '' i think right now he needs tiki barber.''  he will not have barber next season, because barber, one of the league's best running backs, is retiring. and it is unclear who his coaches will be. coughlin fired hufnagel on christmas and handed the duties to gilbride.  those three coaches were given the responsibility for manning's development in 2004, and a large part of the decision over who coaches him next season will hinge on how the team's owners view manning's progress and potential.  manning said he felt somewhat responsible for hufnagel's dismissal. but he mostly seems unfazed by the speculation that swirls around him. then again, nothing appears to truly bother him, which is why he is called easy.  ''if his dog died, you'd have no idea,'' hasselbeck said.  manning talks with reporters with no sense of eagerness or dread, and has perfected the art of the dull interview. even the most direct question about his performance or his feelings is deflected with generalizations, often answered with a ''we,'' not an ''i.'' it can be assumed that nothing he has said has been posted on an opposing team's bulletin board.  in many ways, manning's play matches his interviews. increasingly relied upon to manage the giants, not carry them, his performances are largely forgettable, sprinkled with occasional, nearly equal doses of spectacular and regrettable plays.  he rarely looks angry or thrilled, a nonchalance that has been interpreted by critics as a lack of passion. he does not believe in showing up teammates by screaming or gesturing. he does not believe there is a benefit to celebrating touchdowns with a wild downfield sprint.  his coolness is something that drew the giants to him. it has been displayed during a handful of late-game comebacks, in bursts that give the giants hope that manning can grow from being a decent quarterback to a great one.  ''unfortunately, you guys don't get to spend every day with him,'' center shaun o'hara told reporters thursday. ''and you guys don't get to know what type of person he is, what type of competitor he is.''  teammates say manning has grown into a more fiery behind-doors leader. barber usually gives the pregame pep talk to the offense. but barber has deferred in recent weeks, in effect handing the leadership reins to manning.  manning, his teammates said, is comfortable in that role, but some are still jarred when he spews a curse word. it's a little like hearing opie swear.  ''eli's a young kid still,'' barber said. (manning turned 26 on wednesday). ''people expect him to play like a 28-year-old. he's 25 years old, his third season in the national football league. everything doesn't happen quickly. i didn't get it until five years in the national football league. so you give him time, you support him and you build around him as you go.''  that is what the giants thought they had done. now, whenever the season ends, they must rethink their approach with manning, from the plays he is given, the coaches who teach him and the teammates who surround him.  the only certainty going into next season, it would seem, will be manning and the questions about his improvement that are sure to follow.  pro football  