tax cut measure could be a stumbling block for increase in minimum wage   as part of their 100-hour legislative blitz, house democrats are expected to vote today to increase the minimum wage for the first time in a decade, to $7.25 an hour, in a move that economists say will raise pay for 13 million workers.  the bill's chances are less certain in the senate, largely because of friction over a republican push to include tax breaks for small business in the bill. senate republicans have hinted that, without such tax cuts, they will filibuster the measure, a move that the bill's supporters would need 60 votes to overcome.  the legislation would lift the federal wage floor, currently $5.15 an hour, to $7.25 in three steps between now and 2009.  ''minimum-wage workers desperately need a raise,'' said representative george miller, democrat of california and chairman of the house education and labor committee. ''it is a moral outrage that millions of americans who work full time still live in poverty.''  after opposing a minimum-wage increase for years, many republicans now say they favor one, but only if it is coupled with a tax cut for restaurants and other small businesses -- the groups they say would be hurt most by the wage increase.  ''the democrat leadership's unbalanced proposal may increase the minimum wage, but it leaves small businesses and their workers to fend for themselves,'' said representative howard p. mckeon of california, the ranking republican on the education and labor committee.  on tuesday, mr. mckeon and jim mccrery of louisiana, the senior republican on the house ways and means committee, introduced a competing minimum-wage bill that includes billions of dollars in tax breaks. one such break would allow faster depreciation for newly built restaurants, allowing them to record the building cost on financial statements over 15 years instead of the current rule of 39 years, and thus lower taxes.  president bush has said he might accept a higher minimum wage, but only if it is tied to tax cuts to soften the blow for business.  some democrats and many of their liberal and labor allies assert that the minimum wage should not be used as an excuse to give more tax breaks to business.  ''for the past 10 years, republican leaders have held the minimum wage hostage,'' said the a.f.l.-c.i.o.'s president, john j. sweeney. ''corporations and wealthy americans have gotten their rewards. now it's time to do the right thing for low-wage workers, with no payoffs to business.''  frustrated by congress's inaction, 28 states have adopted minimum wages above the federal floor, affecting 70 percent of the work force.  in an unusual move for a minimum-wage bill -- typically it is handled by the house and senate labor committees -- the senate finance committee is scheduled to hold a hearing today on the bill.  ''to call a minimum-wage increase 'overdue' is the understatement of the year,'' said senator max baucus, democrat of montana and the committee's chairman. ''this congress promised to raise the minimum wage, and we will. we also need to pass meaningful small-business incentives along with a wage increase. we can do both, and we will.''  many economists, especially conservative ones, insist that raising the minimum wage would not reduce poverty, saying it would ultimately reduce the number of jobs for low-skilled workers. but other economists, especially liberal ones, say a higher minimum would have virtually no effect on job levels while it lifted the pay for millions of low-wage workers.  ''the increase will make a big difference for someone who makes the minimum wage -- you're talking about thousands of dollars a year in extra earnings,'' said jared bernstein of the economic policy institute, a liberal research group, and one of the economists scheduled to testify before the finance committee. ''it's important to remember that if you don't have a binding wage floor, a lot of workers are going to end up disconnected from the improving economy and that's exactly what's happened.''  mr. bernstein's institute estimates that six million workers earn less than $7.25 an hour, but workers earning a dollar or two more than that can also expect to see their wages increase if a new minimum is enacted.  joseph sabia, a professor of consumer economics at the university of georgia, said an increase would do little to lift workers out of poverty.  ''most people who earn the minimum wage are not poor or near poor,'' professor sabia said. ''if the goal is to help the working poor, it would be better to raise the earned-income tax credit,'' which refunds cash to poor workers.  the traditional economists' view has been that a higher minimum wage would mean some job losses for low-wage workers. but a landmark 1994 study by david card and alan krueger upset the common wisdom by finding that there were no overall job losses when new jersey raised its minimum wage.  david neumark, a longtime critic of that study and an economics professor at the university of california, irvine, said most credible studies had concluded that an increase in the minimum wage did hurt employment for unskilled workers, although most studies did not find major job reductions. he said an increase to $7.25 might reduce job levels for the least skilled workers by 4 percent.  ''the most affected workers are the ones you'd most like to help,'' professor neumark said. ''if the workers who get raises are middle-class teenagers and the ones who lose jobs are unskilled workers in poor jobs, you can increase poverty.''  harry holzer, a professor of public policy at georgetown university, acknowledged that there might be some job losses, but he said that they would be minor and would be far outweighed by the wage gains.  ''minimum-wage earners are concentrated in the bottom half of families by income,'' professor holzer said. ''they might not be in the bottom 10 percent, but they might be in the bottom 10 to 40 percentile. will a minimum-wage increase dramatically reduce poverty? probably not. but it will redistribute income toward the bottom half of american workers.''  the 110th congress  