detroit puts on a show, and it's playing for keeps   more than ever this year, the detroit automakers are taking a page from those old mickey rooney-judy garland musicals: facing disaster, the plucky youngsters decorated the barn and put on a show to save the day.  for detroit, cobo center stands in for the old barn, with officials supporting a nearly $1 billion expansion plan to make it more convention-friendly.  and the 2007 north american international auto show is detroit's chance -- not last gasp, certainly, but increasingly desperate -- to show that it has the heart and the talent to stage a comeback and save the jobs of its dwindling auto-industry work force.  the show's razzle-dazzle starts today with media previews that continue through tuesday; the show opens to the public next saturday and runs through jan. 21.  automakers from around the world will introduce more than 50 cars and trucks at the event, which remains the pre-eminent auto show in north america. general motors, ford and the chrysler group must hope that their shiny designs can somehow recapture customers lost to imports.  sounding a bit like a wall street analyst, brian pannebecker, an assembly worker at ford's sterling axle plant in sterling heights, mich., said this year's show might be more important than any in memory. ''there's a lot riding on the new models that will be hitting the showroom,'' he said in a phone interview. ''our industry is struggling right now, but the show is a chance to get a fresh start.''  as always, those struggles hit especially hard in michigan. roughly half of ford's 75,000 north american workers have accepted offers of buyouts or early retirement. at general motors, about 35,000 hourly workers, a third of the north american total, have been shown the door.  analysts forecast a slight dip in american auto sales this year. with foreign brands continuing to gain market share, the detroit-based companies are fighting over a smaller slice of a shrinking pie.  certainly, the local industry's future seemed brighter in 1899, when detroit's first car dealer, a former bicycle salesman, william metzger, held a show that included african big-game trophies and equally exotic cars that ran not on gasoline, but on steam and electricity. today, more than a century later, general motors will unveil an electric concept car, the chevrolet volt, which has created the most buzz in advance of the show. g.m. says the volt, a plug-in hybrid, could deliver the equivalent of 150 miles a gallon. the volt thus promises -- at least in theory, given that it could not be produced without a leap in battery technology -- three times the mileage of a toyota prius. [page 2.]  these cars will be among the other highlights of the show:  revamped chrysler and dodge minivans offering new flexibility with second-row seats that swivel to face the third row -- with a removable table in between.  the 2008 ford focus compact car and a sleek ford design study called the interceptor. ford's lincoln division will show the mkr luxury sport sedan, and its jaguar subsidiary will feature the c-xf, a precursor of the s-type's replacement.  the 2008 malibu, chevrolet's latest challenge to the toyota camry. honda will preview the next generation of its competing accord, with a two-door concept.  the second-generation cts, replacing the sedan that kicked off cadillac's revival.  the smart fortwo, a mercedes-built microcar that will take on the mini cooper in north america in 2008.  convertibles including the latest bmw 3 series, with a retracting hardtop; the rolls-royce phantom drophead coupé; the mercedes concept ocean drive, a four-door convertible based on the large s600 sedan; and a chevrolet camaro convertible concept car.  small car-based utility wagons from volvo (xc60) and nissan (rogue). hyundai will present a larger wagon, the veracruz, aimed at the honda pilot.  relatively few new sport utilities, compared with recent years. still, porsche will unveil the next-generation cayenne, and land rover will introduce the smaller lr2 to fill the spot once occupied by the freelander. jeep will show its diesel-driven trailhawk concept.  new sports cars including toyota's 400-horsepower ft-hs hybrid and an acura that could replace the nsx supercar. lexus previews its is-f sport sedan.  the chrysler nassau concept car, a less costly take on the mercedes cls, a sedan with coupelike styling.  while the detroit event remains north america's most prestigious auto show, it faces new competition from los angeles, which has rescheduled its show to fall several weeks earlier, out of detroit's shadow. los angeles has already supplanted detroit as the locus of american car culture, since california is easily the nation's largest market -- particularly for imports, exotics and luxury cars -- and since trends inevitably start on the west coast.  in part to bolster the detroit show's status, local officials are hoping to add 270,000 square feet of exhibition space to cobo center (and demolish the adjoining cobo arena, where the detroit pistons played before moving 35 miles north to the palace of auburn hills).  but the future of cobo center is far from the biggest crisis for the city and its all-encompassing industry. less than a year ago, as detroit played host to the super bowl, news coverage tended to portray detroit as a city on the rise, focusing on the monuments of urban renewal -- a new football stadium here, a gambling casino there. little attention was paid to the abandoned buildings downtown or the neglected neighborhoods that make up much of the city.  as if detroit wasn't suffering enough, this is likely to be the year when toyota does the equivalent of a touchdown dance on detroit's home field: the company seems assured of passing g.m. in 2007 as the world's largest automaker. today at the auto show, toyota will show the tundra crewmax, an oversize-cab version of the texas-built pickup that poses a threat to the last market segment that detroit still dominates.  the show is expected to pump more than $540 million into a local economy that could use a lift, according to david sowerby, chief market analyst at loomis sayles.  attendance topped 750,000 for last year's show, and mr. pannebecker, the ford worker -- he recently turned down a buyout offer -- plans to be at this one. he has his eye on the ford edge utility wagon, but is also dreaming about using his employee discount on luxury models from ford's volvo or land rover subsidiaries.  while acknowledging the automaker's challenges, he added that recent fords, including the f-150, mustang, fusion and edge, had been well received. his prescription? local carmakers need to churn out more of these real-world machines, rather than fantasy cars that never see the light of day.  ''right now, we need stylish, well-designed, innovative cars that are going to get people excited,'' he said. ''if detroit doesn't build them, someone else will.''  