drew is a red sox in waiting  and waiting   j. d. drew could not be reached for comment yesterday. he changed his telephone number or had a problem with his phone service, because the automated message said his number had been disconnected or was not in service.  i hope drew's phone wasn't disconnected because he couldn't pay his bill. he is, after all, between contracts. he walked away from his contract with the los angeles dodgers, and he hasn't begun his contract with the boston red sox. that circumstance could leave him a few dollars short.  to be completely accurate, drew, a free-agent outfielder, doesn't have a contract with the red sox. the club and drew's agent, scott boras, have taken longer to complete a contract than they took negotiating its terms.  on the 24th day that drew was eligible to sign a contract with a new team, boras announced that he had reached agreement with the red sox. thirty-five days have elapsed since then, and neither drew nor the red sox have signed that contract.  because the red sox and boras have not submitted terms to the commissioner's office or the players union, drew remains a free agent. that means he could sign with another team. but he obviously doesn't want to sign with another team. boston agreed to give him $70 million for five years, an amount no other team is likely to give him.  drew walked away from $33 million left in the five-year contract he signed with the los angeles dodgers two years ago. his decision to opt out of the contract, which was his right, prompted speculation among executives of other clubs and baseball officials that someone had tampered with drew, letting him know there was more than $33 million out there if he left the dodgers.  an on baseball column a month ago that raised the tampering issue also raised the ire of boras. the suggestion that he would violate baseball rules offended him.  ''that assessment,'' boras said, meaning his advice to drew to opt out of the contract, ''was made with the knowledge of what the market would be. it was clear there was a record market for these guys.''  despite boras's comment and the dodgers' decision not to pursue a tampering charge with the commissioner's office, talk about the possibility of tampering has not gone away. charges are rarely filed, however, because teams find it difficult to uncover evidence.  in the drew case, boras objected to the anonymity of officials and club executives who suggested the possibility of tampering, while he engages in anonymity. when he talks about his negotiations for a client, he often talks about a mystery team, but the team is never identified.  boras has not had much to say about the delay in the completion of drew's contract.  ''theo and i have been working on that as we speak,'' boras said, referring to red sox general manager theo epstein, in a telephone chat sunday. ''we expect something to move forward in the near future.'' he declined to define ''near future.''  ''i don't talk about those things,'' he said.  epstein was not much more enlightening. ''scott and i were both away over the holidays,'' he said yesterday. ''we'll get back to it this week.''  the problem with the contract is physical, or medical. the red sox' doctors are not happy with the condition of drew's right shoulder, which was operated on in september 2005.  major league baseball has become strict about medical examinations. contracts will not be approved until a player passes a physical. drew had his physical weeks ago and might have had a second one. no one is saying if he did, citing privacy laws that give general managers and agents an excuse not to talk about a player's medical condition when they don't want to talk about it.  boras and epstein have said in recent weeks that they have to clear up minor contract language. but it doesn't take five weeks to clear up minor contract language.  pressed for an explanation sunday, boras said: ''we're working out medical language that took some additional examination so that both sides would have information. there's no disagreement here. theo's been on vacation. i've been working on other contracts. we agreed we would get it done.''  epstein said: ''it was a language issue. how serious a language issue? it's just a language issue.''  the finished product, if there is one, will be interesting to see. boston could well want to reduce the length of the contract, perhaps to three years, or it may want to insert an out clause, in which the contract would no longer be guaranteed if drew were to spend a designated length of time on the disabled list. the sides, however, don't seem to be making progress on resolving the issue.  i made one additional effort to reach drew by telephone to find out what was really happening. three drews are listed in the hahira, ga., telephone directory. i picked one and told the woman who answered that i was looking for j. d.  ''i'm his mom,'' she said.  did she know what was happening with her son's contract?  ''no, i don't,'' she said, ''not at the present time.''  that makes two of us.  on baseball  