looks like a business; should be taxed like one   now i've seen everything. nick saban walked away from the miami dolphins last week to be the coach at the university of alabama.  rumors surfaced during the fall that alabama was courting saban. each time, saban denied it, but perhaps never more emphatically than on dec. 21, when he told reporters: ''i guess i have to say it. i'm not going to be the alabama coach.''  according to reports, saban had three years remaining on his dolphins contract at about $4.5 million annually. the alabama deal will guarantee him $4 million a year for eight years. he can also earn performance bonuses of $800,000 a year in bowl-game bonuses.  though the full contract details have yet to be reported, based on other division i-a compensation packages, one can assume that there will also be other bonuses, free use of a car or two, free country-club memberships, a heavily subsidized mortgage, upward of $1 million in severance pay and a handsome pension, among other perquisites.  in short, a university outbid an n.f.l. team for a head coach. but saban's record after two years in miami was an uninspiring 15-17. imagine what alabama would have offered bill belichick.  so much for myles brand's exhortations that athletic departments should become more frugal. brand, president of the national collegiate athletic association, has acknowledged that, when properly accounted, fewer than 10 of the more than 1,000 college athletic departments run a surplus.  so, what's going on? it's the market. if universities want to get the best coaches, they have to pay the going rate.  never mind that the presidents of large public universities generally have compensation packages of $200,000 to $700,000. never mind that paying the football coach 5 to 15 times more than the college president (and many times more than the professors) sends a strange message to the student body about the institution's priorities. never mind that article i of the n.c.a.a. constitution affirms that academics have primacy over athletics. the market demands it.  what kind of a skewed market makes these demands? first, the players are not allowed to be compensated. instead, the coaches walk off with the value produced by the ''student-athletes.''  second, athletic departments have no shareholders who seek dividends or increases in stock value through higher reported profits. that is, these departments face no market pressure to turn a profit. money finds a way to be spent in such a circumstance and costs bloat.  third, athletic departments benefit from privileged tax treatment. perhaps most notably, boosters can give money to the program and procure the privilege of buying some choice seats on the 50-yard line. tax laws allow a booster to deduct 80 percent of such a donation, which in practice is little more than a personal seat license.  fourth, it is in athletic directors' self-interest to up the ante on coaches' compensation. their worth increases along with their coaches' pay.  yet, even given the artificiality of the market, do division i-a football coaches generate $2 million to $4 million of additional revenue annually? not likely. the average i-a football team earns about $15 million a year in revenue; the average n.f.l. team earns about $160 million. how can a college coach create as much value as an n.f.l. coach?  there may be an n.c.a.a. coach in a given year, like greg schiano at rutgers in 2006, who is largely responsible for turning a program around, and he may create more than a couple of million dollars of value. but there are several dozen division i-a coaches who earn in excess of $1 million, and it is likely that nearly half of them preside over losing teams.  but the real point is that college athletics are not supposed to be run according to the rules of the marketplace. they are supposed to be run according to the norms of the university.  athletic departments should not be able to have it both ways: either they are part of academia and are treated as nonprofit institutions, or they are professional enterprises, whose players are paid a salary and covered by workmen's compensation, and they pay taxes like other business entities.  keeping score andrew zimbalist, an economics professor at smith college, is author of ''the bottom line: observations and arguments on the sports business'' (temple university press, 2006.)  