a sophomore raises tennessee's hopes   the clock was winding down and tennessee looked as if it would win, but candace parker just wanted to make sure.  with connecticut trailing by 4, kalana greene launched a jump shot with eight seconds left, only to have parker swat it back at her. it was an important play, but hardly a matter of saving the best for last. parker had beaten up on uconn all afternoon and was the main reason fourth-ranked tennessee sent no. 5 connecticut to its first loss of the season, 70-64.  parker finished with 30 points, 2 of which came on a dunk, 12 rebounds and 6 blocked shots, and in front of 16,294 at the hartford civic center, tennessee (14-1) overcame a spirited comeback by uconn (12-1) to pull out its third consecutive victory against the huskies.  ''as the game went on, she got better and better,'' tennessee coach pat summitt said of parker, a sophomore. ''she's better under pressure. to have a go-to player like her opens things up for other players. she was assertive, getting to the free-throw line. she stepped up really big for us.''  by their standards, the recent years have been lean ones for the lady vols. they have not won a national championship since 1998, and they failed to make the final four last season, something that had not happened since 2001. but tennessee is confident about its future, and it has reason to be. parker may be good enough to carry this team a long way.  parker scored 15 points in the first half, helping tennessee sprint to a 41-29 lead at the break. when nicky anosike made a layup with 17 minutes 55 seconds left in the game to give tennessee a 47-29 lead, the contest seemed all but over. but the huskies made a determined bid. when connecticut's mel thomas hit a 3-pointer from the right corner with 4:49 to play, it tied the score at 58-58 and seemed to give the huskies the momentum.  parker answered with a turnaround jumper. after the huskies tied the score again, this time on a layup by brittany hunter, tennessee's sidney spencer hit perhaps the biggest shot of the game, connecting on a 3-pointer with 3:49 left. parker scored the next 4 points for tennessee and later blocked the shot by greene, allowing the lady vols to hold on.  ''our team really pulled together,'' said parker, who is 6 feet 4 inches. ''we knew it was crunch time, and it was crucial that we get baskets. everyone kept their composure and we finished out the game.''  connecticut coach geno auriemma was among those heaping praise on parker after the game. ''i think her intensity level and her concentration level during a game are so much better than they were before,'' he said. ''she's always had the skills, but those skills are more evident now because she's not losing her focus. there were stretches in which she just dominated and we didn't have any answers for her.''  tennessee, whose only loss this season came at north carolina, seemed to play this game with a chip on its shoulder. summitt let it be known that she was not pleased that west virginia coach mike carey said the connecticut's post players were more physical than tennessee's and harder to score on.  when asked if this game sent a message, tennessee's shannon bobbitt said: ''definitely, especially to the west virginia coach. it sends a message to everyone out there. we're a great team, a final four team.''  college basketball  