improbable gators consider the possibilities   the florida football team has labored this season without a reliable tailback. its kicker hit only 30 percent of his attempts and none from beyond 33 yards. the gators rank 118th out of 119 division i-a teams in penalties, giving up 64 yards a game.  ohio state has breezed through the season with the top-ranked defense, the heisman trophy winner at quarterback and only one close game.  that means the top-ranked buckeyes (12-0) and the no. 2 gators (12-1) meet in the bowl championship series title game monday night having made markedly different journeys.  one of the biggest themes of this ohio state season has been the need to stay sharp during long lulls in action or competition. the buckeyes did not play a ranked opponent between a victory at iowa on sept. 30 and their game against michigan on nov. 18. only 2 of their 12 games have been decided by fewer than 17 points.  florida's season, meanwhile, has seen a blur of creativity and innovation. seven of the gators' 13 games have been decided by 10 points or fewer.  the gators have juggled two quarterbacks, adjusted to their kicking deficiencies and managed to compensate for the loss of defensive tackle marcus thomas, maybe their best n.f.l. prospect, who was thrown off the team.  ''in the course of a football season, it's all about adapting,'' florida receiver jemalle cornelius said. ''we've had to adapt and go with the flow.''  the gators survived one of the most difficult schedules in the nation and then, improbably, vaulted into the national title game on the regular season's final day when u.c.l.a. upset southern california.  ''i haven't sat back and said, wow,'' florida coach urban meyer said. ''but it's been a team that's had to fight, scratch and claw. you're playing 17 true freshmen, blocking punts and field goals, and your quarterback is running a bit of a single wing.  ''there's been a lot of minds in there working and trying to be creative.''  the biggest area of creativity for the gators has been the offense. their leading rusher, deshawn wynn, ran for only 621 yards and was slowed by injuries.  lately, the gators have relied more on percy harvin, who has run the ball from the receiver position, and the backup quarterback tim tebow, the nation's top quarterback recruit last year.  for the past week, meyer has referred to harvin and tebow as the team's top rushers.  meyers acknowledged the implausibility of reaching the final game without a reliable tailback. ''that is kind of hard to imagine,'' he said.  it is also difficult to figure how the gators successfully juggled two quarterbacks, a system that often proves disastrous.  the senior chris leak is entrenched as the starter and takes a majority of the snaps. leak throws one of the most beautiful balls in the college game, though he has often thrown them to the other team.  he had 13 interceptions, but cobbled together a season that put him among the top 20 in passing efficiency.  some of the biggest plays by a florida quarterback this season have come from tebow, a true freshman who takes 10 to 15 snaps a game.  many are in short-yardage or goal-line situations, where tebow can use his 6-foot-3, 229-pound frame to ram ahead for tough yardage.  tebow converted a fourth-and-1 in the fourth quarter at tennessee to set up leak's winning touchdown pass and threw two touchdown passes against louisiana state in a 23-10 victory.  florida's quarterbacks have accepted their roles. the offensive coordinator, dan mullen, said that while watching film of tebow getting stuffed on a run during the alabama game, leak joked, ''hey tim, you know they lift weights at alabama, too.''  ''there is no jealousy,'' mullen said.  with a patchwork offense, florida has had to rely on its staunch defense and a special-teams unit that has thrived in every area outside of field-goal kicking by chris hetland.  the strengths of those two units have allowed the florida offense to play to its strengths and not gamble. this florida team has played out its season much like the 2002 ohio state team, which was known as the luckeyes for its good fortune during its run to the national title.  that team, much like this florida one, was a heavy underdog in the title game. but the buckeyes ground down one of the best miami teams and eventually won in double overtime.  florida will probably try a similar approach monday.  ''we know that we don't have to come out and score a bunch of points, because our defense will keep us in the game,'' mullen said. ''our special teams are going to make a play instead of give up a play. those little things happening allow you to be more patient on offense.''  the baffling part about florida's success is how often the gators have been penalized. florida is averaging more than eight flags a game. meyer refused to accept the argument that the penalties were simply a byproduct of aggression.  ''undisciplined teams make penalties,'' he said. ''that's not something we are very proud of.''  but while meyer jokes that florida has played enough close games this year to give him gray hairs and ulcers, he said he was proud of his team's resolve.  and the gators are just one more game away from completing one of the most improbable runs in college football.  ''you learn a lot about your football team when you get hit right in the mouth and you respond to that,'' meyer said.  ''we were hit in the mouth quite often this year against some very good opponents.''  on monday, in its biggest test, florida will have a chance to respond against the nation's best team on the game's biggest stage.  college football  