the wedding economy   the new jersey legislature has sent a message to gay and lesbian couples: let civil union bells ring. same-sex couples hoping to marry were not the only ones disappointed at that jarring sound; businesses too have been left at the altar.  from an economic perspective, opening up full-fledged marriage to same-sex couples makes sense. more marriages mean more weddings, and weddings are a big business. according to industry reports, the typical new jersey wedding costs more than $35,000. even if gay couples spend only a fraction of that average, the huge pent-up demand from couples in the state and across the country adds up to a lot of money. florists, caterers, hotels, photographers and restaurants would share in a marriage windfall that could easily top $300 million over the first few years of marriage equality for same-sex couples.  marriage rights for gay couples would also generate other economic benefits for new jersey businesses. recent research shows that equal treatment improves gay, lesbian and bisexual employees' mental health and happiness in the workplace, which means greater job satisfaction and lower turnover.  while it's hard to put a specific dollar value on those benefits, companies know that good health and low turnover save them money. the fact that more than half of fortune 500 companies have already implemented domestic partner benefits on their own suggests that equality pays off.  becoming the second state after massachusetts to let gay couples marry would also raise new jersey's profile among gays and lesbians looking for welcoming places to relocate and work, and for companies seeking a tolerant and open climate. and the state's businesses might get a bonus since recent data suggest that many heterosexuals also want to work in places that treat gay and lesbian people equally.  new jersey's economy would get these work-force advantages at virtually no cost to the state's businesses. even though equality means allowing new spouses of gay and lesbian employees to claim costly health care benefits, the roughly 2,500 newlyweds whose spouses have employer coverage would be easily absorbed by the more than 100,000 employers in new jersey. only the largest companies are likely to see a noticeable but small impact on health care enrollment, and the vast majority of employers will have no new spouses to cover.  just one question remains: are civil unions equal enough to marriage to generate these economic gains?  if civil unions are truly generic marriage without the label, new jersey might still experience a wedding windfall. vermont's introduction of civil unions in 2000 lured thousands of same-sex couples from across the country and created a cottage industry for celebrations.  but new jersey is too late to reap the same business benefit seven years later, and new competition from connecticut and california have reduced the out-of-state demand for legal recognition that stops short of marriage. travel in search of marriage-like relationships has clearly dried up -- only 2 percent of california's registered domestic partners come from other states. marriage alone remains the big draw as demonstrated by the gay couples from 46 states who flocked to san francisco in the one month they could marry there in 2005. (macy's reportedly ran out of wedding rings.)  some of new jersey's own gay and lesbian couples also appear less than enthusiastic about civil unions. raised hopes have made civil unions a distant second best for same-sex couples who would prefer to marry. in fact, some gay couples in connecticut are boycotting civil unions -- only 15 percent of the state's same-sex couples entered civil unions in the first year that status was available. so don't count on being invited to a big fancy civil union ceremony; many same-sex couples will hold out for the real thing.  the good news for new jersey's economy is that civil unions are rare enough that businesses will probably still gain in less direct ways, even if the luster of equal rights is a bit tarnished. the prospect of equal benefits for employees in civil unions will make new jersey look good as a place to live and work for gay men and lesbians.  of course, cashing in on equality might not be the top motive for policymakers concerned about the treatment of same-sex couples. but the economic angle reveals at least two important lessons for lawmakers about the right to marry.  first, equality will benefit a much wider sector than just same-sex couples, namely the state's business owners and workers. and second, the market makes a good equality detector. it remains to be seen whether same-sex couples vote against civil unions with their feet and save their wedding dollars for the real thing.  op-ed contributor m. v. lee badgett, an economist, is the research director of the williams institute at the university of california, los angeles, which deals with sexual orientation law and public policy.  