mayor says city risks losing grants for security   new york city stands to lose access to a $1 billion pool of federal homeland security money to finance improved communications between public safety agencies because its system does not meet federal guidelines, according to a letter that mayor michael r. bloomberg sent yesterday to bush administration officials and congressional leaders.  last month, mr. bloomberg wrote, congress approved the release of $1 billion for state and local grants to develop systems allowing radio communications between agencies on a dedicated frequency. new york has spent the past decade developing such a system for use in the 400 megahertz band of the spectrum, while federal regulations call for the systems to operate on the 700 megahertz band.  ''congress should not use that re-allocation to compel new york city and other localities to invest (or over-invest) in that particular portion of the spectrum,'' wrote mr. bloomberg, who plans to testify on the matter today before the senate homeland security committee.  the letter also says that the federal communications commission granted the city a waiver to use uhf channel 16, at 482 megahertz to 488 megahertz, in 1995, and assigned the channel to the new york metropolitan area for public safety communications use three years ago.  ''this spectrum has been invaluable, as it provides the most effective coverage and performance for police and firefighter communications in new york city's dense in-building and underground urban environment,'' mr. bloomberg wrote.  russ knocke, a homeland security spokesman, said the department shared mr. bloomberg's view that each major city has its own singular challenges in achieving full communications ability between emergency response agencies. he added that homeland security officials anticipate ''continuing to work closely'' with the administration in addressing those challenges.  the city has been receiving mixed signals from the department of homeland security on this year's antiterror grants. michael chertoff, the department's secretary, said last week that under one set of grants, the city would share $411 million with five other metropolitan areas considered at the highest risk for attack, while 39 other areas would compete for the remaining $336 million.  the financing is being closely watched by new york politicians who were outraged last year by the cuts to the grant. mr. chertoff has said that last year's process was flawed and that he hoped to steer as much money as he could to the cities with the greatest needs.  but new york officials have expressed concern that too much of the overall $1.7 billion in antiterrorism grants will go to states based on politically driven formulas, and that new york is being linked to newark and jersey city, which could potentially diminish its share.  