paying the price while coaches cash in   the college football season ended last night with the highly anticipated championship game between no. 1 ohio state and no. 2 florida.  the bowl championship series title game was the finale in a postseason that featured a smorgasbord of exciting games: undefeated boise state defeating oklahoma in overtime with creativity and nerve, louisiana state routing notre dame behind a dominating performance by the junior quarterback jamarcus russell. last night, florida, led by the senior quarterback chris leak, upset undefeated ohio state, 41-14, to win its first b.c.s. national championship.  once again, however, the defining news of the college football season was a transaction that underlined the commercialization, exploitation and hypocrisy that increasingly define big-time college sports. last week, the university of alabama hired nick saban away from the miami dolphins to be its head coach. after weeks of saying he would not be the crimson tide's coach, saban accepted a package worth a reported $32 million over eight years.  there is already talk that ohio state will modify jim tressel's compensation package, estimated at $2.4 million a year. i don't have a problem with saban's accepting the money; no one is forcing presidents to pay it. i don't even have a problem with saban's perhaps lying about his interest in the alabama job -- he gets pummeled if he tells the truth, he gets pummeled if he lies.  what's persistently galling is our approach to the big-time, blood-money intercollegiate sports of football and basketball: adults make millions, and the ''kids,'' as they're called, receive tuition and room and board for the glory of mangling their bodies for ole sigh u.  last week during a news conference, the university of florida's president, bernie machen, took issue with saban's contract. machen, who had hired urban meyer at utah in 2002, said that giving saban an estimated $32 million contract set a bad precedent. yet a little more than two years ago, florida gave meyer an estimated $14 million over seven years to leave for florida.  the coaches, who should be leading the charge for player compensation, are too often silent. on sunday, meyer wanted no part of the issue.  ''wow,'' he said. '' i don't know. i'd rather talk about chris leak. i don't have any idea. i don't have any thought.''  i was willing to let it go at that. but then meyer began talking about the role that players played in his success as a coach.  ''you take alex smith out of that equation at utah, and i'm not the head coach at florida,'' he said, referring to his former quarterback at utah. smith just completed his second season with the 49ers.  ''i am the first one to recognize that. and our staff is the first one to recognize that. you take chris leak and tim tebow out or percy harvin out or ray mcdonald out, and we are at some other bowl and i am already home and jogging and getting back in shape and those type of things.''  instead, meyer basks in the glow of his first national championship.  given that, don't the players deserve a financial bonus for helping a program reach a bowl game?  if the coach is rewarded for leading his team to a bowl, his players should be rewarded (and not in coffee mugs) for helping get him there. if a program reaches a bowl that pays in excess of $1 million, players should share in the bonanza. coaches preach the gospel of team and teamwork, family and unity; they talk about pulling for one another -- until the talk turns to revenue sharing.  on sunday, i asked tressel what he thought about a stipend for athletes for helping their team reach a lucrative bowl game. tressel responded like a politician.  ''i think that would take a lot of discussion, and that's what i think people like about the game of football, is that there are so many components that go on to the success of a team,'' he said.  tressel's first title-game appearance at ohio state was embroiled in controversy. in january 2003, the buckeyes played miami in arizona. the buckeyes' star freshman running back, maurice clarett, complained about not being able to get back to ohio for the funeral of a close friend. the issue revolved around paperwork that had not been completed in a timely enough fashion for the university to provide clarett with the $300-plus plane fare.  clarett made a cogent point at the time about the inequities of a system that pays out millions to universities during the bowl season while players get relatively little.  i asked meyer the same question about giving players a piece of the bowl money.  ''i am a big proponent of that,'' he said. ''i heard the story about ohio state had the families that were going to get together to raise money. that's nonsense. to think about that and all this money being shuffled around, and here is a star player whose mom can't afford to go out there, that's not right.''  a majority of college athletes are content to simply ''be here,'' to play for this college or that, from florida to ohio state, maine to middlebury, to play in the national championship game. but there comes a time when adults must step in and look out for the best interests of young people. that time is now.  share the wealth.  sports of the times e-mail: wcr@nytimes.com  