g.m. officer says toyota is stronger in washington   toyota has not yet passed general motors to become the world's biggest carmaker, but robert a. lutz, g.m.'s vice chairman, says his company has fallen behind its rival in terms of clout on capitol hill.  days after rick wagoner, g.m.'s chief executive, said g.m. was not conceding first place to toyota, mr. lutz stressed that g.m. would rather lose several points of market share than heavily discount vehicles as it has in the past.  that strategy is almost certain to cost g.m. its position as the no. 1 automaker -- which mr. lutz said had already happened in the minds of washington lawmakers.  mr. lutz said on tuesday that toyota had ''more congressmen and senators'' fighting for its interests than g.m., because it had built new factories in a large number of states. g.m., which once had plants from massachusetts to california, has been closing factories and eliminating tens of thousands of jobs in an effort to regain profitability.  later, a g.m. spokesman in washington, greg martin, emphasized that the opinions expressed by mr. lutz, one of the most outspoken executives in the automobile industry, did not represent the company's perspective.  speaking to reporters at the north american international auto show, mr. lutz said g.m. had not been able to keep up with the lobbying efforts made by japanese auto companies, especially toyota.  ''they outspend us,'' mr. lutz said, ''and i will tell you today -- mind you, today -- it is my considered opinion that toyota has more clout in washington than we do.''  he went on: ''one of the sad things is, toyota is so profitable and has plants in so many states that, frankly, they've got more congressmen and senators than general motors does.''  according to the center for responsive politics, which tracks campaign donations and lobbying activity on the web site opensecrets.org, g.m. spent $7.8 million on lobbying activities in 2005. it has 28 registered lobbyists on its washington staff.  toyota spent $5.7 million in 2005, the center said, and has seven in-house lobbyists. (figures for 2006 are not available.) both companies also use a number of outside law firms and belong to industry trade organizations such as the alliance of automobile manufacturers.  ''we don't really keep score,'' said a toyota spokeswoman, martha voss. ''our goal is to become no. 1 with the customer, not in washington.''  but david e. cole, chairman of the center for automotive research, said toyota clearly had won some influence through the $18 billion it had invested in its american factories in the last 20 years.  ''when you're talking about adding new plants,'' mr. cole said, ''you get significant clout, with the possibility that if i'm nice to you, you'll give me a plant.''  toyota and g.m. appear headed for a showdown this year for the title of biggest auto company. last month, toyota released production forecasts showing that it was poised to pass g.m. worldwide.  but mr. wagoner vowed last week that g.m. would ''fight for every sale'' and was not ceding the title to toyota.  in his comments to reporters, mr. lutz said elected officials had shown little interest in detroit, noting that a meeting between auto leaders and president bush, originally scheduled for may, did not happen until mid-november.  but mr. bush, who has said that detroit carmakers need to develop vehicles that can compete with foreign cars, and lawmakers have seemed unmoved by the companies' plight, mr. lutz said.  ''it was, 'tough luck, guys. you made the deal with the unions decades ago, now live with your mistakes of the past,' '' mr. lutz said. ''there was zero sympathy.''  mr. lutz said that g.m. no longer intended to sacrifice profits and damage its vehicles' resale values, and would avoid using incentives to increase sales.  ''it's got to be honestly acquired market share,'' he said. ''the only way to get market share is to get 25 percent of american citizens, day in, day out, going to general motors dealerships and saying, 'i want that car.' ''  