critic's choice: new cds   gal costa  ''our moments'' (drg)  it's hard to understand the link between the earthiness and vitality of brazilian culture and the sagginess of soft middlebrow pop. it's getting to the point where you can almost expect to hear some of that country's greatest singers buried in syrup.  gal costa, for example. ms. costa came along in the mid-1960s, just after bossa nova crested; she is of the generation that venerated joão gilberto. but ''our moments'' (originally released in brazil in 2004 as ''todas as coisas e eu'') goes further back. it points toward popular brazilian songs that predate bossa nova, particularly samba and samba-canção from rio, and baião from the country's northeast. what all this material has in common is the ripeness and full-bloodedness that bossa nova consciously retracted from.  you can't miss the mastery in ms. costa's voice, which is clear and light, with beautifully accurate pitch and usually very little vibrato; like a jazz singer she can end a line either by stopping a syllable and shutting down her breath or giving a note a deep shake. she's not fancy or overcontrolled: she sounds relaxed but alert, and a slight nasal flatness in her voice humanizes her, makes her touch the ground.  a couple of performances here of songs from the 1940s tell the whole story: ary barroso's ''pra machucar meu coração'' and herivelto martins's ''ave maria no morro'' have beautiful melodies, and the vocal melodies she guides through them, with her own hesitations and phrasings, sound definitive.  this record could have been a classic. instead it's a rushed job and a missed opportunity. the songs, in their plain state, are beautiful. but that voice could be recorded much better, and put in better surroundings. the sound of the album is shallow and compressed, almost cheaply synthetic, making the string arrangements (by eduardo souto netto) seem more obvious and saccharine than they probably are. the baby's-breath saxophone introductions and solos, with smooth-jazz affect and scooped notes, are just deadly. the disjunctions of taste become weirdly jarring.  ben ratliff  