f. y. i.   getting the balls rolling  q. i know that george rhoads's wacky motion sculptures at the port authority bus terminal have been mesmerizing travelers and commuters for over two decades. but it seems that more than half the time they aren't working. who is responsible for their upkeep?  a. the upkeep of the pieces, which mr. rhoads describes as ''audio-kinetic'' because of their sound and motion, falls to the port authority of new york and new jersey.  mechanical answers to rube goldberg and alexander calder, the sculptures are titled ''42d street ballroom'' and ''magic clock.'' ever since ''ballroom'' was installed in 1983, a generation of travelers and gawkers have marveled at mr. rhoads's collections of moving balls, ringing bells, ramps, spirals and gears. the machines, which depend on perfect alignment and weighting to work properly, used to be maintained periodically.  mr. rhoads, 80, who lives in ithaca and has created many other mechanized sculptures, expressed annoyance that the agency had let repair work slide.  ''for 10 years and more i have been after the port authority to send the sculptures back here to be refurbished,'' he wrote in an e-mail message. ''my requests have been acknowledged and passed on to unknown persons responsible, but nothing has been done.'' mr. rhoads said he often receives e-mail messages from travelers lamenting the sculptures' deterioration.  the problem, said the port authority, is money. mr. rhoads gave an estimate of more than $50,000 to thoroughly refurbish the two works, an amount confirmed by tony ciavolella, a spokesman for the agency, who added, ''we continue to seek ways to obtain funding to pay for these repairs.'' the agency wants to keep the sculptures moving, he said.  born again back then  q. with the growing interest in evangelism, i was wondering about its history in new york. when was the first revival meeting in the city?  a. revivalism arrived in the city with the english missionary george whitefield, according to the encyclopedia of new york city. on nov. 14, 1739, he preached to 2,000 people outside the wall street presbyterian church. he preached to 5,000 people in a field in april 1740, and he embarked on a seven-week campaign as late as 1763.  while he did not found any churches in the city, his charisma, fervor and audience emotion inspired methodists and baptists to adopt his style of revivalism.  a park long gone  q. i once read about a place downtown called st. john's park, but no one seems to know anything about it. any details you can share?  a. a few. st. john's park was an idyllic, private setting much like gramercy park, and as with gramercy, only the park's owners had keys. st. john's park was bounded by laight, varick, hudson and beach streets in the area now known as tribeca.  designed in 1803, and laid out as a private square by the vestry of trinity church, the park was lined with federal and greek revival homes. st. john's chapel stood on the varick street side.  the area began to decline in the 1830s and '40s as the use of steamboats increased hudson river traffic and waterfront bustle. the stately homes became boarding houses, and in the 1860s, cornelius vanderbilt bought the park area for a railroad depot.  the chapel was razed in 1918, the depot was torn down in the 1930s, and the former park space was taken over by the exit road from the holland tunnel.  michael pollak  f. y. i. e-mail: fyi@nytimes.com  