johnson happy to be back with the diamondbacks   randy johnson is delighted to be back in an arizona diamondbacks uniform, and he sounds eager to prove wrong the critics who believe he is washed up.  ''a lot of people say my career is over,'' johnson said, referring to critics who point to his career-high 5.00 earned run average last season with the yankees. ''well, i was out there pitching with a bad back for most of the year,'' johnson added during a news conference tuesday at chase field.  ''most people would not choose to do that, but that's the kind of person i am,'' johnson said. ''i'm an overpaid athlete who wants to try to give something back. it may sound kind of corny, but that's where i am at.''  johnson said he was confident that, at age 43, he would quickly rebound from october surgery to repair a herniated disk in his back, but he gave no date on when he would return to the mound. johnson said he would begin playing catch next week.  ''i think i'm capable of going out there and still be competitive,'' johnson said. ''in any given year, i think i can still win 20 games.''  the diamondbacks will give johnson two years to win at least 20 more games to reach 300. arizona signed johnson to a $26 million deal in a trade with the yankees that sent the reliever luis vizcaíno, two minor league pitchers and a minor league shortstop to new york. the yankees will pay the diamondbacks $2 million toward johnson's contract.  ''having the security of being here again next year, that would ensure at least 300 wins if not more,'' johnson said, adding that the san diego padres had offered him a one-year contract.  in a call with reporters tuesday, the yankees' general manager, brian cashman, emphasized that johnson had not demanded a trade.  ''it was clear that he would prefer to pitch somewhere else,'' cashman said. ''but he understood it had to make sense for us.''  johnson's agent, barry meister, said in phoenix that discussions to send johnson back to arizona began in early december, shortly after johnson's older brother died suddenly. meister said that cashman called johnson to offer his condolences and that during a lengthy discussion it became clear that johnson would prefer to move back west, closer to his wife and children, who remained in their phoenix-area home, and his mother in california.  cashman said he contacted several teams close to johnson's arizona home but had the best fit with the diamondbacks, who have some pitching prospects the yankees have coveted. cashman, who acquired three young pitchers when he shipped outfielder gary sheffield to detroit in november, said he wanted to add to that depth while further trimming the yankees' payroll.  ''we're trying to change how we do business,'' cashman said, ''and the last two years have been a full-court press on that.''  despite issues with his back, johnson made 67 starts over the past two seasons, the most on the yankees. without him, the yankees must rely on the newcomer kei igawa and the fragile carl pavano to fill the back end of the rotation. andy pettitte will bolster the front end, and the yankees remain interested in roger clemens.  ''i understand by making the move with randy johnson, i do put our rotation at risk,'' cashman said. ''maybe you could describe it as taking a half-step back to take a greater step forward with more inventory to turn to, either with a trade or with a new yankee player who can emerge.''  the only player from the deal who is expected to make the roster out of spring training is vizcaíno, who has logged at least 65 appearances in each of the last five years. ''his nickname is daily, because he takes the ball daily -- which fits our bullpen perfectly,'' cashman said.  johnson, meanwhile, said he was looking forward to joining a young team that he believes will make serious run for a division title.  ''maybe this will be the fountain of youth coming back here and playing with a lot of young players,'' johnson said.  baseball  