a slice of black history, with language that sings   august wilson started out as a poet, and in some ways, that is all a theatergoer needs to know about his plays. though they are rich in character and incident and freighted with the history of black america in the 20th century, it is the declamatory force and seductive rhythm of their poetry that slice through the protective armor we all bring with us to the theater. the audience says, ''show me''; mr. wilson responds with language that sings and shouts and aches, like that of the bluesmen and preachers whose cadences permeated the poor pittsburgh neighborhood where mr. wilson grew up.  in ''fences,'' which begins performances at the hartford stage on thursday, that language defines the dilemma of the maxson family -- troy, a sanitation worker burdened by the knowledge that had he been born just a few years later, he could have parlayed his gift for hitting baseballs into a career in the majors; his son cory, whose high school exploits have caught the eye of college football scouts; and his wife, rose, who must mediate between the men she loves as they clash over cory's future.  mr. wilson, who died in 2005 after completing his wondrous 10-play chronicle of black life in each decade of the last century, found in sports the perfect metaphor for the changes brewing in america in the 1950s. troy's bitterness about having been forced to play in the separate and unequal negro leagues coexists with cory's confidence that his ability to win football games will open doors for him despite the color of his skin, even in pre-civil rights america.  ''fences,'' which won both the 1987 pulitzer prize for drama and the 1987 tony award for best play, went on to become mr. wilson's biggest commercial success, performed all over the country. but it was born in connecticut, at the yale repertory theater, where mr. wilson had forged an artistic alliance with the director lloyd richards. at yale, and then later on broadway, troy maxson was played to galvanizing effect by james earl jones -- a performance that would win him another of the show's four tonys. wendell wright, who is taking on the role of troy in hartford, is not intimidated by that. ''the most daunting thing is august wilson's writing,'' he said.  but for jonathan wilson, who was hartford's artist-in-residence during the 2002-3 season and is directing this production, casting was the biggest challenge. like the work of other great playwrights, august wilson's plays, he said, ''require actors who have a great sense of that world.'' just as there were o'neill actors -- he named jason robards and colleen dewhurst -- mr. wilson, who is not related to the playwright, said he needed to find ''wilson actors'' who could connect to the urban black working-class milieu of ''fences.''  to mr. wright, that milieu feels very familiar. he was 9 in 1957, when the play takes place, and its characters are people he knows, he said. ''i see a lot of my father, a baptist minister, in troy's attitude toward work and family,'' he said. ''as a kid, i would sit just listening to him and my uncles laughing and telling stories on each other -- 'back when we was in oklahoma, your daddy did this, your daddy did that.' one tale would follow another.''  asked if the characters in ''fences'' brought to mind people from his past as well, mr. wilson replied instantly. ''myself,'' he said. ''august's pittsburgh was my buffalo, n.y.'' the steel plants that brought southern blacks to pittsburgh also brought them to buffalo, he said. ''we come from the same world.''  ''fences,'' by august wilson, is at hartford stage, 50 church st., jan. 11 through feb. 11. information at 860-527-5151 or www.hartfordstage.org.  