an election with no losers   former mayor bob corker of chattanooga is now senator bob corker in washington and, while i didn't vote for him, i think that if he proves true to his own past he will do well. that is, he'll be a centrist republican, guided by his own common sense and maybe a bit by the example of tennessee's moderate senior senator, lamar alexander, rather than by the right-wing rhetoric that has become de rigueur in so much of the south.  as for former representative harold ford, the democrat mr. corker defeated, things aren't all that grim. despite his loss, he was quickly nominated by james carville to challenge howard dean for the chairmanship of the democratic national committee. he declined, but sooner or later there is going to be a fight for the leadership of the party, and mr. ford has likely earned himself a pivotal role in any effort to move democrats away from reflexive deaniac liberalism.  ironic as it may sound, what mr. ford did prove in his defeat was that he is electable. as it turned out, race didn't seem to hold the memphis congressman back -- the exit polls made it pretty clear that he probably did as well as any white democrat could have done, given the growing conservative bent of tennessee.  in talking with my republican friends and neighbors, i too have concluded that his color was far less important than his family's long record of graft and political strong-arming. of course, my fellow tennesseans had their reservations, but, as it turned out, their concerns were not based on the fact that mr. ford is a black man or on his voting record, but on the baggage he bears with his lineage.  as one of my neighbors said to me, ''i just kept wanting him to say something more than 'you can't choose your family.' '' the neighbor's big disappointment was that mr. ford wouldn't actively support steve cohen, the democratic nominee for the congressional seat he vacated, over mr. ford's brother jake, who ran a write-in campaign after losing the democratic primary.  and the other night i was having dinner with welling lagrone, one of nashville's civic leaders and a republican if there ever was one, and even he said he had to admit that mr. ford was impressive on all fronts, other than that he was raised in a den of thieves.  i say all this to make the point that despite not being able to choose -- or cut loose from -- his family, his race or his party, harold ford has emerged as a serious politician, a gracious loser, a gentleman worthy of respect and with a solid foundation to build a future on, not only for himself but, i hope, for those remaining yellow dog democrats like myself.  so what does the future look like? gov. phil bredesen, a democrat, will begin a well-deserved second term. senators alexander and corker seem set to infuse washington's newly minority party with the spirit of moderation. and harold ford looks likely to find the door that will lead him to best serve his party and the nation.  in an era when elections leave so many americans of both parties frustrated and bitter, i think tennessee voters across the spectrum are feeling they can congratulate themselves on a job well done.  battlegrounds robert hicks is the author of ''the widow of the south.''  