congress and your security   the new congress is about to revisit some perilously neglected needs of homeland security, with democrats determined to mandate inspection of all incoming sea cargo by 2012. this is an overdue protection that republicans bottled up in the last congress. the house, run now by the democrats, plans swift passage of legislation requiring both stronger port security and the screening of all air cargo over the next three years.  the bipartisan commission that studied the sept. 11 terrorist attacks criticized congress for neglecting these vital steps. they should long ago have been antiterrorism no-brainers for the nation. the complaints of business lobbyists about undue burdens on commerce pale when compared with the havoc that would be created in the american economy if terrorists mounted another major attack.  the senate should move quickly on these important protections. that chamber will also face a key test of whether the new democratic majority can override the selfish regional politicking that has skewed the formula for distributing homeland security aid to states and localities. the house proposal is properly written as a risk-based formula, awarding more aid to states like new york and california and other areas where the obvious risks are greater. the question is whether senators from less populated states will again be able to treat homeland security funds as just more local pork, rather than focusing on demonstrated threats.  during last year's congressional election campaign, the democrats promised to deliver on the neglected proposals of the 9/11 commission. the house legislation gets only part of the way there. on the imperative need for ensuring radio compatibility between different first responders, it creates study grants for localities and states rather than imposing clear deadlines for addressing the problem and fixing it.  the legislation also sidesteps some of the 9/11 commission's most important findings about the dysfunctional intelligence apparatus. it fails to declassify the nation's costly intelligence budget -- a necessary first step for understanding the murky ineptitude of this branch of government. it also makes no effort to rationalize or referee the counterproductive rivalries between the pentagon's intelligence agencies and their civilian counterparts.  the house measure amounts to a worthy step forward, but one that does not go far enough. the new congress should be uncompromising on the challenges of homeland security.  editorial  