for two, a day of recognition; for one, a day of reckoning   mark mcgwire seemed contorted with tension, his face flushed red, his eyes watering up on march 17, 2005, when he ducked the question of whether he had used performance-enhancing drugs.  ''i'm not here to discuss the past,'' he told a congressional subcommittee, adding, ''i'm here to be positive about this subject.'' clamming up on bad advice from lawyers or family members, he had to know nothing positive would ever come of that day.  almost all athletes are engrossed by their place in history, their relative standing on the a list or the b list of their sport. cal ripken and tony gwynn, two great ballplayers, two astute adults, had reason to believe they would be voted into the baseball hall of fame with overwhelming percentages yesterday, which they were.  ''i thought all three of us had a chance to get in,'' gwynn said yesterday.  instead, mcgwire has become the most blatantly tarnished member of the muscles generation. he and sammy sosa stirred north america with their home run duel in 1998, but sosa played four more seasons than mcgwire and will not be in a position to be judged by the baseball writers until 2011, and who knows what the mood will be then?there is no proof that mcgwire or sosa took steroids, which were illegal under federal law, but not baseball law, in the 1990s. but they happened to get bigger and stronger, and hit a rising curve of home runs, at the same time. now there is rising speculation that steroids were rampant.  we all failed to pay attention. sportswriters like me were slow to link the new power and the new physiques -- or even make silly little observations, which would at least have been something -- even when androstenedione, an over-the-counter bodybuilding drug, banned from olympic sports, was spotted in mcgwire's locker in 1998. he admitted he was taking the stuff, and the next season claimed he stopped using it because he did not want to set a bad example for young people, who were grabbing it off the shelves.  addressing reporters on a teleconference yesterday, gwynn said, ''you're innocent until proven guilty,'' and he was exactly right. then he added, ''i understand people having reservations.''  speaking generally about the possible link between huge bodies and huge power totals, gwynn continued: ''we all knew. all you all knew. we knew. players knew. owners knew. everybody knew. and we didn't say anything about it.''  neither did major league baseball. neither did the players union. there was too much money to be made from home runs. and there is no reason to think the fans cared where the muscles came from. everybody went along.  now mcgwire pays the price, at least in public humiliation. jose canseco, who hit 462 homers and once seemed as if he would be a hall of famer, wrote a smarmy tell-all book, saying that he, mcgwire and rafael palmeiro had used steroids. yesterday canseco received exactly six votes and fell out of further eligibility for the hall.  ken caminiti, once a most valuable player award winner, who admitted he had used steroids, received two votes yesterday, 26 months after dying of a drug overdose. and palmeiro, once a potential candidate for the hall, who waved his finger at members of congress and insisted he never used drugs, was suspended after testing positive for a performance-enhancing drug late in 2005.  mcgwire was insulted the most yesterday. he played 16 seasons and hit 583 home runs, seventh most in north american history, but received only 23.5 percent of the votes, far below the 75 percent needed to make the hall.  ''i know he's a hall of fame player,'' gwynn said after receiving 97.6 percent of the votes.  ripken, who received 98.5 percent of the votes, said: ''i don't think it's my place to make judgments. the truth will be known.''  should mcgwire have gone into the hall with gwynn and ripken? i could note that he was ordinary on defense, had a relatively low career batting average of .263, and broke down relatively early, which can be seen as a sign of reaction to performance-enhancing drugs. the new york times does not allow reporters to vote for awards, but i would not have voted for mcgwire mostly because of his pathetic performance before congress.  in addition to ripken and gwynn, i would have gladly voted for rich gossage and jim rice, who both finished short. ripken raved about gossage for pitching three innings of relief one day and coming back and pitching three more the next day. ripken also raved about rice for ''being the man'' in the all-star game locker room for a full decade.  and what about barry bonds, the best player of his time even before his muscles and bone structure assumed bizarre contours in the late '90s? i believe the stories emanating from san francisco that bonds used steroids and whatever else he could buy from the notorious balco lab. bonds is also something of a lout. but unless he is convicted for perjury or income-tax evasion, he'll be voted into the hall five years after he retires.  sosa? i think he'll get more votes than mcgwire did in his first year, if only because he copped a language-barrier plea before congress, and had a nicer smile. life isn't fair.  players used amphetamines (greenies) and diet pills and dangerous substances like andro long before mcgwire -- and after him, too, although the congressional hearings did shame the owners and the union into accepting tougher testing and penalties.  meanwhile, mark mcgwire bears the brunt of the sour feelings from the steroid era. he's a bright guy. i think he saw it coming.  sports of the times e-mail: geovec@nytimes.com  