patriots, hitting the road, will run into tomlinson   after the new england patriots throttled the jets on sunday, 37-16, someone asked patriots linebacker tedy bruschi if the patriots took their game to another level during the playoffs.  ''the next level to us is the super bowl,'' he said. ''and we haven't been there in a while.''  a while? the patriots won their most recent super bowl title two seasons ago. only one championship has been decided since then, and it went to the pittsburgh steelers.  ''that's a while to me,'' bruschi said.  so it is these days in new england, where a trip to the super bowl is a rite of winter. but this winter will be a bit longer for the patriots if they are to reach their fourth super bowl in six seasons. in their three title runs, they did not have to take the long way. the patriots had first-round byes and needed only two victories, the first at home, to make it to the super bowl.  last season, when the patriots had to play a first-round game, they beat the jaguars. the next week, they lost to the broncos in denver, 27-13. of course, the steelers won the super bowl after winning three playoff games on the road.  the patriots were 12-4 this season, but that earned them only the fourth seeding in the american football conference. and their victory over the jets set up a meeting with the san diego chargers, an opponent that no team wants. the chargers have a 10-game winning streak and are unbeaten at home. the patriots, as the lowest-seeded team remaining, cannot be the host for the a.f.c. championship game.  the patriots were 7-1 on the road, with their only loss a 21-0 shocker at miami.  but none of their previous road opponents had the offensive firepower that the chargers possess. the game presents excellent matchups. the up-and-coming quarterback philip rivers against tom brady, the best playoff quarterback in the game. brady will also go against one of the best pass rushers in the game, shawne merriman. chargers tight end antonio gates matches against whatever combination of defenders have to chase him.  the biggest matchup will be the patriots' front seven, the best in the league, against chargers running back ladainian tomlinson, the n.f.l.'s most valuable player. tomlinson, who was also named offensive player of the year, rushed for 1,815 yards and 28 touchdowns this season.  ''he's explosive,'' cornerback asante samuel said of tomlinson. ''if you sit back, he'll gas you like he does everyone else.''  chargers coach marty schottenheimer, who has notably failed in previous postseasons, goes up against bill belichick, perhaps the best coach of his era. still, this is the most balanced team schottenheimer has ever had, and he has said that tomlinson is the best running back ever to play in the league. patriots nose tackle vince wilfork called the chargers ''hands-down the best team in the n.f.l.''  tomlinson has faced the patriots only three times since he came into the league in 2001, but he has turned in memorable performances, averaging 141.7 yards. in 2002, he ran for 217 yards and 2 touchdowns. last season, he had 134 yards and 2 touchdowns as the chargers scored 24 unanswered points in the second half to win, 41-17. samuel remembered feeling as if a professional team were playing a college team in that game, with a sense of hopelessness that the patriots rarely have.  ''he killed us last year,'' belichick said monday. ''we're usually looking at the back of his jersey. we haven't done very well against him. he's killed a lot of people besides us, and he's killed us. a team might keep him down for a few carries, but it's just a matter of time before he breaks out, in one way or another, and gets in the end zone.''  the patriots had the fifth-best run defense in the league this season (they were 12th against the pass and 6th over all), but the perception is that the patriots lack tremendous speed among their linebackers, a potential liability against tomlinson. the jets, who did not have much of a running game, used the speedy leon washington to slash through the patriots' defense. he averaged 4.5 yards while being defended by bruschi, although he had only 11 carries.  safety rodney harrison, who is critical to holding off a multipronged offensive attack, missed the game against the jets because of a right knee injury sustained in the regular-season finale against the titans. on monday, belichick said harrison was day to day and would not say if he would be available sunday.  in their most successful seasons, the patriots relied on harrison in the playoffs to disrupt an explosive offense -- usually that of the colts and peyton manning -- with his hard hits and intensity. manning and the colts play the ravens on saturday in baltimore. on sunday, perhaps without harrison, new england again faces the most dangerous offensive player, this time in tomlinson.  pro football  