memo pad   mishandled bags -- customer complaints in november about bags mishandled by domestic airlines rose to 6.32 percent per 1,000 passengers, from 5.04 percent in november 2005, the transportation department said. of 20 airlines in the report, the five with the fewest complaints per thousand passengers were aloha, hawaiian, airtran, continental and jetblue. the five with the most complaints were mesa, skywest, american eagle, comair and atlantic southeast. a mishandled bag is one that was reported lost, delayed, damaged or subject to pilfering.  registered traveler -- another international airline, air france, said it would join the nascent registered traveler program, teaming up with verified identity pass inc. to open a lane next month at kennedy international airport terminal 1, where air france operates. the program, which costs $99.95 a year, is currently operated by verified identity under the brand name clear at orlando international airport. clear is about to open a lane in partnership with british airways at terminal 7 of kennedy and has plans to open lanes at three other domestic airports, starting this month. competitors of verified identity, among them unisys, have said they plan to start their own versions of the service at various airports this month. registered traveler members pay an annual fee, undergo a federal background check, receive a biometrically encoded identity card and are then entitled to use dedicated security lanes that will employ new technology to speed passage, including machines that scan shoes without the need to remove them.  new aviation era -- eclipse aviation delivered the first so-called very-light jet to a customer on dec. 31. the delivery of the jet, with a current price tag of $1.52 million, starts a new era in which 5,000 of the inexpensive little jets, produced by several manufacturers and able to land at about 5,000 airports, are expected to be in the skies within 10 years. the cessna aircraft company, meanwhile, has delivered the first of its bigger new $2.7 million citation mustang business jets, which it refers to as the newest ''entry level'' jet in its popular citation line. the mustang was delivered in late november to the mustang management group in fresno, calif., which will allow cessna to lease the aircraft for 10 months as a demonstration plane and then to use it in its scott aviation subsidiary for flight training. the first delivery to a customer that will put a mustang into regular service will occur ''in the coming months,'' cessna said. the company expects to deliver 40 mustangs in 2007, and to increase production after that.  hotel rates up again -- the cost of a room is going up but the pace of increase is slowing, according to a pricewaterhousecoopers forecast for 2007. average daily room rates will rise 5.9 percent this year, the research company says, compared with an increase of 6.8 percent last year. ''the 2004, 2005 and 2006 increases were the largest in over 20 years,'' said bjorn hanson, a principal with pricewaterhousecoopers.  your choice -- the homewood suites unit of hilton is testing a concept called suite selection. it will allow guests who check in online to select rooms based on a hotel floor plan and photographs of individual rooms. homewood suites are marketed as ''extended stay'' hotels, for visits lasting more than a few days. the online room selection option will be introduced throughout the chain this winter, first to the highest-status members of hilton's loyalty program.  no to relaxed checkpoint access -- a proposal by the transportation security administration to test allowing nonpassengers to pass through airport security to use retail stores and restaurants is getting a thumbs down from the association of corporate travel executives. the association has said it may conduct a limited test allowing guests staying at hotels attached to the dallas/fort worth and detroit metro airports to pass through security without boarding passes to use retail and food concessions. concessions at many airports are past the security checkpoints, meaning only ticketed passengers may now use them. the proposal, if put in place widely, will only increase congestion at the checkpoints, said greeley koch, president of the travel executives group. ''i understand that airport authorities, especially those with highly developed mall-type terminals, are anxious about maximizing their returns from concession leases,'' he said. but he added that an airport's prime mission is to be a ''safe, secure and speedy terminus for travelers.''  et cetera -- americans made a record 6.81 million visits to europe from may through september of last year, the peak leisure travel season, according to donald n. martin & company. that was up 5.9 percent over the period in 2005 and up 1.5 percent over the previous record set in 2002  somebody was bound to come up with the idea. there is now a web site devoted to the growing luxury trend of fractional ownership in things like private jets, resort accommodations, racehorses, yachts, classic cars and even vineyards. it's www.fractionallife.com.  joe sharkey  itineraries  