a whole lot of thinking going on   short of a ''20 percent markup!'' sign in the window, the owners of project no. 8 have created one of the least inviting store facades in the city.  for starters, the place is locked. as a friend and i stood outside last week waiting to be buzzed in, it was hard not to gawk at the bizarre spectacle being played out inside. an unassuming man sat with his head buried in his knitting. in front of him stood a cabinet, the centerpiece of which was a creepy glass receptacle that brought to mind a bauhaus-designed bedpan.  the few items on display in the window, including a black oversize sports watch and some hoodies of equally dubious origin, suggested a chinatown knockoff store rather than a cool new hangout for those into the avant. a couple of string onion bags dangling from hangers on the walls and clothing racks that looked as if they had been bought in a garment district fire sale did little to assuage my fear that i was in the wrong place.  inside though, all is not as it seems. (even the racks have been carefully curated and are made of disused piping.) as alienating as this stark little boutique appears at first, it is a refreshingly friendly and worthwhile new place to shop.  the owners, brian janusiak and elizabeth beer, have a multidiscipline company called various projects, and the store is their eighth collaboration, hence the name. they have used their design experience (both are trained graphic artists) and arts background (mr. janusiak is also an conceptual artist, and ms. beer is a partner in the berlin gallery arratia, beer) to create a store as gallery space, in which everything on display is an extension of their immaculately informed taste.  because the store is very small, project no. 8 carries precious little stock, a lot of it exclusive and available only in limited runs. variations on key styles, like an attention-grabbing adam arnold jersey shift dress with a pussy-bow collar ($150), are kept in back, but the attentive salesperson -- the performance knitter -- was more than happy to bring out different colors and sizes.  it is part of the store's charm that the too-cool-for-art-school posturing is tempered by a blasé approach to merchandising. on a few occasions my friend and i commented on a piece of clothing or jewelry only to be told that there was something similar in the back that we might like. it's a delightfully romantic notion: taste is as important, if not more so, than retail convention. judging by the satisfying selection offered, mr. janusiak and ms. beer may well be right.  the strong point here is definitely women's wear. in addition to the project 13 in-house line, the store carries a well-edited selection of local and european labels, including bless, boudicca and sunshine & shadow -- all at reasonable prices and tending toward the cerebral end of the fashion spectrum. about the most expensive clothing item in the store was a boudicca accordion-pleated wool-mohair skirt, reduced to $399.  highlights include an asymmetrical cashmere sweater-wrap with one sleeve ($130, available in black, pink, gray and red); a stevie nicks-chic bohemian-style dress by tucker ($225), available in several colors and fabrics; a courrèges-esque crisp white shell top by a détacher ($110); and an anouschka hoevener black cotton boat-neck top gathered at the neck ($108). an a détacher v-neck tunic dress with raglan sleeves ($318) worked best in black. the white version looked too much like something agnetha from abba would wear to step out of her white helicopter.  accessories range from black visor glasses by bless ($200) to menacing-looking springbok-horn bracelets by chris bundy ($695) and pyrex glass rings by jane d'arensbourg, including a knockout knuckle-duster design ($136). also noteworthy were hand-pounded gold rings by maggie trakas ($280 for a set of five) and the aforementioned oversize watch by bless, which on closer inspection turned out to be a coconut-wood bracelet ($180).  though not as exhaustive as the women's offerings, there are good men's wear items to be found, including a lightning-print t-shirt by salvor ($79), a lightweight dusty cobalt blue sweater by various projects ($108) and von wedel & tiedeken scarves (from $55). the standout for guys is the vintage-looking schiesser underwear from germany, which has been reissued in the 1950s packaging (right down to the gauze wrapping) and makes a great gift at $32.  but of all the items handpicked by mr. janusiak and ms. beer on their travels, the random and well-priced bibelots -- many under $20 -- give the store its singular character. desk jockeys who take their cubicles seriously will appreciate the designer erasers ($7.50) and the notepads based on the original grids of famous texts, like le corbusier's ''le modulor'' ($12) and the two-column 42-line gutenberg bible ($22).  foodies will likewise lick their lips over a rare hardcover copy of fergus henderson's panegyric to offal, ''nose to tail eating'' ($40). as for the glass receptacle: it turned out to be part of an art piece by seth kinmont, which is available with a case of wine, a lemon verbena plant, candles, brushes and a funnel with which to distill leftover wine into eau de vie -- a perfect way to toast your good taste.  project no. 8  138 division street (between ludlow and orchard streets); (212) 925-5599  atmosphere -- underground german art gallery.  service -- engaging and accommodating.  key items -- on-trend thinking person's clothing and bibelots.  prices -- nothing you would be embarrassed to admit having paid.  critical shopper  