at the temples of food, an outsider's look at the sacred texts   you won't often hear this from people in the business of writing or talking about food, but it takes some nerve to tell other people what to eat. yet apparently millions of us just love being nudged or browbeaten into particular chowlines by someone else with an air of authority, from weight-loss guru to restaurant reviewer.  questions about these all-too-exploitable couplings of leaders and led are likely to come from nobody except a contrarian outsider -- and the sociologist barry glassner, author of the 1999 popular-paranoia exposé ''the culture of fear,'' certainly is that.  mr. glassner's latest book, ''the gospel of food: everything you think you know about food is wrong'' (ecco/harpercollins $25.95), posits that misguided (and misguiding) gospelmongers are persuading americans to eat according to ever more irrational notions and sillier motivations. it's plain that part of his own motivation is a genuine love of food and indignation at seeing a great common blessing made the sparring ground of officious sectarians who frequently don't know what they're talking about.  as in ''the culture of fear'' (basic books), mr. glassner exposes the strained interpretations, ''prejudices dressed up as science,'' and pure fabrications behind much received wisdom simply by checking out sources with an eye to original meanings.  doesn't a national merit scholarship corporation study confirm the idea that eating family dinners together is a recipe for children's success? well, actually the n.m.s.c. says no such study ever existed. shouldn't intelligent label-readers choose natural flavors over test-tube creations? just read through the labyrinthine f.d.a. definition of ''natural flavor.''  everywhere mr. glassner finds self-anointed apostles telling us not to taste food for ourselves but to measure its performance on their own pet scales of godliness: purity, authenticity, oneness with nature, soaring artistic vision, antioxidant activity. and as he amply shows, these advisers frequently reverse themselves at short notice after years of dire warnings, or betray an appalling contempt for the lower social orders (witness the nameless pundit on a scholarly online forum who characterizes the sorry mentality of convenience-food users as ''ignorance'' bred by ''a diet of peel-heat-and-eat'').  but for all its iconoclastic vigor, this is a book with much less there there than ''the culture of fear.'' perhaps it simply tries to cram in too many aspects of food in pursuit of mr. glassner's wrong-gospel thesis.  the chapters on high-end restaurants serving ''divine meals'' and the ''food adventurers'' who troll obscure ethnic eateries seem chiefly designed to demonstrate his gastronomic sophistication, which they might do better without stumbles like ''hamachi tuna'' (hamachi isn't tuna) or ''gary'' (for ''gray'') kunz.  i'd swap this material for an expansion of mr. glassner's trenchant but truncated explorations of issues with serious public policy implications. the most important, to my mind, are widespread general acceptance of nutritional ukases based on dubious methodologies and the chattering classes' ignorance of what food and health choices look like to truly disadvantaged people.  trying to do too much too quickly, mr. glassner does it with heavy reliance on catchphrases (''treyf'' as shorthand for ''frowned on by the food police'' rapidly wears out its welcome) and straw men (enough already with blanket condemnations of ''food adventurers'' because some of them tout lousy restaurants on chowhound.com). and his eagerness to don different hats in nimble succession leads him to repeated garbling or glossing over of factual details.  any culinary historian familiar with the meat chapters of cookbooks from the mid-19th to the mid-20th century will wince on reading that throughout the period ''inexpensive cuts of beef,'' which mr. glassner takes to mean hamburger makings, ''had a bad reputation.''  food scientists could have a field day with things like his apparent belief that dietary cholesterol is among the ''crucial nutrients,'' his vagueness about just what is involved in food-irradiation technology, or his willingness to accept vanillin as responsible for the chemical subtleties of real vanilla's flavor.  i also think that that his understandable disgust at exaggerated claims that a few extra pounds point inevitably to an early grave leads him to skate much too dismissively over the troubling recent rise in serious childhood obesity as well as increases in several weight-influenced forms of diabetes. alas, these are not isolated instances.  would that there weren't so many nits inviting the picking in a book eminently worth pondering by food mavens and general readers alike. mr. glassner may not be the tidiest of researchers or arguers, but he gets to the heart of something deeply wrong on the national food scene: most of us want the right food to make us healthy and wise as individuals and as a society, without trusting ourselves to know rightness.  book review  