tale of armed abduction gives way to a murder charge   the 25-year-old woman delivered a lengthy video confession to the police, hesitating as she spoke, at times stoic, at other times tearful, slowly explaining the disappearance and death of her newborn son, investigators said yesterday.  her story ended on dec. 31, investigators said, when the woman, lucila rojas, after picking up the baby from a bronx hospital where he had been born prematurely, smothered him by covering his head and neck with a blanket and dumped his body in a trash can in jackson heights, queens.  ''now the baby will sleep forever,'' richard a. brown, the queens district attorney, quoted the woman as telling detectives who questioned her. ms. rojas was arrested yesterday and charged with killing the baby, who weighed three pounds at birth and was named anthony. she was arraigned last night, the authorities said.  ms. rojas told the police that the baby was conceived when she was raped during a visit last year to her native mexico, mr. brown said. ''she says the baby reminded her of the rape,'' he said. a spokesman for mr. brown, peter mccormick, said ms. rojas did not report the rape in mexico before she came back to the united states illegally on nov. 8.  the search for the baby began on monday, the police said, when ms. rojas told a social worker during a scheduled appointment at jacobi hospital medical center in the bronx that a man outside the hospital had stolen her baby from her arms at gunpoint.  her claim set off an extensive search inside and outside the hospital. the police reviewed video surveillance tapes, and helicopter and canine units were mobilized to search surrounding areas.  but as the hours passed, ms. rojas's story began to change. soon the police confirmed that there had been no armed abduction.  ''she made several misleading statements, which led us to believe that she was not being truthful with us,'' said lt. anthony mottola, commanding officer of the 115th precinct detective squad in queens, where ms. rojas was arrested.  during their investigation, detectives learned that she delivered the baby prematurely at jacobi hospital medical center on dec. 17 and that he remained there until dec. 31, when he was released and ms. rojas left with him.  the police said she smothered the boy aboard a city bus to jackson heights, where she has relatives. then on northern boulevard, near 98th street, she left him in a black plastic bag in a trash can before going to her relatives' home, the police said.  those relatives, the police said they believed, had never known that she was pregnant. investigators said they would search for the baby in two pennsylvania landfills where trash from the busy strip of northern boulevard, lined with gas stations and auto repair shops, is taken.  ms. rojas and her 3-year-old daughter, who was at her side on monday at the hospital when she reported her son missing, live in an apartment shared by two families in the bronx near the cross bronx expressway. neighbors there said yesterday that they remembered seeing ms. rojas pregnant.  the police said yesterday that the administration for children's services had not been involved with the family, and they said that officers had never been called to their home over a domestic situation.  the rev. brian jordan, a priest at st. francis of assisi church in manhattan, who visited the woman's residence yesterday to offer support to her family, said he talked with a man whom he described as ms. rojas's common-law husband, carlos vidal. ''he's very sad and hurt about what has happened and about the accusations toward lucila,'' father jordan said, adding that ms. rojas also has a son who lives in mexico.  in addition to a charge of second-degree murder, ms. rojas was charged with tampering with physical evidence, endangering the welfare of a child and violating a public health law for failing to provide a decent burial and disposing of a body without a permit. if convicted, she faces up to 25 years to life in prison.  mr. brown said the circumstances around the disappearance are particularly troubling because, under a state law, ms. rojas could have legally abandoned the baby at places like a police station, firehouse or hospital.  it is particularly heartbreaking, he said, because after the boy's early birth, ''the child was given the best medical care at jacobi hospital.''  