manning needs pennington's nerve   chad pennington started his first professional playoff game four years ago. he was 26 -- the age eli manning just happened to turn wednesday -- when he threw for 222 yards and 3 touchdowns against peyton manning and the colts in a 41-0 wild-card drubbing at giants stadium.  different quarterbacks, teams, times and opponents, and no one in his right mind would expect eli manning to dominate a tough eagles defense that way today in philadelphia. but he is old enough and experienced enough and is supposedly enough of a prodigy that it wouldn't be remotely unfair to ask: can he just make a few plays, give his team a fighting chance?  that's all the giants and their fans want: a handful of smart reads and money throws worthy of the pedigree and the playoffs. that is not demanding too much, just something to hang hope on. manning is only one player of many needing to perform, but he is the quarterback and he needs to do more than hand the ball to tiki barber and pray the eagles' defense disintegrates the way the redskins' did last weekend.  he knows this and acknowledged this and now he needs to back it up, put his first playoff points on the board after last season's carolina whitewash. the giants aren't in against any a.f.c. powerhouse like the chargers, the ravens or even the patriots. after all their missteps, it is the giants who, contextually, have the preferred draw of division rivals and champions in today's intriguing showcase of n.f.l. new york.  the jets get the patriots in foxborough, mass., confront the aura of three super bowl victories and coach bill belichick and tom brady, the modern-day montana. the giants get the eagles, blue-collar survivors, winners of five straight, but a franchise that misery never hovers too far from. they get a plucky journeyman, jeff garcia, in for the fallen donovan mcnabb.  optimism may be a reach for a team that has lost six of its last eight games, but the giants have to be thinking that they have the ability to win this game if they can pressure garcia and -- yes, it has come to this -- they are not sabotaged by their own quarterback.  manning has the famous name, the size, the strong if erratic arm. does he have enough of the quality that made pennington the associated press comeback player of the year with a rebuilt shoulder that never had a rifle attached to it in the first place? does manning have the moxie that pennington makes a living on?  for this one playoff sunday, on the road, jets guard pete kendall was clear as to which of these qualities he prefers.  ''there are plenty of guys with a big arm who flamed out because they didn't know how to run an offense,'' kendall said thursday. ''they don't know where to throw the ball. they can't diagnose the defense presnap and make an adjustment after the snap. a lot of the intangibles that chad has, most quarterbacks don't have.''  he wasn't talking specifically about manning, but for the purposes of the comparison he might as well have been. my guess is that we would be hard pressed to find a giants fan unwilling to make the game-day deal, manning for pennington, who wouldn't surrender the diminished hope for greatness for what jets receiver jerricho cotchery called ''the ability to make everyone around him feel relaxed.''  for the long haul? that's a trickier one. there are as many questions about pennington's durability as there are about his arm. when he took the job from vinny testaverde after four games in 2002, pennington looked much like what brady became soon after. by last summer, due mainly to injury, pennington wasn't even assured the starting position in training camp. for all the platitudes heaped on him last week by his coach, eric mangini may envision the rookie out of oregon, kellen clemens, as his eventual quarterback.  with skilled subtlety last week, mangini called the quarterback competition ''ongoing,'' if only because, as he said: ''it helps get everybody better. it helps make everybody that much sharper.''  a fair point, and one left strangely unaddressed by the giants the past two years. they couldn't wait to replace kurt warner with the rookie manning, then didn't bother lining up an accomplished backup to push him or tutor him. so this was where they were on dec. 30 at fedex field, with the season on the line and probably coach tom coughlin's job as well: third-and-10 from their 28, 2 minutes 33 seconds left, leading the redskins by a scary 6.  they ran barber rather than let manning drop back to pass, survived the night, but with what message sent to the team? can it win in january with a quarterback on training wheels? isn't it time for those wheels to come off, for the giants to stop handling manning as if he were an expensive piece of china, to find out if they need to protect their future with their own kellen clemens?  at 26, manning is certainly young enough to grow, dispel the fears that he may not even be very good, much less great.  he is also old enough to be expected to begin now, today, not necessarily by being brady, or even pennington. just better than jeff garcia.  sports of the times e-mail: hjaraton@nytimes.com  