'08 candidacy could shake up giuliani's firm   in the time since mayor rudolph w. giuliani left office in 2001, he has told friends and political allies that he would consider running for the presidency in 2008, and that he wanted to use the interim to create a consulting business that would both burnish and broaden his image as a leader and security expert.  and in the first months of that new firm, giuliani partners, there seemed no end to its ambitions: mr. giuliani saw safety and security, law, crime-fighting, and real estate as lucrative areas of expertise, his aides say. they quickly announced ventures with ernst & young, nextel and mexico; discussed trading services for equity; and envisioned finding such success that the business could, without doubt, survive his departure one day.  now, as mr. giuliani contemplates that bid for the presidency, the firm -- about which little has been publicly known -- says it is dependably profitable and attractively positioned. but, at the same time, its aspirations have been modestly realized: a collection of boutiques more than an empire, and one whose long-term survival if mr. giuliani departs is very much a matter of debate both in-house and out.  the partnership comprises three distinct businesses that have had varying degrees of success in maintaining the steep trajectory of the early days.  the largest unit, in terms of employees and possibly revenue, is giuliani capital advisors, an investment bank with 100 employees that mr. giuliani did not create, but rather was bought by giuliani partners from ernst & young for $9.8 million in 2004.  the investment firm's revenues were down in 2005, the first year mr. giuliani owned it, though its chief executive said the downturn began in the months prior to the sale and has since been reversed. last year, eight of its original 22 managing directors left for other jobs. despite its name, mr. giuliani is minimally involved.  giuliani partners, the 60-person consulting arm, is mr. giuliani's main focus, and it has had to scale back its reach somewhat in recent years to accommodate his political travel and lucrative speaking offers. it had a base of 20 major clients in early 2004, while now it has 12 to 15: a deliberate limit, firm partners say, because all of the clients seek and receive personal time with mr. giuliani.  the third and smallest unit is giuliani security and safety, another consultancy that former police commissioner bernard b. kerik once ran (as giuliani-kerik l.l.c.) until he resigned at the end of 2004 amid personal problems that caused him to withdraw his name from consideration to be president bush's secretary of homeland security. the kerik debacle forced an overhaul of the unit, which giuliani aides now hail as a small but fast-growing practice, with 10 employees led by a respected former f.b.i. official.  change is a constant in all sorts of businesses, and giuliani partners acknowledges its own set of evolutions. though it once announced new clients with celebratory press releases, the last such announcement was in november 2004.  partners say their newer clients -- they will not give a number -- have not sought the same level of public exposure for their relationship with mr. giuliani.  but the largest potential change, a giuliani candidacy, looms larger than all the rest, and the company says it is now deeply engaged with questions about its future. if he does run, executives say, at least some shakeout at the firm is certain.  ''obviously as things accelerate, there are going to have to be changes, and we're looking at that,'' said michael d. hess, senior managing director of giuliani partners.  mr. hess acknowledged that his view had shifted since 2004, when an interviewer asked if the business could survive without mr. giuliani. ''absolutely,'' he said at the time.  would he answer the same today? ''i think so,'' he said last week. while mr. giuliani is an irreplaceable figure, he said, other executives are also attracting business. ''he is, of course, a draw, people do want to work with him,'' mr. hess said of the ex-mayor, ''but on the other side of the coin, we have a very deep bench.''  yet mr. hess acknowledged in an interview that other top executives at the firm, like him and dennison young jr., a partner who was a top mayoral aide to mr. giuliani, would most likely join a giuliani campaign.  ''i think the answer is yes,'' mr. hess said in evaluating that possibility. at that point mr. giuliani's spokeswoman, sunny mindel, interjected, ''we don't know all these things,'' and mr. hess picked up her line of thought.  ''but no one knows -- that's the study and continuing exploration we have to do,'' mr. hess said. ''the substantive people are less likely to be involved in the campaign. we're not terribly political.''  by ''substantive people,'' he was referring to firm executives who work with clients in areas of expertise; during the interview he included in that group pasquale j. d'amuro, the head of giuliani security and safety; richard j. sheirer, a senior vice president and the commissioner of emergency management under the former mayor; and thomas von essen, another senior vice president and former city fire commissioner. (at the same time, mr. hess did not rule out any of these three or others as possible campaign members.)  giuliani partners is a private company, which makes it difficult to assess its financial health and assets. by one measure of accomplishment, client satisfaction, giuliani advisers say the company has been an unqualified success, and there is no record of lawsuits or notable public complaints from those who have received services.  jim steets, a spokesman for entergy, long a client of giuliani partners, said the firm helped revamp its security and emergency response plans and strengthened its relationships with emergency agencies around its five nuclear plants in the northeast.  how much mr. giuliani and other principals of the firm are earning from the businesses is not public record. but much of mr. giuliani's income comes from his outside business interests and includes millions of dollars he earns from speaking appearances around the world and as a partner in a houston-based law firm, bracewell & giuliani.  mr. hess said mr. giuliani's speaking fees are individual earnings and do not represent income for the firm.  but several giuliani partner ventures have not borne all the anticipated fruit.  in 2003, bear stearns merchant banking set up a $300 million private equity fund to invest in security-related companies, with advice and profit sharing by giuliani partners. but only one investment was made: the $210 million purchase of camelbak, a petaluma, calif., company that makes canteens worn like backpacks. the equity fund put up $100 million of the price, according to the deal and forbes.  two other relationships were ended after questions emerged in news accounts about the backgrounds and operations of the client.  mr. giuliani's experience as a businessman could be a factor in a presidential race, political analysts say. ''voters like supporting a businessman who has to meet a payroll, who built a business from scratch and can demonstrate an understanding of the economy,'' said frank luntz, a republican pollster who has worked for mr. giuliani in the past.  mr. giuliani has said he will decide about a presidential bid early this year, but advisers now say the decision may be up in the air for months.  were he to leave, could rudy inc. survive without rudy?  eric abrahamson, a professor at columbia business school, said survival for a business that loses a key leader can depend on many factors, including the nature of its business and its maturity. he said the departure of a rainmaker could be hardest to survive.  ''when you bring in those people, you are bringing them in for their social network,'' said mr. abrahamson, who studies the creation and growth of management techniques.  giuliani partners is five years old and operates from the times square offices of ernst & young, the accounting firm. as a private business, giuliani partners is not required to release its clients' names, but some have been announced, and others, mr. hess said, wish to remain private. active clients, mr. hess said, include entergy, purdue pharma, and transcanada corp. and shell.  neither mr. giuliani nor other executives have registered to represent foreign governments in the united states, nor are they lobbyists. mr. giuliani also does not hold the type of licenses that are held by the directors of giuliani capital advisors, of which giuliani partners is the majority owner.  the capital firm specializes in bankruptcy consulting, and mergers and acquisitions.  the partnership's security division, which mr. d'amuro took over in 2005, may be the unit most poised for growth. mr. d'amuro has traveled to meet with executives in japan, qatar, and other nations, often focusing on clients who seek the firm out for advice on how to protect against a terrorist attack.  giuliani partners recently launched two international offshoots: giuliani security and safety asia, and giuliani compliance japan, where mr. giuliani and other executives speak to businesses there about complying with new conflict-of-interest rules.  mr. hess said he was not concerned that foreign work would somehow tarnish mr. giuliani politically.  ''we bend over backwards and are very careful about who we do business with, for the most obvious reasons -- from the beginning, rudy's brand of integrity and ethics always had to be preserved,'' mr. hess said.  revenues for giuliani partners' main consulting or security wings are not available because it is a private company.  but the third wing of the business, giuliani capital advisors, is required to file annual financial statements with the securities and exchange commission.  for calendar 2005, capital advisors reported revenues of $48 million, a drop from what the firm had brought in under ernst & young. for example, in the 2004 fiscal year, the last full year ernst & young owned it, the firm reported revenues of $85 million.  steven d. oesterle, a partner in giuliani partners and chairman of the investment bank, said a fairer comparison is to measure the capital advisors' performance in the final five months before the sale in december 2004, where it averaged about $3.3 million a month in revenue, versus the $4 million a month it took in the following year.  he said the firm was more modest in scale than during its ernst & young years, in part because there are fewer bankruptcies today and there had been very little backlog of business when the company changed hands. the firm still ranks high on lists comparing financial advisers based on the number of cases handled.  mr. oesterle said most of the eight managing directors who departed last year had been replaced.  the chief compliance officer and other top executives also left, but mr. oesterle said the departures did not reflect poorly on the business or signal unhappiness with mr. giuliani.  ''it's a competitive marketplace,'' he said, ''but that creates opportunity for us to hire people. i'm very comfortable with where we are in terms of the talent level within the organization.''  of mr. giuliani, he said, ''he plays a very limited role with this business -- you can think of this as more of an investment of giuliani partners in many ways.''  one executive who left capital advisors last year, and spoke on the condition of anonymity because those who left had signed confidentiality agreements, said mr. giuliani's limited role had not helped. he said the firm needed a rainmaker to bring in business and to raise capital for the merger and acquisition portion of the business.  ''when you put all that together, it's just not a winning formula,'' the former executive said.  mr. hess, however, described mr. giuliani as a hands-on manager in the main consulting part of the business, an executive whose busy schedule very much sets the agenda for the company, at least for now.  ''we work with his schedule: when he's off speaking or when he was writing his book, we would find what days worked and what days don't work,'' mr. hess said. ''he's remarkable. he doesn't sleep very much.''  