tulsa coach is top candidate at louisville   louisville is courting tulsa coach steve kragthorpe to replace bobby petrino as the cardinals' football coach.  louisville's athletic director, tom jurich, intends to meet with kragthorpe in the next 24 hours, according to a member of the athletic department who said he was not authorized to speak publicly for the program.  jurich and kragthorpe have worked together before: jurich was the athletic director at northern arizona from 1988 to 1996, and kragthorpe was the quarterbacks coach and then the offensive coordinator there from 1990 to 1993.  ''he knew bobby was going to leave at some point, and kragthorpe is the guy that he always wanted to replace him,'' the athletic department member said.  kragthorpe, 41, has a 29-22 record at tulsa and has led the golden hurricane to bowl games in three of his four seasons. before kragthorpe arrived from buffalo, where he was the quarterbacks coach for the n.f.l.'s bills, the golden hurricane last had a winning season in 1991.  in louisville yesterday, jurich told reporters that he intended to move quickly and had a ''very short list'' of candidates. while kragthorpe is the first choice, the coach at u.c.l.a., karl dorrell, is another strong candidate. he, too, has ties to jurich. dorrell was the offensive coordinator and receivers coach at northern arizona from 1990 to 1991.  don tomkalski, the assistant athletic director for media relations at tulsa, said kragthorpe was at his campus office yesterday and had declined a request for an interview. tulsa's athletic director, bubba cunningham, also declined to comment.  kragthorpe has turned down offers from the n.f.l. and other colleges out of concern for his family. he has made it a priority to spend time with his wife and three sons, all of whom travel with the team for road games.  ''the first thing i'll look at is where my family would live,'' kragthorpe said in an interview last year. ''if the situation is not a good situation for my family, i don't care how good a job it is, because my family is more important than football is.''  a group of tulsa boosters has been trying to fend off wealthy suitors. michael case, the chief executive of a real estate investment and management group in tulsa, started a fund-raising campaign with a goal of raising $500,000 annually over three years for kragthorpe and his assistants. ''as long as it's just about finance, we'll be able to keep him,'' case said last year. ''if there becomes an opportunity where he thinks he can go win a national championship, i don't know if we can keep him then.''  because tulsa is a private institution, it does not have to disclose how much kragthorpe is paid. tulsa has the smallest enrollment of the 119 division i-a programs.  jurich is betting that louisville can meet kragthorpe's family considerations and his aspirations to compete for a national title. jurich has been the architect behind the renaissance of louisville football and has gone off the beaten path to hire coaches. shortly after he arrived at louisville in 1997, jurich hired john l. smith, who had been the coach at utah state and who used a wide-open passing game. smith, who was recently fired by michigan state, brought with him to louisville an innovative offensive coordinator in petrino.  before announcing sunday that he was headed to the falcons, petrino compiled a 41-9 record and led the cardinals to a big east title and their first bowl championship series victory, a triumph over wake forest in this year's orange bowl.  he also brought in highly regarded recruiting classes and had a verbal commitment for the 2007 class from matt simms, the son of phil simms, the former giants quarterback, and the brother of chris simms, a quarterback for the tampa bay buccaneers. matt simms has told the university he remains committed despite petrino's departure, according to an individual with direct knowledge of recruiting, who also said he was not authorized to publicly discuss the team's plans.  the success of football has helped jurich raise $200 million for the athletic department; $16.5 million of that was spent on cardinal park, a multisport complex. the university built new dormitories and doubled the number of students living on campus. in july, louisville signed petrino to a 10-year, $25 million deal.  football  