living in/buchanan, n.y.; deals with river views (yes, there's a catch)   except for the presence of indian point, with its two active nuclear reactors, the village of buchanan might be just another expensive suburb perched above the hudson river in northwestern westchester.  yet, as headlined by the recent defeat of the area's republican congresswoman, sue kelly -- whom some had seen as passive on safety issues relating to the plant -- indian point is the elephant in the room as far as the county is concerned.  inevitably, therefore, its presence on about a quarter of buchanan's 1.4 square miles sets the village apart from neighboring communities -- despite the fact that the potential for danger doesn't exactly respect boundaries.  ever since the terror attacks of september 2001, indian point's 240 acres and its razor-wire boundary, jarring on these bucolic wooded hills 39 miles north of new york city, have taken on tremendous symbolic weight.  security procedures have become more important to the town of cortlandt, of which buchanan is a part. evacuation procedures have been spelled out in detail (go to the web site townofcortlandt.com and click on ''homeland security'').  one irony, however, is that entergy nuclear northeast, indian point's owner, pays 37 percent of buchanan's $5.3 million operating budget, keeping property taxes low. and with the plant's presence also acting as a curb on housing prices, it turns out that buchanan, a village of about 2,200 people, is far more affordable than other westchester suburbs close to the river.  ''we looked everywhere for a home,'' said kelley kertelits, ''and one of the main reasons we moved here was that we got a lot more for our money than we would have elsewhere.''  ms. kertelits, a substitute teacher, and her husband, thomas, a broker for merrill lynch in manhattan, have two children, katie 11, and j. t., 9. they bought their four-bedroom farmhouse-style colonial six years ago for $420,000 -- far less than they would have paid for the same house in comparable westchester neighborhoods, according to statistics from the westchester-putnam multiple listing service.  ''most of the time,'' mrs. kertelits said, ''we don't even think about the power plant being so close.''  occasionally, though, concerns about a nuclear accident or a terrorist strike intrude. that happened recently to michelle and marc hiltsley during a parent-teacher meeting at the nursery school attended by one of their children. on the agenda that evening was the subject of escape routes, meeting places and antidotes for radiation.  like most other residents, ''we have plans just in case,'' said mr. hiltsley, who owns a restaurant in buchanan. his wife, michelle, is a physical education teacher for the nearby briarcliff manor school district, and the couple have two sons: dean, 18 months old; and nicholas, 3.  then mr. hiltsley added an observation that residents of towns farther afield might find unsettling: ''even if something happened, what difference would it make if you lived someplace else in westchester? everyone living within a 60-mile range would be affected.''  what you'll find  of the 700 residential units in buchanan, 607 are single-family dwellings on lots that average about a third of an acre. the others are in multifamily structures, including apartments and condominiums, mr. jankowski said. there are no co-ops in buchanan, and just one five-unit condo complex built two years ago.  half of the houses are more than 45 years old -- like a 76-year-old two-bedroom cottage in need of repairs that is on the market for $299,000, and a 48-year-old two-bedroom cape cod that sold last spring for $272,450. the older stock consists mostly of wood-frame homes clustered in the more densely populated sections of the village near main roads.  the newer houses are predominantly ranches and colonials, among them a 14-year-old three-bedroom raised ranch with vinyl siding listed at $489,000 and a 19-year-old five-bedroom colonial listed at $699,000.  most of these are on winding, hilly side streets with sidewalks, often overlooking water -- though not necessarily the hudson. mr. and mrs. kertelits's colonial, for example, is on lake meahagh, which was created by the knickerbocker ice company during the second half of the 19th century to ship ice to new york city residents.  in addition to its residential areas, the village has a tiny business district clustered around a small traffic circle, with a few stores and dining establishments, including mr. hiltsley's restaurant, called four doors down.  there is also a small strip mall in the village, with several chain food outlets like dunkin' donuts and baskin-robbins, and a chinese restaurant.  what you'll pay  five years ago, the median price of a single-family home in buchanan was less than half what it was for the county as a whole: $197,500, compared with $428,000.  today the housing values are stronger, with the median price for a single-family home in buchanan at $471,500, only about a third less than the county median of $716,125. in part, the relative increase in the median can be attributed to three housing developments that in recent years have added about 50 more expensive homes to the local housing stock, said maria campanelli, an associate broker for rivertowns gmac realty in nearby croton-on-hudson.  at the low end, a 1,200-square-foot three-bedroom colonial built in 1925 and billed as ''a charming starter home'' on a 0.1-acre lot sold last spring for $325,000. annual taxes on the property are $2,844. by comparison, a four-bedroom colonial built in 1994 on a half-acre lot sold four weeks ago for $580,000. taxes in this instance are $8,218.  as for undeveloped land zoned residential, 119 acres of it remain, and a portion consists of wetlands. the dearth of available land for construction has led many homeowners either to expand older houses, which tend to be small, or to tear them down and build larger ones, ms. campanelli said.  what to do  on weekends and late afternoons, when katie and j. t. kertelits are not in school, the family often gets together to ride bikes around lake meahagh's two miles of shoreline and visit the hendrick hudson free library in montrose, on the other side of the lake.  if lake meahagh freezes over in the winter -- ''we're keeping our fingers crossed for this year,'' mrs. kertelits said -- they can take their ice skates out of storage and head out for a spin. their backup plan for warm winter days is fishing on the lake, or driving to bear mountain state park to hike the trails there.  with both children in preschool, mr. and mrs. hiltsley prefer the small zoo and a carousel at bear mountain, as well as the half-dozen small parks in the area. when the couple are not taking care of the children, they are busy renovating their old victorian, mr. hiltsley said, explaining, ''we don't have much time for movies or dinners out.''  on the rare occasion that they do take in a movie, the closest theater is a multiplex in the cortlandt town center in mohegan, on route 6, about a 10-minute drive from their house. the mall also has about 40 stores, including wal-mart, home depot and barnes & noble.  ''this is a very family-oriented village,'' ms. campanelli, the real estate agent, said, ''and we prefer to keep it small and relatively undeveloped. most people around here would rather get in the car and drive to a mall than have one too close by.''  the schools  children here attend the hendrick hudson school district, which has three elementary schools, including the buchanan-verplanck elementary school in buchanan, as well as a middle school in cortlandt manor and a high school in montrose.  enrollment at buchanan-verplanck, which offers full-day kindergarten, is 402. on the english language arts state test, 66 percent of fourth-grade students there met or exceeded state standards, as compared with the state average of 69 percent. on the math portion, 84 percent met or exceeded standards; the state average was 78 percent.  districtwide enrollment is 2,887, with almost 900 at hendrick hudson high school.  sat scores for the class of 2006 were 531 for the verbal section and 556 for the math, compared with 493 and 510 statewide.  the commute  from the cortlandt metro-north railroad station -- the stop north of croton-harmon and south of peekskill -- the commute to grand central terminal takes about 55 minutes. a monthly commutation ticket is $251, or $245.98 if bought on the web.  the history  cortlandt derived its name from the van cortlandt family, which began buying up land late in the 17th century from the croton river north to the mountain known as anthony's nose and east to connecticut.  during the revolutionary war, the area was the site of many battles, and today washington's hill marks the site of the review of the french and american troops at the end of the hostilities.  from 1960 to 1990, the composer aaron copland lived in the hamlet of cortlandt manor, and his home has been restored as a project of the white house's ''save america's treasures'' program.  what we like  in keeping with buchanan's overall character, there is a lack of pretense, reflected in the relatively small scale of the homes and the simple but well-maintained landscaping. this freedom from the ''keeping up with the joneses'' ethos that seems to predominate elsewhere in westchester is welcoming for new families who, perhaps thwarted by the high prices in most locales, have found a way into the county.  going forward  daniel e. o'neill, buchanan's mayor, is pushing forward with a commercial revitalization of the area around the traffic circle in the small business district.  with two commercial taxpayers -- the other is lafarge north america, which has a gypsum plant in the village -- already contributing handsomely to the budget, several more businesses would add to the coffers without drastically altering the small-town qualities that most residents hold dear, the mayor contends.  living in | buchanan, n.y.  