2 stars leap to hall of fame, but steroid cloud stops 3rd   cal ripken was the ironman who played in 2,632 consecutive games, tony gwynn was the hitting machine who won eight batting titles, and yesterday both were elected to the baseball hall of fame in near-unanimous votes. but their achievements were overshadowed by the voters' rejection of mark mcgwire, a slugger who seemed like a modern-day paul bunyan before he fell into disrepute because of suspected steroid use.  mcgwire's name was included on just 128 of the 545 ballots cast by baseball writers who took part in the voting, a 23.5 percent showing that fell far short of the 75 percent needed for induction. because this was mcgwire's initial appearance on the ballot, the vote was viewed as one of the first verdicts to be handed down on baseball's troubled steroids era, a period that began in the early 1990s and apparently continued unabated until recent seasons.  it was during this era that players grew bigger, baseballs traveled farther and records began to tumble. mcgwire was in the middle of it all, hitting 70 home runs for the st. louis cardinals in 1998 to shatter roger maris's single-season mark of 61 and helping restore the popularity of a sport damaged by a strike that led to the cancellation of the 1994 world series. but since then, mcgwire's image had been increasingly damaged, and it was reflected in his paltry voting percentage, a repudiation so pronounced that it may be difficult for him ever to be elected to the hall.  mcgwire, who is 43, retired after the 2001 season, having hit 583 career home runs, which is seventh on baseball's career list.  as concern over steroid use grew in recent years, mcgwire, in retirement, found himself under increasing suspicion. and it came to a head when he refused to answer questions about possible steroid use during a congressional hearing in march 2005.  at the hearing, mcgwire repeatedly stated that he would not discuss the past. his silence was viewed by many of the baseball writers who take part in the hall of fame voting as a tacit admission that he had used steroids while playing. the fact that he would not publicly acknowledge doing so, at the hearing or since then, only made matters worse in the eyes of some of those writers.  ''the fact that mark didn't get in, i think it's more of people making a statement about the congressional hearings than it is what he was able to do on the baseball field,'' gwynn said in a conference call yesterday after the voting results were announced. ''i don't mind saying i think he's a hall of famer. i do.''  but members of the baseball writers' association of america thought otherwise this year, and may continue to do so for the 14 years mcgwire potentially has remaining on the ballot.  under the voting rules, each writer can nominate up to 10 players who have been retired for at least five seasons. mcgwire ended up ninth in the voting, trailing far behind gwynn, who received 532 votes, or 97.6 percent, and even farther behind ripken, who was chosen on 537 ballots, or 98.5 percent, the third-highest percentage ever. gwynn and ripken were also on the ballot for the first time.  unlike gwynn, who called mcgwire a hall of famer multiple times, ripken was not ready to give mcgwire that designation.  ''when i sit and look at myself, i don't think it's my place to actually cast judgment,'' ripken said. ''i honestly believe the truth will be known. it saddens me that baseball as a whole had to go through this process and had the integrity of the game be questioned because of steroid use.''  there were 32 players listed alphabetically on this year's ballot, with mcgwire slotted between don mattingly and jack morris. each player has a box beside his name. an unchecked box is a no vote.  mcgwire's presence on the ballot was tricky for voters because it forced them to reach beyond the statistics and consider a player's behavior and judgment. voters are instructed to rate a player on his record, playing ability, contributions to a team, character, integrity and sportsmanship, although the last three elements are rarely invoked in hall of fame discussions.  rick hummel of the st. louis post-dispatch said he included mcgwire on his ballot because he felt there were too many unanswered questions about steroids. since mcgwire never failed a drug test or admitted that he used steroids, hummel said he chose to focus on the statistics. hummel said mcgwire's 1,626 lifetime hits, a small number for a potential hall of famer, vexed him as much as the allegations about steroids. baseball did not have a testing policy or penalties for steroids until after mcgwire retired.  ''it wasn't a slam dunk,'' hummel said about his vote. ''he wasn't squeaky clean.''  hummel won the j. g. taylor spink award, which honors writers, and he will be inducted into the hall in july, ahead of one of the most dynamic players he has ever covered. he said he did not believe mcgwire would join him there.  ''it's hard to jump from 23.5 to 75 percent,'' he said. ''everybody keeps saying they're reserving judgment until everything comes out. whatever comes out is going to be worse. it's not going to make it better.''  the verdict on mcgwire could have a trickle-down effect on the hall of fame chances of other players who have been linked to steroids. rafael palmeiro is one of four players with more than 3,000 hits and 500 homers, but he failed a drug test in the 2005 season. sammy sosa, whose home run battle with mcgwire in 1998 entranced much of the nation, has also been linked to steroid use and his unrevealing testimony at the 2005 congressional hearings has been criticized as well.  and then there is barry bonds, who eclipsed mcgwire's single-season record with 73 home runs in 2001 and needs only 22 homers to pass hank aaron and become baseball's career home-run king. bonds remains under investigation by a federal grand jury in san francisco, apparently in connection with the bay area laboratory co-operative steroid-distribution case.  while ripken owns minor league baseball teams and runs youth leagues and gwynn is the coach at san diego state, mcgwire has basically disappeared from the baseball scene. mcgwire lives in a gated community in southern california where he plays golf and apparently has no connection to baseball. he was not available for comment yesterday.  ripken and gwynn both played their entire careers for the same team, a rarity in their generation. ripken is best known for his incredible durability. he played in 2,632 straight games, surpassing lou gehrig's seemingly unbreakable record of 2,130. he won two most valuable player awards and had 3,184 hits and 431 homers in 21 seasons.  gwynn, a magician with the bat, collected 3,141 hits, won eight batting titles and batted .338 in 20 seasons. he was also a 15-time all-star and a five-time gold glove award winner.  finishing third in the voting was goose gossage, a dominant reliever who pitched for the yankees and eight other teams. he fell just shy of election, with 71.2 percent of the vote, and stands a strong chance of making it in 2008.  mcgwire doesn't. gwynn said mcgwire ''dominated an era,'' which is typically the barometer used for a player's selection. but not in the steroid era.  gwynn said ''we all knew'' of players who used steroids. ''all you all knew. we knew. players knew. owners knew. everybody knew. and we didn't say anything about it.''  