a father and a father figure teach meyer the rewards of tough love   dean hood remembered making plans to hang out with urban meyer after a baseball game during their senior year of high school. meyer had three hits and made a diving stop before making the last out in a loss. hood recalled vividly that meyer was the best player on the field that day, but not good enough for his father, bud.  ''i can't leave with you,'' he recalled meyer saying to him. ''my dad's making me run home.''  ''i couldn't tell you how far it was, but it was a long way, man,'' said hood, who is now the defensive coordinator at wake forest.  fast-forward from the spring of 1982 to the fall of 1990, when meyer was the receivers coach under earle bruce at ohio state. he walked onto the practice field after the birth of his first child, nicole, and was greeted with a conga line of hugs, backslaps and congratulations.  bruce did not take long to find the perfect opportunity to make sure that meyer stayed focused on beating texas-el paso that weekend. it came when he saw billy gonzales, now meyer's receivers coach at florida, blow the blocking assignment on a screen pass.  ''he just undressed me,'' meyer said, still remembering the name of the play, 94-i twin right, and the defensive scheme they faced, a cover 2. ''he just got after me. i remember it like it was yesterday.''  that scolding, much like bud meyer's mandate for a long run home after a baseball loss, offers a window into the two men most responsible for molding urban meyer. together, they helped forge the values and work ethic that allowed meyer to lead florida into monday night's national title game against ohio state.  ''they're very similar,'' meyer said of his father and bruce. ''i think they both are about doing the right thing. there's a lot of things that are important, but doing it the right way is probably the most important.  ''they're family guys and hard workers who don't take shortcuts.''  bud meyer and earle bruce are 75-year-old children of the depression who have a penchant for colorful language and fist-pounding to accentuate a point.  bud meyer, though, was not a football coach; he was a chemical engineer who would take his children's college textbooks and solve the problems for fun.  earle bruce won 154 games in his hall of fame career, with his most notable stint coming at ohio state from 1979 to 1987, when he won or shared four big ten titles. bruce played for and coached under woody hayes, another disciplinarian who helped shape an attitude so salty in bruce that he would paint the opponents' locker room pink to psych them out.  gigi escoe, meyer's sister, got to know bruce over the years.  ''earle strikes me as no-nonsense, straightforward and a disciplinarian who expects a lot out of people,'' she said during a recent interview in a restaurant near the university of cincinnati, where she is a senior associate dean. she then looked at her father seated across the table and said, laughing, ''that seems familiar.''  bud and gisela meyer reared their three children -- gigi, urban and erika -- primarily in the northeast ohio town of ashtabula, which lies on lake erie and, as he put it, ''has gone the way of rust.''  though ashtabula is a primarily blue-collar town, escoe chuckled at portrayals of her brother as a blue-collar kid. she recalled sundays spent at a nearby yacht club and a comfortable childhood.  bud meyer made sure they were not too cozy. he demanded the most from his children; gigi and erika skipped grades. urban, though he thrived academically, was not allowed to skip a grade because it would put him at a disadvantage in sports. bud meyer said his and his wife's simple parenting philosophy derived from his father's.  ''i was expected to produce,'' he said sternly.  he made sure his children produced, too. bud meyer often doled out punishment in laps or push-ups: breaking curfew usually resulted in some type of productive sweat. urban was rewarded with a dollar for hitting a home run and 50 cents for knocking in a run, though he lost a quarter for every strikeout.  those lessons made an impact. meyer's wife, shelley, said he recently punished their 8-year-old son, nate, by making him run six laps around the house.  meyer starred as a tailback and a shortstop for st. john's high school in ashtabula. he had more potential in baseball, and the atlanta braves chose him in the 13th round in the 1982 draft. right after graduation, he headed to sarasota, fla., to play rookie league ball.  ''when everyone else was going to the prom, he was getting on eastern airlines,'' bud meyer said with a hint of pride in his voice. ''we brought him to the airport, and that was it for the summer.''  meyer struggled with curveballs and endless bus rides. he tried to quit a few times, even calling home from a telephone booth in tears to tell his father he was leaving. bud told him that he was not welcome back in the house but to make sure he called his mother.  meyer was finally done in by tendinitis in his throwing arm and ended his baseball career in class a two years later with one home run. he signed the home run ball, which now sits on escoe's mantle.  ''it didn't hurt him,'' bud meyer said of his son's two years in the minors. ''it gave him a lot of maturity.''  meyer ended up attending the university of cincinnati, as did his father, his paternal grandfather and his sisters, and lettered as a walk-on defensive back. he was also introduced to the two loves of his life: shelley and coaching football.  meyer got an internship coaching at st. xavier high school in cincinnati, a local powerhouse. he then went to ohio state, where he was a graduate assistant under bruce.  ''i was in awe of him,'' meyer said.  a tour of the basement of bruce's home in dublin, ohio, outside columbus showed that meyer was not bruce's only successful protégé. there are photos of a shaggy-haired pete carroll, now the coach at southern california, and a baby-faced jim tressel, now the coach of the buckeyes, as ohio state assistants under bruce. bruce then pointed to a picture of meyer wearing a yellow polo shirt and green pants, with a thick mustache from his days at colorado state.  bruce also learned from his father, who had 13 boys and was a safety inspector in a steel mill in pittsburgh.  ''he always told me, 'if you ever come home drunk, your clothes are going to be outside on the sidewalk; you're gone,' '' said bruce, who now works in radio. ''i never took the chance. i didn't want to test him.''  in bruce, meyer saw a mentor, a man who worked his players hard on the field and loved them off it. a man who taught meyer the two credos that guide his florida program: life is a lot better if you are good off the field, and discipline is 90 percent anticipation.  meyer took to the coaching life as a graduate assistant under bruce and began carving a career path with days that began at 6 a.m. and ended at midnight.  ''he was so intense and into the game even then,'' shelley meyer said. ''that's when i really saw what this whole college coaching thing was going to be about.''  meyer, 42, has not forgotten his roots. bruce is a regular visitor at spring practice and has attended some gators games. meyer asked escoe to get their father an empty ring box for his 75th birthday last month; he included a note saying he would fill it with either a southeastern conference title ring or a national title ring.  bruce's grandson zach smith works as a student assistant to meyer. smith helps the florida coaches break down opponents' tendencies on film, a job like the one meyer had 20 seasons ago.  ''they're very similar,'' smith said of meyer and bruce. ''you can see it in their intensity and love for the game. they have such a passion for their players.''  while bud meyer and earle bruce have much in common, they differ on which team they will be cheering for monday night. but bud said that deep down bruce would be cheering for the gators.  ''i don't care what earle says,'' he said. ''i think he wants florida to win this game.''  bruce probably won't pound his fist too hard if florida pulls an upset.  ''i'm a buckeye, and i want the buckeyes to win,'' bruce said. ''but i'll tell you something, i would not feel bad if they lost. i can't feel bad.''  college football  