gergiev's opus: a new concert hall   when daniel barenboim announced almost three years ago that he would leave the chicago symphony, one reason he gave was that music directors of american orchestras have too many ''nonartistic'' responsibilities. fund-raising is chief among them, but conductors are also expected to be community leaders, educators and shrewd business leaders.  given valery gergiev's zeal for performance it's almost surprising that he has yet to conduct on different continents during the same day. (his companies the kirov opera and orchestra go to washington at the end of january, and mr. gergiev will conduct for the new york city ballet in february.) but he is probably closer to that goal than anyone else. so he, of all conductors, might be expected to resent nonmusical burdens.  hardly. he runs the maryinsky theater with the same relentlessness that fills his performance calendar, and he never seems to long for the sanctuary of pure art. his autocratic control of the maryinsky is quite unlike the way american orchestras are governed, but it still takes time from music making.  mr. gergiev's latest accomplishment off the podium is his most visible yet: a $40 million concert hall conceived and built in a mere three years. three years ago a fire in a redbrick warehouse on a side street near the maryinsky theater destroyed or damaged sets and costumes for 30 productions. the impact on the theater's operations received most of the attention, but also appreciable was the loss of the landmark building, which was once used as a set workshop by the russian imperial theaters.  the architect was viktor schröter, who, in the 1880s, after a fire at the maryinsky, redesigned the facade of the theater. he also designed opera houses in important russian regional cities.  after the 2003 fire only three walls of the warehouse's brick shell remained, and mr. gergiev had the idea of an 1,100-seat concert hall for the site. the maryinsky was already immersed in a project to build a second theater on land across a narrow canal from the historic theater; the architect dominique perrault, known for the bibliothèque nationale in paris, had been selected following a competition earlier in 2003.  with all the funds for mr. perrault's ''maryinsky ii'' coming from the russian government, mr. gergiev turned to private sources for the concert hall on the warehouse site. (after it opened, he said that all it took was ''a few phone calls to friends.'') in the end he raised $25 million, mostly from russian but also from western sources; the government contributed an additional $15 million.  the intricate redbrick facade of the original building has been beautifully restored and now houses some backstage facilities. but the hall itself is in an entirely new building of redbrick and copper.  another french architect, xavier fabre, did a handsome job of harmonizing old and new for the hall. the auditorium itself, in beige with red upholstered seats, has the oblong shape familiar from other new halls.  for acoustical advice mr. gergiev chose yasuhisa toyota, perhaps best known for walt disney concert hall in los angeles, which has won universal acclaim. the interior is basically canadian maple, apparently one of mr. toyota's favorite materials, and what looks like plywood bricks. although there are double rings of seats behind and along the sides of the stage, the hall avoids conventional balconies. as mr. gergiev explained it, he wanted a hall that was intimate yet could accommodate mahler and shostakovich, and mr. toyota thought that balconies would cause the sound to bounce around too much.  the hall opened on nov. 29 with a gala that included performances by lang lang, vadim repin and maxim vengerov. as with other new halls, acoustical adjustments can be made depending on the music.  next on the maryinsky's agenda is the completion of maryinsky ii. while mr. gergiev insisted on modern architecture, st. petersburg traditionalists strongly opposed mr. perrault's design, which calls for the new theater to be encased in a translucent golden glass enclosure. mr. perrault's design has been downscaled; original sketches depicted a huge blob that seemed to threaten the historical theater.  maryinsky ii is scheduled for completion in 2009, whereupon maryinsky i will undergo extensive renovation.  