congress to take up net's future   senior lawmakers, emboldened by the recent restrictions on at&t and the change in control of congress, have begun drafting legislation that would prevent high-speed internet companies from charging content providers for priority access.  the first significant so-called net neutrality legislation of the new congressional session was introduced tuesday by senator byron l. dorgan, democrat of south dakota, and senator olympia j. snowe of maine, one of the few republicans in congress to support such a measure.  ''the success of the internet has been its openness and the ability of anyone anywhere in this country to go on the internet and reach the world,'' mr. dorgan said. ''if the big interests who control the pipes become gatekeepers who erect tolls, it will have a significant impact on the internet as we know it.''  in the house, representative edward j. markey, the massachusetts democrat who heads the energy and commerce subcommittee on telecommunications and the internet, said recently that he would introduce legislation soon and planned to hold hearings.  despite the flurry of activity, the proposals face significant political impediments and no one expects that they will be adopted quickly. but the fight promises to be a bonanza for lobbyists and a fund-raising tool for lawmakers. it pits internet giants like google, yahoo, ebay and amazon, which support the legislation, against telecommunication titans like verizon, at&t and large cable companies like comcast.  the debate may also affect the plans of the companies to develop new services and to consider certain mergers or acquisitions.  consumer groups have allied themselves with content providers. the groups maintain that without the legislation, some content providers would be discouraged from offering services while others would impose costs on providers that would either discourage them from offering new services or pass them on to consumers. they also feel that small companies would be unable to compete.  but the telephone and cable companies say that efforts to limit their ability to charge for faster service would discourage the pipeline companies from making billions of dollars in investments to upgrade their networks, and would, as a practical matter, be even more harmful to consumers.  beyond the debate, the fight over net neutrality is, like most regulatory political battles, a fight over money and competing business models. companies like google, yahoo and many content providers do not want to pay for the kinds of faster internet service that will enable consumers to more quickly download videos and play games.  in their thirst to continue to grow rapidly, content providers are looking to expand, but they consider any attempt by the telephone and cable companies to charge them for priority services as restricting their ability to move into new areas.  on the other hand, the telephone and cable companies -- the so-called internet pipes -- want to be able to charge for access, particularly as they begin competing with content providers by offering their video services and programming.  the phone companies have also been studying a business model not unlike that of the cable tv industry: charging premiums to certain content providers for greater access to their pipes.  they say that existing rules, as well as sound business judgment, would preclude them from trying to degrade or slow their broadband service and that what they oppose is regulation that would prevent them from charging for offering a faster service. they also point out that many content providers are already charging customers for priority services, so that what they are proposing is not unduly restrictive.  while the debate has broken largely along partisan lines -- with democrats among the staunchest supporters and republicans the biggest foes -- there remains considerable democratic opposition. last june, a vote on an amendment by mr. markey similar to what he plans to introduce failed by 269 to 152, with 58 democrats voting against the measure.  many of those democrats have been allied with unions, which have sided with the phone companies because they believe that the lack of restrictions will encourage the companies to invest and expand their networks.  in the senate, where the party in the minority has considerably more power than in the house, the measure suffers from similar political problems. last year the republicans blocked the measure from reaching the senate floor.  but several developments have given some momentum to the supporters of the measures. the house is now under the control of the democrats, and the new speaker, nancy pelosi of california, has been a vigorous supporter of the legislation. ms. pelosi's district in san francisco is near silicon valley, the home of many companies that have sought the legislation.  moreover, the conditions that the federal communications commission imposed on at&t as a condition of its acquisition of sbc communications represented an important political victory for proponents of the legislation. after one of the five members of the commission removed himself from the proceeding, the commission's two democrats forced the companies to agree to a two-year moratorium on offering any service that ''privileges, degrades or prioritizes any packet'' transmitted over its broadband service.  the conditions imposed no significant immediate costs on at&t. the company does not yet have the equipment in place on its network to offer a priority service on a large scale. but the conditions imposed by the f.c.c. showed that, contrary to assertions of the phone companies, it was possible to draft language that would preclude the companies from discriminating against providers.  the conditions also set a political benchmark of sorts, and gave the supporters of the legislation two years to try to gain more momentum just as all of the companies are trying to figure out their next major sources of revenue.  