bipartisanship as the first resort?   the house's new democratic majority is mounting a legislative blitzkrieg meant to leave the displaced republicans gasping in the dust. in successive working days, the democrats plan to enact legislation to bolster homeland security, raise the minimum wage, encourage embryonic stem cell research, require the government to bargain for lower medicare drug prices, recoup lost royalties on offshore oil and gas leases, and lower interest rates on student loans.  these are all commendable goals. equally commendable is the pledge by the house speaker, nancy pelosi, to restore some pay-as-you-go fiscal discipline to a budget process bloated out of control by president bush's deficit spending. but what is sorely lacking is the oft-invoked, more often abused ideal of bipartisanship -- despite the democrats' campaign pledge to end the practice of relegating minority lawmakers to the legislative wilderness.  the democrats have the votes to impose their way. but quickly turning any of these measures into law is dicier given the more complicated rules in the senate and the democrats' blade-thin majority there. in scoring early political notches, house democrats had better keep in mind the promise of bipartisanship for securing larger victories.  for years, bipartisanship has been the missing ingredient in the sour stew of washington. it was lacking during the democrats' long house reign that ended in 1994. but during the last 12 years, the republicans virtually eliminated democratic participation. chronically invoked by president bush, this political ideal has been reduced to rhetorical ashes.  of necessity, perhaps, the new senate majority leader, harry reid, is making a considerable show of promising to reach across the aisle. in the house, ms. pelosi promises bipartisanship will be in evidence after the democrats get past their opening agenda. that is like saying the checks and balances are in the mail. if democratic candidates were smart enough during the campaign to realize that the voters demand bipartisanship, they should be quick enough to try it from the start.  editorial  