talking trash   connecticut prides itself on being green, but falls short when it comes to recycling. to its credit, the state department of environmental protection updated connecticut's solid waste management plan last month for the first time since 1991. the result is a report that recommends that the state nearly double its recycling rate by 2024, to 58 percent from 30 percent.  it will not be easy. the state has a mishmash of garbage collection systems, with various private haulers collecting most towns' trash. the towns complain that the burden of trash disposal falls on local shoulders, and that the state does not help much. that should not continue.  the report conveys how much more could be done to improve and increase recycling. a mere 7 percent of connecticut's bulky waste, composed largely of construction debris, is recycled; nearly three-quarters is sent to ohio or pennsylvania. also, there is no recycling program for electronics, so the mountain of junk that households accumulate -- like broken cellphones and old computers -- just takes up landfill space. finally, the state must do a better job of helping local governments instead of handing down mandates, then tying everyone up in red tape.  the report has many good suggestions, but two need emphasis:  institute pay-per-bag systems for trash collection. these measures are often unpopular because they force residents to purchase special bags for trash. but they increase recycling significantly because paying fees for trash bags brings out the tightwad in just about everyone.  the state should apply unclaimed bottle deposits, which amount to millions of dollars, to recycling, instead of giving them to the industry as it has done for more than 25 years. bottling companies claim that it costs them 7 cents to collect each used beer and soda container returned to stores, and the uncollected deposits help offset those costs.  the legislature has for years refused to revisit this issue with anything other than unrecorded voice votes for fear of angering the powerful lobby involved. but members last year found the gumption to oppose the bottling interests in banning soda from public schools. they should reconsider using the uncollected bottle deposits as a way to pay for increased recycling, as other states do.  connecticut  