after aiding prosecutors, rowland aide gets probation   the deputy chief of staff to former gov. john g. rowland, who pleaded guilty four years ago to taking gold coins and other favors in exchange for steering state contracts, left the federal courthouse here on monday richly rewarded, this time for his cooperation with prosecutors.  rather than serving the 24 to 30 months in prison that he faced under federal guidelines, the deeply relieved former aide, lawrence e. alibozek, was sentenced to five years on probation, including one year under house arrest at his home in new hartford.  moments after the noontime hearing, william t. gerace, mr. alibozek's lawyer, said the sentence ''couldn't be better,'' and prosecutors called the sentence ''appropriate'' even though they had filed a motion calling for some prison time.  mr. alibozek, 61, was deputy chief of staff for governor rowland from october 1997 to july 1999. of all those enmeshed in the federal investigation of corruption involving mr. rowland and those around him, mr. alibozek was the first to plead guilty.  in march 2003, he acknowledged having accepted $10,800 in gold coins that he buried in his backyard and other frills that included cash-stuffed envelopes, limousine rides and help with a new business in exchange for his help in steering state contracts to a favored contractor.  prosecutors investigated and obtained convictions of mr. alibozek's former boss, peter n. ellef; william a. tomasso, a contractor who benefited from the schemes; and mr. rowland himself.  mr. ellef and mr. tomasso are serving 30-month prison sentences, and mr. rowland, a three-term republican governor, received a sentence of a year and a day and was released last february.  appearing before judge peter c. dorsey of federal district court, mr. alibozek, looking stockier in a pinstripe suit than he did when he walked the capitol corridors, apologized for his conduct in a quivering voice.  ''i express my deepest regret for the poor judgment of what i got involved in,'' he said, adding that he regretted dishonoring his family and the people of connecticut. ''the bottom line is i accept responsibility for my action.''  mr. gerace described mr. alibozek as a man whose real fault was being a ''loyal soldier,'' which made him capable of paying $2,500 to help furnish a heater for the governor's weekend cottage when his own house was served only by a wood stove.  in defending the decision to show leniency, judge dorsey said he considered mr. alibozek ''as a lesser functionary'' in the illegal schemes. he also said he credited mr. alibozek for having ''walked away from the scheme'' in 1999, nearly three years before federal prosecutors asked for information about possible wrongdoing.  the judge said he also took into consideration the ''significant degree of harassment'' directed at mr. alibozek and his family since his cooperation in the investigation became public.  nora r. dannehy, the lead prosecutor on the case at the united states attorney's office in new haven, contrasted mr. alibozek's ''extraordinary assistance'' with that of mr. rowland, who she said never shared much information with prosecutors and is ''now marketing his story.''  mr. alibozek was also ordered to pay $100,000 in restitution, at the rate of $100 a month. that is meant to cover all the illegal gratuities he received but not the gold coins, which he had dug up from his backyard and forfeited to federal agents on his own volition.  as a longtime public employee, mr. alibozek will continue to collect a state pension of $874 a month, according to the state comptroller's office.  