the nets lose a step down the stretch   on consecutive nights, the nets have shown that resiliency and effort are slowly finding places in their team persona. but they are still learning how to catch a winning attitude.  after trailing by 16 points in the first half and by 8 in the third quarter against the cleveland cavaliers on saturday night, the nets battled back in the fourth, only to watch the game slip from their grasp in the closing minutes.  with a 96-91 loss to the cavaliers, the nets had their season-long winning streak of three games snapped, and they missed an opportunity to beat two of the eastern conference's best teams on consecutive nights.  on friday night, the nets overcame an 18-0 deficit to start the game against the chicago bulls and executed to perfection down the stretch to win by 5 points at continental arena.  after saturday night's game here, nets point guard jason kidd said: ''there were six minutes left and the momentum was in our favor, and we turned the ball over and took some bad shots. it was kind of the opposite of what we did last night.''  still, kidd echoed the sentiments of several of his teammates that the nets (14-19), who have limped to one of the most disappointing starts in the national basketball association, finally have something to feel good about.  ''the effort was there,'' he said. ''and if we can build on what we've done the last four games in the sense of playing hard, we'll hopefully be in the win column more.''  kidd, who had 11 points, 9 rebounds and 6 assists, said he was playing with a stiff back that he had hurt against the bulls.  the nets held lebron james to a quiet 19 points and forced him into 5 turnovers. but the cavaliers' frontcourt of drew gooden (21 points, 6 offensive rebounds) and zydrunas ilgauskas (16 points), along with guard larry hughes (21 points), picked up much of the slack.  the nets' frontline was again depleted because their starting power forward, jason collins, missed his second consecutive game with a strained lower back. the reserve forward josh boone was also out of the game because of a migraine.  yet the nets got another impressive performance from center mikki moore, who has been shifted into the starting lineup because of the season-ending injury to nenad krstic. moore scored 18 points and grabbed 10 rebounds.  moore and a couple of his fellow role players opened the fourth quarter on a 14-4 run that turned a 6-point deficit into a 4-point lead.  the rookie point guard marcus williams led like a veteran during that stretch, getting a couple of open jump shots on pick-and-roll plays. he helped cap the run by finding his fellow rookie teammate hassan adams with a lob pass for an emphatic dunk.  ''those guys did a very good job to get us in that position,'' nets coach lawrence frank said. ''in the last seven minutes, unfortunately, it was a combination of lack of ability to get defensive stops and lack of ability to score down the stretch, obviously, that determined the outcome of the game.''  with the score tied at 83-83, ilagauskas got an open dunk courtesy of a pass from james. kidd lost the ball on his team's next possession, eventually leading to a reverse dunk by james. two possessions later, gooden scored on a driving two-handed dunk. moments later, hughes all but sealed the game for the cavaliers with a layup.  ''the last six minutes, we pride ourselves in trying to out-execute teams, and we did it for maybe five minutes,'' said vince carter, who scored 18 points.  one encouraging sign for the nets was the play of small forward richard jefferson, who finished with 17 points. jefferson has struggled this season because of injuries to both ankles, and many people within the nets' organization have cited his lack of explosiveness as a direct reason for the team's problems.  during the nets' three-game winning streak, jefferson shot 56.4 percent from the field and averaged 21 points, both well above his season averages.  power forward cliff robinson, who was playing in only his second game saturday night after missing a month and a half because of an injured left knee, pointed to another possibility for the nets' early struggles: a lack of accountability.  robinson, 40, is the longest-tenured player in the n.b.a., and one of the few nets willing to correct his teammates when they do something wrong.  ''you're not out there to step on anyone's toes or hurt anyone's feelings,'' he said before the game. ''but at the same time, if you can't take constructive criticism, you're in the wrong business.''  pro basketball  