john sieburth, 79; studied various types of marine life   john mcn. sieburth, a fiercely independent scientist whose research on turkeys led him to penguins, which in turn led him to help identify infinitesimal oceanic organisms that appear to be the most abundant on earth, died on dec. 7 in west kingston, r.i. he was 79.  the cause was complications of dementia, his son scott said.  dr. sieburth was a young researcher studying the use of antibiotics to fight poultry diseases when he became captivated by old claims that penguins had no bacteria in their intestines. so he went to antarctica on an argentine icebreaker and confirmed the reports.  he then found that krill, a relative of shrimp and a major component of the penguin diet, contained acrylic acid, which he identified as a naturally occurring antibiotic found in the ocean. he published an article in science on his finding. he also patented acrylic acid for use as an antibiotic, but it proved too unstable for regular use on land animals.  his enthusiasm for ''drugs from the sea'' prompted him to seek and win a position at the graduate school of oceanography at the university of rhode island, where he did research and taught for 31 years. dr. sieburth was part of a generation of ocean scientists who used new technology to vastly expand knowledge of ocean life.  he and p. w. johnson confirmed the recent discovery of a species of photosynthetic picoplankton, using electron microscopes to perceive fluorescence produced by the chlorophyll of the organisms. they then demonstrated that picoplankton are so widespread that they provide half the food consumed in the sea.  later, dr. sieburth helped find and name the microscopic algae that wiped out large populations of shellfish and came to be called ''brown tide.''  he wrote two books, including an important marine biology textbook, ''sea microbes'' (1979), and 187 research articles.  john mcneill sieburth was born in calgary, alberta, on sept. 2, 1927, and by his own account was a problem child, repeatedly expelled from elementary schools in vancouver, british columbia, where he grew up. he accidentally burned down his family's house.  his first experience with the sea was sailing with his father, and he hopped freights as a hobo before and during his undergraduate studies at the university of british columbia. he wrote a thesis on the life forms in a guinea pig's intestines, and played a practical joke on his entomology professor by gluing together parts of different insects.  his son said dr. sieburth never mellowed, producing ''brutal'' reviews of his colleagues' articles. when he attended academic seminars, he sometimes wore an alarm device originally intended to jolt drowsy drivers awake.  after college, he studied the effects of antibiotics and earned a master's degree at washington state university, where he met janice fae boston, a nutrition student. she said she married him because he was the only young man who would talk seriously to her about science.  she survives him, along with their daughters heather l. crumbaker of vancouver, wash., peggy j. sieburth of winter haven, fla., and leslie e. sieburth of salt lake city; his sons scott, of bryn mawr, pa., and h. clark, of spring grove, va.; six grandchildren; and his sister, louise anderson of las cruces, n.m.  dr. sieburth earned his doctorate from the university of minnesota, where he studied turkeys. he joined the veterinary department of virginia polytechnic institute, where poultry eventually led to penguins.  as part of the international geophysical year of 1957-8, in which 36 countries united for scientific study, particularly of the south polar region, he found a spot on an argentine research vessel after the americans had no room. he dissected many penguins, and was careful in his articles not to say he broke the birds' necks. his son said he used the phrase ''dislocating their backbones.''  throughout his career, he devised new experimental methods. for example, he used the fluorescence of ground-up firefly tails, which use sugar as an energy source, to gauge the sugar content of marine samples, thus deriving an estimate of the concentration of organisms.  dr. sieburth's interests included boatbuilding, blacksmithing and carving whales' teeth for the knives he made. he used his own boat to continue research after his retirement in 1990.  the little pond in front of his last home particularly piqued his curiosity: do bacteria at the water's surface explain why parts of the pond are rough, and others calm? experiments seemed to prove the hypothesis.  ''he just liked learning new things,'' his son scott said.  