mr. schwarzenegger's modest idea   guaranteed health care for children is the new political apple pie. no one can say he is against it, and it's a sure applause line for politicians who want to show concern for reducing the number of uninsured in america. but special recognition is due california's governor, arnold schwarzenegger, who is reportedly ready to begin his new term with an actual proposal that his state insure all children. and by all, he means undocumented immigrants, too.  the proposal seems a challenge to fellow republicans, and even to much of the state's democratic leadership. predictably, anti-immigrant groups said that including all children would cost billions more than the $400 million experts estimate. in truth, the idea is economical and, if anything, quite modest.  several states, including illinois, maine and new jersey, already have programs that cover all youngsters, including undocumented children who might not have access to government-subsidized care. california has what may be the biggest number of uninsured young people, more than 750,000. most were born in the united states and are citizens.  children, however, cannot take themselves in for medical care. that responsibility falls to parents and other caregivers, and when these adults are undocumented, they are often reluctant to take advantage of a child's birthright. california's array of programs to help the poor obtain health care has heavy enrollment in most communities, except among hispanics. the state's history of discrimination against latinos leaves many suspicious of government.  there's no reason to believe that a push, even from an immigrant governor like mr. schwarzenegger, would alone solve that problem. but the governor's efforts should infect the national health care debate. insurance has become a luxury that eludes 47 million people in this country. putting children first is a good start, because they are usually healthy and cheaper to cover. that's a reason to do the job the right way, without exceptions.  editorial  