today in business   gap hires investment bank -- gap, the casual clothing chain that turned staples like t-shirts into must-have fashions and spawned scores of imitators that nibbled away at its business, has hired goldman sachs to explore strategies ranging from the sale of its 3,000 stores to spinning off a single division, like banana republic, according to people briefed on the matter. [page c1.]  insurer to settle katrina claims -- state farm, the biggest home insurer in the nation, is in the final stages of settling hundreds of lawsuits over its payments for homes wrecked by hurricane katrina along the mississippi gulf coast, lawyers briefed on the talks said. [c1.]  eyes on detroit -- the north american international auto show, which is being held this week in detroit, is living up to its global name. new players are coming from china and elsewhere, and there's a new pecking order in the american market, where toyota has replaced chrysler in the no. 3 spot behind general motors and ford. [c1.]  mortgage applications rise -- low mortgage interest rates are buoying the housing market even as experts are debating whether the market has hit bottom. [c1.]  smog in the developing world -- as demand for electricity increases across the developing world, it is often being met through the dirtiest, most inefficient means, creating pollution in many remote areas that used to have pristine air. [c1.]  universal coverage proposed -- gov. arnold schwarzenegger proposed extending health care coverage to all of california's 36 million residents as part of a sweeping package of changes to the state's troubled health care system. [a1.]  state control in venezuela -- president hugo chávez said that his government would nationalize companies in the telecommunications and electricity industries, signaling a vigorous new effort to assert greater state control over venezuela's economy. [a3.]  feud leads to oil cutoff -- supplies of russian crude oil headed to european markets came to a halt overnight, in the latest manifestation of rapidly deteriorating relations between russia and belarus. [a10.]  health care spending slows -- spending on health care in the united states increased in 2005 at the slowest pace in six years, mostly because of much slower growth in spending on prescription drugs, the government reported. [a13.]  bias cited in food studies -- research studies financed by the food industry are much more likely to produce favorable results than independently financed research, according to a report. [a15.]  france loosens ad rules -- a french ban on television advertising by supermarkets, department stores and other merchants expired at the end of 2006, in a significant loosening of one of the most restrictive marketing regulations in europe. advertising. [c6.]  ex-chief of aspen is charged -- the former chief executive of the software company aspen technology, david l. mcquillin, surrendered to face charges that he illegally inflated the company's software revenues as he competed to become its chief executive. [c11.]  barbs traded in nasdaq bid -- nasdaq and the london stock exchange traded trans-atlantic insults as london exchange shareholders consider nasdaq's $5.3 billion hostile takeover offer. [c7.]  deals lift shares -- wall street overcame early losses to close higher as a fresh round of acquisition activity helped raise investors' confidence in the economy. [c9.]  surgery chain agrees to bid -- united surgical partners international, which runs short-stay surgery centers, has agreed to be bought out by a private equity firm for $1.8 billion, the company said. [c9.]  borrowing rose in november -- borrowing by united states households rose in november by the most in three months as americans loaded up on credit card debt to purchase gifts at the start of the holiday shopping season. [c11.]  japanese food innovator dies -- momofuku ando, who as the founder of the nissin food products company invented those small packets of preflavored dried noodles that require just a three-minute boil, died at age 96. mr. ando, above, concocted the chicken-broth noodles wrapped in cellophane bags behind his house in ikeda, japan, 49 years ago, and the company now produces 16 flavors of what it calls top ramen and cup noodles. [c12.]  reversal in bridge deal -- in a swift reversal, the port authority of new york and new jersey said that it would halt plans to place billboards and other advertisements from geico, the big auto insurer, at the bridge's toll plaza, tollbooths and approach roads. [b1.]  online  business briefing  articles on these developments are at nytimes.com/business.  boston scientific said -- it would eliminate 500 to 600 jobs from its cardiac rhythm division, with most of the cuts coming at a minnesota-based office the company acquired in its $27 billion acquisition of guidant corporation last spring. (ap)  kraft foods said -- weaker-than-projected sales of its tassimo single-serve coffee-brewing machines led to a noncash charge of $245 million in the fourth quarter. (bloomberg news)  advanced medical optics, a laser vision correction company, said that it would buy a rival, the intralase corporation, for about $808 million, gaining its competitor's popular blade-free technology. (reuters)  