deal near on transport of bridge sections   work on replacing the roslyn viaduct is expected to continue unabated now that the contractor and the village of roslyn harbor are near agreement on how to transport large concrete beams to the construction site.  the replacement of the three-quarter-mile-long viaduct, which was built in 1948 and carries route 25a, known locally as northern boulevard, has long been planned. but gerson strassberg, the village mayor, said that village officials were not told until november that 412 large concrete sections of the bridge would be transported along roslyn harbor streets from midnight to 5 a.m.  the plan called for the beams, some weighing 60 tons, to be taken to roslyn harbor from virginia by barge and then placed on a flatbed truck and driven 1.3 miles to the viaduct along glenwood road and bryant avenue.  mr. strassberg said that village officials were also not told that because of the height of the beams -- some of them 17 feet high -- utility wires along the truck route had to be raised to 22 feet off the ground and tree limbs had to be cut.  after four meetings with the contractor, the tully construction company, of flushing, queens, and the state department of transportation, mr. strassberg said it was agreed to minimize inconvenience to the village by using other roads to transport the smaller beams to the viaduct.  the viaduct is a main section of route 25a, carrying 38,000 vehicles a day, but it has no shoulders, the sightlines are poor, and heavy trucks are prohibited.  gerard terry of jericho, the lawyer for tully construction, said plans agreed to on dec. 20 called for only about 60 percent of the beams to be transported through the village. he said the route for the other beams had yet to be determined.  plans call for four beams to be moved each night using two flatbed trucks making two trips each. typically, mr. terry said, the shipments will be made on a weeknight.  ''so we will be making about 120 trips through the village over the course of one year, and each trip takes approximately 10 minutes,'' mr. terry said.  the company and the village were still completing their agreement, with hopes of beginning the truck runs sometime this month.  the $120 million project is scheduled for completion in 2008.  on commuting  