back to 'talking smack' with rosie, donald and barbara   if someone had to describe the feud between donald trump and rosie o'donnell to a television viewer whose power had been off the last three weeks, there are worse analogies than that of a wwe title bout, complete with a little off-camera brawling in the locker rooms and high-stakes ratings on the line.  how better to explain how ms. o'donnell's criticism of mr. trump on ''the view'' on dec. 20, in which she questioned both his financial acumen and his handling of the apparent substance abuse and emotional problems of the current miss usa, tara conner, has spiraled into a free-for-all in which he has since slapped ms. o'donnell down repeatedly over her physical appearance; in the process, mr. trump has even drawn in her co-host and boss, barbara walters.  from her perch on ''the view'' last week, ms. walters scolded mr. trump over his contention that she regretted hiring ms. o'donnell for the talk show, only to get into a backstage shouting match herself with ms. o'donnell on monday that was loud enough to be overheard by others and recounted to the new york post.  to hear mr. trump tell it, even star jones -- who was effectively fired from ''the view'' last june, only to stun ms. walters on live television by pre-emptively announcing she was leaving -- has gotten into the act.  ''i just got a congratulatory call from star jones,'' mr. trump related yesterday in a telephone interview, just after noon.  about an hour earlier, on yesterday's live episode of ''the view,'' ms. walters had the option to ignore the latest salvo from mr. trump, an open letter he wrote to ms. o'donnell, reprinted in the morning's edition of the post, in which he again described a conciliatory phone call he says he received over the christmas break from ms. walters expressing frustration with ms. o'donnell.  ''well, he's at it again,'' ms. o'donnell told the studio audience yesterday as soon as she had taken her seat on one end of a long glass table on the ''view'' set, directly opposite ms. walters. ''you o.k., barbara?''  ''i'm o.k.,'' ms. walters responded. then, taking the bait, ms. walters added: ''that poor, pathetic man.''  ''give me a high five,'' ms. o'donnell responded as she stretched across the table to meet ms. walters's hands with hers, a ''view'' equivalent of a tag team in wrestling, however shaky. ''he just can't let go,'' ms. walters said. ''we're moving on.''  and they did, to a conversation about hot flashes, of all things, but not before ms. o'donnell took a potshot at the opening night ratings for the sixth season of mr. trump's ''apprentice,'' the nbc reality series, on sunday night.  ''and i'm happy to say, his show tanked,'' ms. o'donnell told the audience.  mr. trump, watching ''the view'' yesterday from his 26th-floor office at trump tower in manhattan, was sufficiently moved to fire off a statement to reporters in which he defended the ratings performance of ''the apprentice'' -- the last half-hour of the 90-minute season premiere actually won its time slot, at least among younger viewers -- before taking aim at ms. walters (and, indirectly, ms. o'donnell) again.  ''barbara has become a sad figurehead dominated by a third-rate comedian,'' he wrote. and then, like a major league baseball player seeking to return a most valuable player award from a previous season, he added: ''i now wish she had not recently chosen me as one of the '10 most fascinating people,' '' an honor she bestowed on her annual holiday special, in 2004.  how to make some sense of all this?  on one level, it is a story of two long-running shows -- ''the view,'' now in its 10th season; ''the apprentice'' its sixth -- seeking a little ratings traction.  since joining ''the view'' in september, ms. o'donnell has repeatedly drawn attention by picking on-camera fights with high-profile targets, including oprah winfrey (whose sexuality she openly questioned) and kelly ripa (for recoiling when the singer clay aiken placed his hand over her mouth during an appearance on ''regis and kelly,'' also on abc).  setting aside her heavily promoted first week on ''the view,'' the show drew an average of 3.3 million viewers each morning from sept. 12 through dec. 15, an increase of 13 percent over the same period a year earlier, according to nielsen media research estimates. but during the week after christmas -- the first full week after ms. o'donnell took on mr. trump -- the show drew an average of 3.8 million viewers, according to nielsen, a 24 percent increase when compared to a year earlier.  mr. trump, of course, has had a few public fights of his own over the years at key moments. last february, for example, during the runup to the fifth season of ''the apprentice,'' he wrote another open letter, this one to martha stewart, for the weak performance of her ''apprentice'' spinoff -- which he partly owned -- saying it ''never had a chance.''  on sunday, after mr. trump had mined ms. o'donnell's criticism for weeks of headlines on the gossip pages, ''the apprentice'' opened with 9.1 million viewers -- a drop over all from the premiere of the last season, but an increase among viewers 18 to 49.  asked in the interview if he had continued to pound ms. o'donnell and ms. walters for the benefit of his show, mr. trump insisted he had not.  '' 'the apprentice' means nothing to me,'' he said. ''it's a peanut.''  instead, he said, ''rosie is a bully. and i learned in high school, when there is a bully, you have to hit that bully between the eyes and high.''  he went on to call her ''not smart,'' ''crude,'' ''disgusting,'' ''a slob'' and ''an animal.''  of ms. walters, he said, ''barbara is a sad case. this has revealed the real barbara,'' before adding, ominously and without explanation, ''i know a lot about barbara.''  he also pronounced himself disappointed in yesterday's ''view,'' saying he had hoped ms. o'donnell and ms. walters would dissect his letter. in all, they spent less than a minute on it, before the conversation moved to menopause.  ''how gross was that,'' he said, ''rosie talking about her hot flashes.''  neither ms. walters nor ms. o'donnell was available to respond to any comments by mr. trump yesterday, said cindi berger, the publicist who represents them both. but when asked specifically about the post's account of the dressing-room fracas between the two co-hosts, she did not dispute it. ''there was certainly a squabble,'' she said. ''both women said what they had to say and have moved on.''  ''without,'' ms. berger emphasized, ''affecting their relationship.''  of mr. trump, she said, ''someone has to pull the reins in on him.''  