medicaid shortfall hurts hospitals, report finds   insufficient medicaid payments have left many of the state's hospitals in dire financial shape, with several running a deficit for years, according to a report released last month by the state legislature.  under the current system for medicaid, the federal and state health care program for the poor that has been in place since 1983, the state's 30 acute-care hospitals are each reimbursed the same amount for every patient, regardless of the patients' treatments. that amount is $4,000, said stephen a. frayne, the senior vice president of health policy for the connecticut hospital association.  ''the reimbursement for someone needing a kidney transplant is the same as for someone who needs an appendectomy,'' he said.  mr. frayne said that the state's annual rate of reimbursement had failed to keep up with inflation and the hospitals' rising costs.  the medicaid system had left the hospitals about $250 million short each year, he said, and because of that deficit, the hospitals are not investing in new equipment, updating technology or making other capital improvements.  ''if this keeps up, eventually these hospitals will not be state of the art,'' he said.  in most other states, the medicaid reimbursement rate is similar to medicare, the federal health insurance program, and compensates hospitals according to what kind of treatment a patient receives, mr. frayne said.  toni n. harp, a state senator representing parts of new haven and west haven, said the state should increase medicaid reimbursements.  ''we should be paying 90 percent of the cost of patient care, or more,'' she said. ''we should also track our increases to the cost-of-living increases in the medicare rate.''  ms. harp said the state must also increase the reimbursement rate to doctors. ''because it is so low, some doctors are not seeing medicaid patients,'' she said. ''and that's pushing those people to hospital emergency rooms.''  police use new mobile and arrest 5 for d.u.i.  the state police deployed its new breath alcohol testing mobile -- or bat mobile -- for the first time at a checkpoint on route 2a in preston on new year's eve, and used it to arrest five motorists suspected of driving under the influence.  the bat mobile, which cost $250,000, is equipped with a breathalyzer to check a driver's blood alcohol level, a temporary holding cell, an area to process arrests, high-powered outside lights and a video system to record the checkpoint. troopers save time, the department says, by being able to test motorists right at the mobile, rather than having to take them to a barracks.  trooper william tate, a spokesman for the state police, said the department was pleased with the bat mobile's debut last sunday night.  ''it was very effective,'' he said. ''when you have a new piece of equipment, you expect some problems, but there were none. everything went according to plan.''  route 2a was chosen because it was a popular route to and from the two casinos in the state, trooper tate said. the state police said it had arrested 40 people over the new year's weekend on charges of driving under the influence.  lt. j. paul vance said the mobile would also be used for various presentations at high schools and colleges.  ''a lot of people are under the impression that a d.u.i. arrest is similar to a traffic ticket,'' he said. ''we want to show them the jail cell inside this vehicle and let them know that a d.u.i. arrest is court appearance and a lot more.''  lieutenant vance said the new london police department had a similar vehicle.  the week  