expressing themselves here, with art from there   not every foreign-born local artist can count on madonna for a career boost, but that is how it worked for rashmi jhaveri of edison.  during a 1999 mtv performance, cameras caught a mendhi -- an intricate henna tattoo typically worn by indian brides -- snaking up the pop star's arms. it was instant exposure for the art practiced by ms. jhaveri, whose calendar hasn't been the same since.  a master mendhi artist who moved to new jersey from bombay in 1995, ms. jhaveri travels with her tool kit to workshops at arts centers across new jersey and pennsylvania. with every demonstration, she said, she typically receives at least one invitation to show her craft somewhere new.  cultural appropriation by madonna is hardly the only road to artistic prominence, though. with arts organizations in new jersey, and throughout the region, seeking more diverse audiences, traditional folk-art practitioners of all stripes -- from ukrainian egg painters to chinese puppeteers -- are unlikely to remain a secret.  ''i used to wonder, 'how can i contribute my talent?' '' said ki paek, a korean fan dancer who has lived in lawrenceville since 1993. within a year of moving to new jersey, she started the all-volunteer princeton korean folk dance troupe (now based in plainfield).  ''i wanted to introduce our culture to the local community, and also to give second-generation children a strong identity,'' she said. bookings were slow at first, but that has changed.  ''in 2006, i had people ask me to come, and i had to tell them no,'' ms. paek said. ''we get a lot of invitations now -- i think it has something to do with the internet and cellphones, with more awareness of different cultural traditions.''  another dance troupe raising its profile is xochiquetzal, a traditional mexican group based in phillipsburg that works regularly with the northwest jersey folklife project in oxford, which helps arrange performances and make connections for the group.  ''people in the area have always given us support, but i'd say in the last six months there's been more interest than ever,'' said martha monroy, the troupe's artistic director. ''people have started knowing more about our culture. they value our roots.''  roots also count at the park performing arts center in union city, where, every saturday, the center's folk arts program offers an african-american percussion workshop, afro-cuban salsa lessons and other instruction. generally, though, backgrounds and homelands tend to blend harmoniously once a program begins.  ''one of the best things about park is that it attracts people from all different places,'' said oscar feldman, an argentinean saxophonist who lives in weehawken and teaches latin jazz at the center.  ''what i do isn't just argentinean -- the direction is defined by the people from the area, who are from all different cultures,'' he said. ''so park is like an oasis, a place where they can socialize, share their cultures and be heard. people come and they don't want to leave.''  tammy la gorce  