arts, briefly   directors guild announces nominees  the directors guild of america yesterday announced the nominees for best director of a feature film for 2006: bill condon, right, for ''dreamgirls''; jonathan dayton and valerie faris for ''little miss sunshine''; stephen frears for ''the queen''; alejandro gonzález iñárritu for ''babel''; and martin scorsese for ''the departed.'' the winner is to be announced on feb. 3 at the group's 59th annual awards dinner at the hyatt century plaza hotel in los angeles. since the award's inception in 1949, more than 50 of the winners have gone on to win the academy award for best director.  bob woodruff returns in a documentary  bob woodruff, the abc news anchor who was severely injured by a roadside bomb while covering the war in iraq last january, will deliver his first on-air report since then, when he is seen in a documentary to be broadcast by abc on feb. 27. the one-hour program, ''to iraq and back: bob woodruff reports,'' will include interviews with soldiers and colleagues who were with him at the time of the incident; the military and civilian personnel who saved his life; and his wife, lee woodruff, who will discuss the extent of his injury and its effects on their family. the report will also focus on wounded military personnel at bethesda naval hospital, where mr. woodruff was treated.  philharmonic chooses 'my fair lady'  ''my fair lady'' will be presented by the new york philharmonic in four semi-staged performances in march. the 1956 musical, with book and lyrics by alan jay lerner and music by frederick loewe, will be seen at a gala performance on march 7 at 7:30 p.m., on march 8 at 7:30 p.m. and on march 9 and 10 at 8 p.m. rob fisher, left, currently the music director of ''the apple tree,'' starring kristin chenoweth and playing at studio 54, will conduct. ''my fair lady'' replaces the 1970 stephen sondheim and george furth musical ''company,'' deferred by the philharmonic when plans were announced for a broadway production, now at the ethel barrymore theater.  beatles stamps a hit  the beatles are on track for another best seller: the set of six stamps, above, featuring the band's album covers, that was issued yesterday by britain's royal mail. demand for the stamps, especially from the united states, canada and japan, has been so strong that they are likely to be more popular than any royal mail stamps except those related to occasions like royal weddings, agence france-presse reported. ''we chose to celebrate a band as exceptional as the beatles because of their contribution to the world,'' said julietta edgar, a spokeswoman for the royal mail, ''and that popularity has been demonstrated by the interest this stamp has received across the globe.''  ella fitzgerald (1917-1996), the jazz and pop singer known as ''the first lady of song,'' will be honored by the united states postal service today when she is featured in its black heritage stamp series. first-day-of-issue ceremonies for the 39-cent stamp bearing her portrait will take place at 11 a.m. in the allen room in frederick p. rose hall, jazz at lincoln center. the event is free and open to all.  