after pataki's 12 years, is new york better off?   to the editor:  ''the george pataki era'' (editorial, dec. 31) reminds me of nero before the collapse of the roman empire. gov. george e. pataki's public service announcements kept running in new york while he ran around the country trying to position himself for a 2008 presidential run.  meanwhile in his home state, the g.o.p. was collapsing. mr. pataki's record deficits, excessive spending and late budgets gave real conservative republicans anguish.  new york state is now the no. 2 state in the country in terms of long-term debt. each adult new york resident is responsible for $3,515 of the $50 billion total debt, which almost doubled in the years mr. pataki was governor. to that you can add the debt of the new york state public authorities, now $114 billion.  while mr. pataki was governor, republicans lost numerous public offices, including senate and congressional seats, the office of the attorney general, county executive offices, and state senate and assembly seats.  in 2008, intelligent primary voters will look past glitzy commercials and remember mr. pataki's fiscal mismanagement and the destruction of the state's republican party.  larry penner  great neck  to the editor:  i question your characterization of gov. george e. pataki's choices to lead the lower manhattan development corporation (or what many call the ''leave manhattan destroyed committee'') as ''excellent,'' and your description of their preferred plans as ''first-rate.''  the official planning process for the world trade center site was an outrage and disgrace from the start, designed to ensure that plans that responded in the only appropriate manner -- rebuilding on the scale and in the spirit of what was destroyed -- were never even considered.  gov. eliot spitzer could get off to a great start by consigning the daniel libeskind plan and the misguided priorities that produced it to the trash bin.  louis epstein  carmel, n.y.  the writer is the founder and director of the world trade center restoration movement.  to the editor:  your review of george e. pataki's governorship did not mention the two most important areas of responsibility of any governor today: economic development and education.  when mr. pataki's lack of accomplishment in matters of economic development and education is factored in, his administration can be seen as nothing other than a complete and utter failure.  paul t. shoemaker  bronxville, n.y.  to the editor:  in gov. george e. pataki's first budget, he cut state school aid to new york city while increasing it for the rest of the state, leading to a drastic cutback in the city's public school spending at a moment that enrollment was rising.  in 1997, mr. pataki pushed through his school tax relief program, known as star, which directed rising state aid to the affluent suburban districts that spend the most, raising the average state aid per student in the affluent downstate suburban counties to almost as high as in new york city. in exchange for star, he promised city legislators a state bond referendum to fix the city's aging schools -- a bond issue that was later defeated.  nothing else mr. pataki has done has had as great an impact on as many people. elsewhere in the country, those living in districts with larger tax bases and less needy students face a state education aid system that redistributes their state taxes to less well-off districts.  only mr. pataki could successfully achieve a state education aid system that actually redistributed education resources away from new york city, home of a majority of the state's neediest children.  this unique accomplishment is his true legacy.  larry littlefield  brooklyn  