investigations dim luster of new jersey political star   it has already been a long descent for state senator wayne r. bryant.  for nearly a quarter century, mr. bryant's name was mentioned in the same breath as new jersey's most influential power brokers.  but today mr. bryant, a democrat from camden county, is the subject of three separate inquires -- by federal and state investigators as well as his own colleagues -- and he has become something of an outsider in his own legislative chamber as a new session gets under way.  with investigators sifting through his tangled finances and with the threat of an indictment looming, it appears that a distance has developed between mr. bryant and many of his colleagues.  ''until this, he was pretty comfortable in his day-to-day activities and there weren't a lot of people paying attention,'' said james w. hughes, dean of the edward j. bloustein school of planning and public policy at rutgers. ''now, the political world in trenton has changed. and so has his personal circumstance within that changed world.''  mr. bryant's fall from player to pariah mirrors stepped-up efforts by law enforcement agencies to investigate corruption in new jersey and the weariness of voters with accusations of misconduct by public officials, who in the last five years alone have been the subject of more than 200 indictments by federal investigators.  the focus of the investigations into the 59-year-old mr. bryant -- who stepped down last year as chairman of the senate budget and appropriations committee under pressure by fellow democrats -- apparently center on whether he improperly steered millions of dollars in state grants to the university of medicine and dentistry of new jersey in exchange for a $38,000-a-year position there in which a federal monitor said mr. bryant did ''little to no work.''  he has also been questioned for holding as many as four government jobs at once and for the presence of a handful of relatives on the public payroll.  this month, mr. bryant, who had resigned from three of those positions, including the job at the medical school, after word of the investigations, faced renewed criticism when he applied for public pensions that could pay him more than $83,000 annually.  but the crushing blow came last april. as his political life was unraveling, mr. bryant's 37-year-old son, wayne bryant jr., died unexpectedly after a brief illness.  through all of his troubles, though, mr. bryant has continued to hold his $49,000-a year-job as a state senator.  as legislators trickled back to the state house on monday after the winter break, mr. bryant was among them, sitting in his customary seat in the back row of the senate chamber and frequently peering over the rims of his reading glasses to scribble notes.  at one point, mr. bryant rose and addressed the chamber in support of a judicial nomination but when the session ended, the senator, as he has for months now, declined to comment about the investigations swirling about him, instead referring to a statement issued last summer in which he denied any wrongdoing.  asked on monday about his pension applications, mr. bryant said simply, ''it's self-evident,'' before retreating from the chamber.  many of his colleagues in the legislature have tried to put some distance between themselves and mr. bryant, avoiding public comments in favor of off-the-record conversations.  ''i'd prefer not to talk about my colleague,'' said senator ronald l. rice, a democrat from essex county.  but a few noted that there has been a measure of compassion in the chamber as well.  ''i think there's a lot of empathy and a little sense of a loss because you can feel the weight on his shoulders,'' said senator raymond j. lesniak, a democrat from union county. ''to go through the loss of a son, to go through all the investigations, to have your integrity questioned. for someone who has stood so strong and represented his district so well for so many years, it's a difficult thing to see.''  senator stephen m. sweeney, a democrat from gloucester county who as part of the south jersey delegation sits next to mr. bryant in the senate chamber, said that he had yet to be convinced that mr. bryant was guilty of any wrongdoing.  ''until a jury decides, you're innocent -- i firmly believe that,'' mr. sweeney said. ''senator bryant has basically told all of us that he hasn't done anything wrong. and the investigation has been going on for some time and he hasn't been charged yet.''  asked if mr. bryant's demeanor had changed in recent months, mr. sweeney replied: ''his demeanor changed enormously when his son died. i've lost a sibling, and you lose such a part of yourself, i think the loss of his son has affected him more than anything.''  senator john h. adler, who along with mr. bryant represents camden county, said that his colleague continued to speak out when consulting privately with other lawmakers.  ''we still listen to him closely on budget issues, we still listen to him closely on issues about empowering people, particularly in urban areas,'' he said. ''when his son died, we heard an understandable quiet from him, but we're hopeful that he continues to raise his voice.''  regardless of the outcome of the investigations into mr. bryant, mr. hughes said that the days of the senator living comfortably under the radar were over.  ''he's going to continually be under the microscope,'' mr. hughes said.  