no negotiating with separatists after airport attack, spaniard says   the socialist government of spain will never again negotiate with the basque separatist group eta after a deadly attack on madrid's main airport terminal nine days ago, interior minister alfredo pérez rubalcaba said monday.  ''they broke their word, they deceived,'' mr. rubalcaba said of eta, which he blamed for the attack. ''they have a different logic, a murderous, psychopathic logic.''  he added: ''there will never again be another credible truce with eta. the next time they call a truce, everyone will say, 'a truce -- just like the one at barajas,' '' referring to the name of the madrid airport.  in a 90-minute interview on monday evening, mr. rubalcaba said the attack, which destroyed a new five-story parking garage and left two people dead and about two dozen wounded, came as a complete surprise not only to the government but also to eta's own political wing.  ''nobody really knows why eta did it, because we've even seen that batasuna has been completely shaken by it,'' mr. rubalcaba said, referring to the military organization's political apparatus. ''eta even deceived its own political arm. we knew there was tension with eta and with batasuna, but this was a surprise. it was impossible to predict something like this.''  in addition to the casualties and tens of millions of dollars of damage to madrid's state-of-the-art airport terminal, opened only early last january, the attack also represents the most serious setback in prime minister josé luis rodríguez zapatero's nearly three years in office.  mr. rubalcaba, a close confidant of mr. zapatero who took over as interior minister last april, defended the government's decision to begin a peace process with eta in june, three months after it declared a permanent cease-fire. but the minister accused eta of miscalculating by thinking it could ''soften up'' the government by using violence while hoping to keep talking.  ''they wanted to negotiate with the only thing they know, which is violence,'' he said. ''but they went too far.''  mr. rubalcaba also released new details of the bombing. he said three phone calls were made within three minutes of each other just before 8 a.m. on dec. 30, two to the basque emergency service and one to the madrid fire service saying that the attack would take place at 9 a.m.  two of the calls were made from a caller on a cellphone purchased in the basque city of bilbao, he said. the caller also unsuccessfully tried to place four phone calls to the basque newspaper gara, presumably also to disclose the imminent attack. it was before working hours, and ''no one answered the phone,'' mr. rubalcaba said.  the calls included information about the model, license plate number and location of the burgundy renault van packed with explosives in the parking lot. one of the warning calls was in the name of eta. after verifying that the threats were credible, the police located the van twenty minutes before the bomb was set to explode, which meant there was no time to detonate it, only to evacuate the parking lot.  two ecuadorean residents of spain, diego armando estacio, 19, a construction worker, and carlos alonso palate, 35, a plastics factory worker, who were asleep in their cars awaiting arriving passengers and unseen by the police, were killed.  mr. rubalcaba said the deaths ''were probably not part of eta's plan.''  he explained that the main reason the government was caught by surprise was that it assumed eta would follow its past history and formally announce that it was breaking its cease-fire before committing a major act of violence.  even signs over the past several months that eta had not renounced violence, including the seizure of 350 pistols last october from an armory in france that was linked to the group, were not enough to convince the government that the peace process was going off course.  ''of course we didn't like these acts, and we never let down our guard, but we looked at eta's history, and over and over eta has never broken a truce without warning,'' he said.  mr. rubalcaba said he was certain eta, and not an islamic terrorist group like the one that carried out the march 2004 madrid train bombings, was behind the attack. ''radical islamists don't give you warnings; radical islamists want to kill a lot of people,'' mr. rubalcaba said.  he also noted that the political wing of eta neither confirmed nor denied responsibility for the attack, unlike its immediate denial of responsibility following the march 2004 bombings that left 191 people dead.  what is striking is that despite spain's long history in combating eta's terrorism, it had no warning through its intelligence and security services that an attack, which was meticulously carried out, was imminent.  three days before the attack, for example, the van was stolen from a spaniard who was kidnapped while on a mountain-climbing trip in southwestern france and only released shortly after the bomb went off.  no arrests have been made. mr. rubalcaba said there were several leads, although he acknowledged that the police did not know the identity of the caller announcing the attacks.  despite dozens of samples from the site, spanish explosives experts still have not determined the size of the bomb or the nature of the explosives used. ''when you have such a powerful explosion, it's very, very complicated to find any residue,'' said mr. rubalcaba, an organic chemist by training.  the spanish police and intelligence services now find themselves in the uncomfortable position of not knowing eta's motives or future strategy and whether it may unleash a new wave of violence that could involve casualties.  last thursday night, nearly 100 kilograms, or 220 pounds, of explosives were found in an abandoned car near the basque town of amorebeita ready to be detonated; the next day, a backpack filled with more explosives was discovered on a basque hillside. mr. rubalcaba said the arms caches probably were abandoned when eta followers fled the sites after the recent attack.  ''eta made a decision in 2003 to stop killing,'' mr. rubalcaba said. ''what we are asking ourselves now is whether that decision is being reconsidered. we don't know.''  