a hopeful ponders where to plant her flag   choices, choices. the four seasons in georgetown or the four seasons in midtown? a town full of political leaks or a town full of mysterious odors? easy access to hundreds of gabby democratic strategists or easy access to the one gabby democrat who matters most (one's husband, perhaps)?  among the signs that the clinton presidential kabuki is ending -- that senator hillary rodham clinton will, in fact, announce her campaign for the white house soon -- is a decision, democrats close to her say, that she plans to base her campaign headquarters in or around washington instead of in white plains or new york, which had been under consideration.  running from a base in washington would make the most practical and financial sense, clinton advisers say, and they note that she would have satellite offices in new york and elsewhere. still, a few advisers and supporters are concerned about the decision, saying it could reinforce her image as a washington insider (if it is possible for that to be any more of an issue) and increase the possibility of leaks to the press corps (as if, ditto).  ''one group thinks headquarters should be wherever is easiest for her, and another group is worried about public perception, since washington is an unpopular place,'' said an adviser who has been involved in the discussions and who insisted on anonymity. ''the thing is voters in the end won't really care where she runs from.''  the concerns among the pro-new york crowd are twofold. first, the democrats' success on nov. 7 was seen, in part, as a repudiation of insider politics. even more, mrs. clinton's likely main rivals for the nomination at this point, senator barack obama of illinois and former senator john edwards of north carolina, plan to run their campaigns from their home states and portray themselves as americans who understand the hardships of average citizens.  ''washington is the center of government, but it is a very insular, myopic place,'' said david axelrod, a senior adviser to mr. obama. ''it's hard to see america clearly from washington, d.c., and that's the danger in rooting a national campaign there.''  logistically, washington makes sense. mrs. clinton, as a member of the razor-thin democratic majority, will be needed here to cast senate votes. most of her advisers live and have families here, including her campaign manger, patti solis doyle, and her pollster, mark penn. and unlike chez clinton in chappaqua, n.y., her spacious home here is convenient for meetings and fund-raisers, situated a few miles from the capitol and the airport.  her chief adviser based in new york, howard wolfson, is selling his apartment on central park west and plans to move here soon. mr. wolfson had been planning to do so, clinton advisers said, because his wife, terri, is a top aide to speaker nancy pelosi, and they have a young child.  the site of mrs. clinton's headquarters is less of a concern in a general election, democrats say. a top republican rival, senator john mccain of arizona, is expected to base his campaign across the potomac in crystal city, va., for the same logistical reasons as mrs. clinton's.  the last winning presidential candidate who ran from washington and who was not an incumbent or vice president was ronald reagan in 1980. his operation was based at home in california until he won the nomination. ed rollins, the republican strategist who was an aide in the 1980 campaign and managed the 1984 re-election effort, said news media leaks could be tougher to manage in washington, as well as the flow of politicians who want to offer their two cents (welcome or not).  former vice president walter mondale ran from washington in 1984, gov. michael s. dukakis from boston in 1988, bill clinton from little rock, ark, in 1992, and bob dole from washington in 1996. senator john kerry considered running from boston in 2004. there were tensions between his boston advisers and his washington advisers, and washington won out.  people involved in those campaigns said logistics were always the concern.  ''i won the '88 nomination on long weekends,'' mr. dukakis said, ''because monday through thursday i wanted to be in the statehouse.''  in 2000, vice president al gore started running from washington and then decamped to his home state, tennessee, in part to try to shed his insideritis. he went on to lose tennessee, anyway.  mr. edwards ran for the nomination in 2004 from raleigh, n.c. as mr. kerry's running mate that year, he did not carry his home state, either.  at times, mrs. clinton has considered home to be in illinois, arkansas, washington and new york, and, advisers say, she thinks she can win all four states next year.  george w. bush ran from austin in 2000, when he was governor of texas. ken mehlman, the chairman of the republican national committee who worked on mr. bush's campaign that year and managed it in 2004, said he viewed the headquarters location as a business decision. austin was easier and more comfortable for the team in 2000, and an office complex in virginia helped focus the campaign in 2004.  ''i wanted a place with a lot of open spaces and few offices, where it could be collegial and not hierarchical, and a place with a restaurant, parking spaces and a gym,'' mr. mehlman said, ''so people would never want to leave.''  political memo  correction:  january 12, 2007, friday  because of an editing error, an article on wednesday about possible campaign headquarters for senator hillary rodham clinton misidentified one of the places she has considered home. it is washington, d.c., not washington state.  