news summary   international  a3-14  u.s. and iraqi troops fight major battle with militants  more than 1,000 american and iraqi troops, backed by apache attack helicopters and f-18 fighter jets, battled insurgents in downtown baghdad in one of the most dramatic operations in the capital since the invasion.  a1  democratic leaders said they intend to hold votes in the house and senate on president bush's plan to send more troops to baghdad, forcing republicans to take a stand on the proposal.  a1  anger over somalia airstrikes  somali officials said dozens of people were killed in an american airstrike, most of them islamist fighters crossing the kenya-somalia border. american officials said al qaeda members were the targets.  a8  clergy scandal grows in poland  more allegations of former secret-police collaborators among the catholic clergy spilled onto poland's front pages, sullying an institution that for decades was considered spotless in its fight against communism.  a6  eta sends mixed signals  the basque separatist organization eta claimed responsibility for the bomb attack on madrid's main airport terminal 10 days ago which killed two people, even as it said the ''permanent cease-fire'' it announced last march is still in effect.  a5  u.s. restricts iranian bank  the united states, moving to raise pressure on iran, barred american financial institutions from doing any business with a major iranian bank after concluding it had been involved in illicit weapons programs.  a3  report on toronto sars cases  a commission investigating the sars outbreak in 2003 reported that poor hospital infection-control procedures led to the epidemic in the toronto area that killed 44 people.  a7  national  a16-20  security bill advances; minimum wage vote is set  house democrats, delivering on a major campaign promise, used their new majority to push through a bill that would write into law several remaining recommendations of the sept. 11 commission.  a18  as part of their 100-hour legislative blitz, house democrats are expected to vote today to increase the minimum wage for the first time in a decade, to $7.25 an hour.  a18  bush drops judicial nominees  president bush said he was dropping plans to nominate three of his choices for the federal appeals courts who have been vigorously opposed by senate democrats.  a18  california emissions plan  gov. arnold schwarzenegger said that he would order california to require its petroleum refiners and gasoline sellers to cut the emissions of heat-trapping gases associated with the production and use of their products by 10 percent.  a20  health insurance for the poor  in its drive to provide health insurance to nearly all its residents, massachusetts has already signed up more than half of the poorest people who are eligible. but experts and politicians agree the bigger challenge will be the working poor who will get a state-subsidized rate.  a20  science/health  human influence on climate  the national oceanic and atmospheric administration under the bush administration said unequivocally that the buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere was helping warm the climate, placing 2006 as the warmest year for the united states since regular temperature records began in 1895.  a16  new york/region  b1-6  new york plans to reinvent the urban playground  new york city, which invented the municipal playground in america, is on the verge of a bold experiment in the way children play: by developing a playground near the south street seaport with trained ''play workers'' on hand to help the children interact with the playground's water, ramps, sand and specially designed objects meant to spur the imagination.  a1  bomb plotter's kin arrested  the parents and sister of a man convicted of conspiring to bomb the herald square subway station were detained by federal immigration authorities, who have been seeking to deport them to pakistan.  b1  open ears for mayor's pitch  mayor bloomberg took his perennial pitch for more homeland security money to congress , but unlike in the past, when congress was controlled by republicans, lawmakers seemed poised to listen.  b5  neediest cases  b4  sportswednesday  d1-6  two elected to hall of fame  cal ripken jr. and tony gwynn were both elected to the baseball hall of fame in near-unanimous votes. but their achievement was overshadowed by the voters' rejection of mark mcgwire, a slugger who fell into disrepute because of suspected steroid use.  a1  obituaries  a21  jane bolin  a judge whose appointment by mayor fiorello h. la guardia in 1939 made her the first black woman in the united states to become a judge, she was 98.  a21  business day  c1-14  venezuela shakes markets  investors reacted with alarm in the united states and throughout latin america as they measured the impact of president hugo chávez's plan to nationalize key areas of the economy in venezuela.  a1  business digest  c2  editorial  a22-23  editorials: moving ahead on stem cells; venezuela inc.'s hostile takeover; well-grounded ethics reform; a good call in new york.  columns: thomas l. friedman, maureen dowd.  crossword  e10  weather  b8  tv listings  e13  