hoyas' defense smothers high-powered irish   the georgetown junior forward jeff green stood in the bowels of the verizon center and clutched a white plastic bag that contained his postgame snack.  the hoyas had just defeated no. 17 notre dame, 66-48, and green was ready to board the team bus and head into the unseasonably balmy afternoon. but first, he listened to a quick lesson from the former georgetown coach john thompson jr., who is the father of the current coach, john thompson iii.  ''all that rankings stuff, that doesn't mean a thing,'' said thompson, who coached the hoyas to the 1984 n.c.a.a. title. ''you guys will get there, but that ain't nothing but dessert.''  the elder thompson, a hall of fame coach, was not trying to minimize the hoyas' victory against a ranked team. rather, he wanted green to realize that georgetown's early fall from the national polls was never a cause for concern.  the hoyas (11-3, 1-0 big east) were one of the nation's surprising teams last season. they made their first n.c.a.a. tournament appearance since 2001 and lost in the round of 16 to florida, the eventual national champion, 57-53.  with the return of three starters -- including green and roy hibbert, who were unanimous preseason all-big east picks -- the hoyas entered this season ranked no. 8 in the associated press poll. but the fuzzy feeling that comes from great expectations was short-lived, as georgetown stumbled out of the top 25 with early-season losses to old dominion, oregon and duke.  ''of course, practice got a little harder after that,'' point guard jonathan wallace said. ''coach kind of went back to the drawing board and said we needed to grow in a short period of time.''  georgetown has won seven consecutive games since its dec. 2 loss at duke.  ''it's not like there was some huge, cloud-opening moment,'' thompson iii said. ''but i tell our guys over and over again to get better each day, and now we're doing that.''  the tall and athletic hoyas used their aggressive defense to stifle the fighting irish, who averaged 88 points and nearly 10 3-pointers a game before saturday. at practice last week, the hoyas worked on their close-out drill, during which a defender gets a hand in the face of a shooter once he catches the ball.  notre dame (13-2, 1-1) converted just 4 of 22 3-point attempts, and 16 of 52 from the field over all.  ''we made them dribble, and they really couldn't hit a lot of shots off the dribble,'' said the 7-foot-2 hibbert, who had a game-high 18 points.  the loss snapped the irish's 12-game winning streak, their longest since the 1973-74 season.  once something of an afterthought alongside its football program, the notre dame basketball team is fighting to become part of the conversation at the university in south bend, ind. since the football team on wednesday dropped its n.c.a.a.-record ninth consecutive bowl game -- a 41-14 sugar bowl blowout to louisiana state -- saturday's game was a perfect time for the basketball team to claim the university's attention.  but the hoyas would have none of it. with georgetown comfortably ahead in the second half, one fan in the second row even reminded the irish of their football team's bowl game struggles, yelling, ''we're crushing you guys, l.s.u.-style!''  notre dame was without the sophomore point guard kyle mcalarney, who was suspended indefinitely after his arrest on dec. 29 for marijuana possession. mcalarney holds staten island's career high school scoring record, with 2,566 points for moore catholic.  the irish missed 9 of their first 10 shots as georgetown cruised to an 18-2 lead. the hoyas led by 36-25 at halftime, and used a pair of 3-pointers from wallace to lead by 49-30 with 16 minutes 36 seconds left.  with 10 minutes remaining, georgetown still showed patience with its princeton-style offense. the shot clock routinely crept below five seconds as the hoyas passed the ball quickly, taking few dribbles. several of these possessions ended with baskets by hibbert.  ''this is a good team,'' notre dame coach mike brey said of georgetown, ''and i'm glad we don't have to play them again.''  college basketball  