it's detroit, but accents are foreign   the auto show in detroit has always been something of a living time capsule. the cars may change, but the auto companies, their place in the universe, and the faces here always seemed to remain the same.  but this year is different.  there are new players, including chinese auto companies; new faces, like ford motor's rookie chief executive alan r. mulally; and a new pecking order in the american market, with toyota replacing chrysler in the no. 3 spot, behind general motors and ford.  and so the north american international auto show, which added ''international'' to its name 18 years ago, now seems to be living up to the name change.  ''the theme this year is not about product -- it's about the international nature of the car business,'' said james lentz, executive vice president of toyota motor sales u.s.a.  few other things, though, are as clear about this year's show, where all the old assumptions have turned on their heads. toyota, best known for building fuel-sipping cars, is showing off monster pickups and high-power luxury models. g.m., which spent the last year pushing its new s.u.v.'s and trucks, is trying to grab the spotlight with its electric-powered volt concept car.  matching executives to their car companies is no longer easy. americans are now the face of asian and british car brands, british designers introduce american cars and nissan's french-lebanese chief executive, carlos ghosn, is no longer the only one with a dual passport.  ''the detroit show is how the auto companies relate to each other, and that is certainly changing,'' said jeremy anwyl, who has been coming to the show for years and is president of edmunds.com, a web site that offers car buying advice.  perhaps the biggest change can be found in a dark corner of the basement exhibition space of cobo center, where changfeng motor, a chinese manufacturer, has set up a display, making it the first from china to participate fully in the detroit show.  another chinese company chamco auto, planned to display its vehicles in the lobby of the renaissance center in downtown detroit on wednesday.  last year, geely, a chinese company, drew throngs of reporters to its exhibit in the cobo center lobby during the show's press days. but its cars were gone by the time the public arrived, while changfeng plans to see the show through.  on monday, changfeng drew hundreds of curious journalists to the introduction of its concept car, the bright orange rhombus. but the 10-year-old chinese company was here as much to learn about american auto shows as to show its cars to americans.  "they are very eager and very interested in absorbing" the culture of an american auto show, said jerry kern, vice president for global sales at exhibit works, the company that designed changfeng's display, as well as those for ford, hyundai, mitsubishi and porsche.  mr. anwyl predicted that chinese manufacturers would move more quickly into the american market than their japanese or korean counterparts did, once they find dealers to carry their cars. ''this is an indicator of what's to come,'' he said.  chinese cars may be on the scene even more quickly from daimlerchrysler's chrysler unit, which recently signed a letter of intent with another auto maker, chery, which already exports cars to europe and south america, to build a small car in china for chrysler to sell in north america.  the chief executive of chrysler, thomas w. lasorda, said the deal, yet to clear both companies' boards, allows chrysler a cheaper way into the small-car market.  ''we don't want to put a bunch of capital out here,'' mr. lasorda said in an interview monday. ''we think we can compete with this.''  daimlerchrysler's chief executive, dieter zetsche, said the new players would benefit a city used to the status quo. ''a different perspective is always good,'' mr. zetsche said. ''thinking the same old ways prevents you from going better and moving faster.''  on monday, he met his new counterpart at ford, mr. mulally, when both were interviewed on paul w. smith's popular local radio show. mr. mulally, appointed to his job in september, is attending his first detroit auto show.  on sunday, he was introduced at ford's opening day news conference by his new boss, william clay ford jr. ''four months later, i know he is the right person'' to overhaul ford's operations, mr. ford said.  mr. mulally, who showed off the new version of the ford 500 sedan, is the highest-ranking outsider to join ford since the late 1940s, when the chief executive, henry ford ii, corralled a group of managers who became known as the whiz kids to help revive the company after world war ii.  his presence is equally historic, said kevin boyle a professor of history at ohio state university who has written extensively about the auto industry.  ''it's just a huge, huge change,'' professor boyle said. ''the american auto industry has fallen so far that you really have no choice but to shake things up.''  mr. mulally is already trying to do that. last month, he flew to tokyo to seek manufacturing advice from fujio cho, the chairman of toyota, which ford expects will pass it this year to take second place in the american market.  toyota, which for years kept a modest profile at the detroit show, took second place to no one here during the first few days. thousands of journalists packed its noontime news conference on sunday, which followed ford's presentation and preceded g.m.'s, a prime spot in the lineup it would not have merited a decade ago.  an overflow crowd of 800 people watched toyota's presentation on giant tv screens erected on its show floor exhibit, which has a new section devoted to cars from its scion brand. later, hundreds munched on beef tenderloin and pasta at a cocktail reception that toyota used to show its hybrid-electric ft-hs concept car.  toyota's prominent exhibit across the western wall of cobo center is something that changfeng can only envy. the detroit automobile dealers association, which organizes the show, bars companies from exhibiting on the main floor unless they have an american distribution network.  ''we wanted to be upstairs,'' said zhiyu han, a changfeng vice president. but, he vowed, ''next time.''  