there's more to consider than a tailspin   it's decision time for the giants' president, john mara, and the tisch brothers, steve, the team chairman, and jonathan, the treasurer:  to support or sack tom coughlin as coach. to name a general manager to replace the retiring ernie accorsi.  for all the commotion in recent weeks over coughlin's future and despite the giants' gallant 23-20 loss to the eagles yesterday in the opening round of the super bowl xli playoffs, the thinking here is that coughlin deserves to stay as the coach and that jerry reese, the director of player personnel, should be anointed as the general manager.  when the injury-depleted giants tumbled into a 1-6 tailspin before salvaging an 8-8 record and a wild card, yes, coughlin was the coach. but until that streak, coughlin was the coach of mostly healthy giants teams that over the 2005 season and half of this season were 17-7, not including a 23-0 loss to carolina in the playoffs a year ago.  when mara (who has one vote as co-owner) and the tisch brothers (who have one vote between them representing their co-ownership) sit down to judge coughlin, they need to remember that 17-7 run when the giants were mostly healthy, not just the 1-6 tailspin.  mara and the tisch brothers also need to remember that, whatever the eventual playoff disappointments, under coughlin the giants qualified for the playoffs in consecutive seasons. that had not happened since the 1989 and 1990 teams in bill parcells's last two years as the giants' coach.  mara and the tisch brothers also need to ask themselves: if we dismiss coughlin, is an obvious successor available?  the popular candidate would be charlie weis, the notre dame coach who made his reputation as the patriots' offensive coordinator and sculptor of quarterback tom brady. but before notre dame's 41-14 loss to louisiana state on wednesday in the sugar bowl, weis insisted that he intended to stay in south bend until his son charlie, an eighth grader, graduates from notre dame.  as the dolphins learned when nick saban accepted the university of alabama job, coaches can, and have, often changed their minds about going elsewhere, but seldom does a coach, as a father, link a son to the timetable of his future.  as a coach, weis also has much to prove. over his two seasons at notre dame, he has produced a 19-6 record, but two of those losses were in bowl championship series games, to ohio state a year ago and to l.s.u. last week. he acknowledged having a ''nice, solid team,'' but said that ''you want to be an upper-echelon team'' to compete for a national championship.  if the giants' job were open, another people's choice would surely be parcells, if he were to leave the cowboys after saturday night's painful 21-20 loss in seattle on tony romo's botched field-goal hold. but at 65, parcells may, finally, decide to stay retired. then again, he has been known to change his mind.  three years ago, weis was interviewed for the giants' job along with lovie smith, now the bears' coach, and romeo crennel, now the browns' coach, as well as coughlin -- in retrospect a formidable foursome. coughlin was at liberty, having been out of football for a year after his firing at jacksonville. he had quickly molded the expansion jaguars into a four-time playoff team before sagging to a 6-10 record in each of his final two seasons.  although some new assistants will probably join coughlin's staff, the giants don't need a new head coach as much as they need a running back who will approach the yardage supplied by the retiring tiki barber, a more accurate and more assertive eli manning at quarterback and a dominating pass-rusher to replace the battered michael strahan. they also need healthy comebacks from season-ending injuries to wide receiver amani toomer and linebacker lavar arrington.  as for the identity of the new general manager, who will be responsible for acquiring new and better players, three candidates besides reese, all in the front office, have been interviewed: chris mara, the vice president for player evaluation; kevin abrams, the assistant general manager; and dave gettleman, the director of pro personnel.  if it takes one to know one, accorsi, who was hired by george young as his successor, has recommended reese to be his successor.  chris mara, who is john's younger brother, is certainly qualified as a longtime giants scout as well as an arena football league team general manager, but choosing him would open the giants to complaints of nepotism. it would also make chris mara a possible target for change after losing seasons. if he retains his current title, he will continue to have as much input on player evaluation, for free agents and draft choices, without a bull's-eye on his back.  but those decisions on the coach and the general manager are for john mara and the tisch brothers to make. and make quickly. with the scouting combine only a few weeks away, next season is about to begin.  sports of the times  