a bagel-shaped hole on an unexpected strip   geographically speaking, west 72nd street isn't quite the center of the upper west side. but any street where a person can buy kosher barbecue, kosher pizza and kosher sushi, not to mention brisket, latkes and matzo ball soup, would seem to have its jewish culinary bases well covered.  that is, all but one. while the thoroughfare is crowded with popular businesses catering to both jewish and foodie tastes -- two groups that often overlap around here -- many locals say there's still something missing: a truly spectacular bagel.  in recent years, the street has seen the comings and goings of a handful of jewish bakeries, including the beloved royal kosher bake shop of ''seinfeld'' fame (''you can't beat a babka,'' elaine decrees of its chocolate confections), which closed in 1998 and was eventually replaced by a jenny craig center.  one mediocre bagel shop after another has opened, closed and been largely forgotten, among them a shop on broadway, just south of 72nd street, which shut just a few months ago after an ill-advised attempt to expand its culinary repertoire at the cost of its bagel quality. also departed is a bagel store on 72nd street between amsterdam and columbus avenues that seems caught in a perpetual loop of karmic failure, constantly closing and reopening in a different bagel store reincarnation.  residents of the neighborhood are puzzled by this conundrum.  ''you can have glatt kosher barbecue or chicken soup, and all of this other jewish food,'' said sharon cinnamon (yes, this is her real name), who has lived on or near west 72nd for nine years and is surprised that the street hasn't seen a standout bagel shop in all that time. ''this is such a bastion of good food. i mean, at fairway you can get bread flown in from paris.''  you can also get briny capers, tomatoes on the vine, and lox so impressive it's called supernova. but when it comes to the very building blocks of sunday brunch, a jewish tradition that has long since become a new york tradition, there's a weekly exodus of people fanning out in search of truly great bagels.  arthur schwartz, a brooklyn native who has been a restaurant and food critic for more than 30 years, believes that the lackluster-bagel syndrome is not limited to the upper west side. the real problem, in his opinion, is the city's ever-changing population.  ''i used to say all the best bagel makers moved to baltimore,'' mr. schwartz said. ''in the 1960s, with the flight of the middle class -- those were the bagel makers, too.'' now that the city is full of nonnatives, both behind the counter and waiting in line, mr. schwartz says, bagels ''are made for americans, not new yorkers.''  this trend, it turns out, has created something of a gastronomic diaspora. to satisfy their hunger for authentic bagels, many west siders now trot up to 80th street and broadway, where since 1972 h & h bagels has been attracting tourists, locals and almost-locals with a product it describes as ''like no other bagel in the world.''  james berkowitz, a writer and filmmaker who was there on a recent saturday, methodically devouring an unadorned blueberry bagel, said he would rather ''walk the extra blocks'' from 72nd street than settle for something closer. ''i woke up this morning,'' he said, ''and just had to have these bagels.''  others venture even farther, taking the subway down to murray's in chelsea, on eighth avenue near 22nd street, or a subway followed by crosstown bus to ess-a-bagel on first avenue and 21st street.  the happily named marilyn bagel (yes, this is her real name), author of ''the bagel bible,'' is not surprised at the lengths to which new yorkers will travel for a bagel that suits their taste buds. ''there's a certain texture that's definitely a bagel,'' said ms. bagel, who now lives near washington, but whose calling as a bagel enthusiast has led her to spend much time in new york. ''otherwise it's just bread with a hole in it.''  ms. cinnamon is among those convinced that the bagel pilgrimage is worth making. for the past five years, she and the man who is now her fiancé have walked the nearly four-mile round trip to absolute bagels on 107th street and broadway, in morningside heights, where since 1990 the bagels have been rolled, baked and schmeared by hand. the couple make the trek regardless of the weather, ms. cinnamon said, ''in 90-degree heat, or in long underwear and gore-tex.'' there, they take turns waiting in a line that often stretches outside the door.  ''when you've had a really good new york city bagel -- it's the same thing with pizza,'' ms. cinnamon said. ''it just makes all the difference.''  upper west side  correction:  january 14, 2007, sunday  because of an editing error, an article last sunday about complaints by upper west side residents that they cannot find superior bagels on west 72nd street referred incorrectly to the status of a bagel store on west 72nd between amsterdam and columbus avenues. the store, 72nd street bagel, is open for business -- not defunct.  