that charter jet is available, but how good is the pilot?   one of the many figures i can't quite get my head around is $44 billion, which is one estimate of the amount of year-end bonus money said to have been distributed to the lucky folks rolling with the good times on wall street.  but there is one manifestation of all that money i can get my head around because i've been following it for some time. that's the tremendous growth in the money available to buy a charter air flight and avoid commercial airlines and airports.  charters are the segment of private aviation that allows one to pick up the phone to book a fancy private jet to fly oneself and often one's colleagues, relatives or friends in comfort and style from point a to point b -- or even, as the wall street journal noted last week, from point a to nowhere and back, just to have a fancy party on a trip with no destination.  there are about 10,000 business and other private jets in the united states, and the numbers are growing. some jets are owned outright by corporations or individuals. others are purchased by fleet-management companies like netjets and divvied up into fractional-share ownerships, with each shareholder buying a certain percentage of flight time.  in both segments, passengers know who owns and operates that aircraft. for example, wal-mart, which has one of corporate america's biggest fleets of business aircraft to service its far-flung locations, also has a reputation for commercial airline-level safety and training standards. the same goes for netjets, the leading fractional-share operator. and the same can be said of the vast majority of well-established charter flight companies.  but big money is now pouring into the charter market, and new players -- including bookers, brokers and aircraft owners leasing time to third-party charter operators -- are setting up shop. at the same time, new passengers are entering a charter world they aren't familiar with, often under the assumption that all charter flights operate under tough standards.  two well-publicized charter aircraft accidents brought that assumption into question.  in november 2004, the 14-year-old son of dick ebersol, the chairman of nbc sports, was killed, along with a pilot and a cabin attendant, when their charter jet crashed on takeoff. safety agencies said the probable cause of the crash was failure by the pilots to recognize dangerous ice buildup on the wings. mr. ebersol said that he was unaware that the charter company he usually dealt with had hired another company and its plane and crew to operate the flight.  then, in 2005, a charter jet operated under similar circumstances overran a runway onto a highway at teterboro airport in new jersey, injuring half a dozen people, including two on the ground. in november, the national transportation safety board blamed pilot error and lax oversight of charter operators by the federal aviation administration for that accident.  the f.a.a., working with the business jet industry, is now trying to bolster safety rules for the charter business. ''we must know who is responsible and who should be held accountable for the safety of any flight,'' the agency said on dec. 28 in a long-awaited notice that sharply tightens regulations on third-party operators.  nick solinger, chief marketing officer of xojet, an air charter company that styles itself as a private airline offering on-demand charter flights, said, ''this an endemic situation in the industry.''  xojet owns and operates a fleet of eight-passenger cessna citation x jets, which can fly from new york to los angeles in four hours. the company trains its own pilots and other employees. ''we interview about 100 pilots to fill 10 slots,'' said dave cox, a former commercial pilot and airline executive who is director of operations. ''before that person goes out to fly an airplane, i know everything about them as a pilot.''  mr. solinger said that people in the industry frequently talked about ''jet roulette -- you call a broker and they're spinning a rolodex to find a plane that happens to be available.''  how then do you choose a charter if you don't know the players? ''it's buyer beware,'' mr. solinger said. but consistency and transparency are now more often stressed by charter companies and brokers. reluctance to discuss safety records is waning.  ''that's exactly why the f.a.a. is starting down this road,'' mr. cox said.  the national business aviation association, which represents the corporate aircraft industry, has strongly backed the f.a.a. move as a way to ensure consistency and accountability as the business grows.  ''one thing is certain: it has never been clearer that charter operators must retain operational control of all charter flights at all times,'' said ed bolen, the president of the trade group.  on the road e-mail: sharkeyj@nytimes.com  