flavored with flame and stone   it started with an offhand comment from eric ripert, the chef of le bernardin.  ''you should try cooking on slate; it gives everything the most incredible flavor,'' mr. ripert told me one night. ''ten years ago we had fish on slate at le bernardin, but we took it off the menu because it was too successful. the cooks were tired of making it.'' would i find slate in a cooking store? he laughed. ''at home depot,'' he said. ''in the floor section.''  slate is a staple of rustic cooking in france and in andorra, where mr. ripert grew up. the traditional method, called pierrade, involves heating a thick slab of slate over an open fire, though now most pierrade cooking is done on a timid tabletop appliance that has all the excitement of a toaster oven. but mr. ripert said the slate tiles could be used over an open fire on the grill or in the fireplace to cook almost anything: steak, poultry or fish.  cooking on a piece of flooring? in a fireplace? to make food too delicious for le bernardin? it seemed a good way to punch up a january dinner.  a roaring flame has a primitive appeal, and when a friend with a house upstate offered her blocky 1950's fireplace, it was just a question of choosing which home improvement store to stop at on route 17. in the home depot in mahwah, n.j., i found the slate in an aisle marked ''quarry tile.'' a 16-inch square cost $3.29.  when i told friends about my plan to cook on slate they almost all asked the same two concerned questions: first, what about chemicals? a call to home depot confirmed that the tiles are untreated. second, is it dangerous? well, not always.  the tiles don't come with cooking instructions, but mr. ripert gave me some intuitive advice. the first thing to do to slate is rinse it -- by the time it gets to the shelf of home depot it's coated in dust. the second is to temper it. unlike a cast iron skillet, which can go straight from room temperature to a roaring flame, slate needs to be warmed slowly or it will crack and split. it is important to let the tile absorb the fire's building heat by leaning it against the inside wall of the fireplace. the third step is to season it -- after the fire turns into a pile of glowing coals, balance the tile on the two fire irons with heavy fireplace mitts or tongs, then rub it with a small rag doused in olive oil.  i followed the three steps, and spread the coals out evenly under the slate. in about 15 minutes the slate was hot enough that a splash of water sizzled and evaporated, and i thought i was ready to start cooking a steak. flank steak does well over open flame, but on the slate it just burped and hissed and turned an unpleasant gray.  when i told mr. ripert about the gummy steak, i expected a knowing laugh. instead i was scolded. ''you need to get it really hot. i do it on my grill in the summer, and it's great,'' mr. ripert said. ''but then everything on my grill is melted, all the plastic and some of the metal. you know, because i get it so hot.'' he suggested that i set a piece of slate directly on the burner of the stove so that i could regulate a concentrated circle of heat. i decided to try fish. the recipe i had in mind was a branzino with fried breadcrumbs and roasted hazelnuts.  but before i could start i needed to swing back through mahwah. one of the pitfalls of cooking with thin slate is that it is destroyed by cooking. it splinters and cracks as it heats, and while the tile holds its form long enough for a meal, it's a pile of shards by the morning. (this is true for the  1/2-inch-thick flooring tile i bought. the slate used in france is thicker and more durable; it will break over time, but not after one use.)  the next time i cooked on slate there were four of us for dinner. i chose the burner with the widest diameter and placed the slate on top, then set the flame to low. after five minutes i increased the flame -- i didn't want to melt the knobs on the stove, but i wanted to generate the kind of heat mr. ripert would approve of.  soon the slate was popping and crackling with an alarming intensity, and the kitchen sounded like mott street during the lunar new year. there were some uneasy jokes about safety goggles. then a shard of slate ricocheted loudly against the range. i was suddenly alone in the kitchen.  ''you're not going to write about that, are you?'' somebody called from the next room.  ''just to warn people never to do it,'' i said, shielding my eyes and turning off the flame.  i left the tile on the burner -- moving it seemed like a bad idea -- and took another piece to the fireplace. i tempered and seasoned it and tossed some more wood on the fire. i laid down the fish, each stuffed with slices of lemon, cooking them for five minutes on each side until the skin was crispy.  the branzino was unlike any i had tasted, unexpectedly rich and minerally. the tender and moist flesh contrasted with the crunchy hazelnuts. the slate gave the food a distinct stony tang that hovered in the back of the palate. but beyond its peculiar flavor slate presented a new sort of cooking: an open-flame roasting that concentrated the woody aromas of the fireplace. it was more interesting than a conventional oven and more delicate than a grill, where the intense heat sometimes chars the outside of food before the inside is cooked.  while we ate, the slate slowly flaked apart from the heat of the embers. sometimes a pop would sound from the living room, but the virtues of the fireplace-roasted fish more than made up for the background noise.  oven-roasted branzino with hazelnut picada  adapted from ''the zuni cafe cookbook,'' by judy rodgers (w.w. norton, 2002)  time: about 45 minutes plus one hour's resting  olive oil  2 slices hearty white bread (about 2 ounces)  20 hazelnuts, shelled, roasted, peeled and chopped  1 clove garlic, minced  1 teaspoon chopped mint leaves  1 teaspoon orange zest  4 whole branzino, scaled and cleaned  salt and freshly ground black pepper  1 lemon, cut into 8 1/4-inch slices.  1.  heat  1/2 cup olive oil in small sauté pan and fry bread until golden. remove bread and let cool, then crush into crumbs.  2.  in a medium bowl, place bread crumbs, hazelnuts, garlic, mint, orange zest and  1/2 teaspoon olive oil and mix thoroughly. taste and adjust seasoning, then let sit for at least one hour to let flavors develop.  3.  when almost ready to serve, heat oven to 400 degrees. season fish with salt and pepper. stuff cavities of each fish with two slices of lemon. coat fish with olive oil and arrange on oiled pan. roast in oven for 7 minutes on each side, or until done. scatter hazelnut picada on top of each fish to serve.  yield: 4 servings.  note: fish may be cooked with caution on a tempered slate tile in a fireplace; see accompanying article for details.  