second church official resigns in poland   the roman catholic church in poland was in turmoil on monday as a second prelate stepped down because of his communist-era secret police ties, after sunday's resignation of this city's archbishop over similar allegations.  questions spread about just how broad and deep a stain secret-police collaboration has left on a church long regarded as a beacon of faith and freedom during the communist era. many people also have asked how or why the vatican could have invited the storm by appointing a man to such a sensitive post despite knowing that he had a clouded past.  ''the people responsible for the procedure of appointing such candidates applied the traditional way of doing it, which means it was without an investigation and was based on their confidence in the truthfulness of the candidate,'' said the rev. dariusz kowalczyk, head of the jesuits in warsaw.  in short, church officials from warsaw to rome suggested that the archbishop, stanislaw wielgus, alone was to blame.  but many people here worry that a mishandling of the affair could permanently damage the last major bastion of roman catholic faithful in europe at a time when the polish church is already facing the secularizing trend that has emptied churches in italy, france and spain.  while cases of communist collaboration by polish clergy members have made headlines before, the latest threatens to set off what some worry could be a pernicious cycle of exposures that could erode the church's image.  just a day after archbishop wielgus resigned after admitting that he had collaborated with the sluzba bezpieczenstwa, or security service, the rev. janusz bielanski resigned as rector of krakow's wawel cathedral, the burial site of polish kings and queens. father bielanski cited ''repeated allegations about his cooperation with the secret services'' in his resignation.  the archbishop's resignation has divided the church between those, like cardinal jozef glemp, who were angered that public pressure had scuttled the appointment and the 60 percent who wanted him to step down, according to a recent survey.  the cardinal, who held the archbishop's post before the appointment of bishop wielgus and was reappointed to the job temporarily after the resignation, publicly defended bishop wielgus on sunday.  poland's conservative dziennik daily newspaper called cardinal glemp's defense a ''huge mistake,'' writing that ''he didn't even mention that the archbishop lied to the last minute. that he lied to the pope, bishops and faithful.''  the turmoil in poland reverberated back to the vatican, amid deepening questions of why officials gave such strong support to bishop wielgus's contentious appointment in a place of such importance to the catholic church.  one of pope benedict xvi's greatest concerns is the rapidly declining church attendance around europe. in may, he visited poland to urge the nation not to uproot itself from the church as it modernized in other ways. ''stand firm in your faith!'' he exclaimed.  any deep erosion of faith in poland as a result of disclosures that priests collaborated with the communists would be troubling for a pope elected to re-evangelize europe as a whole.  george weigel, a catholic writer who has taught in poland for the last 15 years, said he did not believe that the wielgus case alone could provoke such wide distrust.  ''the danger is for the future,'' he said. ''if you don't acknowledge that there were problems with a very small minority of people, and that some of them included the clergy, then you run the risk of seeming to be avoiding the truth.''  mr. weigel said the polish church should appoint its own commission to review the secret-police files -- and to explain publicly what it finds.  the case has also raised questions among church experts about benedict's papacy. while some experts like mr. weigel maintain that the case says more about the difficulties inside poland, others drew similarities with the uproar benedict caused after he delivered a speech in september that seemed to equate islam with violence.  in both cases, they say, a pope with an impeccable grasp of theology and doctrine seemed tone-deaf to politics. they say they believe that either he has been ill served by his advisers or, as has been reported often in the italian news media, makes many important decisions alone.  ''i think this hurts the pope's credibility, and i think we will see more of this if he continues to try to do it alone,'' said robert mickens, a vatican expert for the tablet, a liberal british catholic magazine.  in a letter to polish bishops on saturday, bishop wielgus wrote that soon after his nomination to the archbishop's post he had informed the pope and other vatican officials of ''being entangled in contacts with the secret services of past times.''  the vatican could have asked the bishop for access to any files related to his entanglement that might have existed in the secret-police archives. it is not clear whether the vatican did so before it appointed him to the job. such files did exist and were eventually leaked to the polish news media, leading to the archbishop's resignation.  cardinal giovanni battista re, the vatican official responsible for appointing bishops, said that in this case, church officials simply did not know the full story of bishop wielgus's past.  joaquín navarro-valls, until earlier this year the vatican's chief spokesman, wrote an article in the italian daily la repubblica on monday outlining the difficulties imposed by the communists, which often forced priests and others to become compromised.  ''wielgus would never have been allowed to study abroad if he had not agreed to the compromise offered him by the regime,'' he wrote. ''and this situation was common for many of his compatriots, whether priests or not.''  an exception, he said, was karol wojtyla, the polish priest and cardinal who became pope john paul ii in 1978. while father wojtyla was permitted to study in rome in the late 1940s and also attended the second vatican council in the early 1960s, dr. navarro-valls said in an interview that it was ''absolutely impossible'' that he was compromised, though he was regularly approached by the police.  but in his article, he said john paul urged understanding of the difficulties the communists posed to poles. ''one must learn and forgive,'' he quoted the pope as saying.  