big investors still crave commercial real estate   the long-running rally in real estate funds gained strength in 2006, as the category led most others for the year. the surge caught off-guard even some seasoned money managers, who only a year ago were cautioning giddy investors not to expect a repeat of previous years' stellar returns.  but what may not have been evident at the time was the mounting appetite from institutions like pension and private equity funds for commercial real estate and, in particular, real estate investment trusts, which account for the bulk of most real estate funds' holdings.  the big investors, hungry for higher yields, pumped capital into dividend-paying reits and in some cases acquired entire portfolios of office buildings and other commercial property in private deals. about two dozen mergers and acquisitions with a record value of nearly $103 billion were announced last year, according to the research company snl financial. among them was the blackstone group's planned $36 billion leveraged buyout of equity office properties trust, the nation's largest owner and manager of office buildings.  reits have also benefited from low interest rates and steady job growth and, because of rising construction costs, a limited supply of commercial buildings -- unlike the residential side, where the inventory of unsold homes has been mounting.  ''the housing market may be in tough shape, but this part of the world is doing quite well,'' said william e. seale, the chief investment officer at the profunds family of mutual funds.  the subsequent run-up in reit share prices -- they returned, on average, 34.4 percent last year, as measured by the national association of real estate investment trusts -- helped to bring even more riches to real estate fund investors, many of whom had already amassed capacious returns from previous years.  real estate funds, along with e.t.f.'s, ended 2006 with more investment money flowing into them than ever before: around $7 billion, according to preliminary numbers from amg data services.  real estate funds returned 34 percent last year, on average, and 10.1 percent for the fourth quarter, said morningstar, the fund tracker, after climbing nearly 12 percent in 2005 and 32 percent in 2004. for the five years through december, the annualized return was 23.2 percent. by contrast, the standard & poor's 500-stock index returned 15.8 percent last year and 6.2 percent, annualized, over the five-year span.  ''this is a pretty powerful multiyear run; this really is incredible,'' said john coumarianos, an analyst at morningstar. echoing the sentiment of other analysts, he added, ''i can see next year being another good year for real estate funds.''  only a year ago, though, many analysts and money managers predicted that the real estate rally would lose steam in 2006, as they raised concerns about the economy and the direction of interest rates. ''as the year has worn on in 2006, i think that the pace of growth continued to surprise people,'' said theodore r. bigman, who manages global real estate for morgan stanley investment management.  the top performers last year were funds that invest in foreign real estate, like e.i.i. international property, which returned 59.8 percent, and morgan stanley institutional international real estate a and b shares, which returned 56.1 percent and 55.7 percent, respectively.  domestic funds weren't too far behind. the profunds real estate ultrasector, a leveraged index fund that tracks the dow jones united states real estate index, returned 48.5 percent for investor shares and 47.2 percent for the higher-fee service class. among other funds that ranked high on the performance list, the morgan stanley real estate fund returned 38.3 percent; ing van kampen real estate i shares, 38 percent; and neuberger berman real estate, 37.8 percent.  all of those funds had significant holdings in equity office properties trust as well as other office reits like the simon property group. ''they all seemed to go up in anticipation that somebody else will be next'' to be acquired, mr. coumarianos said of the office reit subset.  many top-performing funds also had sizable holdings in apartment reits like avalonbay communities, equity residential properties trust and archstone-smith trust. those companies have benefited from the reduced affordability of single-family homes, which has caused some people to defer home buying.  twenty-six percent of neuberger berman real estate's holdings were in apartment reits at the start of last year, although steven r. brown, the fund's manager, said he had since reduced that allocation to around 18 percent. ''we believe the easy money in apartments is over,'' he said.  some market analysts seemed to agree. ''during the real estate boom, too many apartment buildings were turned into condos, which left a dearth of apartments,'' said jeff tjornehoj, a senior research analyst at lipper, which tracks mutual funds. ''but now there's talk of a lot of condos becoming rentals again.''  while the weakening housing market has had little adverse affect on most real estate funds, because their focus is on the commercial side, there was one noted exception last year. the alpine u.s. realty equity fund, once a marquee star of the sector, ended the year 0.4 percent lower. the fund has a significant portion of its assets invested in home builders like the lennar corporation, toll brothers and hovnanian enterprises, whose fortunes have reversed as demand for new homes has fallen.  the fund's one major bright spot, though, was hotels. and industry experts are predicting that many hotel companies, reits and non-reits alike, will continue to do well this year, as demand for hotel rooms again outpaces supply.  mr. bigman, who manages the morgan stanley as well as the ing van kampen real estate funds, has among his funds' holdings companies like host hotels & resorts, starwood hotels & resorts worldwide and the hilton hotels corporation, which he suggests may be undervalued and poised for growth.  ''we're very much bottom-up stock pickers and looking for stocks that trade at attractive valuations,'' mr. bigman said. he bases his investment decisions on the quality of the underlying properties, he said, rather than on financial metrics like low price-to-earnings ratios.  ''we're looking for a stock where you can buy real estate cheaper on wall street than on main street,'' he said.  and so, it seems, are many other large institutional investors, which helps to explain the growing attraction to reits and the jump in merger-and-acquisition activity. many analysts predict that the trend toward reit privatization will extend through this year.  ''the private market right now is valuing reit assets at a much higher rate'' than the public securities market, explained bruce s. schonbraun, the managing partner of the schonbraun group, a real estate consulting company.  the big institutions, mr. schonbraun and others said, have realized the efficiencies inherent in buying entire reit portfolios rather than going through the onerous process of bidding for individual trophy assets, or developing property themselves at greater expense.  but, more important, commercial real estate in general has evolved into an accepted asset class among investors as well as an excellent portfolio diversifier, said john j. kriz, the managing director of real estate finance for moody's investors service. ''investors, large and small, are feeling more comfortable about real estate; it is no longer a side show,'' he said.  for one thing, ''the technology for analyzing and understanding real estate is far better than it was a while ago,'' mr. kriz said, but also the proliferation of global reits and funds ''provides additional legitimacy.''  what's next for fund investors?  mr. coumarianos suggests that those who have long invested in real estate may want to cash out some holdings this year, if only to keep portfolio asset allocations in balance.  mr. bigman, meanwhile, suggests that investors also start looking at the real estate markets overseas. ''the evolution of investing is away from the u.s. only and toward global,'' he said.  what might hurt commercial real estate, in the united states at least, is a weaker economy or a major spike in interest rates, though most experts aren't expecting either scenario to happen this year.  ''i'm probably like a lot of people and can't quite figure out when this party is going to stop,'' said mr. tjornehoj of lipper. ''but i think as long as there's a lot of liquidity out there -- private equity or hedge funds shopping around for new asset classes or overlooked asset classes -- real estate will continue to show up on the radar screen.''  mr. kriz agreed. ''is the party over? maybe not,'' he said. ''but i would caution that trees do not grow to the sky.''  mutual funds report  