reins off, french retailers rush to buy tv time   france may never be a nation of shopkeepers, but on television, at least, the country's retailers are no longer getting a frosty reception.  in a significant loosening of one of the most restrictive marketing regulations in europe, a french ban on television advertising by supermarkets, department stores, hypermarkets and other merchants expired at the end of 2006.  retailers responded like shoppers rushing toward an after-christmas sale. on tf1, the most-watched tv channel in france, merchants monopolized all 11 spots during the first commercial break of 2007, only minutes after midnight. for new year's day, retailers placed 119 ads on major national tv channels, a quarter of all advertising on those channels, according to tns media intelligence.  ''for any retailer, it's an immense breath of oxygen,'' said philippe sarrazin, chief executive of the french unit of initiative, an agency that buys media space and time on behalf of advertisers. ''of course they will use it.''  the ban was intended to safeguard ad revenue for french local newspapers, and to protect small retailers that feared the effects of nationwide ad campaigns by big chains. in 2004, the european commission forced france to drop the restriction on retailers, though a ban on television advertising of films, intended to protect local movie producers from hollywood's marketing budgets, remains in place for now.  since 2004, regulators have phased in retail advertising on niche channels that are transmitted via cable, satellite and digital systems. as of jan. 1, mainstream over-the-air channels, which represent the bulk of viewing in france, are also allowed to accept retail ads.  analysts say ad agencies, retailers and broadcasters could all benefit from the change. overall television advertising receipts are expected to grow by about $260 million this year alone, according to forecasts from media buyers and research firms. in 2006, total spending on tv ads was $4.38 billion, according to zenithoptimedia. the cost of tv ads could rise as much as 10 percent, according to initiative, as retailers drive up demand for television time.  in 2005, french retailers spent about $3 billion on advertising, according to tns. even without access to mainstream television, that made retail the top advertising category. two retailers, carrefour and leclerc, were among the top 10 spenders.  retailers put 38 percent of their spending into print ads in 2005, according to initiative, followed by 34 percent into radio and 23 percent into outdoor ads. the remaining 5 percent was spent in a variety of other categories, including cinema and online ads. radio, magazine and billboard advertising could be hit hardest by the change in the law, mr. sarrazin said, because, like television, these media reach national audiences in france.  ''these media are obviously going to lose something,'' he said. ''a budget is a budget. they rarely grow by magic.''  analysts say local newspapers may feel less of a blow, because regulators for now are keeping one restriction that could protect them. in television spots, retailers will not be allowed to mention sales or the prices of products, which are often detailed in print campaigns.  instead, retailers like système u, a cooperative that includes 9,000 independent shops, are running brand campaigns.  one spot for système u, created by tbwa/france, part of the omnicom group, shows a young woman who spends her weekends tapping out tunes on her musical keyboard rather than doing the ironing -- courtesy of time saved by using a u-branded detergent, the voice-over claims.  système u has big plans for television, said thierry desouches, a spokesman, though he declined to say how much it would spend. though système u is the fifth-largest retailer in france in terms of sales, many of its stores are in rural areas, and the brand is recognized by only 30 percent of french consumers, mr. desouches said. système u wants to raise that to 60 percent, he added.  ''we think tv advertising is the most effective way to achieve this,'' he said.  système u's ambitious intentions may have helped it win the coveted first spot on tf1, which came during a break in the channel's new year's show.  by handing over its first commercial break exclusively to retailers, tf1 temporarily waived a policy against running competing spots during the same set of ads, said myriam simonneaux, a spokeswoman.  while retailers appear eager to advertise, tf1 is also adding a little sweetener, offering any new retail advertiser one free 30-second spot during january, ms. simonneaux said.  ''it's just a little welcome gift,'' she said.  advertising  