some progress in global trade effort   trade envoys from the united states and europe said on monday that they had made progress in resolving differences to break an impasse on global trade negotiations, but they declined to say specifically where the differences had narrowed.  ''we are clearly making progress,'' the united states trade representative, susan c. schwab, said after a day of talks with peter mandelson, the european union's commissioner for trade. ''perhaps there's some showing of momentum here.''  mr. mandelson, who has tangled sometimes bitterly with ms. schwab in the last year, said he had come to washington ''looking for new impetus, and i believe we've found it.''  he said his new confidence was inspired not only by his talks with president bush but also by those with the house speaker, nancy pelosi, and the new senate majority leader, harry reid. the democratic leaders and many members of congress were recently elected on promises to be more skeptical of trade deals.  the comments of ms. schwab and mr. mandelson came after a session between mr. bush and josé manuel barroso, president of the european commission. both pledged in general terms to try again to complete a world trade accord in coming weeks.  mr. barroso, speaking at the white house, said he and the president had instructed trade envoys ''to come up with a solution'' on issues that have divided the united states and europe for years. the principal issue has been over lowering barriers to trade of agriculture products.  ''there is now the defining moment,'' mr. barroso said. ''of course, it is important to engage also others, because this is a real global agreement that we are trying to build.''  mr. bush said that both the united states and europe recognized ''that the best way to help impoverished nations'' would be to complete the current round of talks, known as the doha round, after the city in qatar where the talks started.  the trade talks were suspended last summer by the director general of the world trade organization, pascal lamy, when it became apparent that europe and the united states could not reach agreement on lowering tariffs and subsidies on farm goods.  the final offer of the united states then was to limit farm subsidies to $22.5 billion a year, less than half what the united states is entitled to impose under current agreements. but because the actual amount of subsidies for 2005 was $19.7 billion, europeans claimed that the united states was trying to increase subsidies, not lower them.  the bush administration has called on europe to lower its tariffs on farm products by more than 50 percent of their current level. a coalition of rich and poor nations has called on europe to lower tariffs by 36 percent.  mr. lamy has said that a final trade agreement can occur only if the united states and europe increase what they are willing to do, and decrease what they are demanding from the other side. but on both sides, farmers make up powerful political blocs, even though they account for less than 5 percent of the population and of the economy.  by itself, a european and american agreement on farm subsidies would not produce a breakthrough. a global deal on trade would require participation by india and some other poor countries that are resisting demands that they lower their barriers on farm goods and on manufactured goods and services.  with millions of its citizens depending on subsistence farming, india is resisting lower tariffs for farm goods. kamal nath, the top indian trade envoy, has said that the doha trade talks should recognize the plight of poor farmers and not ask them to sacrifice in order to get rich countries to open their markets.  negotiators are operating under a timetable that top officials say may be impossible to meet. bush's legislative authority to negotiate a trade deal, and to get an up-or-down vote on it, expires june 30. many experts say it will be impossible to meet that deadline for wrapping up a trade deal.  mr. lamy has said that if the broad outlines of a trade accord can be negotiated by march, then he hopes the bush administration may ask congress to extend mr. bush's trade negotiating authority by another six months so that the deal can be completed.  but democrats and republicans in congress said they doubted that congress would be willing to extend trade negotiating authority past june 30. more likely, they say, congress will let the deadline slip and allow a new congress and president in 2009 to negotiate over trade authority.  european officials say that europe has signaled a willingness to lower tariffs on specific products that the united states hopes to export, particularly poultry, beef and pork.  but europe has other sorts of trade barriers that american farmers and ranchers say are blocking exports to europe, like rules barring certain kinds of cleaning processes for chicken used by american producers. also barred are the levels of hormone for beef used by americans.  it was not clear whether any of these barriers were on the table in the talks this week.  canada seeks talks over subsidies  by the new york times  ottawa, jan. 8 -- canada has asked the world trade organization to start talks between it and the united states about american farm subsidies in general and its support of corn growers in particular.  ''canada is concerned that these u.s. subsidies continue to cause economic harm to our corn farmers,'' the canadian agriculture minister, chuck strahl, said in a statement.  ''that's why we took the action we did, in order to provide the best possible support for our producers by pushing for a level playing field so that they can compete.'' jennifer chiu, a spokeswoman for david emerson, the international trade minister, said that canada did not have specific demands at this point. the canadian government, however, noted in its statement that if the united states does not reduce its farm subsidies, canada will ask the w.t.o. to begin a formal dispute settlement hearing on the issue.  