ultimate exile: a gypsy poet expelled by her people   zoli  by colum mccann  333 pages. random house. $24.95.  to understand all is to forgive all, the french saying goes. in ''zoli,'' a novel about the gypsies of eastern europe, colum mccann imagines a deeper, darker watchword for this immemorially wandering and persecuted people: to be understood, even in part, is to be violated and destroyed.  mr. mccann is a young writer of large and driving vision, and at his startling best he configures his vision with characters, compellingly voiced, who, if larger than life, are specifically and vividly alive. ''this side of brightness,'' his masterpiece so far, portrayed a part-legendary new york in the early 1900s; yet its tunnel-blasting sandhogs, its immigrants, its outcasts are figures of dramatic immediacy.  ''zoli,'' suggesting a cast-out people's proud outcast truth, wields a provocative but impeded vision. the impediment comes in mr. mccann's effort to fashion a novel out of a search; in this case his diligent immersion in the work of scholars, the writings of romany (now a preferred term) poets and memorialists, and his studies and travels in slovakia, where much of the book is set.  the story he tells, a fiction partly based on history, can be absorbing, and it contains passages of stunning lyricism and sharp ironic force. it is the characters that fall short. to a greater or lesser extent they seem little more than his ideas about them, and the roles he has them play.  to sum up: born a girl child to a gypsy clan in slovakia in the 1930s, zoli, the protagonist, has shared the brutal persecution conducted by fascist thugs (driving the caravans out onto the ice, they light a circle of bonfires, sinking the wagons and drowning many of the gypsies) and later by the german occupiers.  the arrival of soviet troops is a joyful liberation, and the communist government set up in 1948 briefly celebrates and rewards the gypsies as emblematic victims of capitalism. when zoli's songs and poems are discovered by stransky, a leading regime poet, and swann, a leftist irishman of slovakian descent who has traveled to bratislava to work as his assistant, she becomes a cosseted regime star.  the political climate hardens; stransky falls victim to the party's internal purges and is shot. (a loyal communist to the end: ''come closer,'' he invites the firing squad, ''it will be easier for you.''). the government cracks down, burns the gypsies' wagon wheels so they can no longer wander, and herds them into housing projects.  at the same time zoli is tried by the gypsy elders for revealing their culture in her poems. expelled, declared a source of ''pollution for life'' and forbidden all association with her fellows, she makes an agonizing trek across borders, and is lodged in an austrian refugee camp. enrico, a professional smuggler, takes her across to italy, marries her and, until his death years later, provides her with her first settled happiness.  much of this is told by zoli as an old woman writing to a grown daughter living in paris. her narration is straightforward, heightened by pointed imagery; seeing swans take wing she calls them ''apparitions not so much of grace as of difficulty.'' despite the dramatic details, though, her story does not convey a character so much as a passion.  almost until the end zoli takes to heart the condemnation by her clan. splendid as her songs and poems may be, they are a betrayal of the silence that for centuries held the gypsies' culture intact even as their caravans moved among the pulsing cultures of europe. after her expulsion, she no longer sings or writes, despite an occasional urge. at the refugee camp she refuses to tell her story to a sympathetic doctor; instead she invents a comically picaresque account of her past.  most touchingly she hears the response of enrico -- a cultivated man despite his rough life -- when, after their arduous travels together, she asks him ''why he had not asked me anything about being a gypsy and he asked me why i had never asked him anything about not being one.'' it was ''perhaps the most beautiful answer i have ever heard,'' she recalls, and it established the trusting peace that was to prevail between them for the rest of his life.  a second narrative, swann's, cuts into zoli's account. he is a radical idealist, drawn to czechoslovakia by his admiration for the hopes he sees initially in the communist takeover, and by the gnarled leftist idealism of the poet stransky, his mentor. he tells in wan and windy prose his love for zoli, with whom he has an affair. he wants to possess her, along with his romantic illusions about the gypsy world. she, by contrast, barely mentions him, having no wish to be possessed. when some young gypsies beat him up, she looks on with the unconsoling remark: ''they're only keeping warm, swann, that's all.''  mr. mccann puts swann there for a purpose. it's not only the thugs and the communist bureaucrats who threaten gypsy freedom. it is also those who study, romanticize, idealize them with what herbert marcuse called ''repressive tolerance.'' swann will come to understand this; but even his understanding clings and dampens. unfortunately, at about one fifth of the book, it dampens that as well.  books of the times  