giants let opportunity slip against the eagles   the ultimate downfall was swift and agonizing for the giants, which made it a perfectly appropriate way to end the season.  a football sailed between the southern uprights of lincoln financial field on sunday as the last second ticked away, and the philadelphia eagles had a 23-20 first-round playoff victory. it ignited fireworks and a lasting cheer.  the giants sulked their way to the locker room, losers for the seventh time in their final nine games. the team president and co-owner john mara sat silently in the third row of the press box.  the loss knocked the giants out of the playoffs and into a stage of uncertainty. the giants were expected to be in the midst of a championship run this january. now they have a general manager to hire and perhaps a head coach, if mara and the team's other owners decide to dismiss tom coughlin.  minutes later, in the bowels of the stadium, mara; coughlin; the retiring general manager, ernie accorsi; and the personnel director, jerry reese, talked quietly.  coughlin had spoken to his team as if he expected to be back, players said, but did not address his job status with them or with reporters. mara declined to answer questions.  ''not right now,'' he said. ''i'll have something to say in the middle of the week.''  everyone, it seemed, was still focused on the game, not its long-ranging repercussions. it was a result that will be viewed as a fitting capper to an 8-8 regular season: filled with possibility, dissolving into a puddle of disappointment.  the giants had taken the game's first lead, as they did 13 times in the regular season. predictably, they fell into old habits, squandering enviable scoring chances and letting the opponent nudge momentum the other way until the giants were left scrambling to recover.  gamely, they did, showing typical fight until the end. but it proved to be only the latest tease, as the entire production -- the game and the season -- drifted into nothing but a memory of blown opportunities and broken hopes, carried off on a 38-yard kick by david akers.  the giants tried to ride the legs of the retiring running back tiki barber, and he gained 137 yards on 26 carries in his final game. sprinkled with a handful of completions from quarterback eli manning to receiver plaxico burress, including two for touchdowns, the giants erased a 10-point deficit and found the score tied, 20-20, with 5 minutes 4 seconds remaining.  manning did not touch the ball again. he finished 16 of 27 passing for 161 yards, 2 touchdowns and an interception.  the eagles' offense slid through the giants' defense in the final minutes, simultaneously milking the clock and moving the chains. the giants used their remaining timeout, but they were helpless to do anything more, having used their other two on the previous drive.  running back brian westbrook, philadelphia's versatile facsimile of barber, carried four times for 34 yards before the eagles squatted a few times to exhaust the giants' season to its final three seconds.  those details will evaporate quickly to make room for the big picture. the giants were 6-2 and playing the chicago bears for top position in the conference nov. 12. but they lost six of their final eight regular-season games, winning the last one to slip into the playoffs.  after sunday's game, coughlin hammered a theme of team unity. he is not popular with players, who tire of his militaristic ways, but the giants never quit playing hard. it may be the key argument for keeping his job.  ''i told our team i was proud of them,'' coughlin said. ''i think they demonstrated a great concept of team this year. through the bad, they hung together. there was never any quit. it wasn't always pretty. there were some ups and downs, but i was very proud that they hung together as a team.''  coughlin has one year remaining on a four-year contract he signed in january 2004. he led the giants to an 11-5 record and a division championship in 2005, but the giants lost at home to the carolina panthers, 23-0, in the first round of the playoffs.  the giants have never fired a coach whose last team made the playoffs, and few coaches in n.f.l. history have been dismissed after a postseason game -- and fewer still after back-to-back playoff appearances.  ''whatever happens, it's not our decision,'' the rookie defensive end mathias kiwanuka said. ''but i feel like we have a good thing going.''  by contrast, the eagles (10-6) arrived with a five-game winning streak and a division championship gleaned from the wreckage of collapsing seasons by the giants and dallas cowboys. the giants and the eagles, with a rivalry linked by about 100 miles of the new jersey turnpike, split their two regular-season games in 2006. each team won close games on the road.  the giants were in position to do it again. they trailed by 17-10 at halftime and by 20-10 late in the third quarter before a 47-yard pass interference penalty against eagles cornerback sheldon brown, who was trying to cover burress on an underthrown ball, put the giants at philadelphia's 14.  the giants moved 8 more yards and were inside the 10 for the second time in the game. but, for the second time, they were forced to kick a field goal, this one 10 seconds into the fourth quarter as the sky spit a slight drizzle.  the giants got the ball back, and manning coolly led them on an 80-yard drive that needed to go 100 yards because of three consecutive penalties.  the giants drove to the eagles' 23 with 7:04 remaining in the game. then tackle david diehl was called for a false start. guard chris snee was called for another. and a long gain on a screen pass to barber was wiped out by a holding penalty on snee. the giants had first and 30 at the 43.  after an incompletion, manning lobbed an 18-yard pass to burress, then hit him again with a quick strike to the left for a first down. seemingly granted a pardon from season's end, the giants tied the score, 20-20, on an 11-yard touchdown pass to burress over the middle with 5:04 remaining.  as much as the ending stung, the giants might look at their inefficiencies earlier in the game as the precursors to the loss.  the giants were inside eagles territory on six drives in the first three quarters, including two forays inside the 10-yard line, but the chances were converted into a touchdown and two short field goals.  outside the locker room, barber received hugs and congratulations from friends and family, then gave coughlin an endorsement, saying he had ''done great things in his three years here.''  his now-former teammates filed past him quietly, not sure what the future holds, certain only that the season was gone.  pro football  