poor hospital practices blamed for 2003 sars epidemic in toronto   a provincial commission investigating the sars outbreak in 2003 reported tuesday that poor hospital infection-control procedures led to the epidemic in the toronto area that killed 44 people.  ''systemic problems ran through every hospital and every government agency,'' doug hunt, chief counsel for the commission, said at a news conference at which the findings were released.  the outbreak surfaced in february 2003, when a woman from the toronto area contracted the virus on a trip to hong kong and returned home, dying soon after. her son went to a hospital with an unidentified condition that was later diagnosed as sars. while waiting for 16 hours in a crowded emergency room, the man transmitted the virus to two other patients, and it continued to spread, the commission's report says.  of the 375 sars cases eventually identified in ontario province, health care workers accounted for 45 percent. two nurses and a doctor died from their infections.  the ailment that came to be known as severe acute respiratory syndrome, or sars, was reported first in asia in early 2003, though the first case may have been the previous november. by july, 774 deaths of 8,000 infections worldwide were attributed to it, according to the world health organization.  outside asia, toronto was the world's most affected city, crippling tourism and leading the world health organization at one point to advise travelers to stay away.  on may 17, 2003, three months after the first case in ontario, the authorities declared the crisis over. as a result, the report released tuesday found, surveillance and prevention measures were relaxed, and an outbreak brewing at another hospital was not detected until it was too late. on may 23, health officials announced a second, larger outbreak.  ''as soon as precautions were relaxed in early may, the disease surged back and spread, again undetected, to patients, staff, visitors and their families,'' wrote justice archie campbell, the report's author, who did not attend the news conference because of illness.  among the commission's recommendations are dozens of changes to hospital practices and health surveillance, and new legislation. the report also said the province's labor department should play a more prominent role in protecting workers from disease outbreaks.  two earlier reports focused on problems in the public health system and in emergency response laws.  the pressure to have the w.h.o. travel advisory lifted and to declare an end to the emergency allowed the second outbreak to take root, according to dr. richard schabas, who was chief of staff during the sars crisis at york central hospital.  ''after the advisories were lifted there was a huge pressure on toronto not to have any more cases,'' dr. schabas said. ''as a result, there was no surveillance program to alert authorities of what was actually happening.''  