new serials: now you see them, now you don't   for the last several years, executives at other television networks have dreaded the annual debut of ''24,'' the fox hit that, with its continuing storyline about a secret agent saving the nation unwinding from one episode to the next, is the ultimate serial drama.  this year, however, executives all over hollywood might be glad to see ''24'' begin its sixth season on sunday -- if only to make viewers forget about all of their dismally failed attempts to start new serial dramas this season.  unlike abc's ''lost'' and a few other hits that have followed the serial format, many of the most recent successors to ''24'' have met a grim fate, dying quickly before most viewers could get to know anything about them.  each of the five major broadcast networks has already canceled one new serial drama that it introduced last fall with blaring publicity and endlessly replayed promotional snippets. come and gone in a few short weeks were several interchangeable series featuring an unexpected crime and plenty of shoot-'em-up violence: ''smith'' on cbs, ''runaway'' on cw, ''kidnapped'' on nbc, ''vanished'' on fox and ''day break'' on abc.  some networks made canceled episodes available on their web sites for a few weeks after yanking the shows from their primetime schedules, but many of those have by now disappeared as well.  two other abc shows, ''six degrees'' and ''the nine,'' have been placed on hiatus with a promise of returning to complete their current story arcs, but little more.  all of which has left some fans of the genre wondering whether it is worth committing to untested new serials, or better to wait and see if a new series will be around for more than a few weeks.  for their part, television executives note that most new series -- comedy, drama, talk show or otherwise -- quickly fail. and they vow that more serials are on the way.  ''all the top new shows that are working are serialized,'' said jeffrey d. bader, an executive vice president of abc entertainment. as proof, he cited ''brothers & sisters'' on abc, ''heroes'' on nbc and ''jericho'' on cbs this season.  ''people do seem to be gravitating to these in large numbers,'' mr. bader said. ''you can't say they're not working because, really, they are the only thing that is working.''  advertisers have generally responded well to serial dramas since the successful ones -- like ''24,'' ''lost'' and fox's ''prison break'' -- attract fanatical viewers, many of whom are willing to spend hours chatting online about characters, plotlines and enduring mysteries behind the scenes.  but brad adgate, a senior vice president for research at horizon media, which helps clients choose where to advertise and when, said he believed that networks had erred in another way with serial dramas: by overestimating the reach of digital video recorders, which let viewers record shows for later playback.  those devices are important to a show's fans because networks usually do not repeat episodes. missing one week, therefore, can leave a viewer bewildered about what happened to which character and when.  and though most networks now post the episodes on their own web sites after they have been broadcast, only a small part of a show's potential audience uses that medium to watch it.  ''these shows are difficult for viewers who are not accustomed to looking at a show they missed on another platform,'' like a network's internet site, mr. adgate said. he estimated that fewer than 15 percent of television viewers use tivo or another form of digital video recorder.  one television executive admitted that, as a group, the networks might have overreached this year with serial dramas. ''clearly, the audience can only make a commitment to so many of these things,'' said craig erwich, executive vice president for programming at fox.  and the viewers' commitment is the key. one problem with kidnapping and bank-robbery dramas, mr. erwich said, was in ''trying to locate the personal stakes.'' that is, if an unknown character is kidnapped in the first episode of a new series, why should the audience care, or even know what to think?  that said, fox has several new serials in development. ''we're not out of the business, but we will be measured in how we go into it,'' mr. erwich said. ''if there is a good one, people will still watch it. but you have to have no hesitation in asking for their attention.''  serials also suffer from the fact that networks are unlikely to repeat episodes, partly because they must be shown in sequence and a season lacks enough weeks to accommodate further showings. when abc mixed repeats of ''lost'' with new episodes last season, it angered viewers who complained about the interruptions in the storyline. as a result, this season abc showed six episodes in october and november, then took a nearly three-month break, planning to return with new episodes from february through may.  ratings also play a part in those decisions, mr. adgate said. with the ratings race unusually close this year, networks are loath to spend valuable air time rerunning a serial drama when, historically, those shows have not done well. ''you can look back to 'dallas' or 'dynasty,' and those shows bombed during their repeat cycles,'' he said.  so far, the evidence suggests that if a drama does not find an audience on broadcast television, it is unlikely to grow into an internet hit. many that migrated to the web after cancellation can now be found, if at all, only on youtube or some fan sites.  highlights of a few episodes of nbc's ''kidnapped'' are present on the network's web site, nbc.com, but no full episodes. cbs, which pulled ''smith'' from its broadcast schedule after three episodes, made the remaining four episodes available on its web site, cbs.com, for a few weeks but dropped them before the end of december. (the complete seven-episode season remains available on itunes.)  fox, meanwhile, has kept all 13 episodes of ''vanished'' online, including four that never were broadcast on television. they can be found on a secondary fox web site, www.myspace.com/fox.  few if any of the canceled series are likely to be released on dvd sets, given the relatively small number of people that tuned in to the shows the first time and the attendant lack of positive buzz around them. the television studios that produced the series, rather than the networks that broadcast them, have the rights to produce the dvd sets, and studio executives say that those decisions, yet to be made, will depend on online viewership and itunes sales.  