breakfast of champions   the senate has been seated, and we have a new senator, amy klobuchar. but we're still talking about the aftermath of the midterm elections.  two friends from high school, guys i've known for 40 years, and i are at breakfast at a greasy spoon on lyndale avenue, watching the minneapolis traffic. i ask for their analysis. my friend the estate planner speaks up first.  ''i have it all figured out. bill clinton defeated karl rove,'' he says. ''the centrist democrats, bill clinton types, beat out the karl rove types, the base voters. the base strategy isn't going to work for a while. if it had worked, mark kennedy would have won the race for the senate, and we'd have a scowling movement-conservative accountant as minnesota's senator. instead, we have a brainy upbeat soccer-mom progressive. she won in a landslide. she was the antidote to despair. that's what's important.''  my other friend looks up from cutting his waffle and joins in. ''bill o'reilly said national voter turnout would be low. he said that the election was a matter of life and death but that everyone -- or 'the folks,' as he calls them -- would be watching 'dancing with the stars.' '' he chews thoughtfully. ''that's pretty cynical of him. who are these 'folks' he's always talking about? anyway, he was wrong. there was a huge turnout in minnesota.''  ''george bush hit the trifecta,'' i say. ''iraq, corruption and incompetence.'' i dig into my huevos. ''failure follows failure. the republic party will take years to recover from this. al franken thinks george bush won't even be invited to the 2008 convention. it doesn't matter. no one has anything new to say about the current administration. it's all been said.''  ''why do you call it 'the republic party'?'' my friend asks.  ''because they say 'the democrat party.' so we should follow their example and say, 'the republic party,' and see what happens.''  ''the republic party convention is going to be here,'' the estate planner says. ''think about that.''  there is a long silence.  ''let them come,'' my other friend, a sculptor and furniture-maker, proclaims with a smile. ''this congressional district is now represented by an african-american muslim, a follower of paul wellstone.'' he means keith ellison.  ''here's a guy who doesn't run a single tv ad and beats his opponent in a landslide. he gets on tv after the election and is asked by a conservative commentator to prove that he's not sympathetic to terrorism. then a representative from virginia wonders if he's going to take the oath of office on the koran. this district is the object of national attention. it's so progressive, it goes beyond blue into deep purple. we're not just a bunch of lutherans anymore: somalis and latinos and everybody lives here. the party of george bush wants to have its convention in st. paul? fine.''  we watch the traffic.  ''it's safer to drive now,'' the estate planner says. ''after the last elections, people were so angry that they were driving 80 or 90 miles an hour on i-35. they've calmed down a little.''  i speak up. ''well, there's no winter here; the roads are clear. you can't ski because there's no snow, and the hockey rinks haven't opened because the ice is unsafe -- when there is ice. in minnesota! it's creepy. you'd think someone would pay attention.''  another pause. ''why did they lie to us, those guys?'' the sculptor asks, reaching for his coffee. ''why do they keep lying about iraq and global warming?'' i am always quoting from somewhere, so i quote my minneapolis neighbor, the poet robert bly: ''these lies mean that the country wants to die.''  ''not anymore,'' the sculptor says, sipping his coffee. ''we're in a new, positive era, starting now. the democrats will make some difference.''  ''you think so?'' i reply. minnesotans cherish their political optimism. but when i think of iraq and of our intentions there, another line of poetry comes to me, by louis simpson, so i say it: ''grave by grave we civilize the ground.''  battlegrounds charles baxter is the author, most recently, of the novel ''saul and patsy.''  