park vistas, with produce   living near a fabulous farmers' market that sells fresh produce has always seemed to me an idyllic situation, but not one that i have ever really been able to take advantage of in new york city.  so whenever i happen to be driving by the union square greenmarket, i feel a distinctive ''if i lived here, i'd be shopping by now'' twinge.  the proximity to apples, cider, flowers, cheese, vegetables and honey -- and all the things that i manically shop for at the greenmarket while my husband circles the block -- is, i must admit, one of the prime incentives for my visit to 8 union square south, on the corner of 14th street and university place, to see what it would be like to live there.  the 20-unit luxury condominium, developed by the claremont group and designed by arpad baksa architect, is in what michael shvo, the president of shvo marketing, describes as ''the last stage of construction for delivery next summer.''  he could have fooled me. i put on a hard hat and reluctantly ride the construction elevator -- a cage-type affair that is closed but still a bit scary for someone with extreme vertigo -- to the third floor. there are two apartments per floor and two penthouses, and, as mr. shvo explains, ''you are buying a park view with every unit.''  apartment costs range from $1.89 million (for a 1,433-square-foot two-bedroom, two-bath unit; $1,838.78 in projected combined monthly charges with the pending 421a tax abatement) to $3.68 million (for a 2,108-square-foot three-bedroom, three-bath unit; projected combined charges of $2,704.84). at those prices, the views had better be good.  i make my way to a corner of the future living room in no. 3a and, yes, there is indeed a lovely diagonal view over union square. the view is not quite as good from no. 3b, the adjacent apartment that mostly faces university place, because you have to cozy up to the window to see the treetops.  i am trying to figure out what goes where at this stage of construction as we re-enter the cage to alight on the 11th floor to get the feel of penthouse a, a two-story, three-bedroom, three-and-a-half-bath, 3,118-square-foot unit with 2,071 square feet of terraces.  ''it's kind of cool,'' mr. shvo says, ''and to have this kind of outdoor space on the park is phenomenal.''  so is the price tag: $8.92 million. i would really have to be committed to being in proximity to a lot of organic produce.  not that i would be grocery shopping every five minutes. the building, entered on university place, not bustling 14th street, has a 24-hour doorman and what mr. shvo described as ''every service and more.''  there will be a library (the perk du jour), valet parking, a gym and, according to mr. shvo, ''anything you need.''  quintessentially, he explains, is the name of the condo's concierge partner. when i do not recognize the brand, mr. shvo adds, diplomatically: ''they're in south america and russia, and miami, actually everywhere you travel.''  employees at quintessentially ''treat members as individuals and can get you theater tickets or lease you a private jet,'' he adds.  that's when mr. shvo starts to lose me. i am still just dreaming of great goat cheese and heirloom tomatoes.  back on the sidewalk, i walk a couple of blocks to the building's ''sales boutique,'' where ran gibor, a sales associate, whisks me through the audiovisual presentation (projected on a scrim placed in front of a mini-forest of birch trees) that touts ''a park to call your own,'' and ''new york's most important public square.''  i learn i would be able to ''shop along with the best chefs, indulge my inner gourmet, and enjoy the exhilaration and true spirit of parkside living, along with uptown elegance with a downtown edge.''  ''we own the air rights to the west and south,'' mr. gibor adds, as the show ends, ''so people are kind of guaranteed to have their views. the windows are floor-to-ceiling and are made of thick, muffling glass to isolate noise from the area.''  tenants will also be able to have ''frequent consultations'' with the interior designer eric cohler on how to set up their spaces. ''people move from smaller to bigger, not the other way around,'' mr. gibor says. oops, that leaves me out again.  we move toward the cohler-designed models of the kitchen and bathroom. ''the finishes are amazing,'' continues mr. gibor, as he shows off the captivating italian valcucine kitchen with frosted glass cabinet doors that smoothly swing up and have nifty pulls (love them!), sub-zero refrigerators and freezers and miele dishwashers.  ''you can practically sleep next to them, they're so quiet,'' says mr. gibor, as he points out an under-sink drawer for soaps and sponges (love this, too!) and mentions that each unit comes equipped with a washer/dryer vented to the outside.  the bathrooms have waterworks bathtubs and double vanity sinks, glass showers, marble floors, medicine cabinets mirrored inside and out, and towel warmers ''to keep you warm in the cold nights of new york,'' says mr. gibor. but i am less keen. the baths are sort of beige and bland.  even so, mr. gibor's enthusiasm sweeps me along as he leads me through the floor plans of the a line (''a corner unit, huge foyer, separate dining area, a juliet balcony so you can have breakfast overlooking 14th street, and a very, very, very large 2,000 square feet,'' he says) and the 1,433-square-foot b line (''very, very beautiful, and most important -- and a very exciting thing -- the two entrances to the bathroom, one from the bedroom, one from the hallway,'' he says).  and, of course, the two duplex penthouses, the proverbial cherries on the top of the understated concrete building. the 2,744-square-foot duplex penthouse no. 2 is listed at $5.36 million, and the 3,129-square-foot penthouse no. 1 is listed at $8.920 million, and it has the party-ready terrace.  on the second floor of penthouse a there is ''a tremendous master bedroom, 22 by 13 feet, and very, very, very large closets, that are every woman's love,'' mr. gibor says.  the two penthouses are still available, but the lone 844-square-foot one-bedroom unit at $1.1 million has already been sold, along with about half the two- and three-bedroom apartments.  i am not going to get any closer to my beloved fresh-picked lettuces anytime soon.  window shopping  