planners clash over transit hub, and riders win   a truce has been called in the battle between form and function that erupted late last year over plans for the fulton street transit center, a new transportation hub in lower manhattan.  it appears that subway riders can now look forward to both an architecturally ambitious station and an underground connection to the e train when the center opens in october 2009.  it also appears that the metropolitan transportation authority is ready to spend some of its own money to make up the difference between the $847 million in federal funds that have been committed to the project and its current estimated cost of $888 million.  the transit center was originally proposed as part of the revival of lower manhattan after 9/11. it was to straighten out as much as possible the spaghetti plate of subway lines -- a, c, e, j, m, z, r, w, 2, 3, 4 and 5 -- converging around fulton street. many of these stations are currently connected, but the passageways between them are constricted and confusing.  at the heart of the center, at is was unveiled in 2004, was a new glass-clad entrance building, or headhouse, at broadway and fulton street, topped by a glass dome not unlike a seashell in shape with a skylight that would scoop daylight down to the station below.  in the months and years since, the plan's scope was repeatedly cut back because of budget constraints. some changes, like the elimination of a subbasement, went unquestioned.  but in november, a minor revolt on the authority's board greeted the proposed elimination of a passageway planned between the r and w lines and the e train terminus at the world trade center. several members cast it as an either-or issue, pitting the form of the headhouse against the function of the passageway.  ''we are not building cathedrals here,'' said one board member, nancy shevell blakeman.  back at their drawing boards in recent weeks, the authority's planners found that they could build a relatively inexpensive connector by using a corner of what is now the temporary path terminal rather than a route under church street.  despite threats by board members to scuttle the dome, the plans were apparently never seriously in danger of being scaled back much further than they had already been.  peter s. kalikow, the authority's chairman, said he had insisted ''that we not lose sight of the project's core benefits, like greater visibility enhanced by natural light to orient our customers and greater connectivity.''  officials said repeatedly that they would not spend more than the $847 million in federal funds, but with little fat left to cut, the authority will have to look in its own budget to cover the difference between the federal money and the most recent cost estimate of $888 million.  mysore l. nagaraja, the president of m.t.a. capital construction, which is overseeing the project, said mr. kalikow ''has agreed to make necessary funding available.'' however, he added, ''we are still looking for opportunities to save money.''  current renderings show a headhouse somewhat less grand and decidedly less diaphanous than the one unveiled in 2004. the light-catching dome has been preserved, though in a different form.  originally, the dome was to have reached 115 feet above the sidewalk and been clad in glass. the plan is now to cover the exterior in stainless steel. to make it easier to build, the designers -- grimshaw architects, james carpenter design associates and the engineering firm arup -- have shortened it about 10 feet, reduced its girth and turned it into a simpler, more conical form.  through a circular skylight at the top of the dome, daylight will be reflected down an interior structure made of triangular aluminum panels held in a crisscross net of steel cables.  ringing the bottom of the dome will be a two-story circular structure, somewhat like a doughnut in form, with authority offices and a restaurant. the circular structure will be enclosed in turn by a boxy 50-foot-high pavilion.  security revisions to the pavilion echo those at the world trade center transportation hub, where the number of steel ribs was increased in part to reduce the expanse of glass that might be exposed to a blast.  about the fulton street headhouse, mr. nagaraja would say only that there would be ''more structural members'' and that these elements would be ''more robust.'' he added that there would be roughly the same amount of glass.  there will be two other large new aboveground entrances, at broadway and dey street to the west and on the ground floor of 135 william street to the east.  the william street entrance will lead to the fulton street station of the nos. 2 and 3 lines, where two stairways have been added to improve circulation and ease congestion on the narrow platform, and to the east end of the mezzanine above the platform of the broadway-nassau street station on the a and c lines.  the a-c mezzanine, the central artery of the multistation complex, is especially hard to navigate, with its changing levels, switchback ramps and u-shaped directional arrows. it is to be entirely reconstructed on a single level. ten new stairways, instead of the ramps, will connect it to the platform below.  a key goal of all the work at the transit center is to create clear sight lines, said william m. wheeler, the director of special project development and planning at the authority. that means eliminating blind corners, u-turns and opaque surfaces wherever possible to help travelers visually orient themselves.  at the west end of the a-c mezzanine, where an artwork in the form of a metal grill is now suspended from the ceiling, the south wall will be removed. the mezzanine will then open into the lower level of the new headhouse.  the main floor of the headhouse -- up one level but still 20 feet below the surrounding sidewalks -- will open on to the fulton street platform of the nos. 4 and 5 lines. the walls between the columns will be removed intermittently for a length of about 90 feet. this will broaden the boarding area and eliminate the choke point between the uptown platform and the a-c mezzanine.  new stairways are being added to the south end of the nos. 4 and 5 platforms. the stairway to the uptown platform is already passable, though not open to the public until the end of the month. the stairway to the downtown platform, in front of 1 liberty plaza, is to open next september.  the 350-foot-long dey street passageway, by far the most ambitious subterranean element in the project, is now being built. it will link the headhouse to the cortlandt street station of the r and w lines and, through that station, to the world trade center transportation hub.  the passageway must be built within a kind of reverse bathtub, a structure that keeps the water out, because there is a high water table in this part of lower manhattan.  this bathtub is created by first constructing a 30-foot-deep subterranean palisade called a secant wall, made of interlocking concrete and steel pilings. once this wall is in place, the soil can be safely excavated and the concrete box forming the passageway can be built. about 80 percent of the secant wall has been completed.  from the cortlandt street station, a 150-foot-long passageway will permit free transfers to the e train for several hundreds of riders at peak hours. in earlier plans, it was to have run under church street, an expensive proposition involving the relocation of utilities. mr. nagaraja said it had become clear to the authority in recent weeks that the space needed for this passageway would be available from the port authority of new york and new jersey, allowing a much less expensive connector to be built.  