stepping aside, a maverick opens a window   in a place where partisanship and party affiliation routinely determine things as basic as where lawmakers sit in state house chambers, where they park their cars or even whether their aides have to walk an extra flight of stairs to get to their offices, state senator william l. gormley has often defied convention -- and has relished doing so.  ostensibly a republican, mr. gormley, who is from atlantic county, has sided with the democrats so often that he has joked that his party's leadership has occasionally placed him on a sort of probation. whether it was supporting an assault weapons ban in the early 1990s or his crucial vote last year for gov. jon s. corzine's budget, which ended a seven-day government shutdown, mr. gormley has often bucked the party line.  ''i have enjoyed working with both sides,'' mr. gormley said at a state house news conference. ''if i hadn't worked with both sides, then the dreams of atlantic city wouldn't have been fulfilled.''  but now one of the last true swing voters in the state house is about to leave. mr. gormley announced last week that he would not seek re-election in november -- a decision that could have far-reaching implications for the republicans' effort to regain control of the senate and on the voting dynamic of the legislature.  democrats, who hold a 22-to-18 edge in the senate, have expressed anxiety about their tenuous hold there. but the departure of mr. gormley, a 30-year veteran of south jersey politics, may provide them a bit more of a window to widen their advantage.  in some circles, mr. gormley's seat was considered vulnerable even without his retirement. that is as much because of the changing demographics of atlantic county -- democratic voter registrations are up significantly in recent years -- as it is the formidable machine of the democratic power broker george e. norcross iii.  mr. gormley deflected a suggestion that his decision might have been prompted because he saw the electoral writing on the wall. ''you can't say that you would win, you can't say that you would lose,'' he said.  and, mr. gormley noted, the person he would like to see assume his seat -- assemblyman francis j. blee (who is also a bit of a maverick: mr. blee also cast a republican vote for the corzine budget) -- has actually pulled better poll numbers than mr. gormley. ''that's an opportunity for the republican party,'' mr. gormley said of his departure.  even as he spoke of the dreams of atlantic city, where casinos have been an economic engine, mr. gormley seemed to realize that many of its aspirations, blunted by pockets of intense poverty, remain unfulfilled. he vowed to remain something of a grass-roots activist.  and despite his many disagreements with fellow republicans, mr. gormley said his loyalty to the party ran deep.  ''they brought me to the dance,'' he said. ''you don't forget that.''  on politics  