grossman, under pressure, faces toughest test   rex grossman is like a beleaguered politician whose approval rating keeps falling.  listen to chicago sports-talk radio or read chicago newspapers, and grossman is a frequent topic of conversation. the talk is not complimentary. the erratic play of grossman, the bears' fourth-year quarterback, is the team's biggest concern heading into sunday's home playoff game against the seattle seahawks. rarely has an n.f.l. quarterback entered a playoff game being scrutinized to such a degree, because grossman's play has ranged from terrific to terrible, leaving the bears no clue what to expect from game to game.  which grossman will show up sunday? the grossman who threw for two touchdowns when the bears dominated the seahawks, 37-6, in october? or the grossman who looked pathetic in his last game, when he threw three first-half interceptions and completed 2 of 12 passes during chicago's regular-season finale, a 26-7 loss to green bay?  sunday could be a crossroads in grossman's career, and he is preparing for it by trying to tune out the critics.  ''i don't care what they say,'' grossman said before wednesday's practice. ''it's a challenge. i'm going to step up to the plate and take that challenge head on.  ''i know it's out there. i'm sure they're saying negative things. they said extremely positive things when i've been playing well, and they've said some extremely negative things when things were going bad. it's just a distraction either way, so i'm concentrating on staying away from it.''  but for the bears and coach lovie smith, there is no staying away from the potential quarterback controversy.  among the eight starting quarterbacks still in the playoffs, grossman had the most interceptions (20) and the lowest regular-season passer rating (73.9). if he struggles early, or if the bears fall behind, will smith turn to the backup quarterback brian griese, who threw just 32 passes all season? if smith stays with a struggling grossman and the bears lose, will chicago ever forgive the coach or the quarterback?  griese has watched the grossman soap opera from the sideline, trying to help, but keeping himself prepared.  ''i owe it to the team to be ready,'' griese said after practice. ''that's my job, and it's a huge game.''  but smith's unwavering loyalty to grossman sounded as strong as ever.  ''we like rex being our quarterback,'' smith said. ''we think he can lead us where we need to go. i can't wait to see him play this week.''  but grossman's previous performance only raised more concern in chicago. he gave his critics more fuel by admitting afterward that he was not as focused on the packers as he should have been because the bears had already clinched home-field advantage through the national football conference playoffs.  ''i think it was taken out of context a little bit,'' grossman said wednesday. ''i won't talk to you as openly anymore.''  the bears are not paying grossman to be open with the news media, but they do expect him to hit open receivers. at this point, the problem may be as much mental as physical. every quarterback struggles at some point early in his career, and how adversity is handled often determines a quarterback's fate.  ''that's part of the deal in this league, playing this position,'' seattle quarterback matt hasselbeck said wednesday during a conference call with reporters. ''you're being evaluated not only on how you play and how you lead in the locker room, but how thick your skin is. being around the game my entire life, you see guys that have an amazing ability to block out the good and the bad. then there's other guys that don't handle it as well. at times i've handled it well, and at times i've handled it poorly. i just feel fortunate to be around enough quality people that have helped pull me through the tough times.''  seattle coach mike holmgren, who helped to develop hasselbeck and green bay's brett favre, said it was too early to know what kind of career grossman will have.  ''as a young quarterback in the league, it takes some time to get comfortable,'' holmgren said. ''they got coaches there who believe in him. you just have to make a commitment if you believe you have the right guy.''  smith loves to remind people that the bears were 13-3 with grossman at quarterback. and when grossman has games like sept. 17 against detroit, when he completed 20 of 27 passes and threw for 4 touchdowns, his coaches and his teammates wonder why he cannot do that more often.  the bears view sunday's game as crucial for the franchise, which has not won a playoff game since 1994 and which has lost its past two playoff games at home.  chicago has lived with grossman's inconsistency all season, but the playoffs will put him squarely under the spotlight.  pro football  