it's another big night in the city for the isles   for all the dominance the islanders have had over the rangers in this season's installment of their rivalry, they were not flexing it particularly proudly after last night's 5-3 victory at madison square garden.  that could be because after each of their previous three victories over the rangers this season, the islanders went into a slump. a 7-4 triumph at the garden in early december precipitated two consecutive losses. a 2-0 victory dec. 26 at nassau coliseum sent them into a six-game tailspin that ended only last night.  ''i'm not sure why,'' islanders goalie rick dipietro said. ''i don't know if it's the rangers and it amps everybody up and it takes you to that next level. it's definitely something we'll talk about and try to figure out.''  if the islanders played as well against the rest of the league as they do against the rangers, they would be in better shape than third place in the atlantic division at 20-19-4, behind the devils and the rangers.  and if the rangers (22-18-4) could muster anything close to their best against the islanders, they would have more breathing room in second place. and they would not have had to endure last night's tirade from coach tom renney, who was careful to compliment the scrappy islanders while blasting his own team.  ''there's no spell on us,'' renney said. ''we were brutal. it's us. we are awful against these guys. we have no concept of camaraderie, no concept of team play, no concept of circling the wagons to go play these guys intelligently. we beat ourselves.''  renney's anger stemmed from the fact that the rangers not only should have learned something about playing the islanders in three previous losses, but also that they had only recently pulled themselves out of a seven-game losing streak. that skid had been so long and bitter that renney hoped its lessons would hold the team's attention for a while.  ''there's a certain responsibility that goes along with being a winning team in this league,'' renney said. ''just because you run off four in a row after losing seven doesn't mean that you've arrived anywhere.  ''we were perfect for the new york islanders today. we were exactly what they needed.''  the islanders wrote the latest chapter in this trend by bouncing back every time the rangers threatened to take control of the game. the islanders scored first, then gave up two straight goals to the rangers' top line, one by martin straka and one from jaromir jagr.  but late in the first period, the islanders caught the rangers in a bad line change, and on a delayed penalty to michael nylander, defenseman brendan witt knocked in his first goal of the season to tie the score at 2-2 with 1 minute 23 seconds left.  the islanders scored the only goal of the second period, by mike sillinger, and the rangers tied the score early in the third with a power-play goal by brendan shanahan.  ''it seems like every time we score a big goal against this team, we have a breakdown and they answer right back,'' shanahan said. ''to me, that says a lot about our concentration and experience.''  the islanders responded quickly to shanahan's goal, scoring twice in 30 seconds, on goals by viktor kozlov and sillinger, to snatch the game away. on both, the rangers were caught flat-footed trying to shift from offense to defense.  ''everyone asks why we have their number right now,'' sillinger said. ''it's just timely goals. we played some good solid defense, and let's face it, dipietro has been fantastic every time we've played them. from that, we've scored timely goals.''  clearly the enthusiasm of this rivalry has meant more to the current islanders than the current rangers. many of the islanders still remember two seasons ago, when the rangers were 6-0 against them. last season, the rangers were 5-2-1 in the series while cruising to a playoff berth.  ''these are big games,'' witt said. ''it's two new york teams who are 45 minutes away from each other. it's like a playoff game. the fans get in on it. they've been playing well. i'm just really happy we rose to the occasion and got out of this funk of ours.''  nothing quite works on an islanders funk like playing the rangers.  slap shots  rangers forwards jaromir jagr and brendan shanahan  had each gone nine games without scoring a goal until last night.  jagr was not sure he would play last night after leaving saturday's victory over montreal with a groin injury.  hockey  