house democrats' security bill draws doubt, even inside party   house democrats intend to fulfill a campaign promise this week by passing broad new antiterrorism legislation, but some senate democrats and the bush administration object to security mandates in the plan, citing concerns about their cost and practicality.  the house measure, the sept. 11 commission bill, is intended to write into law recommendations by the group that investigated the 2001 terror attacks. they include initiatives intended to disrupt global black markets for nuclear weapons technology and to enhance cargo inspection.  ''today marks a giant leap forward toward a safer and more secure america,'' said representative bennie thompson, democrat of mississippi, the new chairman of the house committee on homeland security, as he unveiled the bill friday.  but the proposed legislation, which could come to a vote as early as tuesday, goes beyond what the sept. 11 commission recommended, taking up measures previously favored by democratic lawmakers but opposed by the department of homeland security.  the bill requires that within three years, all cargo on passenger jets be inspected for explosives, as checked baggage is now. the house bill also requires that within five years all ship cargo containers headed to the united states be scanned overseas for components of a nuclear bomb.  homeland security department officials say there is no proven technology for such comprehensive cargo screening, at least at a reasonable cost or without causing worldwide bottlenecks in trade. the screening for air cargo is estimated to cost $3.6 billion over the next decade, and ship inspections could cost even more. ''inspecting every container could cause ports to literally shut down,'' said russ knocke, a homeland security spokesman.  many republicans and some senate democratic committee chairmen said that the goal of 100 percent inspections was worthy, but that they were not convinced that mandates should be included in the bill.  ''airplane passengers must be assured that any cargo on a passenger jet will not pose a terrorist threat,'' said senator joseph i. lieberman, independent of connecticut, who now leads the homeland security and government affairs committee. ''but we must achieve these goals in an efficient manner to allow for the free flow of commerce without placing undue economic burdens on importers or bringing air traffic to a standstill.''  the sept. 11 commission said in its 2004 report that any proposed new security measures must be carefully considered, weighing the cost and benefit of any one step, like inspecting cargo, against others that could be taken, like protecting planes against shoulder-fired missiles.  the commission recommended, for example, that passenger planes be equipped with hardened, bomb-resistant containers for some cargo, instead of moving immediately to inspect every cargo shipment.  homeland security department officials said they were researching ways to inspect more air and sea cargo. the agency has tests planned this year at three ports in pakistan, honduras and england, where all ship containers headed for the united states will be checked for radioactive substances or dense objects that might be hiding a bomb.  until then, the department intends to follow its existing security procedures, which include mandatory inspections of the small fraction of cargo containers deemed suspicious because of the sender, the destination or the contents, among other factors.  currently, about 30 percent of air cargo on passenger planes is inspected by dogs or screening devices, while about 5 percent of all incoming ship containers are sent through a device like an x-ray machine.  mr. lieberman and senator daniel k. inouye, democrat of hawaii, the new chairman of the senate commerce committee, want the security department to complete its tests on new technology before mandating inspection of all cargo.  but mr. thompson, the chief author of the house bill, and senator charles e. schumer, democrat of new york, said the timetables were essential to push the department to move faster.  ''we need firm deadlines to end the administration's foot-dragging,'' mr. schumer said monday.  the push for 100 percent screening of all ship cargo containers first became a top priority for democrats last year after the bush administration proposed allowing a dubai company to assume management of a half-dozen united states ship terminal operations. democrats said then that they recognized the idea was compelling not only to increase security, but also as a political pitch as they tried to buttress their credentials as a party that takes domestic security seriously.  part of the skepticism about the mandate for 100 percent screening is that even if the equipment is installed, it is not clear it would do much to prevent an attack, some security experts said.  the radiation detection equipment now in use, for example, probably would not pick up a crucial radioactive substance for a nuclear weapon if the material was shielded. and even if all cargo containers were checked, terrorists could find other ways to smuggle weapons into the united states, including on private boats or ships that carry cars, which would not be not covered by the inspection mandates.  ''tax dollars should not be spent on what makes for the best election-year bumper sticker, but on initiatives that offer the most security for the dollar spent,'' said james jay carafano, a senior fellow at the heritage foundation, a conservative research group in washington, and a critic of the 100 percent inspection requirement.  aside from the cargo inspection mandates, other security measures proposed by democrats have a greater chance of becoming law.  the house bill calls for changes in the way some $2 billion a year in state and local domestic security grants are distributed, so that the money is more based on risk. a separate bill has been introduced in the senate that would provide antiterrorism grants for amtrak, freight railroads and other transit systems, a plan that previously passed the senate but was opposed by house republican leaders.  mr. thompson said that with the democrats now in charge the party had a chance to push forward at least some of these measures, although he said he recognized compromise might be necessary before they were signed into law.  