many chances to be a hero in new york   for the last week, new yorkers have thrilled to the heroics of wesley autrey, julio gonzalez and pedro nevarez -- profiles in courage, all. mr. autrey risked his life to rescue a young man who had tumbled from a subway platform into the path of an oncoming train. messrs. gonzalez and nevarez caught a little boy who fell from a fourth-floor fire escape.  inevitably, new yorkers now ask themselves if they would have the same kind of guts, especially that shown by mr. autrey. would they run into a burning building or leap into churning waters to save a life?  mayor michael r. bloomberg seems certain that the answer is yes. ''there's no doubt about it,'' the mayor said in his weekly radio address on sunday. ''new york city is a town that inspires courageous action.''  but is it really?  no one disputes the nobility of bold action in a crisis. but few of us will ever see someone fall to the subway tracks or dangle from a fire escape. besides, what we call heroism is often a spontaneous reaction to an emergency, with no time to think.  what about more mundane troubles? do new yorkers get involved when they see something wrong that might demand some moxie on their part, not necessarily medal-worthy heroism?  consider the following ordinary circumstances -- a list that makes no pretense of being complete but includes situations that occur in this city pretty much every day:  walking on the street, you see someone throw a scrap of paper to the ground (all too often ignoring a garbage can that is mere feet away). do you have it in you to tell him to stop dirtying your city and to pick up his own trash instead of adding to the burdens of a not-brilliantly-paid sweeper?  you see a woman or a man on a subway platform screaming pitilessly at a small child for some minor misdeed. the kid looks terrified. do you step in and say that this is no way to treat a kid, because you know in your heart that silence amounts to condoning bad behavior?  you are on the street, or in the subway, and a group of young men are talking loudly, with every third word a vulgarity. maybe you have a small child with you. even if you don't, you believe that loud swearing in public is unacceptable. do you have the gumption to ask that they clean up their language or at least lower their voices?  you hear gunshots outside your apartment window, and call 911. do you give the operator your name and phone number?  in a taxicab, the driver ignores your request to give his cellphone a rest and make a minimal effort to acknowledge your existence. do you stiff him on the tip to register displeasure, and perhaps teach him a useful lesson, even though you dread the tension that this is sure to create?  a related question applies to restaurantgoers. you are normally a generous tipper, but the service on this night is miserable. do you have the nerve to leave a meager tip and deal with possibly being labeled a cheapskate?  someone on a bus has his ipod turned up so high that it emits a loud tinny noise maddening to everyone around. do you have what it takes to ask him to lower the volume?  you're a woman standing in a crowded subway car and some guy -- deliberately, you are certain -- is pressing up against you for a cheap thrill. do you perform a public service by calling the creep on it?  the driver of a commercial truck, with the company's name and phone number on its side, barrels through an intersection as he makes a turn. he scatters frightened pedestrians (who by law have the right of way). do you note the license number and business name, and then call the company to demand that it discipline a reckless employee for the public good?  your boss has a bullying manner, not with you, perhaps, but with some of your co-workers. you see that his behavior is undermining staff morale and productivity. do you have the pluck to tell him what he's doing wrong?  you see a man not cleaning up after his dog has done its business on the sidewalk. do you, as a conscientious citizen, tell him that he owes it to everyone to get his act together?  again, none of these situations demands autrey-style valor. nonetheless, they are everyday matters for which a measure of daring might be in order.  perhaps the mayor is right, that this city ''inspires courageous action.'' but experience suggests that if they were honest about themselves, most new yorkers would respond to each of the above questions with a weary, resigned ''no.''  nyc e-mail: haberman@nytimes.com  