the world has nearly ended, but movies manage to survive   a faux documentary with a twist, ''ever since the world ended'' unfolds in and around an eerily depopulated san francisco 10 years after a mysterious plague has decimated humanity. but instead of making a movie about the aftermath of a disaster, the filmmakers, calum grant and joshua atesh litle, have tried something a little more clever and a lot cheaper: to envision what the first movie made after that disaster might look like.  the result is a rudimentary yet fascinating record of remembrance and reconstruction, accessed through survivor interviews and carefully chosen landscapes. effects are all the more special for being minimal: a decaying golden gate bridge, a decomposing ship listing in the harbor.  the mood is gently melancholic, spiced with unexpected humor -- like the self-described ''last north american indian'' who resents being everyone's spiritual backbone -- and the free-floating tension of a world without laws. at a cozy commune, bees are raised and children receive piano lessons while the adults wonder whether to kill a violent man recently returned to the city. the remnants of civilization are being preserved, albeit with a certain moral primitivism.  thought-provoking rather than deeply philosophical, ''ever since the world ended'' features many engaging performances and several outstanding ones, including mark routhier as a damaged former emergency worker and david driver as a self-justifying scavenger.  what remains in the mind, however, is the film's atmospheric blend of hope and trepidation: the challenge and terror of a world with too much space and too few boundaries.  ever since the world ended  opens today in manhattan.  produced and directed by calum grant and joshua atesh litle; written by mr. grant; director of photography, mr. litle; edited by david driver and mr. litle; released by cyan pictures. at the two boots pioneer theater, 155 east third street, at avenue a, east village. running time: 78 minutes. this film is not rated.  with: james curry (james), linda noveroske (linda), brad olsen (santosh) and ronald chase (teacher).  film review  