in '05, medical bills grew at slowest pace in 6 years   spending on health care in the united states increased in 2005 at the slowest pace in six years, mostly because of much slower growth in spending on prescription drugs, the government reported monday.  it was the third consecutive year of slower growth in the nation's medical bills. total health spending reached nearly $2 trillion in 2005, growing only a bit faster than the economy as a whole, officials said.  but with new medical technology becoming available every month and with a generation of baby boomers approaching old age, federal officials made no bold claims about having tamed health costs.  ''it is unclear whether this phenomenon is temporary or indicative of a longer-term trend,'' said aaron c. catlin, the principal author of the government's annual report on health spending, published in the journal health affairs.  health care accounted for 16 percent of the economy in 2005, measured by gross domestic product, slightly higher than the 15.9 percent share in 2004. over all, health spending increased 6.9 percent last year, the lowest rate of growth since 1999.  federal officials said wages had not kept up with the growth of health spending, but, they added, the numbers did not show a huge shift in the burden of health costs from employers to employees. households spent 6 percent of personal income on health care in 2005, up from 5.4 percent in 2001, officials said.  the most remarkable finding was that spending on prescription drugs grew just 5.8 percent in 2005 -- to $200.7 billion, representing 10 cents of every dollar spent on health care. it was the first time since 1993 that drug spending grew more slowly than total health spending, thanks to efforts by state officials, private insurers and employers.  medicaid, which provides coverage for more than 50 million low-income people, accounted for much of the deceleration. medicaid spending on prescription drugs grew an average of 15.4 percent a year from 1994 to 2004, but in 2005 it increased just 2.8 percent, said mr. catlin, an economist at the department of health and human services.  states, which administer the medicaid program, pooled their buying power, negotiated larger discounts with drug manufacturers, made greater use of low-cost generic drugs and took other steps to rein in drug spending. as a result, mr. catlin said, 42 states showed slower growth in medicaid drug spending in 2005 than in 2004.  total spending on prescription drugs displayed a similar pattern. the total keeps rising, but the rate of increase has declined every year from its peak of 18.2 percent in 1999. private insurers have used higher co-payments to discourage the use of certain brand-name drugs. another reason for the slowdown, federal officials said, was a decrease in the number of new drugs approved.  home health care was, by far, the fastest-growing category of health spending. spending on home care rose 11 percent, to $47.5 billion in 2005, the third straight year of double-digit growth.  health spending averaged $6,697 a person in 2005. but the average is somewhat misleading because health spending remained highly concentrated among a relatively small number of americans. one percent of the population accounted for nearly one-fourth of all health spending, and 5 percent of americans accounted for nearly one-half of all spending.  after remaining constant for two decades, this pattern has begun to change slightly. in recent years, officials said, spending became a little less concentrated. more of the health care dollar is being spent on prescription drugs, which are taken by a broad cross-section of the population, rather than on inpatient hospital care, which generates high costs for a smaller segment of the population.  spending on hospital care grew 7.9 percent in 2005, as in the prior year, while spending for doctors increased 7 percent, slightly less than in 2004.  ''the growing use of prescription drugs largely explains the declining concentration of health care expenditures,'' said samuel h. zuvekas, an economist at the federal agency for healthcare research and quality.  