two places where readers hold on to their bookstores   something quite unlikely happened around here 34 years ago.  on the same day, sept. 9, 1972, two local bookstores opened -- totally independent of each other -- in this westchester county town and in chappaqua, the next town to the north.  and something almost as unusual still goes on. amid amazon.com, the internet, barnes & noble and borders superstores, ipods, wal-marts and the myriad factors that have killed off local bookstores, both still exist.  the death of the local bookstore is a sad, oft-told tale (most recently in these pages about micawber books, which is closing after 26 years in princeton, n.j.). what lessons can be drawn from the fact that the village bookstore in pleasantville and the second story book shop in chappaqua are still alive and kicking? not a lot of easy ones, it turns out, but maybe a few things that matter in ways that go far beyond books.  not much remains the same, both at the shops and in the towns. pleasantville has gone from solidly blue collar to increasingly pricey. chappaqua, once a distant, quiet exurb of stone walls and rushing streams, now would feel like the quintessential strivers' suburbia even if the clintons didn't live there.  during its 34 years, the pleasantville bookstore has been operated by five different owners at six different locations, one of them twice, under two different names (until six years ago it was just the book store). the chappaqua store, whose name comes from its original location above a shoe store, moved to bigger digs 14 years ago, almost lost its lease a year or so back, and still soldiers on.  the village bookstore, in pleasantville, for the past three years has been owned by a local couple, yvonne vancort and roy solomon, both 62. they bought it less for business reasons than for civic ones -- they felt someone should keep it alive and they decided they could.  mr. solomon said his first thought was: ''seven-day-a-week retail -- are you nuts?''  but they've found -- surprise -- that people still read, that they want a local bookstore where the owners know and care about books, and that people are willing to pay a few more bucks than they would at amazon or borders to support it. mr. solomon, in particular, clearly has a small entrepreneur's tenacity and focus. their sales have grown every month, and they're moving yet again two doors up the street to a less expensive location where they hope to make it as a going economic concern -- if not one you could recommend to a young couple hoping to pay the mortgage and send kids to college.  the chappaqua store, the second story, is owned by the woman who started it, joan ripley, 73. it hasn't been easy there, either, though a few clinton book events haven't hurt. when a steep rent increase almost cost mrs. ripley her lease, customers signed petitions to keep the store open, and the chubb insurance company, through a local resident, helped underwrite some of the rent as part of an ad hoc sponsorship.  mrs. ripley does her best to compete with the giant borders in mount kisco, the next town up, but it's enough of a struggle that in november she took to passing out fliers to customers reminding them of the store's history and asking for their support. that led one of them, randi childs, to send out an e-mail, which was then forwarded around town, imploring people to support the bookstore and buy all their books there, lest chappaqua lose it. it worked. the store had a stellar christmas season that should help keep the wolf at bay for a while at least.  you can't find too many absolutes there. given rising suburban rents, any business can find itself priced out of existence.  but here are a few. you can't get rich running a small-town bookstore, but smart, resourceful businesspeople can survive. if lots of trends can kill bookstores, plenty of suburbs are full of smart, literate residents who treasure having one nearby. and, to some extent, people really do get what they pay for. there are good things about the fancy borders in mount kisco, but if people want the small independent with the hand-written tags recommending books real people actually read -- or the other local shops battling the big box stores -- it's their choice whether they live or die.  as mrs. ripley wrote in her flier: ''you, the reader, determine how long a life a book may have and you, too, determine how long a bookstore should keep its doors open. thanks to all of you who have supported us in the past  we can only continue as long as you, the readers, decide you want us to stay.''  our towns e-mail: peappl@nytimes.com  