for gravitas or levity, try a robert frank book   this summer, readers interested in american wealth will be able to pick up robert frank's new book -- and the other robert frank's new book.  robert frank, a reporter who covers private wealth for the wall street journal, and robert h. frank, an economist and professor at cornell university (who also contributes to the new york times), have both written books dealing with the culture of wealth in the united states. mr. frank's ''richistan: a journey through the american wealth boom and the lives of the new rich,'' will be published by random house's crown imprint in june, while professor frank's ''falling behind: how rising inequality harms the middle class,'' will be published by the university of california press in july.  both writers, who are telephone acquaintances, sounded more amused than annoyed by the coincidental timing. ''if robert frank comes out with a book on economic inequality, it's going to be confusing,'' said professor frank, who said that people occasionally mistake him for the journalist. but, he added, the other robert frank ''is entitled to his name and any subject he wants to write about.''  mr. frank's regard for the professor goes beyond just his name. ''i'm a huge admirer of his work. i've read and loved every book that he's written,'' he said. ''he's a renowned and respected and highly trained economist, and i'm a mere journalist.''  the writers also rely on small distinctions to separate their public identities. ''i use my middle initial, so this helps,'' said professor frank, who has some experience sharing his name. (his literary agent also represents the photographer named, yes, robert frank.)  the journalist mr. frank, whose longtime byline is ''robert frank'' and whose middle initial is l., had considered using that initial with ''richistan'' (early copies of the book's jacket have it). but he has now decided to publish the book without the initial, he said friday. both men also said that their books, while superficially related, were very different in tone and purpose. mr. frank described ''richistan'' as a ''colorful and fun'' collection of stories about the lives and lifestyles of wealthy americans. ''falling behind'' examines the pressures facing middle-class americans as a result of uneven income gains.  professor frank's book already has its first endorsement -- from mr. frank, who has read a manuscript copy. ''i think his book is great and i hope people buy it,'' mr. frank said.  maria aspan  media talk  