randolph forgives, but doesn't forget   zach randolph has the marks of a great young player. he has the gaudy statistics: 24 points and 10.3 rebounds a game for the portland trail blazers. he has the gaudy contract: a six-year, $84 million deal signed in 2004.  but even burly multimillionaires need a little love, which is why randolph still burns over a five-year-old snub. as an indiana prep star in 2000, randolph was a favorite to win the title of mr. basketball, the highest individual honor in the state where hoops reigns supreme.  he finished a distant second to jared jeffries, now a forward for the knicks. randolph has not forgotten.  ''he could play; he still can play,'' randolph said, then added with a playful laugh: ''but i deserved mr. basketball though. no question.''  randolph, a bruising big man, played for marion high school, which beat jeffries's bloomington north in the class 4a title game. randolph had 28 points in that game, jeffries 10. as randolph remembered it, he outplayed jeffries head to head.  ''killed him,'' randolph said.  jeffries remembered it a bit differently.  ''nah, sean may was on him that game,'' said jeffries, who was a guard in high school. ''i didn't guard him.''  there were theories to explain why jeffries got nearly three times as many votes (201) as randolph (70) from participating coaches and members of the news media. jeffries was known as a good student and a solid citizen; randolph had pleaded guilty to receiving stolen guns.  randolph pointed to a greater offense in the eyes of fellow hoosiers -- he had committed to play for michigan state, jeffries was heading to indiana university.  ''that could be true,'' jeffries said. ''everybody thought he was going to get it. so he said i stole it from him.''  to this day, randolph will occasionally needle jeffries about the award.  ''i tell him, 'i'm mr. basketball,' '' randolph said. ''that's my boy, though.''  jeffries is not about to surrender the award, or buy into randolph's apparent trophy envy. ''he's in the n.b.a., i'm in the n.b.a.,'' jeffries said. ''can't be no jealousy. we got good jobs.''  off the glass  