aints to saints, child to man, a family affair   since hurricane katrina, the resurgent new orleans saints may be america's team, but they are not completely louisiana's team.  mine remains a family divided.  three great-aunts, all in their 80s, are fanatically devoted. health permitting, most years they gather on sundays to watch the saints. they cook, smoke, wave pompoms and yell at the television. aunt camille, 88, has on occasion worn a football uniform, while aunt margie, 84, has slipped on a cheerleader outfit.  ''fit me perfectly,'' she said.  aunt camille promised to quit smoking by christmas, but with louisiana state in the sugar bowl, and the saints perhaps building toward the super bowl, she has sometimes found one cigarette burning in the ashtray and another in her hand.  ''i said i'd quit on christmas,'' she said. ''i didn't say which christmas.''  then there is my father. grudgingly, he will watch saturday when the saints play host to philadelphia in the second round of the n.f.l. playoffs. in truth, he would rather do almost anything else: give up beer, fall off the roof, vote democratic in a presidential race.  ''the saints,'' he says in the same dismissive tone that seinfeld greets newman.  he tried to love them. he really did.  he took my mother and me to the saints' inaugural game, in 1967. we had box seats at tulane stadium, right behind the los angeles rams' bench. the night before, we stayed at the rams' hotel and swam in the pool until a team official told us to hold it down -- the players were sleeping. this did not chasten my father, but instead emboldened him to run down the hallway screaming, ''rams are sissies!''  thus unnerved, the rams surrendered a 94-yard touchdown return to the saints on the opening kickoff. the saints lost that game and followed with 20 consecutive losing seasons. here in southwest louisiana, and up north, many people came to prefer the dallas cowboys. dallas has won five super bowls, while the saints have won a single playoff game in 40 years of existence.  the worst came in 1980, when new orleans went 1-15. fans began wearing bags over their heads. my father wanted to put one over his television. the saints became the aints. you did not have to be terrible to lose a game, but you had to be awful to lose a consonant.  russell erxleben, the place-kicker, said of that season, ''i tried to commit suicide twice, but the bullet went wide left.''  even aunt camille lost interest.  ''she had a new husband,'' aunt margie said. ''she had to break him in.''  in archie manning's long-suffering years as quarterback, the saints never got above .500. strange things happened daily. before one exhibition game, he said monday, a castoff from the raiders walked into the superdome with a parrot on his shoulder. the guy then fumbled a punt and bobbled another, and when he got back to his locker, manning said, ''that parrot was dead as a doornail.''  another saints player, manning said, missed an exhibition game, claiming he could not find the superdome. well, coach john north retorted, ''i hope you can find the airport because you're gone.''  even the saints' greatest accomplishment -- a record 63-yard field goal by tom dempsey at tulane stadium in 1970 -- ended in horticultural abandonment. the patch of grass where dempsey's kick was spotted was given to him as a souvenir. he planted it in his yard, but by the next season, he left for philadelphia. the grassy patch remained behind.  ''i couldn't very well take it with me,'' dempsey once said.  the eagles have the dubious distinction of being the first team the saints defeated. but at least philadelphia has three n.f.l. titles, as cobwebbed as they may be, while the saints' trophy case is as empty as the feeling that many fans have toward the team's owner, tom benson. my father, and many others, are upset that, pre-katrina, the state agreed to pay the saints $186.5 million in subsidies over a decade, a deal that remains in effect. this was done to allay benson's threat to move the team elsewhere. wasted money, my father believes. ''if he wants to go,'' he says of benson, ''i'll help him pack.''  benson's critics say he violates two cardinal rules of football: an owner should never stand on the sideline. and if he does, he should never dance with an umbrella. my great-aunts tolerate benson, but they love the saints, a devotion that has survived husbands, strokes, broken hips and frequently broken hopes that a bad team would make itself good.  the sisters live in and around donaldsonville, 45 minutes west of new orleans. margie and billie married brothers. they are all widowed now and do not get around as well as they once did. so this season, two of them watched the games together and provided running commentary over the phone to the third sister. only aunt margie has actually ever attended a saints game.  ''i went once,'' she said of the superdome. ''i went another time, but it was ringling brothers.'' truth be told, it has often been difficult to tell a saints game from a circus, what with all the clowns and the juggling. this is what aunt billie, 82, must mean when she says that her in-game conversations with aunt camille and aunt margie usually go like this: ''did you see that? what the hell are they doing?''  each year, the sisters get a saints schedule from a friend who is 95 and still runs her own printing company. then they plan their sundays. ''once we had a slumber party,'' aunt camille said.  monday afternoon, aunt billie wore a sweater set in the saints' colors of black and gold, and said that saints games mostly provided a chance to see her sisters and to ''cut up and act crazy.'' there is another sister, aunt dorothy, who is 92 and still plays bridge five days a week. but she is not invited to the football gatherings because she talks too much.  ''she never learned the game,'' aunt margie said.  aunt camille brought pictures of herself in a football uniform. to and from her sisters' homes, she would wear a long coat over the uniform, fearing the puzzlement if she got into a wreck. ''they'd have locked me up,'' she said.  she sends birthday cards to aunt margie signed ''deuce,'' after deuce mcallister, the saints running back.  ''that's her boyfriend,'' aunt camille said.  there is one problem with the game saturday against the eagles. it does not start until 7 p.m. here.  ''i fight sleep at the end of games,'' aunt camille said.  ''not me,'' aunt margie said. ''i take something.''  the game also coincides with another of the sisters' favorite shows on tv: ''the lawrence welk show.''  ''i think we'll bypass lawrence,'' aunt billie said.  pro football  