among his official duties, keeping on top of the 100-hour clock   rob cogorno is busy watching the clock. and not just any clock.  it is the clock, at least as far as capitol hill is concerned this week -- and early next week, and maybe into late next week, depending on how long house democrats decide it will run.  mr. cogorno's formal title is floor director for representative steny h. hoyer of maryland, the house majority leader, but for all practical purposes, he is the keeper of the clock. that is the digital timepiece on mr. hoyer's web site marking the passage of legislative time as house democrats push their ''hundred hours for a new direction'' agenda through congress.  mr. cogorno, 50, is a neatly dressed, precise and exacting man whose shiny desktop in the majority leader's office holds a neat stack of newspapers and a canister of purell hand sanitizer. he wakes promptly at 6:20 a.m. (by digital clock radio set to npr) and has prided himself on being punctual since his parents gave him a mickey mouse watch when he was 6.  mr. cogorno tells time by his blackberry, but charts the official passage of ''legislative time'' by the stately face clock that looms above the house floor.  ''we're only counting legislative hours,'' mr. cogorno says in response to the question he has volleyed repeatedly this week. ''legislative time'' he explains, occurs when the house is in session and toiling at some official function -- debating, voting or doing anything related to making laws. it does not count designated periods in which members can bloviate on all manner of things (say, the plumage of a state bird or the efforts of a national championship football team).  in the event of a dispute? ''we decide what constitutes the 100 hours,'' said stacey bernards, a hoyer spokeswoman. chiefly, mr. cogorno decides. it is a monumental charge.  the clock, which is also on speaker nancy pelosi's web site, was set to start running at noon. (you could imagine parents waking their newborns to catch the epic moment on c-span.) alas, noon arrived with a failure to launch or tick. mr. hoyer's office issued a news release at 12:02 p.m. titled ''update on house democrats' 100 hours clock.'' the clock, it said, ''will begin ticking'' at approximately 1:30 p.m.  at 1 p.m. many members were contemplating lunch and wondering whether the clock had started.  ''i think it has, yes,'' said representative ellen o. tauscher, democrat of california.  ''jeez, i don't know,'' said representative don young, republican of alaska. ''i don't have one of those hourglasses.''  mr. young said he expected that republicans would be given stopwatches ''with those little mickey mouse thingies on them'' to keep track. either way, he says, he doesn't give a squeak.  ''hmm, let's find out,'' said representative dennis j. kucinich, democrat of ohio, when asked at 2:20 p.m. if the 100 hours had started. he picked up a phone at a security station, called the democratic cloakroom and asked for someone named bob.  yes, mr. kucinich reported, the heady hours commenced at exactly 12:57 p.m. when the house began debate on carrying out the recommendations of the sept. 11 commission.  or did they?  ''the clock started at 1 p.m.,'' mr. cogorno corrected, with the certitude of someone who has the final say.  like many other congressional staff members, mr. cogorno, who joined mr. hoyer's office in 2003 after working for richard a. gephardt, the former democratic house leader, finds that these are busy hours. clockwatching duties fell to him as a top aide to mr. hoyer, who is in charge of scheduling bills.  for a keepsake, mr. cogorno said he would make a printout of the official clock on mr. hoyer's web site when it hit its 100th hour, which might not occur until the end of next week because of gratuitous speeches (the kinds that do not count as legislative time), motions or scheduling obstacles.  he also said he intended to make a printout of the clock at 1 p.m., when the 100 hours began -- except 1 p.m. had already come and gone almost two hours before this interview took place. so the souvenir would require him to turn back the clock, which democrats say they are loath to do these days.  the 110th congress  