a cultural gulf that you can invest in   in one election after another, american voters have shown that they are sharply divided along partisan lines. now, americans have a new way to demonstrate whether they lean red or blue: through their choice of a mutual fund.  two funds started recently by blue investment management, a new york fund company that is less than a year old, will limit their holdings to companies that donate the majority of their political contributions to democrats.  on the other side of the aisle, action fund management, based in potomac, md., created the free enterprise action fund in 2005. this may be the closest thing to a republican-red mutual fund. the managers intend to lobby the companies in the portfolio whenever they think shareholders' money is being wasted on social causes.  whether it is possible to make a decent profit by investing in the funds remains to be seen, but for some investors that may not even be the point.  of course, some funds have long taken stands on certain political or moral issues. in the 1980s, there were funds that did not invest in south africa because of apartheid; and as far back as the 1950s and 1960s, some funds refused to own shares of cigarette makers or military contractors, noted geoffrey h. bobroff, a fund industry consultant in east greenwich, r.i. and funds that focus on what they call socially responsible investing have gathered steam since the early 1990s.  but the blue funds and the free enterprise action fund are much more overtly political. russel kinnel, director of mutual fund research at morningstar, compared the new funds to affinity credit cards that make small donations to causes when cardholders charge purchases.  but mr. kinnel criticized the expense ratios of the free enterprise and blue funds, which are essentially run like index funds. free enterprise action and the blue small-cap fund charge annual expenses of 1.75 percent; blue large-cap charges 1.5 percent. the average for a socially screened index fund is 0.85 percent, according to morningstar.  high expenses can be a drag on total returns. the free enterprise action fund lagged the standard & poor's 500-stock index by about five percentage points in 2006. ''i think it would be much smarter to invest in a good fund and donate some portion of the proceeds to whatever cause you want to help,'' mr. kinnel said.  the first concern of any investor in these funds may well be their political agendas, which are splashed all over the companies' web sites (www.freeenterpriseactionfund.com and www.bluefund.com).  the blue site says the funds will invest only in companies that both ''act blue'' and ''give blue.'' the free enterprise action fund site says the managers want to wage shareholder proxy campaigns to ''promote the american system of free enterprise.'' the blue funds operate much the way traditional socially screened funds do, eliminating companies they regard as having poor environmental records, for example.  but what really sets the blue funds apart is their exclusion of companies that make less than 51 percent of their political donations to democrats. although the funds do not have any official connections to the democratic party, the funds' managers, daniel de faro adamson and joseph j. andrew (a former democratic national chairman) plan to meet with finance chiefs of democratic political campaigns and union pension funds to ask them to become blue fund investors.  after the winnowing process, few companies make the cut: only about 75 in the s.& p. 500 index qualify for the large-cap fund, and about 370 in the russell 2000 make the small-cap fund. the only sector not included is energy; no companies in that category satisfied all the requirements.  the free enterprise action fund does not exclude stocks based on social or political criteria. it now includes the 450 largest stocks in the s.& p. 500. the managers view the fund as a platform from which to start shareholder proxy battles -- so all the better if bad apples are included. ''the corporation has become an extension of the cultural battle in our society,'' said steven milloy, co-manager of the fund. ''thirty or 40 years ago, before all of this social investing started, companies were just in business to make money. now corporations are being hijacked by various activist groups.''  mr. milloy has decided that if you can't beat 'em, join 'em. for example, he opposes the decision by fedex, the package delivery company to buy hybrid trucks.  this probably won't surprise the readers of mr. milloy's column for foxnews.com or his blog, junkscience.com, where he disputes the science behind global warming. he was an adjunct scholar at the cato institute, a conservative research organization, before leaving to start the mutual fund in 2005.  thomas borelli is the other co-manager. he retired a few years ago from the altria group, which was formerly known as philip morris.  the managers of the blue funds also intend to engage in shareholder activism. mr. adamson said they would raise objections whenever they saw a company falling short of what they see as progressive values. ''i think companies are like people,'' he said. ''no person or company is completely good or completely bad.''  all three of these funds might have appeal in a polarized electorate, but mr. bobroff doubted that investors would get much political bang for their buck: the funds are too small, he said. free enterprise action has about $10 million in assets; the two blue funds -- which started taking in money only a few months ago and do not yet have ticker symbols -- have about $1 million combined.  ''they would need to have several hundred million to get people's attention,'' mr. bobroff said.  mutual funds report  