3 relatives of plotter are held by officials   the parents and sister of a man convicted of conspiring to bomb the herald square subway station were detained yesterday by federal immigration authorities, who have been seeking to deport them to pakistan.  the arrests came a day after the convicted man, shahawar matin siraj, 24, was sentenced in united states district court in brooklyn to 30 years in prison.  the family, who came to the united states in 1999, had been seeking asylum since 2003, citing religious persecution in their home country.  a spokesman for immigration and customs enforcement said that mr. siraj's father, siraj abdul rehman, 54, was arrested because a final deportation order had been filed against him. but a lawyer for the family said his case was still under appeal.  the agency spokesman, mark thorn, said that the man's mother, shahina parveen, 50, and his sister, sanya siraj, 19, were arrested and detained on immigration violations.  mr. thorn said that the mother and daughter would be given due process and that their cases would be heard by an immigration judge. he said he could provide no more information, because it was the agency's policy not to discuss case details. mr. thorn could not explain why the action was taken yesterday, other than to say that the detention was part of an administrative process and that criminal cases take priority over administrative ones. it was unclear why the criminal case against mr. siraj would have delayed the detentions.  the lawyer for the family, mona shah, disputed that a final order of removal had been entered against mr. rehman. she said he still has an appeal pending before the united states court of appeals for the second circuit.  ''it's absolutely disgusting that they've picked him up under the guise of a deportation order,'' ms. shah said yesterday. ''fine, punish the son. but why punish them like this?''  she could not offer an explanation for the timing of the move, but suggested that it might stem from pressure on the authorities because the family's immigration status was cited in news reports about mr. siraj's case.  the immigration status of mr. rehman's wife and daughter hinge on his asylum case, ms. shah said. all three were picked up at their home in jackson heights, queens, early yesterday morning. mr. thorn said they will be held at an immigration and customs enforcement facility in elizabeth, n.j.  mr. siraj, who was convicted on may 24 of conspiring to place an explosive device in the herald square subway station in 2004, had also filed for asylum on the same grounds as his father, religious persecution.  ms. shah said that all members of the family are ismaili muslims, a sect that she said has been mistreated in pakistan. she said family members had been robbed and attacked several times. ''they would be subject to torture and harassment if they returned,'' she said.  but prosecutors during mr. siraj's trial in the bomb plot suggested that he had lied to immigration authorities in his asylum request. they cited his own testimony in an earlier hearing, when he had first told immigration authorities that he did not fear harm if he returned to his native pakistan. but later, in mr. siraj's asylum application, prosecutors pointed out that he said he was afraid.  also, on tapes secretly recorded by a police informer and played at his trial, he said he had no fear of returning to pakistan and spoke about influential family members who served as judges and magistrates. he also said he had rich and influential friends and friends on the police force.  he was recorded telling the informer that he planned to conduct surveillance of the subway station tied to his bomb plot immediately after attending an immigration hearing in lower manhattan. testimony also showed that he had discussed entering into a marriage only to get citizenship.  ms. shah acknowledged that immigration authorities have some discretion about how to proceed and whether to detain people whose cases are pending, but she was bothered by yesterday's arrests.  ''they're not supposed to detain halfway through a case,'' she said, calling the action ''an absolute uneven use'' of the discretion.  ''you do not give someone the freedom of being not detained and then suddenly pick them up,'' she said.  