another wound from war: perversely eroticized power   josh fox, an esteemed member of the avant-garde theater world in new york, is a young playwright of ferocious passion who seems to consider himself a big pitchfork hurtling toward our most egregiously held cultural and political fictions. his themes -- that americans are anxious and alienated from one another, that estrangement breeds violence, and impulsivity, misfortune -- lack the controversial effect that his visually elaborate stagings assume. and so it is to his credit that his latest piece, ''you belong to me: death of nations, part v,'' produced by his international wow company, engages an idea with which his audience may not find easy and immediate sympathy.  ''you belong to me,'' the fifth installment of mr. fox's play cycle about the various horrors of millennial life, made its debut at performance space 122 on friday night as part of a winter arts festival. what interests mr. fox here is war's impact on marital and sexual life and the provocative notion that it animates our darkest intimate longings, actualizing dormant fantasies of dominance and ill will until they become demonstrable pathology.  mr. fox's three-act play, which he also directed, moves from a southern plantation on the final day of the civil war to an affluent german home at the end of world war ii to a present-day united states military hospital in germany that treats americans who have fought in iraq. what links these wars and presumably all others is a residual of eroticized madness. in each of mr. fox's depictions, women left behind remain unhinged (in two instances, feloniously so), as if he were saying that wives and girlfriends robbed of war's opportunity to exert power will perversely find some other way to do it, as predictably as they will choose their husbands' ties for church.  the problem here is that the fundamental premise of ''you belong to me'' simply feels untrue, and mr. fox digresses from it enough to suggest that he is not entirely convinced himself. the third act features a recording of lionel richie's ''hello'' and two actors in giant animal costumes (the kind people wear to hand out coupons in front of a wendy's) who appear in the service of nothing.  irene christ, playing the mistress of the german household -- a woman who beds an american soldier wearing a silk slip beneath his military garb -- does the best job of communicating the play's manic pitch. but she can't save it from mr. fox's occasionally clotted thinking. he needed a sieve, and he is smart and capable enough to rattle around his mental kitchen to find one.  ''you belong to me: death of nations, part v'' continues through jan. 23 at performance space 122, 150 first avenue, at ninth street, east village; (212) 352-3101 or ps122.org.  theater review  