the ununited states, when it comes to the weather   western europe often experiences extremes of weather in a uniform way, as when a catastrophic summer heat wave in 2003 in a half-dozen countries caused the deaths of thousands of people.  in the united states, which spans a continent, there is almost never a shared sense of meteorological misery -- as was made vividly clear when epic snows buried denver as if two winters hit back to back while the northeast basked in warmth that seemed to render the whole idea of seasons meaningless.  some climate experts muse that the innately variegated climate across the country might help explain why it has taken longer for human-caused global warming to rise to the level of a national priority here than in europe.  this is not a testable hypothesis, and the experts note that many other factors contribute to varied attitudes on the issue, ranging from contrasting cultural and political biases to different levels of dependence on oil and coal or the industries that profit from them. but they do see the climate issue compounded here by how normal it is to have abnormal -- and very different -- conditions around the country.  ''what happened in europe was everybody experienced the same things,'' said michael maccracken, who spent 32 years studying climate change for the energy department and now works at the climate institute, a nonprofit group in washington.  ''often mainland europe gets a common flooding event,'' he said. ''their rivers connect everything so they feel it all the way down the rhine or the danube.''  in the lower 48 states, he said, conditions are shaped by variable patterns of warming and cooling in the pacific and atlantic oceans, the atmospheric blockade created by the rockies and other factors.  this essentially guarantees that the country is almost always experiencing more than one so-called weather anomaly at a time, dr. maccracken said.  ''people live the weather,'' he said. ''climate is a mental construct.''  michael mann, a climatologist at pennsylvania state university, said the varied influences on the north american climate not only inhibited a common appreciation for current climate extremes but also made it harder to project how conditions in a particular region would change should heat-trapping smokestack and tailpipe gases continue to build in the atmosphere.  he has another theory about why washington, particularly, has lagged even as some states and cities have moved ahead to limit such emissions.  ''the east coast of the united states, and particularly the mid-atlantic region, did not warm nearly as much as rest of globe over the 20th century,'' dr. mann said. ''and that's where the decision-making is going on.''  ideas & trends  