a journey to ethiopia, citified yet authentic   the modish, minimalist décor tips you off that things are a little different at zoma, a new ethiopian restaurant just north of central park on fredrick douglass boulevard.  the azifa confirms it.  at zoma, that well-spiced heap of lentil salad flecked through with onions and chilies ($4) isn't served on injera flatbread as it is elsewhere. instead, it arrives at the table cradled in leaves of endive, like a canapé you might poach from a passed platter at a cocktail party.  it's one of the touches that give the food at zoma a tonier, more citified treatment than it gets at other ethiopian restaurants in new york.  the proprietors employ broad white platters instead of the more traditional metal trays and have a short beer, wine and cocktail list.  dishes like tibs wett, beef and the spice mix called berbere slowly simmered into a delicious whole, are more lightly sauced, not swimming in spice-infused butter ($13). it's not ethiopian lite, per se, it's just that the kitchen manages to avoid the warm, welcoming arms of buttery overkill. even the injera seems a little healthier: it's a shade or two darker than some and a touch less spongy than most. butter and relative sponginess aside, the kitchen's sure hand with spice and seasoning ensures that flavor is never in short supply.  the combination platters are the best way to sample a range of dishes and are the best values by a stretch. the menu says they feed two, but, with an appetizer, there's plenty for three.  the vegetarian combination ($17) includes heaping dollops of all seven vegetable and legume preparations from the menu. each is clean and distinct, but the shiro wett, toasted and ground legumes boldly seasoned and simmered forever in the berbere-flavored wett sauce, struck the strongest chord.  the shiro wett (the spelling used here, though it is sometimes rendered wat or wot) showed up again on the doro wett combination platter ($19). the doro wett is a mess of chicken drumsticks that have seen the same simmering and spicing treatment as the other wett dishes, and is the best meat preparation at zoma. the night i tried it, the chicken was cooked to a perfect point of tenderness. it yielded to just the tiniest tug of injera-enrobed fingers, slipping off into the assertive and buttery (but not too buttery) sauce.  you might be tempted to wash down the meal with a bottle of tej, ethiopian-style honey wine made by brotherhood winery in washingtonville, n.y., or with some of the restaurant's custom cocktails. but unless drinks like supersweet one-dimensional wine or a harlem raging bull cocktail (red bull, tequila, vodka and lime) are your idea of good companions to food, it might be best to stick to beer or wine. (the only thing wrong with a friend's martini was its bathtub-like size, though that might not be a bad thing, depending on what you need to do the next morning.)  the dining room at zoma can feel unwelcoming when it's empty -- a sea of wobbly black tables set against sparsely adorned walls.  a stepped lightbox on the back bar doubles as a display for bottles of booze and as one of the chief sources of illumination in the room. as a result the votive candles on the table are a must for reading the menu.  but as the room fills up -- and it does seem to be popular enough already to fill up around 9 p.m. some nights -- it warms up. and the well-intentioned, if occasionally overwhelmed, servers are quick with a smile regardless of the hour.  zoma  2084 frederick douglass boulevard (113th street), harlem; (212) 662-0620.  best dishes -- doro wett, shiro wett, both dishes with collard greens in them.  price range -- appetizers, $4 to $6; main courses, $7 to $15; combination platters, $17 to $19.  credit cards -- visa and mastercard.  hours -- monday though thursday, 4 p.m. to 11 p.m.; friday, saturday and sunday, noon to 11 p.m.  wheelchair access -- all on one level.  $25 and under  