in hevesi's seat, rising potential for party split   just days after being sworn in with a 19-gun salute, gov. eliot spitzer is facing his first major political challenge -- and it comes, perhaps surprisingly, from his fellow democrats who control the state assembly.  the initial flashpoint is over mr. spitzer's demand that in replacing comptroller alan g. hevesi, who resigned as part of his guilty plea for defrauding the state, the legislature should select an independent outsider with financial expertise. the administration is said to be considering outside candidates.  but several assembly democrats are campaigning openly for the position, and many of their colleagues are complaining that assembly service should not disqualify them from consideration.  on top of that, the state constitution leaves the choice of the new comptroller to the legislature, with the assembly democrats specifically controlling the choice. even lawmakers who do not want the post say that the governor should not be the one to select the official who will audit his agencies.  but the potential divisions are wider than that. throw in the fact that mr. spitzer sprinkled his first address to the legislature with several proposals traditionally championed by republicans -- from adding more charter schools to passing a law to allow the state to civilly confine sex offenders who have served their prison terms to overhauling some laws favored by unions -- and some assembly democrats were quietly questioning what kind of relationship they will have with the governor they supported as a candidate.  the fault lines were evident when mr. spitzer went into the assembly chamber on wednesday for his first address to a joint session of the legislature: republican state senators were much quicker to jump to their feet and applaud the new governor than the assembly democrats.  it all puts sheldon silver, the speaker of the assembly, in a delicate position. after 12 years as the voice of the loyal opposition to a republican governor, mr. silver is now a booster and wingman for mr. spitzer, a fellow democrat.  so last week he said that mr. spitzer's speech deserved an ''a,'' spoke enthusiastically about the spitzer agenda, and made it clear that he would seriously consider mr. spitzer's views on replacing the comptroller. but the speaker also has to keep the members of the democratic conference happy.  some lawmakers worry that mr. spitzer, who has been vocal in his denunciation of albany's gridlock and dysfunction, holds the whole legislature in disdain. ''dysfunction should not be painted with a broad brush,'' said assemblyman keith l. t. wright of harlem, who supports a fellow assemblyman, richard l. brodsky, for comptroller.  adding insult to injury, several assembly democrats said last week, was mr. spitzer's choice of a republican state senator, michael a. l. balboni of nassau county, as his deputy secretary for public safety. that left some democrats feeling doubly aggrieved, as they wandered the capitol asking why the governor believed that a republican lawmaker could protect the state, but that democratic lawmakers could not guard its finances.  but mr. spitzer was elected with wide support from republican parts of the state, and in governing he also must court the republicans who control the state senate. (of course, by tapping mr. balboni, the governor gave the democrats a chance to gain another seat in the senate.)  several lawmakers, including those supporting assembly candidates for the comptroller's post, say they expect that in the end the governor and the speaker will agree on a candidate, more likely than not, from outside the assembly.  noting that the comptroller is the sole trustee of the state's $145.7 billion pension fund, the spitzer administration continues to push for an outsider with business experience to run for comptroller, and officials say it has been actively trying to recruit possible candidates.  christine anderson, a spokeswoman for the governor, would say only that ''the desire remains to find someone who is the most qualified, who can be trusted to be objective -- someone outside of government.''  but new york's comptroller has many other responsibilities, from auditing the state agencies controlled by the governor to approving or blocking contracts, most of which are issued by the executive branch, to monitoring the state budget.  and in recent years, the legislature and the governor have agreed that if they cannot reach consensus on their forecast of how much revenue the state will take in -- the number that helps set the size of the budget -- they would rely on the comptroller's projections.  assemblyman william l. parment, a democrat from western new york, said that while it was appropriate for mr. spitzer to say what kind of candidate he would like to see, he should stay out of the selection process.  ''the governor really shouldn't be involved in the selection of the next comptroller because the office needs to be perceived by the public to be independent of the administration; it needs to be in fact independent from the administration,'' he said, noting that for most of the last few decades voters have elected comptrollers of different political parties from the governor.  a history of the comptroller's office by arthur levitt, who spent 24 years as state comptroller beginning in 1955 and is often credited with redefining the office, shows the perils of appointed comptrollers. it says that new york's first comptroller, samuel jones (a state senator from queens county), was appointed in 1797, with gov. john jay casting the deciding vote. but three years later, when mr. jones warned the legislature that it had to raise taxes or cut expenses, it chose that latter -- cutting his salary. he resigned.  but mr. hevesi's agreement to resign his four-year term before it even begins leaves the legislature in the extremely unusual position of picking a comptroller for almost an entire term.  the vote will be taken of all 212 lawmakers, from both houses, voting as a whole -- meaning that 107 votes will decide the matter. since there are 108 democrats in the assembly, mr. silver, the assembly speaker, essentially gets to choose.  there are at least five democratic assemblymen seeking the job -- including mr. brodsky, of westchester; thomas p. dinapoli of nassau county; alexander b. grannis of manhattan; joseph d. morelle of the rochester area, and felix w. ortiz of brooklyn.  several said in interviews that comptrollers are not just stock pickers, but politicians who manage the 2,400 professionals in the comptroller's office, most of whom are civil servants, and decide the direction that the office takes.  outsiders who have been mentioned as possible candidates include carol bellamy, former executive director of unicef, the first woman elected president of the new york city council and a former managing director for bear stearns; and william j. mulrow, an investment banker close to mr. spitzer who ran for comptroller in 2002, among others.  between the bad blood over the comptroller's race, and mr. spitzer's decision to highlight both democratic and republican priorities in his address to the legislature, it was perhaps not too surprising that republican senators sounded at times more enthusiastic than their democratic counterparts this week.  shortly after mr. spitzer's speech, senator william j. larkin jr., a hudson valley republican, said, ''i thought it was a senate republican agenda that he was talking about.''  but senator eric t. schneiderman, a manhattan democrat, saw strategy in the new governor's decision to include priorities from both houses in his speech. ''it is like he was fast-forwarding to the end of the session, when the deals usually get made,'' he said. ''the governor was saying: 'here are everybody's issues, let's get to work now.' ''  