what's on tonight   7 p.m. (speed) nascar preseason thunder -- racing suit feeling a little tight? now that the holidays are over, some 25 teams of nascar drivers are participating in the three-day nextel cup series testing, the annual preseason mental and physical gut-check held at the daytona international speedway (above) in preparation for speedweek 2007, running feb. 14 through 19.  8 p.m. (13) nova science now -- next floor, outer space. neil degrasse tyson, the director of the hayden planetarium and the  show's host, investigates attempts to build a 22,000-mile-high space elevator, for which one company has already constructed a  prototype, to transport cargo and passengers out of the planet's atmosphere. other topics include aging, a new way for unearthing  mayan ruins, and a biologist who studies small-talk on a microscopic level.  8 p.m. (discovery) really big things -- in this new technology and invention series, matt rogers travels the globe to prove that, in some cases, size does matter, starting with the sinking unit that places concrete mattresses along the banks of the mississippi river to help prevent bank erosion; the rammer hammer used to break ore in the arctic circle, and the world's largest paper mill.  9 p.m. (fox) house -- it's shocking, simply shocking! house (hugh laurie, right) reveals startling information in order to save himself from serving jail time. meanwhile; a firefighter chooses a risky, radical brain treatment so that he can keep a secret.  9 p.m. (nbc) law & order: criminal intent -- child's play? when the granddaughter of lady harrington (doris roberts, in a guest role), a socialite, is murdered, detectives goren and eames go looking for the father of the victim's daughter. turns out he's a married man she met at a nearby playground. and that's not the only secret the harrington family is keeping.  9 p.m. (abc) big day -- places, everyone. jane's ex-boyfriend shows up, making steve jealous; lorna hires a new photographer, her ex-fiancé -- who dumped her -- and danny suddenly gets cold feet. at 9:30, the garf learns that steve does not want alice to  marry danny. is that why the bride and groom are nowhere to be found?  9 p.m. (cbs) the 33rd annual people's choice awards -- queen latifah is host of this awards ceremony in which viewers do the voting. no surprises here: nominees include jennifer aniston for favorite female movie star and, with her former beau vince vaughn, favorite on-screen match-up.  10 p.m. (abc) boston legal -- the effervescent nia long (left) joins the cast as vanessa walker, an ambitious baby eagle among the grizzled vultures of crane, poole & schmidt. first stop: new orleans, where she, denny and alan will defend a doctor accused of performing euthanasia on patients during hurricane katrina.  kathryn shattuck  