rangel says encouraging obama on '08 is no big deal   are charles b. rangel's loyalties mixed?  mr. rangel, the longtime harlem congressman, has let it be known he encouraged barack obama to run for president, which could complicate the presidential ambitions of mr. rangel's fellow new york democrat, hillary rodham clinton.  ''i told him if he didn't run, he'd regret it, and that he's a young man and he ought to test the waters,'' mr. rangel said in an interview yesterday, echoing comments he made on msnbc and that will appear in the coming issue of new york magazine.  he said he also told mr. obama that he was following mrs. clinton's moves ''and that as dean of the new york delegation, i had obligations, and he would have to understand that,'' mr. rangel said.  asked if that meant he would support mrs. clinton, he said it was too early to say. and he added, ''i got a call recently from my good friend wes clark who said he's still contemplating entering the race.''  though neither has announced a candidacy, mr. obama is seen as mrs. clinton's biggest obstacle as she prepares for a 2008 run. her advance work has included an effort to build a united front among new york democrats, including mr. rangel. the two met in late november to discuss her plans, about the same time he spoke with mr. obama, he said.  mr. rangel called the importance of having a united state delegation ''relative.''  ''it's not the end of the world if we split,'' he said, though it is better to be united.  on msnbc last week, mr. rangel said of mr. obama: ''he's brilliant, he's talented. he's not tested, but who could be with the limited political experience?'' he said that democrats ''should have as many exciting candidates up front as we can get, so we can find out who's electable and who can best lead our country.''  herman d. farrell jr., chairman of the state democratic party, was unfazed by mr. rangel's advice to mr. obama. ''with two years to go before the next presidential election, it's an acceptable position,'' he said. ''a year from now, we'll talk.''  