a night out with: stacey bendet; yoga on the rocks   stacey bendet, 28, the lively titan behind the five-year-old design label alice + olivia, stretched herself across a half-filled table of friends at kobe club, a new steakhouse in midtown. addressing everyone present, she asked, ''can we get the bowl of punch?''  ''is that the punch that made you vomit last time?'' replied her friend paula froelich, a gossip columnist for the new york post.  ''yeah,'' ms. bendet said with a shrug, ''but it's their signature drink.''  considering she invented a signature line of clothing (her shape-hugging low-rise pants earned her the moniker staceypants), her reasoning seemed apt. that night, she was dressed in full alice + olivia -- black silk and mesh polka-dot minidress over a black bodysuit and white leggings -- and had invited eight friends to a night of dinner and barhopping. with her third boutique, near bryant park, having just opened in october, and design meetings done, ms. bendet wanted to unwind. kobe club would seem an interesting choice for a vegetarian.  ''last time it was so fun,'' ms. bendet said, unconcerned with contradictions perhaps because she is one. her carefree manner belies a work ethic that would make john calvin beam. she designs five collections a year and is often mistaken for a clerk at barneys because of covert visits in which she reorganizes the alice + olivia racks and display cases.  kobe club was teeming with bankers (not fun), and three friends were late. while she waited, ms. bendet tucked her terry de havilland silver python platform wedges under herself, took a sweeping look around the room and checked her blackberry before turning to the menu.  she waxed enthusiastic about the lauren salad. ''it's like so good,'' she said. ''it's like my favorite.''  ms. bendet's boyfriend, eric eisner, and her business partner, andrew rosen, finally arrived. when half the table got up for a smoke, ms. bendet said in her baby voice: ''i'm the yoga person, i don't smoke. i just go to yoga drunk sometimes.'' then she began rearranging the night's plans. after kobe club, would it be the anchor, double seven and then bungalow 8, or beatrice inn, the anchor and then double seven?  ''i change my mind all the time,'' she said, once again checking her blackberry. ''i can't sit for that long.'' stuck to the back of the device were nearly rubbed-away stickers of her role models, madonna and hello kitty.  on the car ride down to the anchor in the west village, the model devon aoki, a longtime friend of ms. bendet's, got a text message from her brother, steve.  ''he's spinning tonight at stereo,'' ms. aoki said.  ms. bendet, her eyes trained on her blackberry, responded, ''we should fully go see him.'' but the cab continued on.  it was opening night for the anchor, and there were white frosted vanilla cupcakes. coy and grinning, ms. bendet smeared the frosting onto the face of her best friend, anthony akselrad. being a good sport, he smiled and wiped it off. margarita in hand, ms. bendet saucily added a signature drink to the chalkboard menu (misspelling patrón): ''the pantserita. petron silver. fresh lime,'' then drew an equal sign and a smiley face.  an hour and a new bar later (beatrice inn, on west 12th street), someone reached for ms. bendet's drink, and she spoke like a true designer. ''that's your drink,'' she said, pointing to another glass. ''it has a golden hue. i'm very color-sensitive.''  soon, her jacket was on and she was ready to move again. maybe she would head to stereo or double seven. maybe home. or perhaps, at nearly 4 a.m., with a few margaritas under her belt, she'd go to yoga.  a night out with stacey bendet  