wisconsin defeats ohio state in a clash of top-5 teams   for one of the few times all game, wisconsin fans at the kohl center turned oddly silent. a badgers victory that 10 minutes earlier seemed assured was suddenly in peril, and many held their breath as jamar butler's 3-point attempt to tie the score descended toward the cylinder in the final seconds.  when the ball clanged off the back rim, and the horn sounded before an ohio state player could reach it, the third-ranked badgers had escaped with a 72-69 victory over the no. 5 buckeyes on tuesday night. and butler, who shot from the right wing in front of the ohio state bench, turned toward his coaches and teammates with a look of disbelief.  ''from my standpoint,'' ohio state coach thad matta said, ''i'm glad we can check this off on the places we have to go.''  the badgers (16-1, 2-0 big ten) had done what they usually do at kohl, especially against ranked teams. led by kammron taylor's season-high 25 points, and sparked by the sophomore forward marcus landry's 8 points and 4 blocks off the bench in the second half, the badgers improved to 13-2 against ranked teams here in four seasons under coach bo ryan. their 85-5 overall mark includes 40-2 in big ten play.  a 14-0 run midway through in the second half enabled wisconsin to take a 16-point lead. after joe krabbenhoft's layup began the run, landry blocked shots by othello hunter and daequan cook in the same sequence, energizing the crowd. michael flowers then stole the ball from cook and drove for a layup. ohio state (13-3, 2-1) missed six shots and committed four turnovers before scoring again.  ''we took advantage of some hustle opportunities,'' ryan said. ''we took advantage of some long rebounds. sometimes you can get that in transition. when we had the opportunity to run, we did.''  alando tucker, the badgers' leading scorer, had a slow first half, missing 7 of 10 shots and even air-balling a free throw. but he contributed two big baskets in the run. he drove for a layup after flowers pushed the ball upcourt, and he added a pumping put-back in the lane just before the shot clock expired.  ''i've made a lot of difficult shots,'' tucker said. ''this is up there with them. it's just determination.''  wisconsin's defense held ohio state's two leading scorers, cook and the 7-foot freshman center greg oden, to a combined 15 points, less than half their average. cook shot 1 for 8 from the field for 5 points. oden (10 points, 7 rebounds and 6 blocks) had a quiet game until dunking twice in the final 37 seconds.  ''it was an all-around great team effort -- marcus stepping in, and joe always does a solid job,'' tucker said. ''defensively, we did well almost the whole game. at the end, they hit some shots and it was like, wow.''  that was when things got interesting. ohio state began fouling with the badgers ahead by 10 and 1 minute 4 seconds to play. but wisconsin made 4 of 7 free throws, ron lewis hit two 3-pointers, and suddenly oden's second dunk with eight seconds left made it a 2-point game. taylor, fouled with seven seconds left, made the first but missed the second, giving butler his chance.  it had been more than decade since ohio state played a game in which both teams were ranked in the top five. in 1992, the no. 4 buckeyes lost to indiana, which was no. 5. wisconsin had never played such a game because it had never been ranked higher than sixth before this season.  for the badgers, this has been a season of uncommon success. their 15-1 start going into the game matched the best in team history. wisconsin had already beaten two ranked teams: marquette and pittsburgh.  the buckeyes lost both previous games this season to ranked teams: north carolina and florida, the top two teams in the latest a.p. poll.  college basketball  