a cool gadget here, an a-list chieftain there   with the end of the holidays comes a fresh start and new resolve to lead a loftier, healthier, simpler life. maybe it's time to tend the garden, take up the harpsichord or read proust. then, before you know it, everyone in the media business hops on planes to las vegas and swarms the consumer electronics show, which starts today.  more than the oscars, the emmys, the grammys or the endless investment bank conferences and guru gatherings where media honchos strut, c.e.s., as the event is known, has quickly emerged in the last few years as the super bowl of cluster-huddles. over the next few days, 150,000 people will jam convention center floors in the nevada desert.  sure, most of the people darting around the endless rows of display booths are either representatives of electronics, computer or software companies that are showing off their wares, or are buyers from retail chains trying to figure out what the must-have gizmo will be next christmas.  but for the first time this year, the consumer electronics association, host for the palaver, has tallied the number of media industry -- or ''content,'' as they put it -- attendees: about 10,000. the media chieftains leslie moonves of cbs and robert a. iger of the walt disney company will occupy two of five slots for industry keynote speeches, which are increasingly seen as symbolically important for showing everyone how brilliant and tech-savvy one's company is and how glorious its future is shaping up to be.  last year, the keynote speakers included sir howard stringer of sony, terry s. semel of yahoo and larry page of google, accompanied on stage by the likes of tom hanks and tom cruise, robin williams and dan brown, author of ''the da vinci code.'' peter a. chernin of the news corporation was the featured speaker at a big dinner the electronics association held for dignitaries.  in other words, this is the chance for media biggies to show that they know their bluetooth from their blu-ray, their outkast from their comcast.  but there are deeper tensions in the hospitality suites as the corporate titans combine and recombine themselves in various consortiums and partnerships with gadget makers and web giants with hopes of getting a jump on the next guy.  every time i've been to las vegas, at c.e.s. or otherwise, i have marveled at the incongruity amid the theme park architecture, pulsing lights and thumping music -- and at how many glum faces there are in the crowds and at the casino tables. there's a lot more losing going on than winning.  the question this year is: which technologies can hollywood throw its resources behind to generate the next wave of profits? after all, dvd growth has slowed, radio is struggling to find new revenues, the music industry continues to grasp for footing and the television business is on the brink of reinvention.  last year, americans spent $150 billion on all manner of devices needed to play, watch, communicate and learn. and so it is no accident that the technology and engineering branch of the emmy awards will hand out its awards at c.e.s. for the first time, and the academy of recording arts and sciences is host for a grammy party on monday night.  gary shapiro, the president of the consumer electronics association, points out that the trade floor will include a ''legal downloading area'' and tells me that dan glickman, head of the motion picture association of america, will be there as his ''special guest.''  it was not ever thus. the first c.e.s., held in the summer of 1967 in new york city, attracted a crowd roughly one-tenth the size of this year's and featured various symposiums and seminars and, according to the c.e.s. web site, an ''all industry'' banquet with an ''all-inclusive price'' of $10 per person.  the first solid-state tv was introduced at that debut show, while the 110 exhibitors -- compared with more than 2,500 today -- showcased the latest in transistor radios, stereos and small-screen black-and-white tvs.  c.e.s. didn't fully begin to draw the media crowd -- the movie and television producers and the music executives -- until the dvd was introduced a decade ago and digital technology took hold. then, of course, the internet ushered in a whole new category of products and web applications like file-sharing that at first blush posed more of an immediate threat than a benefit to existing business models.  another boost for c.e.s.'s profile came when its main rival in the realm of what mr. shapiro calls ''converging industries,'' the computer trade show comdex, sputtered out in 2003.  even five years ago, the media industry was largely at odds with the consumer electronics folks, who in turn were dueling with the computer and software people whose products were increasingly competing for household dominance. hollywood executives sent emissaries to poke around c.e.s. and to report on the latest things to worry about.  mr. shapiro, who spends the rest of his year lobbying for the electronics association, noted that mr. iger's keynote performance would be a milestone because his legendary predecessor, michael d. eisner, was a staunch opponent of the electronics industry on a number of lobbying fronts.  ''i started my career fighting disney on new technologies including the vcr in the 1970s and 1980s,'' mr. shapiro recalled. ''when robert iger came on, it was like a 180-degree switch and i can't tell you how happy i am. instead of fighting them in washington, we're working with them.''  mr. iger's speech is noteworthy in another respect: given the arrival a year ago of steven p. jobs, the apple computer founder, on the board of disney -- where he is also the largest individual shareholder -- closer alliances between disney's content and apple's ipods and other gadgets have been forged.  yet apple is the one company that pointedly sits out c.e.s. in favor of its own clambake, macworld, which this year is even running at the same time as c.e.s., but up in san francisco. it's not exactly nixon coming to china, but mr. iger's appearance in las vegas shows that he is taking the temperature of the times and shrewdly keeping his options open.  and so this week his company, viacom and time warner are just a few of the media businesses expected to announce new ventures during the convention, including the new total hd videodisc from warner brothers. that product is meant to bring détente between warring manufacturers of high-definition dvd players by creating a disc that will work in both machines.  the general rule may still be that what happens in vegas stays in vegas. but what happens at c.e.s. will shape the media battleground for the year ahead. maybe tending the garden can wait until next year.  media frenzy  