home-court advantage   the backyard court where wisconsin guard kammron taylor learned his harshest basketball lessons is gone. taylor's father, kenneth, took down the basket about three years ago, and it hangs, faded and rusty, inside their garage.  but a swath of blue carpeting still covers the garage's only window, a reminder of how kammron and his older brother kerek honed their dribbling skills. kenneth taylor kept the garage pitch dark so the boys would have to dribble without being able to see the ball.  every fundamental skill and instinct kammron taylor brings to the court tuesday night in madison, when the third-ranked badgers (15-1, 1-0 big ten) play host to fifth-ranked ohio state (13-2, 2-0), was developed on the grounds of this split-level home on minneapolis's north side.  madison is where taylor, a 6-foot-2 senior, learned to choose better shots and force fewer passes, traits that make him a key component of a badgers offense built around small forward alando tucker, the big ten scoring leader at 20.2 points a game. taylor averages 12.6 points, second on the team, and his 3-point shooting percentage, 49.1, is among the best in the conference.  but taylor, who resembles the comedian chris rock, credits what he learned at home from his father and brother for getting him to wisconsin and then through a difficult first season, when he hardly played and thought about transferring.  ''my freshman year, it was tough,'' taylor said in a recent telephone interview. ''i can't believe i made it through it. i owe a lot to my family, and especially my brother.''  learning and achieving have been hallmarks of all five taylor children, who followed the example of their parents. kenneth, the son of a steelworker, grew up in gary, ind., as the 15th of 17 children. an army veteran, he teaches physical education at an alternative special education high school. taylor's mother, blondell, an x-ray technologist, attended the university of minnesota part time for nine years to finish her bachelor of science degree while also working and raising a family.  besides emphasizing schoolwork, the taylors required their children -- who all have first names starting with k -- to take up a physical activity. after kerek decided to play basketball, kenneth worked with him. and kammron, the youngest, always tagged along.  their backyard court, a rectangular cement patio, featured an eight-foot basket that kenneth kept below regulation so the boys could shoot with good form rather than push the ball two-handed to reach the rim. kerek, four years older and much stockier than kammron, regularly brutalized his little brother in games of one on one.  ''he dominated me for the most part,'' kammron said. ''i would cry to him and go crying to my dad: 'all my brother is doing is posting me up. he won't let me win.' and my dad would send me right back out and say, 'you've got to learn how to win.' ''  in the darkened garage, the boys dribbled as a boom box played something rhythmic and up-tempo -- ''will smith, or whatever was popular at the time,'' kerek said.  the lessons paid off. kerek was part of two state championship teams at minneapolis north high school and went on to play at gardner-webb university in north carolina. kammron won a state title as an all-state guard at north, where he was also a wideout in football and played no. 1 singles in tennis. their sister krystal, a year older than kammron and a latecomer to basketball, won a state title at north and plays for valparaiso.  four years ago, kammron arrived at wisconsin expecting to play immediately even though the future n.b.a. first-round pick devin harris and three other guards were ahead of him. converted to point guard from shooting guard by coach bo ryan, kammron played only 41 minutes all season.  though kammron said harris and the others ''schooled me all the time in practice,'' he still thought he should be playing. kerek told kammron to stop griping and start working harder in practice.  ''kamm had been a star since fifth grade,'' kerek said. ''from what i gathered, coach ryan got after him really hard. he was just not used to that in a basketball context, having the coach cuss at you, having other point guards on the floor better than you.  ''i kind of got this from my parents: you can either blame somebody else for the situation, or say, 'what did i do to get here, and how do i get out of it?' when you blame somebody else, you're giving another person power over your life.''  by the end of his sophomore year, with harris gone to the n.b.a., taylor had become a fixture in the badgers' lineup. as a junior, he averaged 14.2 points a game, second behind tucker, and lead the badgers in minutes played, 3-pointers and foul-shooting percentage.  although his scoring average is down this season, taylor's 3-point and overall shooting percentages are up significantly. taylor, a combo guard who shares playmaking duties with the junior michael flowers, has averaged 13.6 points in the badgers' current 11-game winning streak. the badgers rarely lose at the kohl center; after last saturday's 68-45 rout of minnesota, wisconsin is 84-5 at home under ryan and 39-2 in the big ten.  ''he's quiet, but effective,'' ryan said. ''it's kind of tough when you have an alando tucker with his type of ability. if alando wasn't here, kamm would be that guy. but it's o.k. to have a couple.''  that newfound maturity has not been lost on the taylor family. ''when we talk,'' kenneth said, ''you can hear the man kammron now instead of the boy kammron.''  college basketball  