if you misplace co-op documents   for home and condo owners, losing a deed is usually no big deal. but for co-op owners, the loss of a share certificate -- and the proprietary lease that goes with it -- will almost always cause a problem, and in some cases can get quite expensive when the time comes to sell or refinance the apartment.  so what happens when a stock certificate and lease can't be found?  ''first, don't panic,'' said stanley simon, a manhattan real estate lawyer. ''the stock certificate and proprietary lease are only pieces of paper, and if they are lost, there are procedures in place to deal with that.''  stuart m. saft, a manhattan real estate lawyer and the chairman of the council of new york cooperatives and condominiums, said the original co-op stock certificate and proprietary lease are important because they are a recognition of who owns an apartment -- or technically, who owns x number of shares in the co-op corporation entitling the shareholder to occupy a particular space, as set forth in the proprietary lease.  when a person buys a home or condominium, mr. saft said, the deed, recorded with the municipality's clerk or registrar, provides that recognition. when the time comes to sell, the fact that the deed has been recorded by the clerk is all that matters. ''if you lose a deed after it's recorded, it's irrelevant,'' he said.  with a co-op, however, there is no procedure to publicly record the share certificate and proprietary lease. as a result, these original documents must be surrendered to the co-op when the apartment is sold in order for the co-op to issue new documents to the buyer.  when a co-op owner finances an apartment, the lender takes physical possession of the original stock certificate and lease. ''and that can create a problem,'' mr. saft said, ''because lenders frequently lose the original documents.''  it is less common but not unheard-of for owners to lose the documents. or, when a shareholder dies, the person handling the estate may not be able to locate them.  what to do?  arthur i. weinstein, a manhattan lawyer who is a vice president of the co-op and condo council, said that the solution can depend on who lost the documents.  when the lender has lost them, he said, the co-op will require the lending institution to provide an affidavit stating so. in addition, it will require the lender to indemnify the co-op -- that is, agree to cover any loss the co-op experiences if someone else eventually claims an interest in the shares.  the lender will typically shoulder the $500 to $1,000 cost associated with submitting the affidavit and indemnification.  things get more complicated when it is the owner who loses the documents.  while most co-ops will accept an affidavit and indemnification from a shareholder, mr. weinstein said, that may not always be prudent. that is because the shareholder simply may not have the resources to back up the indemnification. and if the shareholder disappears, he said, ''what does the co-op do then?''  these issues become even more troublesome when a shareholder has died and the person handling the estate cannot find the stock certificate and lease and knows little or nothing about the decedent's financial affairs.  in either instance, mr. weinstein said, a co-op might insist that the shareholder or the estate provide either a bond or insurance from a title company before it will agree to transfer ownership of the shares and lease. a bond, he said, can cost anywhere from 1 to 3 percent of the sale price, while insurance from a title company can cost about 1.25 percent or less.  ''in either case, when you're selling an apartment worth a few million dollars,'' he said, ''that can be a lot of money.''  your home  