a chance to save social security   to the editor:  re ''and now, a word from chile '' (editorial, dec. 31): you are right in asserting that the failure of chile's privatized old-age security program should be a cautionary lesson for president bush and other would-be privatizers of our social security system. but you are wrong in arguing that ''modest'' benefit cuts are needed to strengthen social security for the long run. any proposal to cut benefits, even ''modestly,'' must collide with two inescapable facts.  first, no one can seriously argue that benefits are too high now and that they are already being cut under current law. second, and more ominous, is the decline of the nation's private pension system and the dwindling of private savings.  social security, intended to function as one of the legs of a three-legged stool supporting economic security in old age, is now the only firm leg. we simply cannot afford to weaken it. nor is there any need to.  three simple steps that are desirable in any case would close social security's long-term revenue shortfall: gradually restoring the practice of collecting taxes on 90 percent of covered incomes; investing some of the trust funds in equities; and dedicating a residual estate tax to social security rather than eliminating the tax entirely, as president bush proposes.  this would be a truly balanced approach, and the democratic-led congress could pass it. we may have to wait until 2009 to get a president to sign it, but if necessary, we can afford to wait a little longer to get social security right.  robert m. ball  mitchellville, md., dec. 31, 2006  the writer was commissioner of social security under presidents kennedy, johnson and nixon.  to the editor:  to assure adequate long-term social security financing, you declare that ''the best solution would involve a combination of modest benefit cuts and modest tax increases.''  the meltdown of employment-based pensions and the devastation of 401(k)s over several recent years make it unwise to reduce social security inflation-proofed benefits. and the elderly -- disproportionately women -- are the poorest of the old and the most heavily dependent on social security. make cuts, and many would fall into poverty.  further, increases in the retirement age unfolding over the next 16 years are already reducing benefits. i urge you to go back to the drawing board.  merton c. bernstein  brewster, mass., dec. 31, 2006  the writer served as principal consultant to the 1982-83 national commission on social security reform.  to the editor:  one essential policy option that can help maintain defined benefits and make social security into a much more stable system: a prudent investment policy for the trust fund.  as prof. franco modigliani and i said in our book, ''rethinking pension reform,'' the only problem with social security is a financing problem. pay-as-you-go systems are vulnerable to small changes in population and economic growth.  the united states has a unique opportunity to maintain social security as a partly financed system, and one critical step is to invest the trust fund and future surpluses in a portfolio of global assets (as opposed to lending this money to the government).  current benefits can be permanently maintained with just a 1.1 percent permanent increase in taxes. this increase is smaller than those under pay-as-you-go and leaves social security less susceptible to changes in demography and economic growth.  arun muralidhar  west windsor, n.j., jan. 1, 2007  