to cross the bridge, job no. 1 is to get on it   you can see them everywhere in the blocks near cadman plaza: lost tourists, brows furrowed over guidebooks, looking for that most elusive of landmarks, the brooklyn bridge.  ''we had to ask four people,'' said kelli parsons, 21, a londoner who on wednesday morning had just found the entrance to the bridge's pedestrian footpath.  ''we're useless,'' puffed her mother, debra.  that morning, dozens of tourists were discovering one of downtown brooklyn's navigational oddities. though the brooklyn bridge is clearly visible from many of the neighborhood's streets, its pedestrian entrances are almost unmarked, and nearly impossible to find without directions.  one entrance is a tiny concrete plaza hidden among five lanes of traffic on adams street, half a mile from the bridge itself, at the end of a long, snaking walkway. the second is a narrow stairway hidden beneath an overpass, marked by a single sign that faces toward a parking lot and the east river.  to make up for the lack of official signage, some unknown good citizen has wired neat hand-painted signs to the fences along the pathways around cadman plaza. and neighborhood people are accustomed to being pressed for directions. ''i get close to 15 people a day,'' said steven delgado, a security guard at a new york city transit repair yard near the overpass. ''they're desperate, trying to get to the bridge. they're confused.''  all that may be about to change. the metrotech business improvement district is producing and putting up 120 orange-and-blue signs throughout downtown brooklyn, in a $1.5 million project subsidized by the city council and the borough president, marty markowitz. sixty of the signs will feature large-scale maps on one side showing major neighborhood features, like the brooklyn bridge and the navy yard, and five or six more will point directly toward the bridge.  ''there are some issues with actually putting signage on the bridge, because it's a landmark,'' said michael weiss, the improvement district's executive director, with a tinge of regret in his voice. ''but we will have one at the foot.''  alex mindlin  neighborhood report: downtown brooklyn  