where the grass is greener   before their relocation to new york from boston, christoffer eriksson and muge tuncel eriksson assumed they could find a home almost as nice as their two-bedroom condominium, which overlooked bunker hill.  but after hunting for a manhattan rental for $2,500 to $3,000 a month, they changed their tune. ''that was fantasyland,'' mr. eriksson said. ''it was not going to happen.'' first, they raised their budget; then, they decided what they could live without.  mrs. eriksson, whose given name (pronounced meh-geh) is turkish, is from lynnfield, mass. after college at the university of massachusetts at amherst, she moved to boston, renting an apartment with a roommate. so did mr. eriksson, who is from karlstad, sweden, and attended green mountain college in poultney, vt.  when the two met playing in a recreational soccer league nearly two years ago, she had just decided to buy a home. for $420,000, she bought a two-bedroom condo in boston's charlestown neighborhood, settling in with barkley, a puggle pup, a cross between a pug and a beagle. the erikssons, both 29, married in august, went on a honeymoon in fiji, put the condo on the market for $445,000, and prepared to move to new york for mr. eriksson's new job in international banking. mrs. eriksson, an event planner for the questex media group, which produces trade shows, switched to her company's new york office.  they decided to rent while they became accustomed to the city. mr. eriksson told sumi vatsa, an agent referred by his company, that his top priority was a location within walking distance of his wife's office on third avenue in the 40s.  in boston, mrs. eriksson drove nearly an hour each way, and ''that was something i wanted to get her away from, so she could have more time for fun stuff,'' he said. ''i wanted muge to be happy. that was the most important thing. she wasn't too keen on the move to new york to begin with.''  he hoped for their own washer and dryer, too, but ms. vatsa told him that was almost impossible. ''so i was, like, o.k., another unpleasant thing to tell my wife,'' he said.  and, without question, they needed a dog-friendly building. ''i am thinking, how am i going to find them what they need, within those parameters?'' said ms. vatsa of warburg realty. she warned them, ''no apartment is going to be perfect.''  because murray hill was geographically desirable, they began at windsor court, one of the neighborhood's dormlike high-rises. ''when i walked in, i said, 'i know this building!' '' mrs. eriksson said. a good friend of hers had lived there just after college.  they saw a one-bedroom shared by roommates but knew that post-collegiate living wasn't for them. ''a poor girl who had a major hangover from a party the night before was still sleeping,'' mr. eriksson said. ''it is the smallest thing that can turn you off in terms of an apartment -- people have been in there smoking cigarettes.''  they were curious about a house on east 27th street renting for well under $3,000. ms. vatsa hadn't seen it. ''i said, 'i don't understand how you can get an entire house for this price, so this is going to be interesting.' ''  they found ''a crazy, wacky, short, squat house'' with a step down to the living area and a kitchen ceiling so low you had to stoop, ms. vatsa said. a dollhouse, mr. eriksson called it. two spiral staircases led to tiny rooms. any visiting parents would have trouble climbing up and down, mrs. eriksson said. so would she. ''it's dangerous,'' she said. ''what if i had to go to the bathroom in the middle of the night?''  an apartment on east 50th street was just blocks from her office, but in a bustling commercial area. proximity was its only advantage. most of the places they saw seemed old, but in a bleak way, ''not a charming way,'' ms. vatsa said.  maybe their budget was insufficient. ''what is the difference between a $3,000 apartment and a $3,500 apartment?'' mr. eriksson said. ''we were looking for at least somewhat of a nicer building and a nicer apartment. if we go up to $3,500, is the grade going to be much different?''  yes, they found when they visited the orion, a new condominium building on west 42nd street, near the port authority bus terminal. a one-bedroom for rent was a negotiable $3,600. the pristine apartment had a lovely view. but neither of them wanted to walk the dog in the commotion near port authority. ''it was just a zoo, it was insane, you get bumped into,'' mrs. eriksson said. besides, the neighborhood was all pavement. out for a walk, barkley won't use the sidewalk or gutter. he needs grass.  the building's laundry room was on the 29th floor, which seemed a waste of a great view, and an inconvenience. ''even though you know no one is going to come and take your clothes, you still don't feel comfortable leaving your clothes there,'' mr. eriksson said. ''plus, thinking about how both of us are, who is going to go up and do laundry?'' it would probably pile up for weeks.  still, they were hopeful. if they found nothing else, they had the orion as a fallback.  but they did find something else, in the windsor park condominium on the avenue of the americas and 58th street, formerly the helmsley windsor hotel. a 700-square-foot one-bedroom, for $3,500, was equally pristine, though it had an interior location with no view. it also had two things they judged more valuable -- a dog-friendly location one block from central park and a washer-dryer in a hallway closet.  ''we know we've grown up now that we get excited at a washer-dryer in the unit,'' mrs. eriksson said. ''your priorities change. ten years ago, we would have thought: who cares?''  they moved to their new home in november, storing their wedding gifts and extra furniture at her parents' house -- an unsettling feeling for them. in a year, they plan to hunt for a bigger home to buy.  meanwhile, when barkley goes for his walk in the morning and evening, he heads for central park.  mrs. eriksson planned to hire a dog walker for an afternoon walk, but it didn't seem enough. ''i felt so bad, leaving the dog sitting in the dark all day,'' she said, so she enrolled him in doggie day care.  the hunt e-mail: thehunt@nytimes.com  