in the region/new jersey; wares in search of warehousing   there is a warehouse shortage in new jersey these days, if you can believe it. citing a critical need for more facilities around the port of newark, gov. jon s. corzine has called for the reclamation of brownfield sites to permit building as many as possible, as quickly as it can be done.  but wait just a new jersey minute. this state is pretty much founded on the principles of storage and distribution. where did all the old warehouses go?  hoboken and jersey city may be trendy residential spots now, but once it was warehouses (and bars) that gave those cities their bustling, muscled identities and verve. did the ''gold coast'' warehouses of yesteryear just crumble and fall down?  some did, actually; and others -- as building preservationists lament -- were plowed under in the name of progress.  the maxwell house coffee buildings in hoboken, for example, were cleared away to permit redevelopment and construction of the elegant maxwell place condos, whose residents are now moving in. other more-anonymous brick boxes, where seafood was stashed and baking powder was packed and fruit was put into crates, were leveled to make way for chic apartments, high-class restaurants and a better class of bars.  but in fact, a lot of the old warehouses remain right where they always were. their lives have just gone into their second acts.  in jersey city, the huge structure near hamilton park where wells fargo stored its horse-drawn carriages was converted to loft apartments in the late 1980s. recently, the building's six-bedroom penthouse -- which has 45-foot ceilings and a catwalk above its light-filled living room -- was on the market for $2.3 million.  nearby, the sugar house lofts, created five years ago from an american sugar refining company warehouse that suffered two major fires over the decades, also houses condos with very high ceilings, very tall windows and very big price tags.  in hoboken, the hostess building, where twinkies once filled the shelves, is now home to a new york sports club. across 14th street from that building, ''tribeca style'' lofts are being marketed in a converted coconut warehouse.  a block closer to the river, governor corzine himself has a condo in the hudson tea building, where lipton used to store its products. just behind that, on an inlet known as hoboken cove, a former baking goods warehouse dubbed the ''skeleton building'' because it was tall, thin, white and vacant for many years, is getting a makeover.  the skeleton, newly reskinned in brick and glass, is undergoing conversion to become harborside lofts, with 116 units that are expected to open toward the end of the year.  the ebb and flow in demand for warehouses that are just warehouses, and likewise, for warehouses that can play cinderella roles in a city's resurgence, is ''what redevelopment is all about,'' observed benjamin d. jogodnick, a vice president of toll brothers, a partner in redeveloping both the tea and skeleton buildings.  ''a city is not unlike a forest,'' he continued, philosophically. ''when there's a fire or an area of devastation, that provides an excellent bed of fertility for regrowth. in hoboken's case, that means old, rotting warehouses are becoming residential. in newark, the brownfields are ready to be redeveloped into warehouses. it's nature's way, so to speak.''  in the region/new jersey  