as newark mayor readies offensive against crime, toll rises by 2   two men were killed in a midday gun battle in a newark housing project yesterday, less than 24 hours before mayor cory a. booker was scheduled to reveal a new initiative against drugs and violent crime.  the killings yesterday were newark's fourth and fifth homicides of 2007, following a year in which the city tallied the most killings in a decade and underscoring the primary challenge confronting the new mayor. and they came a day after another afternoon burst of gunfire that critically wounded two men on south orange avenue, a busy commercial street.  ''it has not been a good week at all,'' garry f. mccarthy, newark's police director, said yesterday.  but mr. mccarthy said that important inroads had been made in fighting violent crime, and that homicides had declined since mr. booker took office in july.  the two men who were killed yesterday were not identified by the police, but a resident of the baxter terrace housing complex, a large project of three-story brick buildings within sight of interstate 280, identified the victims as his brother, samad grimes, 18, and his uncle, saad rahman, 19.  the resident, sadir grimes, 17, said that his brother and uncle had claimed in the past to be members of a street gang, but that recently they had ''tried to get their lives together.'' he said that both had until recently lived at baxter terrace, where the shootings took place. they had moved away, but returned yesterday for a party, sadir grimes said.  residents said they heard about 15 shots around 12:30 p.m. when the police arrived, they found both victims with multiple gunshot wounds. one of the men was found just outside the complex and was pronounced dead at university hospital. the other man was pronounced dead where he was found, inside a hallway at the complex, at 182 orange street.  ''early indications are that a group of armed suspects drove up to the location and entered the courtyard, where they exchanged gunfire with another group already in the courtyard,'' the newark police said in a statement. the police said that they had recovered weapons at the scene, and that some of the gunmen had fled in a vehicle.  ''the location of the shooting suggests the shooting may have been drug-related,'' the police said.  the case remained under investigation late yesterday, and there were no arrests.  mable ivey, 52, who said she heard the exchange yesterday, said she was able to distinguish ''10 shots, a pause, and then 5 more.'' she said there had been outbursts of gunfire at baxter terrace during the christmas and new year holidays.  lupe todd, a spokeswoman for mr. booker, said that he was unavailable for comment yesterday, but that the spate of recent shootings would probably be discussed at a news conference he had previously scheduled for this morning. she said he had planned to talk about a revised strategy against street violence, and a new, 45-member narcotics squad being created within the newark police department.  under mr. booker and mr. mccarthy, a former deputy commissioner and specialist in strategic planning in the new york police department, overall crime rates have decreased.  but in a troubled city with three times the number of homicides per capita that new york has, mr. booker's young administration came under scrutiny late last year as the number of killings mounted to levels not experienced for over a decade. for all of 2006, the police said, newark had 104 homicides, far below its record of 161 in 1981, but more than in any other year since 1995. in the first week of 2006, there were three homicides.  mr. mccarthy said yesterday that the spate of killings over the last week came as newark was about to begin a broad new initiative, and that his department's performance in recent months had been encouraging.  newark's violent crime ''is not going to stop overnight, but we are having very good success,'' mr. mccarthy said. he said that during the last four months of 2006, there were 22 percent fewer killings in newark than in the same period the previous year.  since taking over the newark department in september, mr. mccarthy has given more autonomy to precinct commanders, demanded greater professionalism and accountability and shifted 150 uniformed officers from desk jobs to the streets. the department has also indicated that it plans to put surveillance cameras in crime-battered neighborhoods.  the newly formed narcotics squad is to coordinate a revised and more aggressive assault on drug dealing, which the police have long tied to a large share of the city's homicides and gun violence.  mr. mccarthy said yesterday that the focus of enforcement would shift more heavily to midlevel and upper-level drug dealers, and away from small-scale street criminals.  ''by focusing on the street level, you are simply not getting to the whole thing,'' he said. among the tactics to be used are undercover drug purchases and expanded police intelligence work, he said.  ''the vast majority of violence comes from narcotics,'' mr. mccarthy said.  