deep in the heart of tennessee williams   at a recent rehearsal of tennessee williams's ''summer and smoke,'' kevin anderson wore a suit.  his co-star amanda plummer was in a black turtleneck and black pants. their director, michael wilson, had on a black sweater and jeans. but in light gray, with his white shirt open at the neck, mr. anderson, holding a cigarette and brandishing a flask (in character), already looked the picture of the charming, wayward southern boy dr. john buchanan jr. he is the heroine's love interest in the play, which opens wednesday at the paper mill playhouse in millburn.  mr. anderson also stood out in another way. the director and most of the cast, including the formidable ms. plummer, did the show together in september at hartford stage.  when the decision was made to restage the play at paper mill, marc kudisch, who had played john, had a prior commitment: he is now starring on broadway with kristin chenoweth in ''the apple tree,'' playing the serpent in the garden of eden, among other roles.  mr. kudisch's unavailability led to numerous challenges.  ''i'm usually the last person to learn my lines,'' said mr. anderson, 46, over a lunchtime turkey sandwich at the new 42nd street studios in manhattan (rehearsals were scheduled to move to new jersey a week later). ''i like to keep it as loose as possible.''  but this time he made an exception to that rule and went for immediate memorization, just to play catch-up.  one advantage, though, is that he and ms. plummer, 49, know each other. ''we used to hang out, about 20 years ago,'' when he was appearing in the play ''orphans'' in london, mr. anderson said.  they lived in the same neighborhood and would meet for breakfast. ''but life takes you into different places,'' he recalled, and they lost touch. ''we can use our own personal history,'' he suggested, to bring meaning to their characters' ''unrealized friendship.''  ms. plummer's character, alma winemiller, is a small-town mississippi spinster who knew john as the boy next door in childhood and now yearns for a closer, grown-up relationship with him. ms. plummer received glowing reviews for her performance in hartford.  mr. wilson, the artistic director of hartford stage, is not at all worried about presenting her with a new leading man. ''it's such a joy to get in the ring with kevin,'' he said. ''he's coming to dr. johnny like a glove -- it's a very good fit.''  theatergoers know mr. anderson from the 1999 broadway revival of ''death of a salesman,'' in which he played willy loman's irresponsible elder son, biff. discerning television viewers remember him from ''nothing sacred,'' the critically lauded and short-lived (1997-98) abc series in which he starred as a sensitive, sometimes doubting roman catholic priest. clearly, mr. anderson, who is living in summit during the play's run, has no trouble playing cute and conflicted.  the biggest change in moving ''summer and smoke'' from connecticut to new jersey, mr. wilson said, is in the theater itself.  ''in hartford, you had audiences on three sides of you,'' he recalled. ''it created this incredible voyeurism. here, it's the formal 19th-century frame.''  with 1,200 seats, the paper mill is also considerably larger than hartford stage, which has fewer than 500 seats. and mr. wilson considers ''summer and smoke'' one of williams's most intimate plays.  on the positive side, mr. wilson said, he is ''amazed at how well tony straiges's set design is translating'' to the new stage. and he feels the decision to deck over the orchestra pit, breaking the proscenium line, was a good one.  audiences are less likely to be aware of theater logistics than of the chemistry between alma and john, which is essential to the success of any production of this play. when it works, the chaste minister's daughter awakens the reckless golden boy's spiritual side, and he does the same for her awareness of the physical.  john ''wants other people to live like he does,'' mr. anderson says, and the character is afraid of alma, partly because she does not.  ''it's this universal male psyche,'' mr. anderson concluded.  ''summer and smoke'' is at the paper mill playhouse, brookside drive, millburn, wednesday to feb. 11. information: (973) 376-4343 or www.papermill.org.  