separatists blamed for attacks killing 67 people in indian state   at least 67 people have been killed in the past four days in attacks in india's troubled northeastern state of assam. most of the dead are hindi-speaking settlers who migrated to the area for work decades ago.  the police suspect that a separatist rebel group, the united liberation front of assam, is behind the attacks. the group has been fighting since 1979 for independence and for the expulsion of non-assamese workers who came from outside the region of assam, the oil-rich and tea-producing state bordering myanmar.  peace talks with the government failed in september, and the government resumed counterinsurgency efforts against the rebels.  assam's police chief, r. n. mathur, said, ''we are patrolling the area heavily, and the situation is tense but under control.'' he said the killings were in retaliation for the counterinsurgency operations by security forces.  the dead include six government officials, who were killed in a bomb attack while returning from work.  most of the dead, though, are roadside workers, vegetable sellers, brick kiln workers and the keepers of small stores, killed in attacks with ak-47 rifles.  it was the worst violence in the region in years, and hundreds of workers were fleeing the area, the authorities said. the rebels accuse the government of flooding the state with outsiders to reduce the assamese to a minority.  family members and neighbors of the victims held protests to demand protection and an end to the violence. they blocked a highway and for a time refused to allow the cremation of seven of the bodies.  the authorities imposed a round-the-clock curfew in the affected districts and sent out police and paramilitary patrols. the federal government was also sending security forces.  rajendra prasad singh, a local lawmaker in the state's tinsukia district, said in a telephone interview that the rebel group ''wants to drive out the non-assamese people because they control the business, provide the labor and are a powerful community.'' mr. singh is a hindi-speaking settler whose grandfather migrated to assam from bihar.  