itineraries; when the fur flies   increasing numbers of people are taking pets on business trips. but imagine the challenge when the animal is not the typical dog or cat.  ''it's difficult finding room and board when you're carrying a sack full of alligators and pythons,'' said tim williams, who is the chief alligator wrangler at gatorland, a commercial wildlife center in orlando, fla. frequently, mr. williams says, he packs up an alligator or two, plus pythons, lizards and tarantulas, for a road trip in a gatorland van, promoting the attraction and providing entertainment.  the alligators travel comfortably, and usually undetected, in big duffel bags that mr. williams hoists into motel rooms, along with pythons and whatnot. usually but not always, he stays at off-brand motels -- ''places where they don't ask a lot of questions,'' he said.  of course, most business travel with animals does not involve alligators. the most common traveling animal is the pet dog, and then the cat, though cats are notorious for finding hiding spots in hotel rooms, usually at checkout time.  as many hotels and even some airlines become more animal-friendly, more business travelers are taking an animal along. partly driving this trend are longer stays on business trips -- a work project, say, that might require living in an extended-stay hotel for weeks or months -- as well as the increasing number of pet-owning households headed by a single person.  in 2003, about 15 million americans took at least one overnight trip with a pet. last year, the number was 29 million, according to the american pet products manufacturers association.  ''a lot more people are traveling with dogs,'' said len kain, a co-founder of dogfriendly.com, which lists dog-friendly hotels nationwide.  low-end highway motels were the first to begin promoting pet friendliness in the 1980s. but as more travelers began taking small dogs and other pets along in cars and, increasingly, on planes, hotels across the spectrum have discovered the marketing value of catering to animals.  some high-end hotels now have pet sitters and pet walkers, ''which are things that business people often look at if they're out of town with a pet for three days and they have two days of meetings,'' mr. kain said. ''a lot of the upscale hotels even have perks like room-service dog meals.'' some also have dog happy hours where dogs are given treats while owners sip cocktails.  airlines typically allow (and charge for) small pets in cages that can fit under seats. midwest airlines recently began giving out pet travel packs with dog goodies on some routes.  larger pets must fly in the cargo area, which can be frightening and potentially unsafe to an animal. airline and hotel pet policies are listed on most pet travel web sites like mr. kain's and others like petswelcome.com and tripswithpets.com.  the sharp growth in travel by private jet has enabled many well-off people to take along the family pet without a second thought.  beth shak and her husband have had a share for four years in a private jet through netjets, the largest fractional-share operator. if she were to fly commercially, ''i don't know what i would do, because my little teacup yorkie runs around the plane,'' she said. on the private jet, ''they have dog treats and a pet-friendly stewardess,'' ms. shak said, adding that she favors pet-friendly five-star hotels like the ritz-carlton and four seasons.  ''one of my best friends flew commercially newark to las vegas in first class, and it was a nightmare,'' she said. ''they confiscated the food at security, and the dog was whimpering unmercifully in the little cage and they scolded her for that.''  to accommodate the growing numbers of customers who travel with pets, netjets started a program, pennvet, with the university of pennsylvania school of veterinary medicine to provide 24-hour telephone consultations and referrals.  the american pet products manufacturers association says that 63 percent of households have at least one pet. there are 90.5 million cats, 73.9 million dogs -- and 6.4 million birds.  birds fly, but they are not especially good at being flown. most people who travel professionally with birds, like nikki moustaki, the author of ''parrots for dummies'' and nine other books on pet birds, go almost exclusively by car.  ''i pack the birds and my dogs in the car, all with travel carriers, everything bungee-corded and secured,'' she said. ''but it looks insane.''  as to hotels, ''just be sure they're cool with pets. you can't sneak a parrot in. but parrots are good guests. you turn the lights out and they go to sleep,'' ms. moustaki said.  a parrot can be good company. on the other hand, a parrot sometimes does not know when to stop talking.  ms. moustaki said, ''on one long trip with a friend, my african gray didn't stop talking for six or seven hours. at the end of the day, we were like, 'shut up! we're frazzled!' ''  the country western singer laura bryna, who has three parrots, is scheduled to start a performing tour this year and is making plans to accommodate the birds.  ''my manager has been talking to various companies about customizing a bus,'' she said. ''you know, make the back of the bus into a bird room with cages bolted in securely and perches and play stations.''  her birds also talk a lot, even to one another. but they travel unobtrusively, for the most part. ''the exception is snuggle, my cockatoo,'' she said, ''who likes to sit on the steering wheel. if, say, you turn into a gas station, snuggle just stays in place and goes around with the steering wheel. you do get some looks.''  mr. williams, the alligator wrangler, knows about the looks. he and an assistant checked into a fashionable hotel in philadelphia, and managed to get their luggage and a duffel bag holding a sleeping nine-foot alligator onto a bell cart and into the elevator.  ''we were going to the 12th floor, and just before the door closed, in walks an elderly gentleman and his wife, him in a tux and her in an evening gown. the door shut and the elevator went up, and the motion woke up the alligator, which started wiggling around inside the bag and knocked a suitcase off the cart,'' mr. williams said.  ''well,'' he continued, ''this poor couple were plastered against the wall, and finally the door to their floor opens and they rush out, but the lady looks back. and my assistant tells her: 'don't worry, that's just mother. she hates to travel.' needless to say, we had a visit from the manager the minute we got to our room.''  