genealogists find new roots   relocating multiple tenants at once can be tricky enough. moving them en masse to the same new home, one that suits all their tastes, is about as much fun as ''corralling cats,'' says clinton w. blume jr., who has been saddled with finding new quarters for 15 small ancestry-themed clubs based in the new york genealogical and biographical society's building at 122 east 58th street. the society, in search of better-configured space, is selling the building, between park and lexington avenues, and mr. blume is coping as best he can.  the wrangling, though, is almost over.  in march, the clubs will decamp to a 7,500-square-foot fifth-floor space in the headquarters of the general society of mechanics and tradesmen of the city of new york. the limestone-clad building, completed in 1890, is a little farther downtown, at 20 west 44th street, between fifth avenue and the avenue of the americas.  spaces in their new home range in size from 600 to 1,835 square feet, all of them with 10-year leases or subleases, according to mr. blume, a managing director of abs partners real estate. each tenant will pay $35 to $40 a square foot annually, he said.  although the rents are about twice those of the genealogical and biographical society building, the ability to stay together is convenient, the tenants agree, because many of the clubs share members.  for example, some daughters of the cincinnati, who can trace their bloodlines to revolutionary war officers, are also descended from the pre-1675 dutch settlers of new york, new jersey and delaware, which might earn them inclusion in the holland society of new york, another tenant.  the huguenot society of america, meanwhile, honors those descendants of the protestants who fled french persecution for places like new york and south carolina. membership is by invitation only.  even more mysterious, and perhaps selective, is the order of colonial lords of manors in america, which recognizes those families who once owned estates along the banks of the hudson river.  (a call to confirm the existence of the group, placed to the society of foreign wars, which will sublet space to the colonial lords in the new building, was met with a hang-up.)  overlapping membership leads to a strong sense of community and better turnout at events like historical lectures, said john delamarter, the holland society's assistant treasurer.  ''we are just delighted to keep the same ambience,'' mr. delamarter said. ''it allows the interplay of interests and social functions.''  the seller of the old space, the genealogical and biographical society, needs rooms that better reflect its day-to-day functions, with less space for large gatherings and more for offices and storage, said william johns, the group's president and chief executive.  the society has a collection of 30,000 manuscripts and 75,000 books, many now locked away in storage, with a few available to the public in a dimly lighted and cramped library.  the buyer of the four-story, 24,000-square-foot neo-classical building, completed in 1929, is the new york synagogue, an affiliate of the hampton synagogue in westhampton beach, n.y., which is seeking a city sanctuary in part for a congregation that travels back and forth.  the sale price is $24 million, according to both parties, though the deal has not yet closed. the synagogue likes the building's close proximity to apartments, offices and hotels, whose guests are often in need of a jewish house of worship, said rabbi marc schneier, the founding rabbi of the hampton synagogue.  mr. johns says he has not yet found the ideal new location for the genealogical and biographical society, though his search began in earnest only a month ago.  the sale is propitious because it will bolster the society's endowment, he explained, adding that, taken together, the improvements could eventually fulfill any genealogist's dream: getting more people to care about where they are from.  posting  