they came from montana   it seemed a good idea, during the holidays, to get a dose of capra corn. so i rented ''mr. smith goes to washington'' (one of the screenwriters based it on a novel he'd written called ''the gentleman from montana'') to watch jimmy stewart play the consummate rube who can scarcely stop gawking long enough to get sworn in as a newly appointed senator. nefarious powers think his naïveté makes him the perfectly malleable replacement for his predecessor, who keeled over unexpectedly. but, boy, are they in for a surprise.  during senator smith's excited sightseeing (''i don't think i've ever been so thrilled in my whole life, and that lincoln memorial! gee-whiz!''), i thought about montana's new senator, jon tester, gazing up at the capitol dome for the first time, shortly after the general election. ''it hasn't soaked in yet,'' he told reporters. ''maybe it will never soak in.''  mr. tester and his wife, sharla, had traveled to washington from their farm in north-central montana, a patch of ground in a county with 1.5 people per square mile, about 1,800 miles from the nation's capital as the crow flies. they were there because mr. tester, campaigning for government honesty and attention to the concerns of ''regular folks,'' had unseated the republican incumbent, conrad burns, in a cliffhanger that helped deliver the senate to the democratic party.  and now what?  undoubtedly, mr. tester's rhetoric and style -- he might always look a little wrong in a business suit -- will tempt continuing comparisons to the barmy screen version of the gentleman from montana. but only if one forgets that mr. tester is 50 years old, he's seasoned in state politics, he ran a canny, gloves-off campaign, and he's the kind of charismatic, hard-to-peg, western neopopulist (like his friend, gov. brian schweitzer of montana) who might be, even now, redefining in certain far-reaching ways what it means to be a democrat.  or not.  the 110th congress is just four days into what it will become. it is still on the brink. on the verge. the verge, says my dictionary, is ''the point beyond which an action, state or condition is likely to begin or occur.'' it's also, interestingly, ''a rod, wand or staff carried as an emblem of authority or office.''  montana, like any state, has sent to congress its share of those who strode forth, verges in hand, to become forgettable in the long run. but i think we can be forgiven for anticipating the exceptional. after all, we sent lean and plain-spoken mike mansfield, the senate's longest-serving majority leader and a pivotal force behind civil rights legislation, the watergate investigation and opposition to the vietnam war. decades earlier, we sent congress its first female member, republican jeannette rankin, the only person to vote against united states entry into not one, but two, world wars. we sent thomas j. walsh, who became a national hero for exposing interior department corruption in the teapot dome oil scandal of the 1920s. and senator burton k. wheeler, a democrat, who became the most vocal foe of f.d.r.'s attempt to ''pack'' the supreme court.  ''always try to see life around you as if you just came out of a tunnel,'' senator smith advises his hard-boiled assistant, miss saunders, in the capra parable.  campaigns are tunnels in a sense, filled as they are with obfuscation, noise and narrowly defined progress. out of the tunnel, out in the lit-up day, it's different. what the members of the 110th congress see now, and what they choose to do about what they see, might well decide who among them -- among both the testers and the old hands -- will outlast their day.  battlegrounds deirdre mcnamer's novel ''red rover'' will be published this summer.  