after pataki's 12 years, is new york better off?   to the editor:  re ''the george pataki era'' (editorial, dec. 31):  gov. george e. pataki's public service announcements kept running while he ran around the country trying to position himself for a 2008 presidential run. meanwhile at home, the g.o.p. was collapsing. mr. pataki's record deficits, excessive spending and late budgets gave real conservative republicans anguish.  new york state is now the no. 2 state in the country in terms of long-term debt. each adult new york resident is responsible for $3,515 of the $50 billion total debt, which almost doubled in the years mr. pataki was governor. to that you can add the debt of the new york state public authorities, now $114 billion.  while mr. pataki was governor, republicans lost numerous public offices, including senate and congressional seats, the office of the attorney general, county executive offices, and state senate and assembly seats.  in 2008, intelligent primary voters will look past glitzy commercials and remember mr. pataki's fiscal mismanagement and the destruction of the state's republican party.  larry penner  great neck, n.y.  to the editor:  you did not mention the two most important areas of responsibility of any governor today: economic development and education.  when george e. pataki's lack of accomplishment in matters of economic development and education is factored in, his administration can be seen as nothing other than a complete and utter failure.  paul t. shoemaker  bronxville  to the editor:  i question your characterization of gov. george e. pataki's choices to lead the lower manhattan development corporation (or what many call the ''leave manhattan destroyed committee'') as ''excellent,'' and your description of their preferred plans as ''first-rate.''  the official planning process for the world trade center site was an outrage and disgrace from the start, designed to ensure that plans that responded in the only appropriate manner -- rebuilding on the scale and in the spirit of what was destroyed -- were never even considered.  gov. eliot spitzer could get off to a great start by consigning the daniel libeskind plan and the misguided priorities that produced it to the trash bin.  louis epstein  carmel, n.y.  the writer is the founder and director of the world trade center restoration movement.  