capitalizing on a town's high values   two major corporations have decided to cash out of greenwich's high-flying office market and relocate to less expensive settings, abandoning their headquarters in the town this year. though the moves will open up nearly 300,000 square feet of office space, commercial brokers say the surge in availability will amount to not much, in a community increasingly dominated by companies willing to pay to be in a business district that has become nearly as exclusive as the lanes winding past back-country estates.  the corporate office buildings of unilever and ust inc., both near the train station and within view of long island sound, could fetch rents on a par with midtown manhattan and may set a record for greenwich.  ''greenwich prices are extraordinary,'' said jim fagan, senior managing director and head of cushman & wakefield's fairfield county, westchester and long island offices. ''i wouldn't be surprised to see greenwich prices topping $100 per square foot in 2007.''  to date, the highest deals in greenwich have landed somewhere in the $906, according to frank saphire, a vice president in the new york office of hines, a property management firm. yet, as one of the new owners of the unilever home and personal care headquarters at 33 benedict place, hines is seeking rents of as much as $100 per square foot in some parts of the building, he said. the company bought the 127,0-00-square-foot property from unilever for $87.5 million in 2005 in partnership with the willett companies and warren private clients. (unilever then leased back the space; it expects to begin moving employees later this year and finish in early 2008.)  ust inc., a smokeless-tobacco and wine company, recently put its west putnam avenue offices up for sale. that property, a four-story building with about 160,000 square feet of space, is likely to go for more then $100 million, brokers say.  the departure of two corporations that have been in greenwich for more than 30 years reflects the central business district's evolution into an offshoot of wall street. as hedge funds, private equity firms and other financial services companies continue to move into the town, driving prices skyward, ''major corporations are looking to capitalize on the value of their real estate holdings,'' mr. saphire said. ''it's that simple.''  neither company is going very far. about 350 unilever jobs will be moved to the company's facility in englewood cliffs, n.j., as part of a broader business consolidation strategy, according to sabrina glavan, a company spokeswoman.  ust is moving roughly the same number of employees to a slightly smaller space about 10 miles away at the high ridge park corporate center in stamford. selling the existing headquarters is ''a way of unlocking value for our shareholders,'' said mark lozelle, ust's vice president of corporate communications.  theirs aren't the only large spaces coming available. the shutdown of the hedge fund amaranth advisors adds another 150,000 square feet of space at the greenwich american center on american lane, outside the central business district.  while at some point in coming months the availability of so much space may drive greenwich's 3 percent vacancy rate as high as 15 percent, the market will close up again quickly, mr. fagan predicted. his firm represented unilever in the sale of its property and is now handling the sale of the ust building.  but robert caruso, managing director of cb richard ellis's westchester/fairfield office, noted that this is the first time so much downtown office space has become available at once. the greenwich market absorbed roughly 300,000 square feet of office space in each of the last two years, but that was both inside and outside the central business district.  still, mr. caruso said, the unilever, amaranth and ust properties are attracting a lot of interest, a sign that ''the market was almost too tight.''  the hines partnership is planning a $6 million renovation to spruce up the unilever building and upgrade its telecommunications infrastructure. ''we believe there is some pent-up demand among hedge funds, private equity and financial firms that will take a good portion of the building,'' mr. saphire said.  that demand has squeezed out more cost-conscious tenants like greenwich hospital, which had to go outside the town to find affordable office space for about 75 nonclinical employees who work in financing and purchasing. those workers are currently at the hospital's operation at 55 hill lane; the hospital is seeking state approval to put an ambulatory surgery center on that site.  this summer, the employees are to move to 30,000 square feet of office space at 900 king street just across the state line in rye brook, n.y. the site is about a 10-minute drive from the hospital's main campus at 5 perryridge road.  ''the reality is there isn't a lot of space at affordable prices in greenwich,'' said george pawlush, the hospital's vice president for public relations and community affairs.  greenwich may soon begin feeling the effects of the shifting office market in other ways, said mary ann morrison, president and chief executive of the chamber of commerce. over the years, ust has contributed generously to the public library and has paid for emergency vehicles, while unilever has encouraged employees to volunteer for various programs. the void left by their departure may be hard to fill, she said.  some hedge funds have contributed locally on a private basis, she said, but they tend ''to be a little more under the radar screen.'' in contrast, the corporations moving out ''have become a part of the fabric of greenwich,'' she added.  in the region/connecticut  