a double reverse   when jets receiver jerricho cotchery talked, were people listening? could they see his dark eyes glistening?  cotchery was a revelation for the jets during a 10-victory season that landed them in the playoffs -- as if by a lark, to hear outsiders talk. after winning a starting position in training camp, he made one clutch catch after another, including one for a 77-yard score sunday that gave the jets their only lead in the first-round game against the new england patriots.  the jets' 37-16 loss to the patriots on a deceptively sunny day at gillette stadium could not be pinned on cotchery. indeed, on a game-turning play in the third quarter, he was one of only two jets on the field with the presence of mind to recognize that a batted-down pass was, in fact, a backward pass, and that the loose ball was actually a live ball.  patriots nose tackle vince wilfork pounced on the ball before cotchery could reach it, but still. at least cotchery had tried, right?  a noble effort was considered by many to be the best the jets could hope to achieve in their return to the playoffs after a one-season absence. what chance did they have against a playoff-tested patriots team that has won four consecutive american football conference east titles and had won six straight games against the jets going into this season?  cotchery's answers were short and his voice barely audible. his shell-shocked expression in the losing locker room was reflected everywhere. to a man, the jets looked as if they had been broadsided by defeat. they may not have been favored to win, but after beating the patriots here in november, they clearly did not expect to lose.  chad pennington, the jets' quarterback and conscience, had nothing to be glum about. that he came back from two career-threatening shoulder operations to play a single down this season, much less 17 games, was a minor miracle. but he dressed especially slowly after the game, and when it was his turn to speak, he struggled to find the words to explain his emotions.  ''when you've accomplished a lot of things as a team,'' pennington said, ''when you overcome a lot of adversity and do some things that people didn't expect you to do, and then it all comes crashing down in 60 minutes worth of football, you're numb because you don't expect it to end this way.''  pennington passed for 300 yards for the fourth time this season. he completed 23 of 40 passes, attempting 36 of them after he sustained a hyperextended elbow in the first quarter while trying to brace his fall during an especially fierce rush.  he was slow to get up, but once on the sideline, he stayed only long enough to slip a black protective sleeve on his left elbow. one play later, he was back in the game.  late in the third quarter, the jets were trailing, 20-13, when pennington led the jets just past midfield, then tried the lateral to cotchery -- a long handoff, really -- which linebacker rosevelt colvin batted down.  because the pass went backward, it was a live ball, a fact that seemed lost on all the jets except for cotchery and the rookie left tackle d'brickashaw ferguson, whom colvin had beaten on the play. wilfork scooped up the ball and ran to the jets' 15 before cotchery caught him.  the jets' defense held, and the patriots went on to kick a field goal to take a 10-point lead.  coach eric mangini, who spent six years in new england as a defensive assistant before accepting the jets job last january, preached performing all the little things well. his attention to detail was a big part of the team's overall success.  not much seemed to escape his notice -- he was so fastidious, he deployed one of his assistants to the hotel kitchen on the road to oversee the preparation of team meals.  but whether it was the patriots coming out in a no-huddle offense or wilfork's heads-up play, the bill belichick-led patriots showed an eye for detail that had the jets blinking first.  ''i thought we made some good plays throughout the course of the game,'' mangini said, adding, ''but in the end, they were able to execute more effectively than we were.''  the patriots' efficiency on third downs and inside the jets' 20 was the key to their success. they converted 11 of 16 third-down opportunities while the jets made good on only 3 of 11. near the end of each half, the patriots put together clock-draining drives that ended in touchdowns -- a 1-yard pass from tom brady to daniel graham in the second quarter and a 7-yard pass to kevin faulk in the fourth.  those long drives helped the patriots control the clock and dictate the outcome. the jets crossed the patriots' 20 three times, but each time their offense stalled. they settled for field goals, with mike nugent converting from 28, 21 and 37 yards to run his streak of attempts made to 21.  the jets were 4 of 17 in scoring touchdowns in the red zone in their last five games.  ''looking at it, it's always hindsight,'' pennington said. ''you may want to do a couple of different things. but i knew every time that we got down there that we had to come away with something. we couldn't give an opportunity for a turnover or something like that.''  late in the fourth quarter, with the jets trailing by 14 points, pennington threw a pass intended for his favorite receiver, laveranues coles, that was intercepted by cornerback asante samuel, who returned it 36 yards for a score with 4 minutes 54 seconds remaining.  coles, who sustained a head-and-jaw injury in the jets' penultimate regular-season game, absorbed another head injury in the third quarter. he kept playing but made only one catch after that. the jets' best cornerback, andre dyson, also tried to play after sitting out the season finale against the oakland raiders with a sprained right knee.  on the patriots' opening possession, dyson slipped while covering receiver jabar gaffney on a play that went the other way. dyson got up and took a few mincing steps. he signaled to the sideline that he wanted to come out, but the patriots were operating a no-huddle offense and there was no time for the jets to make a substitution.  so dyson stayed in, and on the next play, a third-and-8, brady connected with gaffney on a 15-yard pass. gaffney would finish with eight catches, three of which he made while dyson was covering him.  ''i really thought it was going to be a lot better than it was,'' he said.  dyson was talking about his knee, but he might have been referring to the outcome.  ''the fact that guys are taking it so hard is a good sign,'' said linebacker matt chatham, who followed mangini to new york from new england. ''it shows that a lot of stuff that eric's doing is working.''  pro football  