in faded beach community seeking rebirth, projects and luxury homes meet   in a gritty section of the rockaways, there is a cluster of new homes that stand out for their catchy colors and modern style. they are laid out in neat clusters with cheery nautical names like ocean breeze, the sands and the breakers, and there are newly mapped streets with names like spinnaker drive.  this is the early phase of the mammoth arverne by the sea development, a heralded project to make over a mostly blighted stretch of the rockaway peninsula into 2,300 homes and condominiums.  there are snazzy showroom apartments with stunning ocean views, and a warm-and-fuzzy short film featuring families frolicking on the beach. the promotional material makes no mention of the surrounding low-income area of meager houses, shabby bungalows and public housing projects, but rather urges potential buyers to ''imagine the serenity of living in an oceanfront community.''  that serenity has been interrupted in recent weeks by gunshots from the nearby projects, a spate of violence that has left three young men from the projects dead.  some community leaders and elected officials say the violence is sparked by an escalating conflict turf war between gangs at several of the housing projects.  ''this is a gang war between housing projects,'' said councilman james sanders jr., who has met with the police and community leaders.  the unrest has also worried officials at the benjamin-beechwood company, which is building the arverne development. the 117-acre development stretches into low-income, primarily black neighborhoods that include the ocean bay houses, a public housing complex formerly known as the edgemere houses, and the hammel houses, which abut the western edge of the development.  though the rockaways were once a popular beach resort, the expanse of trash-strewn lots that overlook pristine beaches has remained undeveloped for decades. it is premium oceanfront real estate accessible to manhattan, but it is also a low-income area with few amenities and high crime rates. these are challenges the developer counts on overcoming in building two-family oceanfront homes costing up to $1 million.  a company official, gerry romski, said that police officials from the 100th precinct assured him that extra police units had been brought in to help patrol the projects and that ''the situation was under control.''  ''these seem to be isolated incidents limited to the housing projects, the hammels and edgemere houses,'' mr. romski said. ''we have not been impacted in any way. we've increased the security guards around our buildings, and there have been no incidents.''  the shootings, which received meager attention in the news media, have not affected the brisk sales of the units, he said. roughly 500 of the planned 2,300 units are completed, he said, and most of those are occupied.  eric rasmussen, 26, a city firefighter, recently moved into the coral house, an apartment building that is part of the arverne development. it overlooks building 10 of the hammel project, the site of one of the shootings. ''you definitely hear gunshots over there pretty regularly,'' mr. rasmussen said. ''but i don't consider it dangerous.''  mr. sanders calls the violence and the ensuing response by developers -- initial panic, then relief that it did not affect their development -- a microcosm of ''exactly what is wrong here in the rockaways.''  mr. sanders contends that development officials are ''trying to build a self-contained city'' while ignoring the surrounding community and its ills: unemployment, gangs, guns, drugs and troubled schools.  ''we're going to be stuck with a tale of two cities,'' mr. sanders said. ''they're creating the conditions for a perfect storm of racial discontent and possibly more violence.  ''this situation cannot be dealt with by simply increasing security and police and arresting and imprisoning more young people.''  community leaders have long complained that the rockaways have been a dumping ground for the city's poor. the residents of the housing projects, an overwhelming majority of them black, have few nearby job opportunities, social and youth and parolee services. they complain of being isolated on the peninsula.  mr. sanders said the recent violence stemmed from turf battles between gang members at the ocean bay houses, the hammel houses and the redfern houses, which are farther east, in far rockaway.  on nov. 27, christopher glenn, 16, of the ocean bay houses, was shot and killed. on dec. 15, another teenager, cedric smalls, 18, was fatally shot in front of building 10 of the hammel houses. four days later, laton spurgeon, 25, an ocean bay resident, was killed.  last week, jamel bryant, 17, who the police say is a bloods street gang member with a street name of psycho, was arrested at the ocean bay houses after firing eight bullets at police officers, the department said.  mr. smalls was one of 11 children of cynthia young and had moved with six of his siblings from the hammel houses into the apartment of his grandmother, algia young, 71, a block away. his grandmother said cedric kept hanging out with his friends in the project, but he denied being in a gang.  ''i used to check his backpack and go through his pockets every night to see if he was up to anything,'' she said. ''he was a good kid.''  she looked out her window toward the arverne development and said, ''how they going to build that thing when they can't even take care of the community now?''  but mr. romski said the development had good relations with its neighbors and would benefit the rest of the rockaways by bringing jobs, shopping and recreational facilities.  he said the development would bridge communities by serving as a link between poorer black areas of far rockaway and wealthier white sections such as breezy point, neponsit and belle harbor. arverne by the sea is attracting many retailers, he said, and a new y.m.c.a. center on the property will be open to outside residents.  ''this project is going to pull up the rest of the community,'' he said.  rockaways journal  