doctor confronts the human drama's inevitable finale   final exam  a surgeon's reflections on mortality  by pauline w. chen  268 pages. alfred a. knopf. $23.95.  when it comes to confronting death, doctors are as much at a loss as the rest of us. they are in the business of saving lives, not ending them. by instinct and by training, they avoid what pauline w. chen calls ''the final exam,'' the emotional challenges posed by terminally ill patients. death represents failure. it asks unanswerable questions. perhaps most vexingly, it threatens to crack the hard professional shell of detachment that medical training puts in place. in modern american medicine, death is everywhere and nowhere at the same time.  dr. chen, a surgeon specializing in liver transplants, is her own patient in ''final exam,'' a series of thoughtful, moving essays on the troubled relationship between modern medical practice and the emotional events surrounding death. she recalls episodes from her own medical training, and cases in which she was involved, to dramatize her misgivings about the ''lessons in denial and depersonalization'' that help doctors achieve a high level of technical competence but can also prevent them from expressing empathy or confronting their own fears about death.  in the current system, she writes, ''few of us ever adequately learn how to care for patients at the end of life.'' among other things, ''final exam'' is a crash course in the specifics of human mortality. dr. chen begins with her first dead body, the dissecting-room cadaver that she disassembles over a period of many weeks, sometimes sawing and flaying, at other times gently separating minute muscle fibers and veins, as she learns to itemize every muscle and bone.  it is a strangely intimate ritual. ''my partners and i would know our cadaver's body better than any patient we would ever take care of,'' she writes. later she learns how to poke and prod a dead body before drawing up a death certificate, witnesses a failed attempt to resuscitate a patient in cardiac arrest and experiences the first death of a patient under her care. through endless repetition and constant attendance on the sick and dying, she struggles to find a professional middle ground between inappropriate attachment and cold indifference.  the middle ground proves to be elusive. as a student, dr. chen found it difficult to regard death as ''a clinical event.'' instead, she writes, ''seeing patients die bothered me.'' her own family background only compounded her sense of confusion. the daughter of immigrants from taiwan, she grew up regarding death as a matter of fate. on the day of her birth, her parents engaged an old man in taiwan to tell her fortune. much more than she could admit to her fellow students or teachers, her feelings about death were shaped by her culture.  ''that great passing of life was too sacred; it was nearly magical,'' she writes. ''death was an immutable moment in time, locked up as much in our particular destiny as in the time and date of our birth.''  dr. chen vividly conveys the fears and anxieties of medical training, as well as its pleasures. there is joy in mastering difficult skills and a strange tactile pleasure in feeling a pulsating heart or velvety liver. she dwells, with a sort of grim amusement, on the awful diet and the funny rituals that define the lives of medical interns. it is amusing to find out that clever nurses, to help surgeons finish up a long operation, put ''closing music'' on the sound system in the operating room: pulsating dance music intended to keep exhaustion at bay.  she also laments the lack of training in talking to patients, especially about death. doctors, like everyone else, avoid the topic. institutionally, discussions of death are limited to formal inquiries known as morbidity and mortality conferences, in which surgeons analyze recent deaths on the operating table in the hope of learning from them.  outside the conferences, death is the unwelcome, awkward visitor who stops conversation. dr. chen cites a survey showing that one-quarter of oncologists failed to tell their patients that they were suffering from an incurable disease. nearly half of the doctors in another study rated themselves as ''poor'' or ''fair'' in breaking bad news to their patients. often, with several specialists and sub-specialists assigned to a dying patient, each doctor waits for the other to provide unwelcome information.  dr. chen experiences an epiphany when she witnesses a break with tradition. normally, in a patient's final hours, doctors close the curtain around the bed and disappear, leaving family members alone with their dying relative. but one doctor, trying to console an elderly woman whose husband is dying, stays with her by the side of the bed. as she holds her husband's hand, he tells her what the strange sights and sounds on the monitors are saying, and what her husband is experiencing as life ebbs away. that scene of compassion and communication, in the midst of high-tech beepings and buzzings, shows what doctors can do when nothing can be done.  dr. chen cites a few experimental programs and recent changes in medical training to suggest that future doctors may be better equipped to take a more realistic, humane approach to mortality, but she is uncharacteristically vague about this. old ways die hard, and technology-driven medicine, in a strange way, impels doctors to deny death as they apply heroic means to defeat it. her most hopeful argument is herself: a doctor open to confronting her own fears and doubts, and willing to prepare her patients for the final exam.  books of the times  