buckeyes' big return is quickly forgotten   the ohio state buckeyes took turns tackling one another in the back of the end zone, a dog pile that was as raucous as it was premature.  sixteen seconds had ticked off the clock. ohio state's ted ginn jr. had returned the opening kickoff 93 yards for a touchdown. the buckeyes greeted ginn in the end zone as if they were already the national champions and he was the most valuable player.  the florida gators, already heavy underdogs, were probably dismissed in living rooms across the united states. football showdowns, which traditionally receive weeks of hype, often unravel in a few minutes. this bowl championship series title game started according to script.  but on the way to ohio state's anticipated blowout, the gators began chomping away at an inflated point spread. they calmly and methodically scored 21 consecutive points on their way to a 41-14 victory.  ginn's kickoff return left the buckeyes breathless, but not the gators. they scored touchdowns on their first three possessions, never straying from a creative game plan.  by the end of the first quarter, florida had used three quarterbacks. by the end of the first half, the gators had scored with the pass, the run and an option play with a wide receiver. ginn's return was lost among all the other highlights.  florida fans stood in the rafters and chanted ''s-e-c, s-e-c,'' a reference to the southeastern conference and an obvious dig at the big ten, which has never been known for innovative play-calling.  when ohio state coach jim tressel did try to be aggressive, going for a fourth-and-1 play in the second quarter, he came across as desperate. the buckeyes, who trailed by only 10 points at the time and they were at their own 29, came up short.  the gators had already shown how a quality team keeps its cool. after the initial kickoff return, players and coaches gathered on the sideline. they changed their kickoff coverage, wisely keeping the ball away from ginn, who injured his ankle in the celebration of his touchdown and missed the last three quarters.  florida looked comfortable playing from behind. for weeks, the gators heard that they did not deserve to be in this game, that michigan was the better team. florida ignored the talk, but perhaps ohio state did not. after ginn's return, the buckeyes appeared to let up. they promptly allowed a long kickoff return and committed a personal foul.  then they committed another personal foul on a punt return. it was hard to determine whose coverage team was worse. but it was easy to see which team improved.  ohio state looked complacent after ginn's return. florida looked motivated. in a twist, the most memorable play of the game might have helped the team it hurt.  college football  