room to improve   q. what is the best way to clean leather furniture?  a. in general, smooth leather surfaces need to be wiped with a damp cloth to remove any dust or grime. because of exposure to central heating, the sun and other environmental factors, most leather also requires moisture to keep it from cracking, flaking or splitting. think about your own skin in winter, or worse, the disintegrating 1930s leather club chairs found at flea markets around the world.  once or twice a year i break out a tin of saddle soap and a sponge moistened with a little warm water, and lather up everything made of leather in the house, from a briefcase i bought in buenos aires to the seats of my greek revival-style dining chairs. the secret is to use the saddle soap sparingly; a minuscule amount is enough to clean and moisturize. after the soap has dried, i buff the leather with a soft, dry cloth.  ''people get carried away when it comes to cleaning leather,'' said teddy edelman, a founder of edelman leather, a connecticut firm whose leather furniture, upholstery, floor tiles and rugs are favorites with top interior designers.  she has heard horror stories of leather being subjected to inappropriate cleaning agents including furniture polish. (i once cleaned a lovely cowhide desktop with the abrasive side of a kitchen scrubbing sponge, which resulted in a number of disfiguring abrasions.)  ''leather is like your skin,'' mrs. edelman said. ''it's basically resistant to dirt, so there's no reason to overclean it.''  in addition to saddle soap, mrs. edelman said, ''a tiny bit of castile soap, just a couple of drops in a quart of warm water, applied with a barely moist sponge or cloth, works well too.''  when her antique biedermeier chairs start looking ''a bit exhausted,'' she added, she refreshes their leather upholstery with lexol conditioner. for information and store locations, lexol.com or (800) 241-6996.  q. how do i get rid of a heavily textured ceiling?  a. most of my childhood bedroom was great: my mother let me decorate one wall with a huge orange fishing net, which i studded with starfish, glass weights and other nautical gear picked up along the embarcadero in san diego. but the ceiling looked as if it had been finished with cake frosting. since then, i haven't been able to abide textured ceilings.  before you do anything, break off a few small samples and have them tested for asbestos by an environmental protection agency-approved lab. (you can find an appropriate lab in the yellow pages under asbestos removal.) if the asbestos is found, your best solution is to cover the ceiling with a layer of sheetrock. but if you get the all-clear and you are handy, then move everything out of the room and cover the floor with dropcloths, newspapers or contractor's paper (which comes in large rolls), and get ready for a very messy operation. there will be lots of dust, so wear a disposable mask.  the only way to remove a textured spray-on surface is to moisten and scrape it, small section by small section. fill a pump sprayer with warm water and carefully soak a four-by-four-foot area of the surface until it is wet enough to be removed with a trowel or a metal scraper. your goal is to get down to the underlying ceiling, which is likely gypsum board. you may have to go over the ceiling a couple of times to get rid of it all.  once the textured gunk is gone, break out a pole sander and gently sand the ceiling until it is as smooth as possible. patch any scrapes or gouges with joint compound and sand again once those repairs are thoroughly dry. now the ceiling is ready to prime and paint.  