leak justifies hype and finishes with a flourish   through the first 50 games of his college career, chris leak was a disappointment.  in the last game, he became a legend.  when leak signed with florida four years ago, he was among the top high school quarterbacks in the country, and he brazenly predicted that he would win multiple national championships with the gators.  instead, he went through multiple coaches and became the face of florida's fall from the elite. he finally played for his first national championship monday night. it was his last college game, and it is likely to be the only one that the gators will remember.  leak completed his first nine passes. he led touchdown drives on his first three possessions. he overwhelmed the ohio state defense, and he completely outplayed the heisman trophy-winning quarterback on the other side of the field.  heading into this national championship game, troy smith had everything leak did not. smith won the heisman this year. he went undefeated. he captured the affection and admiration of his school's most ardent fans.  but he would likely trade his heisman for the crystal trophy that leak kissed monday night. in a 41-14 victory over ohio state, leak completed 25 of 36 passes for 213 yards. his final pass was a celebratory one, into the stands at university of phoenix stadium.  ''my legacy was to get the university of florida back here,'' leak said. ''with my teammates and coaches we were able to do that.''  ohio state, which figured to have a decisive edge at quarterback, lost to a team that has spent much of this season trying to play down a quarterback controversy.  if polled sunday night, much of florida likely would have endorsed the freshman tim tebow to start at quarterback against ohio state. if another poll were taken tuesday morning, the results would be much different.  leak is not as outgoing or charismatic as joakim noah, the basketball star who led florida to the national championship last season, but he, too, came to symbolize his team. the gridiron gators were unappreciated right until the end.  ''when you do all the right things,'' leak said, ''eventually your time is going to come.''  leak, who is often criticized for his misguided throws, did not commit a turnover monday. smith, who is often hailed for his mature decision-making, had an interception and a fumble. when leak was pressured, he calmly threw the ball out of bounds. when smith was pressured, he tried to force a play.  smith was rattled by a defense that looked faster than any he had ever seen. florida defensive tackle derrick harvey chased him down twice in the first quarter. linebacker earl everett chased him down him once without a helmet, dreadlocks flapping in the air.  ''i am the one guy out there who can control everything,'' smith said. ''i didn't do it well. i have to take all the blame in the world.''  ohio state's defense was advertised as one of the best in college football, but its performance against michigan in the regular-season finale prompted suspicion. the buckeyes gave up 39 points to the wolverines, proof that they were vulnerable.  florida had already faced louisiana state, auburn and tennessee, teams with truly elite defenses. leak's struggles in the southeastern conference prepared him to face the best of the big ten. the game seemed to slow down for him.  the best evidence came on florida's first drive, when leak led the gators down the field and then lofted a 14-yard touchdown pass to dallas baker. the pass hovered in the air, like a knuckleball, floating over the fingertips of ohio state's malcolm jenkins.  leak found six different receivers, showing off florida's depth of talent. smith, on the other hand, could not find a playmaker after ted ginn jr. was injured in the first quarter. often, smith just had to tuck the ball under his arm and take the sack.  to satisfy the florida crowd, tebow replaced leak for a handful of snaps in the red zone, even though the gators did not need him. tebow threw one touchdown pass, ran for another and provided plenty of hope for next season, when he will be the starter.  florida will count on tebow for multiple national championships. but it will be nearly impossible for him to finish his career with the flourish that his predecessor did.  college football  