in the middle of broadway, sickness, and a sturdy legacy   in the summer of 2005, diana biederman, a publicist with long black locks and an air of girlish candor, was nearing the end of a seven-month stretch of chemotherapy after surgery for colon cancer. because of the side effects, she had to stay within sprinting distance of a bathroom at all times, which effectively left her a single place to relax: a bench on the mall of broadway at 80th street, across the street from her gym and a block from her apartment.  ''that became my beach,'' recalled ms. biederman, 41. she read and napped there on weekend mornings, soaking up the sun and getting to know the peculiarities of the bench, a battered gray affair dating to the late 1980s that, she later recalled, was missing crucial slats from the bottom and the back. ''the bench was a little frayed,'' she said. ''it was sort of gray and sad and worn out.''  fall came, and with it weeks of unrelenting rain. on the first sunny day of october, ms. biederman ventured out again to the bench, where she fell into conversation with a stranger, a lantern-jawed 37-year-old named douglas rosefsky. they got to talking about their favorite benches.  ''i told him, 'long story short, i'm thinking about adopting the bench,' '' she recalled. ''he's like, 'i'll go halfsies with you.' i said, 'are you kidding?' ''  mr. rosefsky, a specialist in corporate turnarounds, introduced himself by name. ''you'll always be benchboy to me,'' ms. biederman told him.  about seven months later, the broadway mall association, the median's nonprofit caretaker, installed a pair of new benches to replace the old one, using $2,500 donated by ms. biederman and mr. rosefsky. the new benches have elegant, looping, semicircular armrests, and a plaque on one of them reads, ''diana and doug's sunny warm happy bench.''  mr. rosefsky and ms. biederman celebrated by having a pizza delivered to the spot, which they had granted a fictional street address, 227 west 80th street. and on oct. 20, the two held a ''bench-warming party'' for 60 people at ms. biederman's apartment, followed by a march to the site of the benches.  the median maintained by the mall association extends for about five miles, from 70th to 168th streets, and has about 250 benches. ms. biederman and mr. rosefsky's benches are the first to have been sponsored by donors, though the practice is common in other parks, including central and prospect parks.  both adoptive parents confess to proprietary feelings about the benches.  ''every time i cross the street, i'm looking to check that there's no litter,'' ms. biederman said. and she and mr. rosefsky have jokingly invented a set of bench rules. chief among them, ms. biederman said: ''should this bench be too crowded, you have to make room for us.''  alex mindlin  neighborhood report: upper west side  