mr. spitzer's valley   the hudson valley is the perfect launching pad for the top priorities of reforming state and local government and revitalizing cities and towns in new york that gov. eliot spitzer outlined in his ''one new york'' state of the state address last week.  why? because the hudson valley is where the governor's vision of economic growth in harmony with protected environmental resources stands the best chance of early results. as a national heritage area with world-class cultural, scenic and natural resources, it is also where the stakes are highest and failure is not an option. so here are some things mr. spitzer should consider:  hudson valley cities many cities, like yonkers, newburgh, beacon, kingston and poughkeepsie, share the same economic challenges as upstate municipalities like buffalo and rochester. these include contaminated former industrial sites, the out-migration of young people and salaries up to 25 percent below the national average. the governor's proposals for catalyzing an ''innovation economy'' should begin here.  his promise of property-tax relief and increased investment in schools and community needs like roads and waste-water treatment plants will boost tourist-based economic development on these cities' waterfronts and spur commerce in their downtowns. the hudson valley economic development corporation, a regional marketing organization, is already attracting ''green'' businesses to the valley because of the beauty and quality of life in the region. the corporation is eager to begin working with the new administration.  governor spitzer demanded that increased state aid to cities be dependent on better fiscal management. he also pledged to provide zoning incentives to encourage construction of affordable housing. he should require zoning that concentrates development in urban and town centers, protecting waterfronts as a public and natural resource and curbing the sprawling development that increases traffic and air pollution.  smart transportation mr. spitzer raised hopes -- and concerns -- by pledging to ''break through the political gridlock'' to complete transportation projects, including the replacement of the tappan zee bridge and the expansion of stewart airport as the fourth major downstate airport. both projects could yield benefits if they are planned and implemented with the ''smart growth'' principles the governor says are essential ''to alleviate environmental degradation, instead of contributing to it.''  particularly in the case of stewart airport, the governor's ability to work with regional development and environmental constituencies will be crucial in stemming the sprawl around the airport. we cannot allow a drastic increase in jet traffic along the river to destroy the very foundation of the region's future prosperity, its beauty and tranquillity.  global warming to tackle global climate change and reduce energy costs, governor spitzer pledged to expand clean energy generating capacity and to implement aggressive conservation measures, starting with state energy consumption. this will be important to achieving another of his campaign pledges: closing indian point.  smart development will also be critical in reducing greenhouse gases. on beacon's waterfront, my group, scenic hudson, and a private developer are moving ahead on plans for the country's ''greenest'' hotel and conference center. this project will use new energy technologies while preserving two-thirds of the 25-acre property as public parkland. governor spitzer should establish waterfront-development standards for the entire hudson valley based on this environmentally sensitive, energy-efficient design pioneered with community input.  land preservation mr. spitzer has pledged to increase the environmental protection fund with proceeds from an expanded bottle bill to help protect farmland and open space across the state. the hudson valley contains an estimated 100,000 acres of ''legacy landscapes'' that should be preserved as we approach the 400th anniversary of henry hudson's sail up the river.  by leading the effort to protect the state's priceless heritage, the governor will ensure that the land that binds us together and makes us ''one new york'' will be the basis for prosperity for generations to come.  op-ed contributor ned sullivan, a former environmental commissioner of maine, is the president of scenic hudson, an environmental organization.  