a disputed a.p. source turns up, but bloggers are not appeased   after weathering six weeks of criticism for quoting an iraqi police captain whose existence had been called into question, the associated press had some relief last week when iraq changed its story and acknowledged that, yes, jamil hussein did work there.  iraq's interior ministry confirmed thursday that mr. hussein was an active member of the police force, assigned to the khadra station, according to the a.p. mr. hussein had been a source for an article in november about six sunnis being doused in kerosene and burned alive by shiite attackers -- a report that the ministry, among others, had denied.  the confirmation did not halt the mud fight between conservative bloggers and the wire service. bloggers had accused the news agency of gullibly quoting a dubious source, or even fabricating one, to exaggerate the violence in iraq. this week, unmollified, they shifted their criticism to the fact that the a.p. itself was the source of the article acknowledging mr. hussein.  linda wagner, an a.p. spokeswoman, said that the confirmation from the interior ministry vindicated the reporting methods and standards of traditional news organizations. in a reference to a memorable swipe that jonathan klein, cnn's head of domestic operations, once took at bloggers who work from their living rooms, ms. wagner wrote in an e-mail message: ''our reporters are not 'pajamas media.' ''  she added, ''our reporters tell what they've seen and heard to editors who ask tougher questions than many of these bloggers might imagine.''  far from retracting their accusations, though, some web critics continued the attack. the flopping aces blog (www.floppingaces.net) accused the a.p. of ''whining'' and wrote, ''i would settle for some confirmation that this guy exists from someone other then the a.p. at this point.''  another, dan riehl (www.riehlworldview.com), also remained defiant. ''i don't see that bloggers have anything to apologize for, nor do i see this story being at an end,'' he said.  the good news for the a.p. was bad news for mr. hussein: a warrant for his arrest has been issued, since he had not been authorized to speak to a news organization.  maria aspan  media talk  