belichick's wisdom equals victory   vince wilfork, all 325 pounds of him, spotted the football loose on the ground and knew exactly what to do with it.  ''pick it up,'' he said. ''that's the rule around here.''  later, he would be able to sort out where he had heard that rule -- ''from bill, one time.''  that bit of football wisdom -- reinforced by bill belichick and many of the patriots, jumping up and down and screaming and waving on the near sideline -- prodded wilfork, all 325 pounds of him, to rumble in the general direction of the end zone for what would be the major turnaround of this playoff game.  wilfork did not reach the end zone because he was caught from behind by a receiver, jerricho cotchery (''a little guy, darn,'' wilfork muttered later), but his opportunistic romp with a tipped lateral led the patriots to a 37-16 victory over the jets.  that quick thinking by the patriots, after several jets overran or ignored the hot potato on the ground, does not prove that belichick is a better coach than his protégé, the jets' eric mangini. the sudden reversal does suggest that belichick presides over a dynasty very much au courant, at least until it plays san diego next weekend.  the manly-man grapple of a hug between belichick and mangini after the game does not prove much either, except that belichick knew enough to make nice after a satisfying victory.  ''do you want to talk about the game?'' belichick rasped when asked about the quickie hug he committed on mangini. ''i'm not going to get into a postgame analysis here. really, i've had enough of that.''  belichick was so eager to get it done that he waded into the swarm of photographers on the field, slinging a photographer out of the way with a neck hold that lawrence taylor might have perpetrated on some hapless lineman back in the day.  ''there were 80 people between me and eric,'' belichick said. ''i'm just trying to coach the team, that's all. i'm just trying to coach the team.''  mangini said he did not remember much about their brief exchange, saying, ''he said, 'good luck,' and i said, 'good luck,' and i do wish him good luck.''  millions of amateur psychologists watching the body language on the tube would realize that whatever belichick and mangini had to say to each other was not as warm as the exchange after tony dungy's colts beat herman edwards's chiefs, 23-8, in a similar one-sided playoff game saturday.  ''you hear me? you win this thing,'' edwards said to dungy, his best friend and former boss, as they met on the field.  then again, belichick and mangini never claimed to be best friends. mangini wasted no time going after a few of belichick's players after leaving the patriots to take the jets' job this season.  in this business, that's enough to bring a chill to any relationship.  for a while, belichick made it look bad by seeming to strain to avoid mentioning mangini by name, but last week he began noting that ''eric'' has done a good job, and yesterday he gave tepid but sufficient praise to ''eric'' all over again. that really is the last we need to dwell on this for the next decade or two.  the main lesson we can take from yesterday is that belichick has not won three of the past five super bowls by accident. he has taught his players to take advantage of whatever the opponent shows them -- and to recognize the possibilities, like the one yesterday when rosevelt colvin got his hand on a backward pass by chad pennington and knocked the ball to the ground.  ''it was clearly a lateral,'' belichick said later. ''colvin got his hand on it and vince made the smart play, which we always talk about -- get on the ball and ask questions later.''  wilfork acknowledged that he was not sure it was a live ball, but he followed the coaching engrained in his head and he took off.  if he had botched it, he said later, ''i'd be the laughingstock of the locker room.''  with the dignity of a very large man who has his hopes and dreams, wilfork reveled in the first time he has touched the ball in his three years in the national football league.  he stood in front of his locker and modestly informed a crowd of reporters that he had scored a few touchdowns as a running back at santaluces high in boynton beach, fla.  ''i ran a kickoff back 55 yards weighing 275,'' wilfork said. ''i'm an athlete.''  athletes move fast, even at 325 pounds, and most of them remember their lessons, or they would not be performing on national television on sunday afternoons.  everybody can work on something, even the coach. belichick certainly upgraded his touchy-feely act in the past week. and at least one of his players was impressed.  when tedy bruschi, belichick's three-super bowl linebacker, heard about the muscular hug after the game, bruschi nodded his approval.  ''we're working on things now,'' bruschi said with a smile. ''that's good.''  sports of the times e-mail: geovec@nytimes.com  