bloomberg finds friends on senate security panel   mayor michael r. bloomberg took his perennial pitch for more security money to congress on tuesday, but this year, for a change, lawmakers seemed poised to listen.  though mr. bloomberg is a republican, the democrats who now control congress may well be sympathetic to his pleas -- and those of other big city mayors -- for more money to protect transportation systems. hours after mr. bloomberg appeared before a senate committee and criticized the department of homeland security, the department announced that the new york region would be awarded $90 million in new grants for transit, port and ferry security -- representing nearly a quarter of all of the port and transit financing given out by the department this year.  the single biggest grant is for the new york, new jersey and connecticut transit systems, which will get $61 million to spend on training and equipment to prevent or respond to an attack.  ''our goal,'' michael chertoff, the secretary of homeland security, said at a news conference, ''is to put our resources where the risk is the greatest and where the funds will have the most impact.''  mr. chertoff said the department was trying to direct grants toward the highest-risk targets, like new york, so that less grant money was available for communities that might have used their grants in past years to ''spend money on leather jackets or gym equipment or things of that sort.''  earlier in the day, mr. bloomberg was the first witness to testify at a hearing before the senate homeland security and governmental affairs committee on the recommendations of the 9/11 commission.  the mayor has important allies on the panel. the incoming chairman, senator joseph i. lieberman of connecticut, was re-elected as an independent -- after losing the democratic primary -- with help from mr. bloomberg, who sent political operatives to help the senator.  a second committee member, senator claire c. mccaskill of missouri, a democrat, received help from mr. bloomberg in her challenge to a republican incumbent last year.  the mayor exchanged warm words or glances with other democratic members of the committee, including senators jon tester of montana and mary l. landrieu of louisiana.  three members of the 9/11 commission -- former representatives lee h. hamilton and timothy j. roemer and former senator slade gorton -- testified alongside the mayor on a wide range of intelligence and preparedness matters.  last year, new york and washington officials were enraged when homeland security announced a reduction in antiterror grants for the two cities. last week, mr. chertoff announced adjustments in the rules used to distribute the grants.  at the hearing, mr. bloomberg called those adjustments ''a step in the right direction.'' under that plan, 55 percent of $747 million in security grants this fiscal year would be reserved for six high-risk urban areas (including the new york area), although the mayor predicted that the total money available to the six regions will be ''virtually the same'' as last year.  the mayor said that the city's ''calls for fully risk-based homeland security funding have been ignored'' repeatedly. ''instead, we have seen large sums of homeland security money spread across the country like peanut butter. more than $3 billion has been distributed in this irrational way so far.''  mr. bloomberg did praise the department's decision to loosen restrictions on how the grants could be spent. the city will now be allowed to use 25 percent of its grant money to pay for the roughly 1,000 police officers dedicated to intelligence and counterterrorism.  the mayor, however, criticized restrictions on the use of federal money for construction projects that ''harden'' buildings and monuments against attack. the mayor also said the city received just $4.34 per capita for bioterrorism, making it 27th among 54 states and cities eligible for such money.  because the city uses a different frequency from the 700 megahertz band specified in federal law, it risks being ineligible for any of the $1 billion set aside for improvements in public safety communications, the mayor added.  mr. bloomberg said the existing rules, if allowed to go forward, would represent ''the height of foolishness,'' adding that instead of ''uniform solutions,'' cities need ''more nuanced and individual attention.''  ''do not confuse risks with targets,'' he warned. ''every place there are risks, but there aren't that many targets, and targets are what the enemies of this country will focus on.''  responding to a question from senator barack obama, democrat of illinois, mr. bloomberg said: ''our corn crop is very important. we can't eat in this country without it. but homeland security monies shouldn't go to protect the corn crop because that's not what terrorists are going to try to attack.''  after he testified, mr. bloomberg met privately with ms. mccaskill and alphonso r. jackson, the secretary of housing and urban development.  later he visited adrian m. fenty, the new mayor of washington. mr. fenty has modeled his office arrangement after mr. bloomberg's, working out of a ''bullpen'' alongside top aides instead of a traditional private office.  