news summary   international a3-10  hussein tapes chronical use of chemical weapons  in an iraqi courtroom, the voice of saddam hussein was unmistakable on audio recordings made years ago as he was heard justifying the use of chemical weapons against the iraqi kurds in the late 1980s, predicting they would kill ''thousands'' and saying he alone had the authority to order chemical attacks.  a1  a new video of saddam hussein's body, taken after he was executed by hanging, was posted on the internet by a group sympathetic to the former dictator.  a8  more criticism for evo morales  political opponents of president evo morales of bolivia have stepped up criticism of the country's strengthening military relationship with venezuela after that more than two dozen uniformed members of the venezuelan military had recently entered the country without congressional approval.  a3  iran's ayatollah stands firm  iran's supreme religious leader, ayatollah ali khamenei, said iran will not back down from developing its nuclear program, despite sanctions imposed by the united nations security council.  a9  u.s. strikes qaeda in somalia  a united states air force gunship carried out a strike against suspected operatives of al qaeda in southern somalia, a senior pentagon official said monday night. a3  national a12-15  universal health care proposed in california  gov. arnold schwarzenegger proposed sweeping changes to california's huge, troubled health care system, including the requirement that all of the state's 36 million residents have health insurance.  a1  debate over new terrorism bill  house democrats intend to fulfill a campaign promise this week by passing broad new anti-terrorism legislation, but some senate democrats object to security mandates in the plan.  a1  bush chooses new top lawyer  president bush has chosen fred f. fielding as the white house's new chief lawyer, succeeding harriet miers.  a1  sentencing laws revisited  federal sentencing laws that require lengthy mandated prison terms for certain offenses are expected to come under scrutiny as democrats assume control of congress.  a12  hunter killed in wisconsin  officials confirmed that a hmong hunter was slain in wisconsin, reigniting racial tension where two years ago a hmong hunter killed six white hunters.  a12  medical bills grew at slow pace  spending on health care in the united states increased in 2005 at the slowest pace in six years, mainly because of much slower growth in spending on prescription drugs.  a13  new york/region b1-6  pace university president fights to save his job  david a. caputo, the president of pace university, is fighting to save his job in a time when top officials at a range of other campuses have fallen or resigned.  a1  mystery odor pervades city  an unpleasant sulfur odor that typically signifies a gas leak coursed through manhattan buildings, caused evacuations and mass-transit reroutings, and led to fears that a dangerous chemical had been deliberately released.  a1  neediest cases  b4  business day c1-11  insurer in katrina deal  state farm is in the final stages of settling hundreds of lawsuits over insurance payments for homes wrecked by hurricane katrina along the mississippi gulf coast.  c1  business digest c2  sportstuesday d1-6  florida wins championship  the university of florida gators upset the previously undefeated ohio state university buckeyes 41-14 to win the bowl championship series title game. d1  editorial a16-17  editorials: past time to get real on iraq; common sense on the census; lawrence downes on mr. noodle.  columns: orlando patterson, nicholas d. kristof.  crossword e10  tv listings e9  weather d8  