shipyard worker killed by falling metal plate   christopher g. thomas hardly ever worked on saturdays. it was his day to shop, do laundry and, most important, languidly pass the hours with his wife.  but yesterday, needing money, mr. thomas reported to work as an ironworker at the gmd shipyard in the brooklyn navy yard near fort greene.  about 10:15 a.m., witnesses said, a massive metal plate, weighing thousands of pounds, that was being used to repair a barge in dry dock somehow came loose and crashed to the ground. mr. thomas had been working beneath the barge, and was crushed during the plate's fall, his hard hat no match for its force.  mr. thomas, 51, was unconscious and in cardiac arrest at the shipyard and was taken to brooklyn hospital center, where he was pronounced dead, said his sister-in-law, kathy mclean, 45.  mr. thomas's wife, carol, 32, said he had just started working at the shipyard last week. michael cranston, the president of the gmd shipyard, said in an e-mail message that his company was working with investigators to determine the accident's cause, though it was not immediately clear yesterday which law enforcement agencies were involved.  mr. thomas had been a welder nearly all of his adult life. he prided himself on paying scrupulous attention to details and safety, his family said.  though he lived on nelson avenue in the bronx, mr. thomas retained an enduring passion for his homeland, trinidad, and its pastimes including soccer and cricket. he was second youngest of nine children, and had been welding since he arrived in the united states at the age of 18, ms. mclean said.  his parents, delores and james thomas, both in their 80s, and extended family members lived near him in the bronx. he had two children, christopher, 24, and kimberly, 16, neither of whom lived with him.  during holidays, their family gatherings sometimes drew 100 people, and mr. thomas was known for cooking giant batches of spicy curry, thick with crab and shrimp.  ''he was just a really nice, fine person,'' said ms. thomas, as she stood forlornly yesterday in the hospital waiting room, her eyes red, clutching a plastic bag filled with the clothes her husband died in. ''he had a smile that just warmed up your heart.''  