massachusetts could serve as a guide in california's health insurance bid   in its drive to provide health insurance to nearly all its residents, massachusetts has already signed up more than half of the poorest people who are eligible.  but experts and politicians agree that the bigger challenge will be the next 150,000 people: the working poor who will get a state-subsidized rate but will still have to pay for insurance, typically $18 to $170 a month depending on their income.  ''this group is going to be much more challenging,'' said paul ginsburg, an economist who leads the center for studying health system change. ''they're dealing with people who don't even think about having health insurance.''  as california maps out its path to near-universal health insurance, massachusetts could offer some guideposts.  ''we're really changing the culture of providing heath care,'' said michael j. widmer, president of the massachusetts taxpayers foundation, a nonpartisan group that studies state spending. ''for some people, it's changing the mind-set from one of showing up at the emergency room or at the local health center with a problem to understanding that they can be insured. nobody's expecting that would happen overnight.''  devising a plan that all of the state's political stakeholders could accept took hard work and time. it dates back to at least 2004, when gov. mitt romney, a republican and former venture capitalist, proposed requiring an ''individual mandate'' that everyone get insurance, a feature of the plan now being proposed in california. the president of the state senate, robert e. travaglini, a democrat, also called for expanded coverage, presenting a more incremental plan than mr. romney's.  then the speaker of the house, salvatore f. dimasi, a more liberal democrat, demanded an expansion of medicaid and a payroll tax for employers who did not provide insurance. those provisions were opposed to different degrees by mr. romney and mr. travaglini, and the legislation almost fell apart.  but several factors helped propel the parties to an agreement: a federal threat to cut $385 million in financing if the number of uninsured was not reduced and the support of senator edward m. kennedy, a democrat and rival of mr. romney.  the plan requires about 515,000 people, most of the state's uninsured, to get health insurance by july 1 or face penalties that could include the loss of a personal income tax deduction. medicaid was expanded somewhat to pay for those below the poverty line. the state's $1 billion pool to pay for free care was reconfigured to be used for subsidized premiums for people earning up to three times the federal poverty limit.  the state will set rules to help insurance companies create health plans intended to be affordable enough for people with lower-middle incomes.  so far, about 29,000 people at or below the poverty line have enrolled, or slightly more than half of those eligible for this type of enrollment.  the second phase, focusing on the working poor, began this month and is considered much more difficult.  the insurers selling the subsidized health plans have been trying to get the word out.  christina severin, executive director of network health, the insurer with most of the lowest-priced plans, said her company was advertising in several languages and enlisting hospitals, clinics and churches to recruit the uninsured.  the other major challenge will involve people not eligible for subsidized plans. first, the agency set up to put the law into effect, commonwealth connector, will have to set standards for affordable health care plans, deciding, for example, whether to require plans to include prescription coverage.  ''on the one hand, there's pressure not to set the bar too low so it's not some sort of inadequate plan,'' mr. widmer said. ''on the other hand, you need to have options because you're trying to draw in a lot of different groups.  massachusetts is clearly breaking new ground, going further than other states.  vermont's program, passed last may, will require private insurance companies to offer coverage for the uninsured starting in october 2007. to pay for the program, employers who do not offer health insurance will pay $365 per employee, and taxes on cigarettes will increase. unlike massachusetts, vermont will not make participation mandatory.  maine's program, dirigo, which started two years ago, has run into several obstacles. fewer than 20,000 people have been enrolled in the program; the goal was to cover all 130,000 of maine's uninsured by 2009.  business and insurance groups have sued over a provision that requires private insurers to pay. and a study group recently recommended considering individual mandates, requiring employers to provide coverage and imposing new taxes.  ''maine has had a fair amount of problems because it was based on a very questionable idea,'' stuart h. altman, a professor of health economics at brandeis university, said, adding, ''it's not going well.''  correction:  january 12, 2007, friday  a front-page article on tuesday about a proposal by gov. arnold schwarzenegger to extend health care coverage to all of california's residents misstated a requirement for insurers. they would have to contribute 85 percent of premiums to health care services, not 85 percent of profits. the article also referred incorrectly to the precedent for universal coverage. california would be the fifth state, not the fourth, to try near universal coverage. (besides maine, massachusetts and vermont, hawaii has also tried.)  a picture caption with an articlewednesday about efforts by massachusetts to extend health care coverage to all residents reversed the names in some copies of two people who helped an immigrant from bangladesh sign up for insurance. feroza bashar, a translator, was at right, and goretti macedo of cambridge health alliance was at left.  