garden q.&a.   a veronica so tall  q. do you know of a veronica similar to spicata that has the same roughly two-foot height but with bigger, more substantial dark green leaves and larger flower spikes? i saw it here in zone 4, and that's the hardiness i need.  a. veronicas are a cold-hardy bunch, many of them even to zone 3. it is the damp that does them in, so as long as you have well-drained soil you have a wealth of choices.  but as you check the offerings from good sources like fieldstone gardens (fieldstonegardens.com or 207-923-3836) and lazy s's farm nursery (lazyssfarm.com), you will see that most veronicas are short, from a couple of inches tall to a bit over a foot. there are only two commonly grown taller species, v. spicata and v. longifolia. longifolia has narrow leaves, which narrows the field to v. spicata or a hybrid with spicata genes.  v. spicata, a k a spike speedwell, is long-blooming, low-maintenance, deer-resistant and durable in the vase. not surprisingly, there are lots of varieties, in shades of blue, pink and white, with heights from eight inches to over three feet.  your quarry could be among them, but it is probably sunny border blue, a hybrid that is often called a spicata, introduced in 1946 and still one of the best. it will make bushy 20-inch plants and bloom from late june through october if it has plenty of elbowroom, full sun and fertile, slightly acid soil.  a bulb so warm  q. my potted spring bulbs for forcing always do their cold time in my unheated garage. but this winter has been so warm they are already sprouting. should i put them outside on mild days and let them grow?  a. better to put them out on cold days and let them cool their jets. (just kidding: they should stay in the garage unless you want to evict the produce and put them in the fridge.)  after planting, spring bulbs need at least 8 to 12 cold weeks to form good roots and be primed to flower. mild temperatures can start green growth, but as long as cold comes while shoots are small, it will stall upward progress without harming the future show.  