learning how to fight america's most wanted   i'm holding a gun for the first time and trying to look as if i know what i'm doing, as my partner and i pursue a suspect in a fatal bank robbery.  we take him by surprise in his motel room, and my partner tries to handcuff him. the suspect's brother unexpectedly emerges from the bathroom, and the momentary confusion allows the suspect to reach for a gun. i shoot once and hit the wet bar. the suspect's aim is better, and within 1.6 seconds, i am dead. left unprotected, my partner takes two bullets to the head, and our assailants gleefully escape.  witnessing this exercise in humiliation was a roomful of people who, like me, had signed up for an invitation-only ''citizens' academy'' course given in the fall by the federal bureau of investigation in connecticut. as part of our weekly training, we shot guns in computerized simulations, subjected ourselves to lie detector tests and met some of the graduates of a ''body farm'' in knoxville, tenn., where federal agents blow up, bury, submerge and do other unspeakable things to donated corpses to sharpen their crime-solving skills.  though the two dozen of us taking the class often wondered why the government runs such a course, citizens' academy has been around for at least 13 years. one stated objective is to help the bureau improve relationships with the communities it serves. another is ''to demystify the bureau,'' as kimberly k. mertz, the special agent in charge of the f.b.i. in connecticut, explained.  the cautious side of me fretted whether to participate, given the personal information i had to divulge in the mandatory background check. did i have to mention religious affiliations? what about my library card? withholding information, the application noted, was a potential crime. i inquired whether i was also subjecting my husband to a background check.  ''why, is he a communist?'' i was asked.  ''not lately,'' i sputtered.  on sept. 14, having learned that my loved ones and i had passed muster, i was waved past a fortified guard booth and seated near a minister, a chiropractor, a lawyer and other working people who had been deemed by the f.b.i. to be ''business, religious, civic and community leaders.''  like me, at least a few had prior dealings with the bureau. for instance, one classmate, rocco orso, the purchasing agent for the city of waterbury, volunteered that his phone had been wiretapped for six months during a federal investigation into bid-rigging. agents discovered instead in 2001 that the city's mayor, philip a. giordano, was molesting young girls. mr. orso said he was eventually told by the f.b.i. that he ''was the most honest man in waterbury.'' a city lawyer confirmed the comment and the agent's admonition to ''give the man a raise.''  such efforts to rein in municipal corruption, white-collar fraud and organized crime have long been the f.b.i.'s stock in trade. but international terrorism has created new pressures, and the bureau's top brass has been deflecting calls for reorganizations that would separate newer intelligence-gathering functions from its historic crime-fighting mission.  our eight weeks -- three hours every thursday night -- inside the f.b.i. did not provide enough information to resolve these larger questions. but it did give us a feel for some of the 100 or so agents in connecticut and their boss, ms. mertz. an iowa native, she ran the public corruption unit in washington from 1999 to 2001 and is now one of eight women running one of the bureau's 56 field offices. when we met, she was wearing pearls and strappy black heels and had her hair in a pony tail, and if she was packing a weapon, it was artfully tucked away inside her fitted suit.  less than 3 percent of those who apply to be agents make the cut, and her staff was suitably impressive. david rhieu, her chief division counsel, sometimes thumbs through 4,000 laws to determine if a situation merits federal jurisdiction. in 2002, when a man took hostages at fairfield university, mr. rhieu determined that the standoff's impact on traffic on interstate 95 justified his agency's intervention.  dan o'brien, the agent who runs the bureau's meriden, conn., office, quoted oscar wilde's ''i can resist everything except temptation'' in describing public officials and their cheating ways. stuart robinson, the head of a public-corruption squad in bridgeport, instructed us that when catching crooks, ''you want to get to the beehives, not catch bees.'' erin mcnamara, an agent who recovered some of the $200 million that the former financier martin r. frankel had amassed by defrauding insurance companies, told us about finding a 15-carat diamond disguised as a sucrets lozenge. judy eide, another agent, shared tales of ''tipsters'' who call the bureau's hot line to complain, ''i ordered a mail-order bride, and did not get it.''  we each left with a graduation certificate, or a reasonable facsimile, signed by robert s. mueller iii, the f.b.i. director. and some of the lessons continue to resonate, especially after a nov. 25 melee with police outside a queens strip club left an unarmed man dead on his wedding day.  our introduction to shootouts had taken place weeks before, in september, and i have no idea who was right or who was wrong on that tragic night in new york.  but one reason for letting us wield a 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistol hooked up to a $50,000 training device was to sensitize us to the split-second decisions that law enforcement agents must make in the name of public safety and to the fact that their lives are on the line. none of us wielding that gun were terribly experienced with weapons, and the full range of human frailties, from eyeglasses to middle-aged paunches, was on display that day. so the experiment had its built-in limits.  surely, i asked, people who are better trained can disarm an assailant without killing him, say, by aiming at the hand holding the gun? our instructors looked at me as if i watched too many westerns. few agents are sharpshooters, they said, and their priority must be stopping the threat. one instructor, a former marine, noted that assailants often keep shooting after they've been wounded.  to minimize the chance of confrontations with tragic consequences, federal authorities say they collect a great deal of information about the individuals they are following and their habits before kicking in doors. by the time they make an arrest, agents generally know which night of the week a suspect orders pizza, ms. mertz said, jokingly. many agents, we were also told, have never discharged their weapons in the line of duty. that goes for ms. mertz. ''most agents never do,'' she said.  after failing at the simulator, i can see, perhaps, how i had overestimated others' proficiency with weapons and their ability to control situations that might be beyond control. leaving the f.b.i. building, i ran into a longtime agent, mark gentil, and told him about my lousy shooting. he asked which scenario had done me in. i told him the motel scene.  ''oh, that's a hard one,'' he said, extending some welcome sympathy as i headed out into the night.  e-mail: conn@nytimes.com  