a weakness is a strength as the colts advance   even though peyton manning was not at his best saturday, the indianapolis colts' defense was superb.  following a script that few expected, the colts opened the n.f.l. playoffs by defeating the kansas city chiefs, 23-8, at the rca dome. it was a role reversal for the colts, known for their high-powered offense led by manning, and for their porous defense, which ranked last in the league against the run during the regular season.  ''this was playoff football,'' said colts defensive end dwight freeney, who had three tackles and two sacks. ''if not now, then when?''  the colts changed their identity against the chiefs. while manning threw three interceptions in the game and struggled to find his rhythm in the first half, the colts held kansas city without a first down until late in the third quarter.  the first seven times that the chiefs had the ball, they ran three plays and punted. it looked like a scene from the film ''groundhog day;'' the same thing happening over and over, as kansas city's offense produced only seven first downs and 126 total yards.  ''we couldn't run, we couldn't pass, we couldn't do anything,'' chiefs coach herman edwards said.  when the chiefs finally made their initial first down, late in the third quarter on a pass from trent green to tony gonzalez, colts fans cheered derisively, mocking kansas city for its struggles. the chiefs finished that drive by scoring their only touchdown, but that was not enough to save their season, as the colts advanced to meet the baltimore ravens in the next round of the american football conference playoffs.  manning's numbers looked stout (30 for 38, 268 yards, 1 touchdown), but his two first-half interceptions could have changed the game's momentum if his defense had not bailed him out. manning's first interception should have led to a chiefs score, and his second probably cost the colts at least 3 points.  in the third quarter, a pass by manning was intercepted by ty law with no colts receiver in the vicinity. usually, it is manning who confuses the defense, but for much of the game, kansas city's defensive players kept showing up in places where manning did not expect them to be.  ''obviously, those were three poor throws,'' manning said of his interceptions. ''i told ty law i would be glad to introduce him at the hall of fame.''  unfortunately for the chiefs, their defense eventually wore down. during the first half, indianapolis had 15 first downs and held the ball for 21 minutes 5 seconds, compared with 8 minutes 55 seconds for kansas city. colts running back joseph addai took advantage of the tiring defense, rushing for 122 yards on 25 carries and eventually opening up the passing game for manning.  leading by 9-0 midway through the third quarter, the colts scored the game's first touchdown, driving 89 yards in 12 plays to take a 16-0 lead.  how tired was kansas city's defense? the colts finished the drive with seven consecutive running plays, moving from kansas city's 41. addai capped the drive by running 6 yards up the middle for the touchdown.  kansas city went to a hurry-up offense and responded with its only scoring drive, moving 60 yards in 8 plays, capped by a 6-yard scoring pass from green to gonzalez. edwards decided to try a 2-point conversion, which paid off, green passing to kris wilson to cut the colts' lead to 16-8.  but instead of the momentum swinging to the chiefs, manning responded with his best drive of the game, moving the colts 71 yards for their final touchdown, on a 5-yard pass to reggie wayne.  it was a satisfying victory for the colts' defensive players, who had heard talk all week about how they would struggle to stop chiefs running back larry johnson, who rushed for more yards this season than any player except ladainian tomlinson of the chargers. but johnson was held to 32 yards on 13 carries by the swarming and aggressive indianapolis defense. by the fourth quarter, the chiefs were forced to abandon johnson and try to catch up through the air.  nothing the chiefs tried offensively worked for long, as the colts overcame a lackluster offensive start.  the colts squandered a chance to put kansas city into a deep hole early, dominating the statistics but not the scoreboard. the colts took a 3-0 lead on their opening drive. on their second drive, they looked poised to take a 10-0 lead, with second-and-goal from the 2. but the chiefs held firm, and when coach tony dungy sent the field-goal unit onto the field, many fans booed. adam vinatieri's 19-yarder, his second of three first-half field goals, made the score 6-0.  a brief momentum swing occurred when law intercepted manning early in the second quarter after wide receiver marvin harrison broke inside and manning threw outside. law, who caught the ball near midfield, almost returned it to the end zone after avoiding a tackle attempt by manning. but he was caught from behind by harrison at the 9, setting up the chiefs with first-and-goal.  a touchdown and the extra point would have given kansas city the lead, and perhaps have changed the direction of the game. even a field goal would have helped. instead, the chiefs got nothing. after two carries by johnson made it third-and-goal at the 2, green fell after being accidentally stepped on by one of his lineman as he backed away from center. kicker lawrence tynes compounded the error by missing a 19-yard field goal attempt, hooking the ball against the left upright. tynes grabbed his head in disbelief, and the colts ran off the field in celebration.  it was that kind of day for the chiefs, and a day of redemption for the colts' defense.  ''this was the way we had hoped to play all year,'' dungy said. ''we picked a good time to play that way.''  pro football  