at crucial moment, season slips through cowboys' fingers   tony romo, the dallas cowboys' quarterback who went from scrub to celebrity this season, finished where he started.  with 1 minute 19 seconds left in a first-round playoff game against the seattle seahawks, dallas lined up for a potentially game-winning 19-yard field goal. it seemed as automatic as a field goal gets.  but place-kicker martin gramatica never had a chance. romo, the holder on field goals, dropped the snap. he picked up the ball and bolted to his left. he needed only 2 yards to get to the end zone, 1 yard to pick up a first down.  romo could not get to the end zone and could not get a first down. so the cowboys lost to the seahawks, 21-20, at qwest field, and have not won a playoff game in 10 years. the second season will now start in dallas, filled with intriguing questions. will coach bill parcells retire? will receiver terrell owens be back? will romo be the same?  romo led the cowboys on a successful two-minute drill in the fourth quarter, keyed by a 35-yard run by tailback julius jones. but they could not finish what they started.  the record will show that the game-winning touchdown was caught by seattle's jerramy stevens, whose last playoff game was marred by dropped passes and public humiliation. that playoff game, of course, happened to be last year's super bowl.  stevens grabbed a 37-yard touchdown pass with 4:24 left, capping a frenetic sequence. seattle had driven to the dallas 2-yard-line on its previous drive, failed to convert a fourth down, and then scored a safety on what officials initially ruled a touchdown.  the play began when dallas receiver terry glenn caught a pass at the 3-yard-line and was stripped by seattle cornerback kelly jennings. as the ball rolled into the end zone, seattle's julian peterson tried to jump on it. but he only knocked it closer to the sideline.  lofa tatupu came next, flipping the ball into the field to prevent it from going out of bounds. michael boulware finally recovered the fumble for an apparent touchdown, but it was ruled a safety because tatupu's left foot was on the sideline.  the play still had its desired effect. after seattle marched down for a go-ahead touchdown, hasselbeck pushed place-kicker josh brown off the field. the seahawks wanted a 2-point conversion. when they failed, they left dallas a window of opportunity.  the player who made the biggest impact for the cowboys was not owens, but miles austin, an un-drafted rookie from monmouth. with dallas trailing by 3 in the third quarter, austin took a kickoff and tiptoed down the cowboys' sideline, 93 yards for a touchdown. several seahawks swarmed him, but they could not touch him.  austin, the first player from monmouth to make a 53-man n.f.l. roster, did not have a return for longer than 37 yards this season. his return saturday night has to count among monmouth's football highlights.  the cowboys' secondary, considered their weak spot, turned for a moment into their strength. one dallas cornerback, anthony henry, intercepted hasselbeck in the first half. another cornerback, terence newman, created an interception in the second half. hasselbeck has thrown multiple interceptions in half of his games this season.  fighting with receiver d. j. hackett for a jump ball on the sideline, newman tipped the ball with his right hand. intentionally or not, he guided it to roy williams, a cowboys' safety. williams corralled the ball and managed to sneak both feet inbounds.  even though seattle went to the super bowl last season and dallas was considered a super bowl contender last month, both teams had come to embody the mediocrity of the national football conference. the seahawks and the cowboys staggered to 9-7 regular-season records, losing three of their last four games.  seattle and dallas came into the playoffs with two of the worst pass defenses in the n.f.l. the seahawks, with three injured cornerbacks, had an excuse for their struggles. the cowboys, with a full complement of defensive backs, did not.  but the anticipated shootout saturday did not begin as scheduled. the first touchdown was scored with 11 seconds left in the first half, when dallas receiver patrick crayton caught a pass at the 5-yard-line and stretched into the end zone.  the cowboys went to halftime with the lead, 10-6, in spite of owens. on the last drive of the first half, with his team facing a third-and-2 from the seattle 35-yard-line, owens dropped his 15th pass of the season.  the cowboys could have easily sent out gramatica, who had already made a 50-yard-field goal. but they went for the first down and romo completed a 32-yard pass to tight end jason witten.  romo's best play of the half might have been an earlier pass to witten, on a crossing route in the first quarter, but witten was promptly sandwiched by seattle linebacker leroy hill and boulware. the ball popped out of witten's arms and was smothered by cornerback pete hunter.  it was amazing that hunter was even on the field. two weeks ago, he was working as a loan officer in dallas, believing his football career was over. but the seahawks, desperate for defensive backs, looked everywhere for help.  they signed safety john howell, who was guiding hunts for elk in the great plains. they signed cornerback rich gardner, who was working out at a gym in nashville. and they signed hunter, who has been the most effective of all.  while hunter was on the field, marcus trufant was in the stands. trufant, perhaps seattle's best cornerback, stood at the top of qwest field before the game and raised the 12th man flag, a local tradition.  deep into saturday night, the flag still flew.  pro football  