the history of crunchy, revisited   when the first mass-produced granola came on the market in the 1970's, it was greeted with a touch of disbelief by many of us, as in, ''how dare they?'' if ever there was a homegrown food it was granola. yet nostalgia isn't the only reason we should honor its roots.  in fact, there are two good reasons for making your own granola. one: it tastes better. two: it contains better ingredients.  i won't argue that it's faster than grabbing a bag off a store shelf. in fact it requires some attention, because to make oats crunchy you must toast them, carefully and for a while. not that this is a big deal, but it can't be done in your sleep.  into this base of rolled oats you can stir just about any dry ingredient imaginable: other grains, like flakes of rye or wheat; dried fruit (raisins are the fallback, but neither the only nor best choice); spices, from cinnamon to vanilla to nutmeg to cardamom; orange zest, crystallized ginger, peanut butter  even, dare i say it, chocolate chips. and of course, any nut or seed you can think of: i favor a combination of cashews, sunflower seeds, sesame seeds and pecans.  i always add coconut, a flavor i adore. and i insist that there is no better sweetener than grade b maple syrup. honey is good too.  look at the ingredient list here, then compare it to one on the side of a box of commercially made stuff. see if that isn't enough to get you to take a trip back in time, to when all granola was made at home.  crunchy granola  time: 40 minutes  6 cups rolled oats (not quick-cooking or instant)  2 cups mixed nuts and seeds: sunflower seeds, sesame seeds, chopped walnuts, pecans, almonds or cashews.  1 cup dried unsweetened shredded coconut, optional  1 teaspoon ground cinnamon, or to taste  dash salt  1/2 to 1 cup honey or maple syrup, or to taste  1 cup raisins or chopped dried fruit, optional.  1.  preheat oven to 350 degrees. in a bowl, combine oats, nuts and seeds, coconut, cinnamon, salt and sweetener. place on a sheet pan and put in oven. bake for 30 minutes or a little longer, stirring occasionally. mixture should brown evenly; the browner it gets without burning, the crunchier the granola will be.  2.  remove pan from oven and add raisins or dried fruit. cool on a rack, stirring once in a while until granola reaches room temperature. transfer to a sealed container and store in refrigerator; it will keep indefinitely.  yield: about 8 cups (at least 16 servings).  the minimalist  