when dream cars collide with real-world demands   the banner heralding this year's detroit auto show reads: celebrating 100 years. take that with a grain of modesty, because detroit's first public car show was actually in 1899, eight years before any dealer's association existed to sponsor it.  no matter how you slice the birthday cake, the showstoppers have always been detroit's notion of what we might be driving in 10 or more years. customs became dream cars that evolved into design studies that are now called concept cars, but the premise hasn't changed; a ticket to the auto show buys you a glimpse into the future.  though none of the concepts assembled here graduated to the assembly line, each deserves credit for charging full-throttle down an amusing blind alley.  1938 buick y-job harley earl, general motors' first design guru, never dreamed that the two-seat convertible he created for personal use would turn out to be the seminal concept car. built on a buick chassis, earl's y-job requisitioned its code name from experimental aircraft and established ''longer, lower, wider'' as detroit's mantra for the next quarter-century. ''my sense of proportion tells me that oblongs are more attractive than squares,'' the earl of detroit said, explaining his approach. the y-job previewed both his 1953 corvette and the power windows, flush door handles, hide-away headlamps, gun-sight hood ornament, vertical grille bars, hinged top covers and gratuitous chrome that eventually appeared on g.m. production cars.  1955 lincoln futura the arrival of the jet age permanently scarred american car design, especially at the ford motor company. the lincoln futura's mission was peeking ahead to 1956. essentially a surgically altered lincoln premiere, the futura wore sunken headlamps, grotesque fins and a double-bubble roof that lifted on rear hinges for entry. the public was not amused. instead of heading for production, the futura took a trip to hollywood. the customizer george barris removed the plastic canopy and other warts to convert this concept into the television batmobile.  1956 dodge dart ink blots blown in a wind tunnel by 200-mile-an-hour gusts inspired the original dodge dart's creation. smoothly integrated bumpers, a sealed engine compartment and a compound-curved windshield significantly reduced aerodynamic drag while soaring tail fins supposedly improved directional stability. the roof slid into a compartment behind the rear seat. while the dart was one of the most attractive 1950s concepts, only the name made the leap to production.  1956 packard predictor the star-crossed predictor, a collaborative effort by packard and ghia of italy, was damaged by fire before its debut and had to be hurriedly rebuilt. its vertical grille scooped the edsel. with hidden headlights, swivel seats and retractable roof panels, this concept car was supposed to forecast the 1957 packards. when those designs were canceled because of financial problems, packard limped on for two years selling rebadged studebakers before expiring in 1958.  1958 ford nucleon as postwar car-buying euphoria wound down, ford tried to kindle interest in advanced technology and cars in general with a concept based on the dream that nuclear power might someday be practical in cars. the cockpit and front end were cantilevered ahead of its front axle to counterbalance a theoretically weighty propulsion system. while a press release boasted that this project was backed by scientific research, the nucleon never ventured beyond the scale-model stage.  1959 cadillac cyclone as tailfins reached their apogee, cadillac introduced an experimental road rocket resembling a wingless jet fighter. the two-seat cyclone eclipsed the common canopy roof with sliding doors, radar and automatic climate control. it also had a forward-mounted v-8 engine and an automatic transaxle positioned behind the driver, a powertrain layout cadillac revived in 2003 for its xlr sports roadster.  1961 ford gyron relying on computer-controlled gyro stabilization, ford's gyron teetered on two wheels. automatic guidance allowed the driver to relax while monitoring the road on an infrared screen. in 1981, the new wave band devo used footage of the gyron in its ''beautiful world'' music video.  1962 ford mustang i finally getting serious about concepts, ford hinted at the affordable sports model that was just around the corner. the 1,700-pound two-seat mustang i roadster was powered by a 1.5-liter v-4 engine mounted amidships. while ford never built that particular mustang, porsche used similar ideas in the boxster concept it presented at the 1993 detroit show.  1968-90 midengine chevrolet corvette zora arkus-duntov, who became the corvette's chief engineer, concurred with ford that a sports car's engine belongs behind the driver after exhaust heat in a front-engine car he designed nearly cooked the driver john fitch during a 1957 sebring endurance race. that experience prompted a series of nine midengine experimental and concept cars stretching from the cerv i (chevrolet engineering research vehicle) of 1960 through the cerv iii (now corporate engineering research vehicle) of 1990. reporting on the next-to-last experiment in this series, car and driver said, ''the next-generation production corvette will almost definitely be a wild-looking, midengine design.'' the magazine was wrong. to see the cerv iii, play atari's test drive iii video game.  2000 general motors precept soon after the clock ticked into the 21st century, g.m. rolled out the remarkable precept. built under the auspices of the government-supported (read: taxpayer) partnership for a new generation of vehicles, this sedan was a diesel-electric hybrid with four-wheel drive, aluminum construction and seating for five. what precept lacked in beauty it more than made up in fuel efficiency by breaking the 100 m.p.g. barrier in e.p.a. tests.  2003 dodge tomahawk every jaw in the house dropped when the dodge tomahawk was driven onto the stage at the 2003 detroit show. was it a motorcycle or a car? the 500-horsepower v-10 viper engine and four wheels suggested car, but this concoction looked more like the world's most outrageous motorbike.  2005 jeep hurricane the most spectacular recent concept had two hemi engines providing 670 horsepower, four-wheel drive and four-wheel steering that turns on a dime and gives change. it also had three steering modes: countersteering with front and rear wheels aimed in opposite directions, crab-steering with all four wheels pointed the same way for easy parallel parking, and knock-kneed (front wheels together, rear wheels splayed apart) when indecision moved the driver to pirouette in place.  detroit auto show  