sleek they are. but will they make the cut?   even at atlantic avenue and court street, a bustling corner of brooklyn that is home to a freshly built luxury apartment building and a gleaming new y.m.c.a., the structure on the southeast corner of the intersection is the shiniest thing in sight.  it has tempered glass walls and a translucent roof, brushed-metal accents and an insouciant row of polka dots across the middle. it is spacious but, for the moment, decidedly short on seating.  it is the new bus shelter.  mayor bloomberg unveiled the first in a new style on queens boulevard in late december, and there are to be 3,300 by the time the project is complete in five years, along with 330 redesigned newsstands and 20 public toilets. so far, 50 of the new shelters are in place -- 10 in each borough -- and anyone who thought they would escape notice does not know new yorkers very well.  people waiting for the b61 and b63 buses on a chilly morning last week cast a critical eye on the atlantic avenue shelter. annmarie lamb of park slope liked the glass walls, which she said made her feel safer, but suggested posting the bus schedules inside near the route map, instead of outside on a pole. valerie rivera, whose 11-year-old son, jacob, is in a wheelchair, worried that the sidewalk sloped too steeply toward the curb.  for marina zweifler of boerum hill, the shelter's sleek lines conjured images of middle america. ''i think it makes it a little bit mall culture-ish,'' she said. ''but i like it.''  nearly everyone at the shelter wondered why there was no bench.  ''i spent a long time trying to find out if it's finished,'' said one rider, the owner of a dance and yoga studio, who goes by the single name mason.  ''to me, man, it's all about finding someplace to sit, in all seasons, different weather,'' mason said. ''people work hard in this city. they need a place to sit down.''  the good news, said the city transportation commissioner, iris weinshall, is that the shelters are indeed unfinished. the material for the benches has not fully come in, she said last week; all but 45 of the 3,300 finished shelters will eventually have seats, along with electronic displays showing the next arrival.  aside from the seating question, ms. weinshall said, the shelters are getting a strong positive reaction.  ''architecturally it's very distinct and very different from anything that's up on the street right now,'' she said.  still, it is a different piece of street furniture that has truly captured the city's imagination. ms. weinshall explained: ''the biggest request we're getting, of course, is 'when are the toilets going to go in?' ''  jake mooney  neighborhood report: downtown brooklyn  