democrats rush to frame political debate over troops   ''cut and run'' versus ''stay the course'' is so 2006.  this week has ushered in a new political battle over the language of the war: ''surge,'' meet ''escalation.''  the democrats introduced the latter word to portray president bush's expected proposal for a troop increase in iraq in a negative light.  ''an escalation, whether it is called a surge or any other name, is still an escalation, and i believe it will be an immense new mistake,'' senator edward m. kennedy, democrat of massachusetts, said tuesday in a speech critiquing mr. bush's as-yet-unannounced iraq plan.  should the significance of the word be lost on those too young to remember its loaded usage during the vietnam war, senator kennedy added: ''the department of defense kept assuring us that each new escalation in vietnam would be the last. instead, each one led only to the next.''  on sunday, the new house speaker, representative nancy pelosi of california, used ''escalate'' or ''escalation'' six times during an interview on the cbs news program ''face the nation.''  asked at his regular briefing on tuesday about the democrats' use of the ''e'' word, tony snow, the white house spokesman, initially said, ''i think a lot of times people are going to try to find a one-word characterization that allows them to make a political point without perhaps diving into the details.''  but, pressed further by a reporter to address the new ''democratic party language,'' mr. snow said, ''well, ask the guys who do their focus groups.''  finally, he said, given that president bush would not announce his new plan until his speech on wednesday night, ''it seems a little silly for me to start quibbling about adjectives without discussing what they purportedly describe, don't you think?''  mr. snow last night said that the president would not be using the word ''surge'' in his speech, adding that it implied what he called a ''rush hour'' approach to a serious policy.  the struggle for iraq  