today in business   chÁvez plan draws alarm -- investors reacted with alarm in the united states and throughout latin america as they measured the impact of a plan by venezuela's president, hugo chávez, left, to nationalize critical areas of the economy. flashbacks of past nationalizations during another turbulent era, in places like cuba and chile, helped drive down the caracas stock exchange's main index by almost 19 percent. [page a1.]  apple unveils cellphone -- with characteristic showmanship, steven p. jobs unveiled apple's long-awaited entry into the cellphone world, pronouncing its iphone an achievement on a par with the macintosh and the ipod. [a1.]  the making of the iphone -- cingular and apple may be fast-moving technology companies, but they took their sweet time putting together a deal to offer cellular service for the new iphone device. officials of the two companies began discussions nearly two years ago, in february 2005. [c1.]  internet neutrality legislation -- senior lawmakers, emboldened by the recent restrictions on at&t and the change in control of congress, have begun drafting legislation that would prevent high-speed internet companies from charging content providers for priority access. [c1.]  muscle cars on display -- as detroit automakers try to find a winning game plan to reverse their sliding market share, it is clear from the cars on display at the north american international auto show that they are trying to play up a distinct advantage over their asian and european competitors -- nobody, after all, can design the american muscle car quite like american car companies. [c1.]  another auto rivalry -- robert a. lutz, vice chairman of general motors, says his company has fallen behind toyota in terms of clout on capitol hill. [c4.]  mills issues warning -- the mills corporation, the real estate investment trust known for off-price malls in outlying suburbs that combine entertainment and shopping, said that it was running out of cash and might be forced to seek bankruptcy protection, putting its shareholders at risk of losing their investment. [c3.]  ruling on patent suits -- the supreme court opened the door to a category of patent lawsuits that a lower court had barred, issuing a decision that will probably shift power in the courtroom from bigger patent-owning companies to smaller start-ups that rely on obtaining licenses for patented technology. [c3.]  warning from putin -- an unyielding president vladimir v. putin raised the possibility of diverting oil transit routes away from belarus, a day after moscow cut off pipeline deliveries of crude oil headed to customers in eastern and central europe through the country. [a13.]  california presses oil companies -- gov. arnold schwarzenegger of california said that he would order the state to require its petroleum refiners and gasoline sellers to cut the emissions of heat-trapping gases associated with the use of their products by 10 percent. [a20.]  alcoa's net rises -- alcoa said that fourth-quarter net income rose 60 percent on high metal prices and strong demand from aerospace, commercial transportation and building markets. [c4.]  dell says plant a tree -- michael s. dell, in a speech at the consumer electronics show, urged the electronics industry to foster the planting of trees to offset the effect on the environment of the energy consumed by the devices they make. [c6.]  united picked for china route -- the united states government has tentatively selected united airlines to provide new nonstop service to china, federal regulators and the airline said. [c9.]  a question of succession -- when home depot announced the departure of its chairman and chief executive last week, it also said that three directors would remain on the board even though they were due to retire this spring. corporate governance watchdogs say the move shows that home depot's board is doing a poor job of succession planning. [c1.]  thailand may restrict capital -- thailand warned that it might add further restrictions to foreign investors, ignoring warnings that the move was ill timed and damaging for a fragile economy already struggling to overcome the stigma of a military coup. [c11.]  session is mixed -- wall street was mixed in an erratic session as investors debated whether the drop in oil prices would eventually bring down stocks as well. [c11.]  online  business briefing  articles on these developments are at nytimes.com/business.  comcast says it will hire 2,800 people for its east coast cable division, buoyed by demand for the company's promotional package of video, internet and phone services. (ap)  mcafee inc., the security software maker, said yesterday that it expected to record pretax charges of $25 million to $45 million related to the extension of expiration dates on some employee stock option grants. (reuters)  a brazilian court allowed web surfers access to the popular video-sharing site youtube, a day after they started blocking it because of a celebrity sex video. (reuters)  dow jones, publisher of the wall street journal, said it would cut jobs at dow jones newswires and factiva to reduce overlap between the news groups. the number of positions to be eliminated is to be announced at a company meeting this morning. (bloomberg news)  