express scripts moves to derail a merger   express scripts opened a proxy war in the pharmacy benefits industry yesterday, moving to derail the pending acquisition of its rival caremark rx by the drugstore chain cvs.  express scripts said it would nominate four directors to the 11-member board of caremark. but caremark said the vote would need to wait for its annual meeting, which is normally held in may but which the company said yesterday it had not yet scheduled.  the action came after the caremark board voted unanimously on sunday to reject a $26 billion hostile takeover offer by express scripts, even though the offer values caremark at about 13 percent higher than the cvs deal. caremark said in a statement yesterday that the express scripts offer, which was made on dec. 18, would create ''significant, if not insurmountable, antitrust risks.''  express scripts yesterday dismissed the antitrust issue as ''a red herring'' that caremark was wielding to distract stockholders.  caremark is currently the second-largest player and express scripts is no. 3 in pharmacy benefits management -- the business of acting as a middleman between drug companies and health plans that offer drug benefits to workers, retirees and medicare enrollees. the current leader is medco health solutions, but a combined caremark-express scripts would be much larger.  the question of how much competition prevails in the pharmacy benefit business is likely to be at the center of the proxy war. express scripts asked the federal trade commission last week to review its bid and analysts expect the commission to seek further information later this month.  a second request could start a lengthy process and potentially cast a pall of uncertainty over the caremark-cvs deal, which has already received antitrust clearance from the f.t.c. caremark has said it would ask its shareholders to approve the cvs offer at a special meeting before march 31.  edwin m. crawford, caremark's chairman, said in the company statement yesterday that the ''certainty'' of having the antitrust clearance ''and the opportunity to close our merger promptly translate in a strong financial benefit.''  since the express scripts bid three weeks ago, caremark investors have indicated hopes that the cvs deal would be sweetened, one way or another, but this has not yet happened. ''some investors may be figuring that a higher bid is worth waiting for, even with the uncertainty of the antitrust issue,'' said sheryl skolnick, a health care analyst with crt capital in stamford.  shares of caremark gained 29 cents, to $56.64 yesterday, which analysts noted, was well above the cvs cash and stock offer for caremark, which was worth a total of $52.35 at yesterday's cvs price.  shares of cvs rose 18 cents, to $31.35. express scripts dropped 8 cents, to $68.78.  in the hope of speeding the antitrust review, express scripts has already dispatched its lawyers to start arguing its case before the commission staff. ''most people think this will get through the f.t.c.; granted it will take some time,'' said kemp dolliver, a health care analyst with cowen & company.  the pharmacy benefit business is ''probably less consolidated than it looked 18 months ago,'' mr. dolliver said. with the advent of medicare part d drug coverage last year, the largest health insurers -- wellpoint, unitedhealth group and aetna -- have aggressively expanded their in-house pharmacy benefits units.  employers and smaller health plans can choose from the insurers' drug management services along with those of the big pharmacy benefit managers: medco, caremark and express scripts.  trying to reduce drug costs, the pharmacy benefit managers bargain with drug manufacturers for rebates and discounts on brand-name drugs, and they work to switch patients to lower-cost generic versions of expensive brands. with taxpayers footing much of the bill for elderly medicare enrollees and low-income people in medicaid programs, the benefit managers' effectiveness became an issue in some congressional races last fall.  express scripts yesterday nominated to the caremark board stuart l. bascomb, chief executive of amerisight, a privately held laser eye surgery company and former express scripts executive; duke k. bristow, an economist at the university of california, los angeles; john j. jones, a former executive of the argosy gaming company, and todd e. warnock, a health care investor and former investment banker at credit suisse first boston.  in press releases yesterday, express scripts and caremark each said that the merger it preferred could achieve $500 million in savings by cutting costs.  caremark said that combining with cvs would create an integrated health care product that would include mail-order and retail drug sales and ''personalized pharmaceutical and disease management services.'' a forced merger with express scripts would require debt that would diminish the financial strength of the combined company, caremark contended.  express scripts stressed that citigroup and credit suisse had committed to fully finance the transaction. but even if caremark and cvs shareholders reject cvs-caremark merger, some analysts say that investor approval of the express scripts offer would be far from certain.  ''i would be very surprised if express scripts and caremark ever get together,'' said andrew l. speller, an analyst with a.g. edwards & sons in st. louis.  market place  