the tamale girl of williamsburg   elizabeth reddin is a 32-year-old poet with saucer eyes and a rosy smile who stands nearly six feet tall without her roller skates. and last summer, on a whim, she became the tamale girl of williamsburg.  low on cash in july after the end of her job teaching an adult computer course, she was inspired by tamale sellers who frequent bars in southern california, where she grew up. and so one night, ms. reddin bought a stack of tamales from grand morelos, a 24-hour mexican diner on grand street, laced up her tan leather roller skates, her usual mode of transportation, and began making the rounds of bars in her brooklyn neighborhood in an effort to sell her wares.  ''the first night, i was insecure and didn't know what a good route was,'' she said. ''i went up and down bedford, and people were really excited. i sold them out. but the next night it was dead everywhere, and i got kicked out of some bars.''  through the summer and fall, ms. reddin refined her route. someone suggested that she hit the turkey's nest tavern, a working-class watering hole turned hipster haunt, after the sunday kickball games in nearby mccarren park. there the tamales proved a sensation. they also sold briskly at fun, a gay bar on north fourth street, which has since closed.  ''that was crazy,'' ms. reddin recalled. ''there were naked guys dancing on stools, but still they'd buy tamales.''  with the arrival of winter, ms. reddin has largely taken her business indoors, becoming the tamale girl in residence every sunday night at metropolitan, a bar on lorimer street. but she recently headed out around the neighborhood for a last spin of the season, with 40 steaming tamales, half chicken and half cheese, packed into a rubbermaid cooler atop a black shopping cart, which she pushed in front of her as she skated  ''hey, do you guys need a tamale?'' she asked a group of 20-somethings clutching pints of beer at barcade, a bar on union avenue outfitted with 27 vintage arcade games. some eagerly handed over dollar bills. a few said they were not yet intoxicated enough to truly need a tamale, even at the relatively reasonable price of $3. matt huard, a 25-year-old video editor, cautiously admitted that he didn't know what a tamale was.  ''it's a mexican appetizer made of cornmeal that's mildly spicy,'' ms. reddin replied. ''they're delish.''  her cooler emptied of a dozen tamales, she zipped along under the streetlights to union pool, a chic bar in a former swimming pool supply shop farther down union avenue. she wended her way through the crowd, her thick eyeglasses swinging on a gold chain around her neck.  a muscled, tattooed man named ted shred, a recent transplant from san francisco, said he had been accustomed to a locally famous tamale seller in the mission district. ''the tamale lady in san francisco was a big part of my life,'' said mr. shred, a 36-year-old d.j. and professional skateboarder. ''so coming out here and seeing this, and on roller skates -- it's beautiful.''  ms. reddin chatted about matters both tamale- and non-tamale-related. she reassured a woman with platinum-streaked hair that tamales were not terribly fattening. she listened to comparisons between her wares and those of a fellow known as the empanada guy, who also makes nighttime rounds of williamsburg bars but, unlike ms. reddin, is mexican and travels by car.  by 2 a.m., ms. reddin's cooler was almost empty. she skated over to metropolitan bar, where people flocked to her as soon as she rolled through the door. there were more hungry customers than she had tamales. ian hays, a 23-year-old designer, was among the lucky ones. ''you see a tall figure roll across the floor, and you know it's the tamale girl,'' mr. hays said. ''she's fabulous.''  jennifer bleyer  neighborhood report: city people  