the factory retooled   the warhol era's 15 minutes continue at the 205 club, a new lower east side spot done up in the style of the factory. like that hangout, the interior of 205 is silver, a mix of paint and aluminum foil.  the grottolike space downstairs is decorated with neatly printed graffiti, and the furniture on both floors -- tables covered in decoupage or made out of clocks -- is stylishly kitschy. even the upholstery on the banquettes was intentionally torn to match the less-ironically distressed factory. as a crowning meta-touch, instead of warhol's famous prints of marilyn monroe, there are large photos of paris hilton.  of course, the connection may be lost on people whose knowledge of the factory era begins and ends with sienna miller as edie sedgwick.  ''i don't know if it's warhol-esque, but it's a nice atmosphere,'' barnett citron, 24, said last weekend. ''you can dance like a villain here.''  well, mr. citron could. a group of his friends -- men and women, ''good looking people,'' he noted -- had been turned away. since it replaced 6s and 8s, a not-so-sleek rock 'n' roll bar in the same location a few months ago, 205 has found a following. it's one of the few downtown clubs with a cabaret license, which means those fiendish dance parties are perfectly legal.  backed by the night life maven serge becker (who came up with the factory theme and is also behind the night spots la esquina and the box) and the skateboard guru known as a-ron (whose shop, anything, is nearby), 205 has pedigree but comparatively little pomp. the bar takes pleasure in poking fun at its brethren on club row in chelsea (the only specialty cocktail is the 27th street, an $18 cosmopolitan), a stance appreciated by the modish, artsy crowd that treats 205 like a hangout.  ''the club scene has gotten really boring in new york,'' said sophia reznikas, an artist who grew up in the neighborhood. the 205 club, she said, is ''a better playground for younger people who are trying to make something of themselves, not just buy bottle service.''  or as tommy bones, a dj who stopped by, put it, ''there's some vibe left.'' and plenty of it. miguel strong, a skinny blond musician with a warholian haircut and a raccoon tail hanging from his back pocket, was twisting and cantering to a run-d.m.c. song.  ''i'm an enthusiast and i express myself sensually and i can barely hold myself in,'' he said. ''i can tell that there's an element of the pulse, of neurotic, erotic perfection.''  205 club  205 chrystie street (at stanton street), (212) 477-6688.  getting in -- at doorman's discretion. come before midnight to avoid a line.  dress code -- for women, bangs and jumpers; for men, hoodies and fedoras.  sightings -- ed norton, rosie perez, julia stiles, derek jeter, liev schreiber.  signature drink -- colt 45, $6.  boÎte  