an outbreak of rift valley fever kills dozens in kenya   a growing outbreak of rift valley fever has killed at least 62 people in northeastern kenya since last month, and health officials fear that it could become much more widespread.  the disease primarily infects livestock, but humans can catch the virus that causes it from mosquito bites or exposure to blood, raw milk or other fluids from infected animals. most people do not get very sick, but some develop a brain infection or a hemorrhagic fever, which causes shock and bleeding and can be rapidly fatal. in people, the death rate is usually about 1 percent.  although that is a relatively low mortality rate, the deaths are so horrible that the disease generates great fear, said dr. rob breiman, who works in nairobi as director of the international emerging infections program, part of the centers for disease control and prevention in the united states.  ''when it occurs in its severest manifestations, it's very, very frightening,'' he said. ''there's a rapid onset of illness, multi-organ failure, bleeding from multiple sites and death -- usually in young, healthy people. they can be healthy one day and near death the next.''  so far, 165 human cases have been reported in kenya, but the real number is thought to be much higher, because mild cases probably go unreported and because the region is vast, with hard-to-reach areas inhabited by nomadic livestock herders.  the cause of the outbreak is unusually heavy rains, which have created ponds and lakes where mosquitoes can breed, in an area that is normally dry.  the government in kenya has banned the transport and slaughter of livestock in the affected region, and doctors and scientists from other countries have been pouring in to help. the world health organization, doctors without borders and government agencies from the united states, including the centers for disease control and prevention, are all working in the region.  there is no specific treatment for the disease and no human vaccine for it. doctors can offer only supportive care, like fluids and transfusions. the only means of prevention is to avoid mosquito bites and infected animals or raw meat or milk from them. pasteurized milk and cooked meat from infected animals are safe -- but milking, slaughtering and butchering infected animals are risky.  the last outbreak of rift valley fever in kenya occurred in the same region, the garissa district, from november 1997 to february 1998. at least 170 people died, and researchers estimate that tens of thousands were infected. the district is about 200 miles northeast of nairobi.  james lorenz, a spokesman for doctors without borders, said the group was using cars and helicopters to reach affected areas, treat patients and teach local health workers how to diagnose cases and care for victims. he said that the severe cases were ''shocking and horrific'' and that people in the area were frightened for themselves and for the animals that are their livelihood.  no one knows why some people become so ill from the virus. so far, severe cases have not been linked to h.i.v. infection, old age or other conditions that can make people especially vulnerable.  because the virus is carried by mosquitoes, the disease has the potential to spread far and wide. cases have already been reported outside the northeastern province, which has scientists worried. they point out that outbreaks can have substantial economic impact, if they lead to international quarantines and restrictions on livestock sales, particularly in areas like northeast kenya, where the economy is almost entirely based on livestock.  the 1997-98 outbreak led to bans on imports of cattle from kenya and east africa that lasted for years, dr. breiman said. other countries feared that imported animals would touch off epidemics in people and livestock. the death rate is much higher in animals than in people, and the infection causes pregnant animals to abort.  the centers for disease control worked with ministry of health in kenya to set up a laboratory in garissa to test human blood for the virus and signs of infection, dr. breiman said, adding that scientists from the united states will also help to set up separate labs to test samples from animals.  researchers have trapped 50,000 mosquitoes, and insect experts will be examining them to determine which species are in the region and which are carrying the virus. several species of aedes are already known to be carriers.  but it is not clear whether the outbreak can be halted, dr. breiman said. there is a vaccine for animals, and kenya is receiving about 400,000 doses. the vaccine cannot help animals that are already infected, so the idea is to try to administer the vaccine in the projected path of the outbreak.  experts are also debating whether it is feasible to use larvicides against the mosquitoes, but flooding in the affected area is widespread and any aerial spraying would have to be extensive.  mosquito nets over beds cannot be distributed to everyone in the area because distances are long and some roads have been washed out. some mosquitoes bite during the day, like aedes. insect repellent has not been widely distributed.  covering up with clothing can also help, but when the rains stop, blistering heat sets in. dr. breiman said since most people in the region are muslim, and women cover themselves in public, they may not fare too badly.  ultimately, what stops the outbreak may be what started it: the weather. that is what occurred in the 1997-98 outbreak.  it is summer in kenya, normally a dry season, and if the floodwaters dry up, so will the mosquitoes, and the disease.  