g.e. is said to be seeking a buyer for its plastics unit   in a move that has been expected for months, general electric has begun shopping its plastics business to private equity funds, a person with knowledge of the details said yesterday.  the person said that goldman sachs, the investment bank that g.e. had retained to find buyers, had approached at least four equity groups, including apollo management, bain capital, the blackstone group and kohlberg kravis roberts & company. a deal could potentially be worth $10 billion.  rising costs for chemical feedstocks like benzene, and increased competition that is holding down prices, have squeezed profits at the plastics division. this squeeze has tightened at a time when jeffrey r. immelt, the g.e. chairman since 2001, has promised shareholders that profit would grow at two or three times the nation's overall rate of economic growth.  g.e. announced in october that overall profit rose 10 percent in the third quarter over a year earlier.  results would have been even better but for weak performance at the plastics unit, whose profit fell 23 percent to $152 million. plastics account for about 8 percent of g.e.'s revenue and about 5 percent of profit.  with the auction still in its initial stages, potential bidders have been required to sign confidentiality forms and to agree not to speak with rival firms about forming consortiums without permission from g.e., people involved in the process said. the practice is increasingly becoming standard in an effort by sellers to keep auctions competitive.  g.e. is likely to allow certain firms to pair up later in the process, once it has established which firms are most interested in the asset.  for months, mr. immelt had declined to comment on growing speculation that he would sell the plastics division. but in the conference call to announce the quarterly results, he gave the first hint of what strategy he would pursue. while being careful to neither suggest a sale nor rule one out, mr. immelt emphasized that g.e. would invest only in specialized, higher-margin plastics, not the commodity plastics in its portfolio.  making a sale at a good price may be challenging.  a year ago apollo bought most of the plastics business of tyco international for $975 million, acquiring 43 of tyco's 51 plastics factories.  apollo, which is controlled by leon black, bought tyco factories in five countries that make trash bags, duct tape, plastic sheeting and similar products. tyco held on to the a&e products group, the world's largest maker of plastic clothes hangers.  tyco had tried to sell its plastics business in 2002, when it was still mired in the scandal that led to a prison term for its former chief executive, l. dennis kozlowski. between the initial failed sale and the deal with apollo, tyco closed 30 plastics plants.  g.e. to buy vetco gray  by the associated press  citing strong global demand for energy, general electric said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the oil services company vetco gray for $1.9 billion from a group of private equity funds.  vetco gray provides drilling, completion and production equipment for oil and gas fields. its owners include candover partners, the 3i group and jpmorgan partners.  the business, which generated an estimated $1.6 billion of sales in 2006, has 5,000 employees, with operations in houston, britain, norway and singapore. g.e.'s current oil and gas business had about $3.6 billion in revenue in 2005, company officials said.  