a dance fling to salute the soul man   dwight rhoden's hip and slinky ''chapters'' has broadway dance musical written all over it. the balance of the program presented by the complexions contemporary ballet on tuesday night at the joyce theater was an up-and-down affair, with two of the most appealing dances coming from guest artists. but mr. rhoden, the company's chief choreographer and its founder with desmond richardson, has a promising thing going in ''chapters,'' which celebrates the music of marvin gaye.  ''chapters'' sets out to suggest the tightly intertwined lives and personalities of 15 friends, men and women in their 20s who have come to new york filled with dreams. sounds familiar, but the story and the selection of nine songs are pretty much a pretext for an all-out dance fling that takes place in what looks like a bar. by the end, the recorded performances by mr. gaye start to feel unvaryingly loud and brash. the piece, seen here in a one-act form, needs more nuances and dynamic variation, both in the dance and in the choice of music, to become a full-evening work.  the choreography could allude more to the song texts, particularly in mr. gaye's haunting antiwar ''what's going on.'' but the music's lazily insistent beat has the effect of a curl-relaxer on mr. rhoden's frizzy, hectic choreographic style. to watch these stretched, beautiful young bodies and sassy presences at easy play in the music is a great pleasure. and several of the fine dancers stand out from the crowd, among them clifford williams as a funny but lethal pal to all and rubinald pronk as a village people motorcycle guy striding through on towering high heels.  an expressive young powerhouse dancer named bryan arias is the runaway star of mr. rhoden's new ''hissy fits,'' danced to bach. the piece fully lives up to its name with a series of jousting duets for taut-bodied men and women with inexplicably snaking arms. an excerpt from mr. rhoden's 2005 ''b. sessions'' gives mr. williams and mr. richardson a chance at more lyrical ballet-influenced movement, in a fine cast completed by kimi nikaidoh and karah abiog.  ''loose change,'' choreographed by the actor taye diggs, to music by david ryan harris, is a charmer. the solo gives the exquisite mr. richardson the chance to act and move simultaneously in an evocation of life's throwaway activities, useless but all-important. matthew prescott sets juan rodriguez and yusha-marie sorzano to romantic spiraling about each other in ''this heart,'' a duet to music by sinead o'connor that adds a welcome tenderness to the evening. but jodie gates's new ''barely silent'' looks like outtakes from a rhoden piece, with music by alan terricciano, performed live, and a murmured taped musing on a broken affair.  complexions contemporary ballet performs through sunday at the joyce theater, 175 eighth avenue, at 19th street, chelsea; (212) 242-0800 or joyce.org.  dance review  