driver's letter to yoko ono is released, and rebutted   when prosecutors arrested yoko ono's chauffeur in december, they said he was a disgruntled, potentially violent employee trying to extort money from her.  but yesterday, the chauffeur's letter asking for money was released for the first time, and it turned out to be a tormented account of passion, romance, sex and humiliation, with the demand for money just one part.  the chauffeur, koral karsan, 50, said that he had been not just ms. ono's driver, but her lover as well, and that his marriage and self-esteem and ultimately their love affair had been destroyed by her mood swings, dependency and abusive behavior.  in the first paragraph of the two-page, typewritten, single-spaced letter, mr. karsan wrote, ''as you know, i have loyally served you in many capacities as your driver, bodyguard, assistant, butler, nurse, handyman and more so your lover and confidant over the last 10 years.''  elliot mintz, a spokesman for ms. ono, who is 73, denied yesterday that she and mr. karsan had had a sexual relationship. ''all of that is untrue,'' he said. he acknowledged that the publicity had possibly hurt ms. ono's reputation, but said she did not regret going to the police.  ''she certainly feels awful, and has absolutely no second thoughts about proceeding in the manner that she did,'' mr. mintz said. ''it is an extortion letter. she does not pay blackmail or extortion fees.''  mr. mintz declined to comment on other details of mr. karsan's letter, except to say that they differed in some small ways from the draft of the letter he had seen.  mr. karsan wrote that he had contacted a lawyer about suing ms. ono for sexual harassment as a ''quid pro quo'' for her mistreatment of him. in the last sentence of the letter, he said he deserved $2 million as compensation for his pain and suffering, and would drop his plans for a lawsuit if ms. ono paid him.  prosecutors say that mr. karsan read the letter to ms. ono in her apartment at the dakota on dec. 8, the 26th anniversary of the killing of her husband, john lennon, by a crazed fan. they have characterized it as an extortion letter, saying that mr. karsan threatened to release embarrassing tapes and photos and to kill ms. ono if she did not pay him $2 million so he could return to his native turkey.  prosecutors had so far released only small excerpts from the letter.  but mr. karsan's lawyer, robert gottlieb, filed what he said was the full text yesterday in state supreme court in manhattan as part of a bail application for mr. karsan, who has been jailed since his arrest on dec. 13. in the bail application, mr. gottlieb suggested that if mr. karsan had hired a lawyer to write a more ''artful'' version of the letter, he might never have been accused of a crime.  ''we respectfully submit that this letter is not the damaging piece of evidence the people represented it to be,'' mr. gottlieb wrote to justice daniel p. fitzgerald, who is to hear the bail application tomorrow.  the district attorney's office declined to comment yesterday.  the letter, dated december 2006, begins on a formal note -- ''dear ms. ono.'' over 10 years, mr. karsan wrote, ''our relationship has also deepened into a very emotional and physical one as well.''  but he accused ms. ono of destroying his marriage and his self-esteem.  ''your systematic and continuous physical and psychological abuse has caused me to become a different person, stripped of any kind of dignity and self-respect,'' he wrote. ''my wife has now left me because of the relationship between you and me.''  mr. karsan wrote that ms. ono made him work more than 15 hours a day, seven days a week, obliging him to wait until she was out of the country to take his wife to the doctor or have an engagement party for his son.  he wrote that in pursuing his lawsuit, he would call people who would testify to ''things that will shock the world.'' his list included ''paul,'' which seemed to mean paul mccartney; ms. ono's son, sean lennon; her daughter, kyoko, from her previous marriage to anthony cox; jann wenner, the editor of rolling stone; and her neighbors at the dakota.  mr. karsan said he would write books revealing such personal details as sean lennon's telling a girlfriend that his father was a wife beater.  he said he would repeat ms. ono's critical remarks about people ranging from her children and the beatles to jacqueline kennedy onassis and mr. mintz.  ''if you want all of these pictures, recordings, e-mails, conversations and memories to vanish from the face of the earth and never hear from me again, all you have to do is send me a certified cashier's check from a new york bank for a total amount of $2 million,'' the letter says in its last sentence. it is signed, ''thank you very much, koral karsan.''  mr. karsan does not threaten physical violence. but prosecutors have said that he made such threats in a subsequent meeting with ms. ono's lawyer.  mr. gottlieb told the judge that after mr. karsan was arrested, he and his wife, nazan, reconciled, and that she ''fully supports him.'' he said mr. karsan had no interest in fleeing the country, because his son was to be married in new york in february, and he ''desperately wants to be present at and take part in his son's wedding day.''  in the letter, mr. karsan suggested that even strangers knew about his affair with ms. ono, and that it had ruined his reputation. ''additionally, our relationship both in the public eye and private has caused a significant degree of defamation to my character,'' mr. karsan wrote. ''people, including your own son and daughter, have voiced their opinions regarding our relationship.  ''every day i endure countless demeaning looks and comments from people at work, on the street and most painfully at home. this continues and will continue to cause indescribable pain for me and more importantly my family.''  