e.w. scripps explores options for its newspaper holdings   newspapers may have lost their luster for yet another media company.  e. w. scripps, the parent company of the rocky mountain news, the commercial appeal in memphis and 18 other dailies, told an investor conference yesterday that it was exploring separating its newspaper business from its more profitable cable television and syndication ventures.  the growth of scripps over the last few years has come more from the success of its fast-growing tv networks, like the food network and hgtv, than from its newspaper operations, which accounted for only 25 percent of its revenue last year, down from 55 percent in 2000.  ''clearly the most advantageous route is to separate the newspaper business in some fashion,'' kenneth w. lowe, the chief executive, said at the investor conference in las vegas. he indicated, however, that restrictions in the scripps trust, which controls the company, ''may preclude an outright sale.''  investors, seeing newspaper companies like knight ridder and the tribune company sold or on the block, have been pressuring scripps to reduce its newspaper operations. yesterday's announcement sent its shares up $1.92, to $51.92.  but the company is limited in what it can do because of the restrictions in the family trust, which holds 44 percent of equity in the company and has 88 percent of the vote.  the scripps family owes its fortune to edward w. scripps, who started the enterprise in 1878 when he bought the cleveland penny press, a paper aimed at working-class people who could not afford the 5 cents that many papers then charged.  the scripps trust, created in the early 1920s, includes language that says it must control the company. but there is debate over whether the wording requires the company to be a ''newspaper'' company or simply that the trust must control whatever properties are currently in the company portfolio. since mr. scripps's death in 1926, a number of individual papers have been sold.  scripps might choose to spin off the newspaper division into a separate company, also to be controlled by the trust, or sell some individual newspapers. in addition to its 20 dailies, the company has a handful of weekly or semiweekly community papers, and its united media unit syndicates more than 150 comic strips, including peanuts and dilbert.  joseph g. necastro, the scripps chief financial officer, said at the conference that it was difficult to know when the declines in newspaper readership and earnings would bottom out. ''we think there is some value to be found in deconsolidation,'' he said.  correction:  january 12, 2007, friday  an article in business day yesterday about the media company e.w. scripps, and the possible sale of some of its newspapers, misattributed a quotation explaining the reason for the strategy. it was the chief financial officer joseph g. necastro -- not the chief executive kenneth w. lowe -- who said: ''clearly the most advantageous route is to separate the newspaper business in some fashion.''  