thailand may add measures to restrict foreign investment   thailand warned yesterday that it might add further restrictions to foreign investors, ignoring warnings that the move was ill timed and damaging for a fragile economy already struggling to overcome the stigma of a military coup and the instability caused by recent bombings in bangkok.  news of stricter foreigner ownership laws, which were approved by the cabinet but still need the agreement of two government bodies, sent the thai stock index down 2.7 percent. that is the latest setback for the market, which plunged last month after a botched experiment with rules limiting the flow of foreign money into the country.  ''thailand has shot itself in the foot,'' said ping chew, a regional analyst at standard & poor's in singapore. ''i know there are domestic pressures, but they have to be sensible and rational about it.''  the decision by the military-appointed cabinet, if upheld, would require some foreign investors to sell holdings that exceed 50 percent in companies based in thailand and give up voting rights in excess of 50 percent, according to the finance minister, pridiyathorn devakula.  american companies would be largely exempt from this rule because of a treaty with thailand that dates to the vietnam war, said kitipong urapeepatanapong, a partner at baker & mckenzie in bangkok. ''american investors do not have much to worry about,'' he said.  european and japanese companies, however, have complained loudly in recent days that any law should not be retroactive. it remained unclear yesterday exactly which categories of foreign companies would be forced to reduce their stakes or find thai partners. mr. pridiyathorn said the limits would apply to companies operating in telecommunications and other sectors vital to national security.  the foreign business act bans foreigners from owning majority shares in businesses as diverse as the media, rice farming, the production of images of buddha, legal services and many types of construction. foreign businesses have often skirted these laws by appointing thais to serve as proxies, a gray area that the proposed laws seek to clarify.  although legal analysts say changes have long been needed, the announcement caused widespread confusion. affected companies will have two years to comply with the new rules. but retailers, insurers, banks and brokers would be exempt, the commerce minister, krirkkrai jirapaet, told reuters.  it also comes at a time when thailand's image around the region is suffering. last month, the government announced capital controls to stem the rise in the baht but partly rescinded them the next day after the market plunged 15 percent.  confidence in thailand was further shaken when eight bombs exploded around the thai capital on new year's eve, killing 3 people and wounding more than 40. with foreigners already wary of investing in thailand, the last thing the country needed, analysts say, was a new law perceived as antiforeign.  ''i don't quite understand what purpose this is designed to serve,'' said korn chatikavanij, a former president of the thai unit of jpmorgan chase. ''effectively, it's a tightening of foreign ownership which begs the question of why in this day and age this is good for thailand.''  thailand, heavily dependent on both foreign investment and trade, has experienced declines in investment recently. approved foreign investment fell 43 percent during the first 11 months of 2006, to 305.8 billion baht ($8.6 billion), compared with the period in 2005, according to the board of investment.  political instability leading up to the coup in september that ousted prime minister thaksin shinawatra has frightened some foreign investors away, and the new foreign investment rules could frighten away more, mr. korn, the former banker, said.  ''the law that exists already provides protection,'' he said. ''it doesn't seem reasonable to make it more onerous.''  the immediate goal of the new rules is largely political: to close the loopholes that the thai government says enabled the investment arm of the singapore government, temasek, to buy control of shin, the thai telecommunications company, from the family of mr. thaksin for $1.9 billion in a deal done last year.  that deal galvanized public protests against mr. thaksin, culminating in the september coup. to help them justify ousting the prime minister, the military leaders who staged the coup are intent on showing that the shin sale was illegitimate.  mr. thaksin's ouster set in motion a series of challenges to the deal, including a pending lawsuit against regulators who approved the transaction and an investigation into allegations of tax evasion that has culminated in the government's firing of the head of the revenue department.  