urban studies -- appreciating; amid the a.t.m.'s, art blossoms   compared with a free toaster, the ingres oil of the dauphin riding a white horse back to paris after the quelling of a peasant revolt was an unusual enticement coming from a bank.  in fact, the ingres was not intended as an adornment for anyone's living room, though as one of 13 objects at the inaugural show of a tiny gallery within the new flagship branch of the park avenue bank at 350 park avenue, it delighted those who saw it.  ''you can look at each piece and read about it without getting too tired,'' said mary shallman, an intellectual-property lawyer who lives on the upper west side and attended one of a series of receptions that the bank held in connection with the show. the gallery is the brainchild of martin fisher, a real estate consultant for the bank, who with martin mullin, an artist and curator, hatched a plan to create a museum-quality exhibition space within an area of the branch not needed for banking.  ''the president is an opera lover, but i said we can't have 'tosca' or 'madame butterfly' at the bank,'' mr. mullin said, referring to the bank's president, charles antonucci sr. but the bank could have art, he concluded, and in doing so contribute to the neighborhood. ''there are lots of banks along park avenue,'' mr. mullin said, ''but not many museums.'' at 475 square feet, the mini-museum calls to mind a cozy manhattan studio, albeit one with good lighting and a heavy security door.  the first exhibition, which closed last week after the three-month run, was a tightly edited collection of european works on loan from the wadsworth atheneum in hartford. each year, the gallery plans to present six exhibitions of work lent from other institutions; coming up are a collection of warhols from the jewish museum and paintings by alex katz from the farnsworth art museum in rockland, me.  at the reception last month, wine glasses clinked and guests drank near the tellers' stations. inside the little gallery, mr. mullin, tall and elegantly tailored, showed off tiepolo's ''susanna and the elders,'' in which a fearful, semi-naked woman determinedly resists the lustful overtures of the elders of babylon tendering fistfuls of jewels. ''and now she's at the bank,'' mr. mullin mused.  marjorie van dyke and steve stankiewicz, two 50-year-old printmakers who attended the reception, considered the tiepolo.  ''this is a period of work i really love,'' ms. van dyke said.  ''you love everything,'' her companion replied with a frown.  ''that's not true,'' ms. van dyke snapped.  debating the merits of tiepolo versus caravaggio, they headed off past the a.t.m.'s into the night.  jennifer bleyer  urban studies | appreciating  