i.r.s. use of private debt collectors is criticized   the national taxpayer advocate called on congress yesterday to repeal the authority of the internal revenue service to use private debt collectors.  in her annual report, the taxpayer advocate, nina e. olson, said the private debt collection program was economically inefficient and prone to abuse. in particular, she faulted the i.r.s. for not disclosing certain ''psychological techniques'' used by the private contractors to try to collect unpaid taxes.  the office of the taxpayer advocate was created by congress to identify problems within the i.r.s. that affect taxpayers and to promote their interests before the agency and congress, which writes the tax code.  ms. olson's office provided its most extensive review yet of the private debt-collection program, which it has been monitoring for two years since plans for it were announced. the program, which formally started in september, is meant to farm out easily collectible tax bills, typically owed by low-income taxpayers, to private collection agencies. when the i.r.s. announced the program, it said that the private entities would abide by the same publicly disclosed rules as i.r.s. employees.  private debt collection has drawn criticism that it is not cost-efficient and that some of the private firms hired by the i.r.s. have questionable business practices. one firm hired by the agency was the law firm of linebarger goggan blair & sampson of austin, tex., whose former partner, juan peña, pleaded guilty to federal bribery charges for his role in winning a collection contract from the city of san antonio.  the taxpayer advocate also criticized some of the techniques used by private collectors. ''in an initial draft of this report, we cited sections of a collection script used by one of the contractors which used psychological tricks during the conversation to get the taxpayers to commit to a payment, which is then followed by a belated fair debt collection practices act warning at the end of the conversation,'' the report says.  ''the i.r.s. informed us that private collection agencies had designated the 'collection scripts' and operational plans as proprietary and that we could not cite specific portions of the scripts.''  she then wrote that the i.r.s. had later asked the three private debt collection firms to release information on their practices. one firm complied, ms. olson wrote, the second released partial information, and the third refused to release any information.  in a brief telephone interview yesterday, ms. olson said, ''taxes are the lifeblood of government; to have private agents collecting them changes the relationship between the taxpayer and government.''  in its written response to ms. olson's criticism of the private debt-collection program, the i.r.s. said that it ''strives to make certain that p.c.a. employees adhere to the same guidelines and restrictions as i.r.s. employees.'' p.c.a. refers to private debt collectors.  the i.r.s. also said that it had taken steps to have all three private debt collection firms approve the release of the documents sought by ms. olson, and that it was releasing ''other appropriate information.''  the i.r.s. began using three private debt collectors last september for 12,500 cases considered easy to collect, and expects to process 446,000 cases over two and a half years, ms. olson wrote. the collectors keep 25 cents of every dollar they collect. so far they have collected just 8 percent of the dollars assigned to them, she wrote -- less than certain i.r.s. units with more difficult collection cases.  ''our conclusion is that this initiative is fatally flawed, risking much for a small return on investment,'' she wrote.  the commissioner of internal revenue, mark w. everson, has said that if the i.r.s. had more money it would not have to outsource tax collection to private firms.  ms. olson also noted a 36 percent rise last year in demands, called notices of levy, that the i.r.s. sends to delinquent taxpayers asking them to settle their bills with the agency. a significant portion of such demands were served on elderly or disabled taxpayers, she wrote.  in her report, ms. olson also recommended that congress improve funding for the i.r.s., which received $10.6 billion to collect $2.2 trillion, or 98 percent of all federal revenue. she also recommended, for a second consecutive year, that congress protect not-guilty spouses from the burdens of tax crimes, by repealing joint and several liability rules. she also called upon congress to create a federal oversight agency to supervise quasigovernment retirement plans, ''to ensure that they are carrying out their fiduciary duties.''  ms. olson also said that the i.r.s. failed to turn over documents concerning its internal deliberations on tax matters. this was the first time that the i.r.s. failed to turn over documents requested by the office of the taxpayer advocate, she said.  ''the effect of this refusal is to thwart congressional intent in seeking a taxpayer perspective on potential problems within the i.r.s.,'' ms. olson wrote. ''as a consequence, congress is being left in the dark, and taxpayers are being harmed.'' ms. olson did not specify in her report what types of documents she was looking for or what issues they addressed.  in its response, the i.r.s. said that it was ''committed to improving the way it manages instructions to staff.''  