retrofitting operetta for a 21st-century crowd   here's a ''jeopardy!'' answer: it's a musical genre that features pointed, witty texts; catchy tunes; strong music; and cutting-edge visuals, presented in an intimate setting.  what is operetta, alex?  what, indeed? operetta is not generally associated with any of these things. the term mostly conjures up visions of ostrich feathers and rhinestones; central european duchies with ornate military uniforms; pretty melodies crooned by bright-eyed ingénues.  and for many, it conjures nothing. operetta, once the most popular european form of musical theater, has declined in its native lands, while in the united states it never caught on strongly. today johann strauss's ''fledermaus'' and franz lehar's ''merry widow'' are the only two operettas americans are likely to have encountered, apart from the light operas of gilbert and sullivan.  but when the austrian cultural forum sets out to answer the question ''what is operetta?'' in a festival called mostly operetta (tomorrow through jan. 25), the results are not likely to be the ones people expect. for one thing, the tiny concert hall on east 52nd street that the festival is using is not suited to music-hall-type spectacle; rather, it forces intimacy on audience and performers. the forum's director, christoph thun-hohenstein, said that he first thought of the idea when he heard the cd ''im chambre séparée,'' a selection of operetta excerpts by the soprano barbara bonney, with piano rather than the standard orchestral accompaniment.  ''the piano accompaniment gave the operetta excerpts almost lied-like qualities,'' he said. thus was born the notion of presenting operetta in liedlike terms. a program of works by franz lehar will include a number of the composer's little-known songs as well as his famous operettas (on monday and jan. 18); an evening devoted to kurt weill arranges songs from his american years, at the junction of operetta and the broadway musical, into what mr. thun-hohenstein called ''a sort of winterreise,'' referring to franz schubert's cycle of 24 linked songs (jan. 20 and 25). the lied parallel, and the small-scale setting, should enable american audiences to ''get'' the part of operetta that tends to get lost in translation: the text.  another striking part of the presentation are its visuals. the forum has commissioned victoria coeln, an installation artist based in vienna, to create a multimedia visual accompaniment for all five programs (each to be performed twice), combining silhouettes of the performers, photographic images and live video.  ''the abstract images give the imagination more free play,'' ms. coeln said, than would pictures of, say, austrian landscapes.  the presentation may also emphasize that operetta was originally a sophisticated contemporary entertainment. born as a french satiric form with the bouffes of jacques offenbach in the 1850s, it moved on, like most parisian fashions, to vienna, where it was embraced as a native product, albeit still following french models; even ''die fledermaus'' was based on a play by offenbach's librettists, henri meilhac and ludovic halévy. viennese operetta continued to flourish into the 20th century -- ''the merry widow'' dates from 1905 -- and even migrated across the atlantic to some degree.  the opening concert of mostly operetta, sung entirely in english (on wednesday and friday), is a tribute to the operettas that played on broadway in the first half of the past century, like oscar straus's ''chocolate soldier'' or emmerich kalman's ''countess maritza.'' an antecedent to the broadway musical in many respects, operetta was looked down on by serious opera companies. the metropolitan opera didn't deign to stage ''the merry widow'' until it had aged enough to qualify as a respectable classic -- in the year 2000.  operetta's aging is part of its problem today. what appeared sophisticated in 1920 may seem hackneyed now, all the more so in translations that are almost inevitably inadequate. a successful operetta translation requires nearly a complete rewrite of the original text (as sheldon harnick did for a late-1970s version of ''the merry widow,'' starring beverly sills). the metropolitan opera effectively acknowledges the problem, without solving it, by performing ''die fledermaus'' with the spoken dialogue in english but the sung text in german, so that any appearance of dramatic verisimilitude is purely accidental.  yet because operetta has grown into respectability and away from popularity, opera houses are the only place where modern audiences are likely to encounter it. ms. coeln's visuals, and the cabaret-like setting, represent an ambitious bid by the forum to move the genre into the 21st century.  it remains open to question whether viennese operetta can ever appear truly contemporary. certainly one of the festival's highlights is a representative of the classic operetta tradition: the hungarian-born soprano marta eggerth, a major operetta star of stage and screen, for whom both lehar and kalman wrote. now 94 and still singing with astonishing freshness, ms. eggerth on thursday will discuss operetta style, give a few sung demonstrations and preside over the screening of a few of her 1930s-vintage film clips. unfortunately, there is no film of ms. eggerth's broadway run of ''the merry widow'' from 1943-44, with her husband, the great polish tenor and matinee idol jan kiepura. (sidney sheldon was co-author of the book; george balanchine was the choreographer.)  asked in a recent telephone conversation about operetta style, ms. eggerth first turned to practicalities. ''technically, there is no difference between opera and operetta,'' she said. ''either you can sing it or you cannot sing it.''  but in ''the merry widow,'' she conceded, ''i had the vilja aria in two different keys, and if i was tired after eight performances a week, i made the sign to the conductor to do it half a tone lower. these things you cannot do in opera. of course, most of the time i sang it in the original key.''  the real distinguishing characteristic of operetta, ms. eggerth said, lies elsewhere.  ''there's a certain atmosphere,'' she said. ''it is not only the style and the way of singing: operetta is really a very erotic thing. today, there is no erotic. on the beach the bikini, two little leaves over the breasts: there it is. that is not sex. sexiness is something which is not shown right away. the mysterious. you don't see immediately, but you suspect, and the suspicion makes curiosity, and the curiosity you play around with.''  ''also with operetta,'' she added, ''this not knowing but suspecting, kind of teasing one another -- that makes it interesting, sexy, but funny at the same time. this is my whole principle of what makes operetta.''  eroticism may not be included in the ''jeopardy!'' answer. but ms. eggerth's summary demonstrates that there may be a lot more to operetta than many new york audiences suspect. the mostly operetta festival hopes to bear this out.  all performances in the mostly operetta festival, tomorrow through jan. 25, will take place at the austrian cultural forum, 11 east 52nd street, manhattan, (212) 319-5300, ext. 222. admission is free, but reservations are required.  