new school campus is approved for the bronx   the new york city council yesterday unanimously approved the construction of a $235 million campus with four secondary schools, a football field and basketball courts on old railyards in the south bronx.  the project, which was initially proposed by local community groups and strongly supported by mayor michael r. bloomberg, had become the subject of a bitter feud in recent weeks over environmental and health concerns about the site, particularly the city's plan to remediate pollution, including elevated levels of mercury and lead in the soil.  opposition to the project by councilwoman maria del carmen arroyo, who represents the mott haven neighborhood where the campus will be built, forced the bloomberg administration to withdraw its proposed site plan last month to avoid having it voted down by the council's subcommittee on landmarks, public siting and maritime uses.  some council members also sought to use the dispute over the project to force a conversation with the bloomberg administration over school admissions and zoning.  after the administration agreed to pay for an additional environmental study, the council voted 46 to 0 yesterday to approve the city's plan.  in an interview, the council speaker, christine c. quinn, praised lawmakers and the mayor's office for reaching a positive outcome.  ''they are going to be top-notch, state of the arts seats in really top-notch buildings,'' ms. quinn said.  the campus is intended to serve 2,460 students in two high schools, a school for grades 6 to 12 and a charter middle school.  in a statement, mr. bloomberg said: ''the approval of this project is critical to ensuring that we continue to create high-quality classrooms all across the city. for students in the bronx, this project will create greater school choice and alleviate overcrowding, which ultimately will translate to increased classroom success.''  the campus will be located on more than six acres between east 153rd and east 156th streets in the bronx.  it is the biggest project in the mayor's $13.1 billion, five-year school construction plan and is scheduled to be completed in 2010.  