streetscapes/upper west side; along broadway, jettisoned cornices are being rebuilt   broadway, as it snakes through the upper west side, is a laboratory revealing the shift in contemporary attitudes toward historic buildings over the decades. for most of its length it is unfettered by landmark regulation, and owners and architects can do as they wish with the slightly threadbare prewar apartment houses. as a result, many buildings scalped of their cornices in the mid-20th century have been recrowned in the last decade.  there are at least a dozen examples, some restorations, others totally new works, but all demonstrating widely varying ideas.  as construction heights reached 10 to 15 stories in the 1800s, the crowning element of the cornice became the standard for how a building should meet the sky.  typically, it followed a classical design and was made either of copper or galvanized iron. stone and terra cotta were sometimes used, but metal could be shop-molded into intricately detailed pieces while remaining lightweight.  a mile's walk down broadway, beginning at 100th street, offers up a sort of design studio in contemporary cornice repair for the 10-to-15-story apartment house. at 100th street rises one of broadway's most sophisticated works, the 1909 allenhurst.  in that year, the new york times wrote that the two upper stories ''will be particularly ornate, with a large overhanging cornice.'' indeed, its architect, william rouse, gave the building a particularly notable one of copper, which has a higher initial cost than galvanized iron but does not need regular painting.  later, the allenhurst became a single-room-occupancy hotel, the midway, and in the winter of 1992 a storm ripped off one part of the cornice. the next spring, the owners took off most of the rest.  michael ahren, the manager, says that three years ago the owners decided to spend $100,000 to restore the cornice, using fiberglass to imitate the original, although they had to shrink it for structural reasons. ''we wanted to return it to its original glory,'' mr. ahren said. ''it's 90 percent exact.''  as to size, that's an overstatement, because photographs appear to show a cornice twice the depth of the present replacement. nonetheless, for a relatively modest real estate operation, it is an expansive and praiseworthy gesture.  the midway's replacement cornice was installed by the architectural fiberglass corporation, whose president, charles wittman, says fiberglass is now the material of choice for cornice installations. because of its stabilizers, fiberglass doesn't need to be painted, he said, adding that his company has installed 13 miles of fiberglass cornice in the metropolitan area.  at 86th street, the bretton hall, designed by harry mulliken and completed in 1903, lost its galvanized iron cornice decades ago and has the characteristic scalped look. but now a new treatment, designed by john c. calderón, is nearly finished.  he wanted to replicate the original chunky projecting cornice but said that the cost was prohibitive, even though projecting cornices serve to keep moisture away from the vulnerable upper walls. so he redesigned the rooftop, rebuilding the vertical wall -- the parapet -- in red brick and cast stone laid in alternating stripes. it has an art moderne look, as if it dated to the 1930s.  mr. calderón's work is uncannily like the upper section of the 1980s apartment house diagonally across the 86th street intersection, but he said that any similarity was unintentional. he sought to complement the rhythms of the brick and stone detailing of the rest of the bretton hall, and also leave room for see-through balustrades for future rooftop tenants.  his effort looks a bit raw now but should blend in better when the entire facade is cleaned, part of a $1 million project. his is an intriguing departure from the usual ''make it look as though it has always been there'' approach.  at the northeast corner of 81st street, a 1913 building designed by gaetan ajello lost a huge projecting cornice -- either galvanized or copper -- sometime before 1980, leaving a bare patch at the top that has long been a painful sight. the architectural firm of lawless & mangione has just finished rebuilding the parapet wall.  instead of replicating the original cornice, the architects have installed one that doesn't project as far. neither they nor the owner would give details on the project, but the material appears to be fiberglass or cast stone.  compared with old photographs of the original, the new cornice is dinky, but to a viewer unfamiliar with the building's past appearance, the result is neat and trim, and certainly shows a decent respect for the opinions of others.  on a stroll like this one, it is hard to miss the spectacular roof lines that remain intact; they give the flavor of what the replacements seek to reproduce.  the two 1910s apartment houses on the east corners of broadway at 98th street have majestic cornices of copper, with patina worthy of a renaissance bronze in open-air florence.  rouse & goldstone's lovely haroldon court of 1912, at the northeast corner of 90th, has a beautiful earth-toned cornice, apparently of terra cotta.  and the king of the hill is the great projecting copper cornice that charles platt designed for his 1916 astor court apartments, on broadway from 89th to 90th.  having the originals still in place is a blessing, of course, but their newer cousins add a piquant variety to a feature that new yorkers are often too busy to stop and enjoy.  streetscapes | upper west side e-mail: streetscapes@nytimes.com  correction:  january 14, 2007, sunday  the streetscapes column last sunday, about cornices on buildings on broadway between 81st and 100th streets, misstated the date for the construction of haroldon court, a building by rouse & goldstone at 90th street. it was built in 1922, not 1912.  