lessons for homesick evacuees on how to be houstonian   hurricane katrina evacuees take note: you're not in new orleans anymore.  it's time to ''think like a houstonian.''  that is the message from two displaced new orleanians in a lighthearted new video prepared by houston social agencies to help survivors of the 2005 hurricane find work and establish new roots here in the nation's fourth largest city.  of 106,393 suddenly unemployed evacuees who took refuge in the houston area, 28,508 had found jobs through november, according to worksource, an arm of the texas workforce commission, which made the seven-minute video with the city of houston and neighborhood centers inc., a nonprofit aid group, for the community settlement network, a group of aid organizations. but many newcomers still need guidance, said cindy gabriel, communications director for the network and a producer of the video, to be posted on local web sites.  ad-libbing a little riff on ''the wizard of oz,'' the volunteer stars, durrell johnson and rashida jackson (she wears dorothy-style pigtails), voice amazement at the unfamiliar skyline and lament the lack of oyster po' boy sandwiches with cheese before getting down to a series of recommendations.  ''you have to know a little bit about the city and know how people think here,'' says ms. jackson, 29, formerly an adjunct professor of health promotion at the university of new orleans and now working as a case management supervisor at neighborhood centers.  mr. johnson, 36, who worked for an aids foundation in new orleans and is now a case manager at neighborhood centers, agrees. ''that's what you do,'' he says, ''you think like a houstonian.''  a houstonian is prepared, they agree -- prepared for lots of paperwork. keep index cards with notes of previous jobs and employers.  a houstonian does not keep a cellphone with a 504 new orleans area code. ''you want to make sure that the employer knows that you are planning on staying in houston,'' mr. johnson says.  make sure, ms. jackson agrees, ''to put a 713 or 832 or another local number on that application.''  and mr. johnson chides, ''you should leave the rap or jazz intros out of your voice messaging system so that employers know that you are serious about finding a job.''  don't regale prospective employers with tales of narrow escapes, he cautions: ''you should think about going forward as opposed to backward.''  ''now that you're in houston looking for work,'' mr. johnson says, ''you should think of yourself as a houstonian, not a homesick new orleanian.''  ms. jackson finds a rainbow in houston. ''i don't know about you,'' she tells mr. johnson, ''but the city's kind of starting to grow on me.''  