barbs traded in nasdaq bid for exchange in london   nasdaq and the london stock exchange traded trans-atlantic insults on monday, as london exchange shareholders consider nasdaq's $5.3 billion hostile takeover offer.  nasdaq has been trying to take over the london exchange since march, but has failed to lure london executives to the negotiating table.  ''without nasdaq, your l.s.e. shares would be worth far less,'' the nasdaq stock market said on the front of a 34-page document sent monday to london exchange shareholders. nasdaq said a ''complacent'' london exchange was facing customer dissatisfaction and increased competition. and nasdaq said it might even pair up with someone else to compete with london if this deal did not go through.  the london exchange replied that nasdaq's arguments were ''self-serving'' and ''blatantly misleading,'' criticizing in particular the industry comparisons the new york exchange used for its financial arguments.  nasdaq is expected to extend its preliminary deadline of thursday for shareholders to tender their shares on the £12.43-a-share ($23.99) offer for 30 days, until feb. 10.  the london stock exchange, meanwhile, has until jan. 20 to make any revisions to its projections and plans. some analysts said they thought it might offer shareholders a big payout, which could add debt and make a nasdaq takeover more difficult.  the nasdaq offer, which was made dec. 12, also illustrates a growing phenomenon in deal-making: a trend for hedge funds or temporary investors to enter the fray and possibly decide the outcome.  since nasdaq made its first moves on the london exchange, hedge fund investors have piled into the stock. they now hold an estimated 30 percent of the london exchange, which could give nasdaq, which owns 28.8 percent, the more than 50 percent that it needs to take control.  boards and executives from both companies must appeal to hedge funds, rather than relying solely on the votes of long-term investors, who generally side with their company's board.  how the bulk of these investors will vote on the london exchange is still not clear. shares in the exchange closed down 0.1 percent on monday, at £12.82, a sign that many still think the london exchange will fetch a higher price than nasdaq is offering. samuel j. heyman, an investor, said monday in a regulatory filing that he had bought more stock at £12.82 a share and owns nearly 10 percent.  other investors are showing some caution. trafalgar asset managers bought call options, which permit the buyer to buy shares of a security at a certain price, for as low as £12 a share. the london exchange also said monday that ing's wholesale banking division had informed the exchange that it had reduced its stake to less than 3 percent.  the london stock exchange has paid cash to shareholders several times in recent years to fend off takeover bids.  nasdaq was critical of that practice as well on monday. ''the l.s.e. board claims credit for proactive balance sheet management when 76 percent of capital distributed in the last three years was either a reaction to a third-party bid or an exceptional distribution,'' its mailing to shareholders said.  international business  