bridging the worlds of commerce and the arts   in her 30 years as a jazz vocalist, ellen christi has received numerous grants from arts organizations to finance music and theater projects in the united states and europe.  her latest grant may be her most prized. it is from great performances -- not the public television series, but the manhattan catering company she works for to support her career as an artist.  ms. christi, who holds the position of catering captain, will use the money to complete a recording she made a year ago with jodie christian, a chicago piano player whom ms. christi has revered since she was a teenager. without the grant, the project would still be gathering dust.  ''this is tremendous,'' ms. christi, 48, said in a recent interview after learning that she was one of three colleagues to win $4,000 from her employer. ''i am constantly on this little treadmill trying to get a lump sum of money together, and then it will slip out for expenses.''  new york is filled with singers, actors and other artists who pay their bills by working as waiters, store clerks and secretaries, and who often have to delay dream projects. at great performances, which says 85 percent of its 525 employees have a connection to the arts, the grants are intended to bring the worlds of the arts and commerce together.  liz neumark, the company's founder and chief executive, established the program in the late 1980s to keep her employees' creative juices flowing while they serve canapés and pour drinks. ''it is about giving back, but also recognition,'' ms. neumark said. ''this is how we all started, and we all recognize what it is to have a dream.''  to be eligible, employees must have worked at least 400 hours in the previous year. the grants are for hourly employees -- about half of the staff -- to finance specific projects aimed at advancing their artistic careers. they are awarded by an outside panel of judges. amy todd middleton, senior vice president of north american marketing for sotheby's international, one of the sites where great performances caters events, was a judge in the latest round.  the awards, given every other year, have grown with the company, from $1,000 to $4,000 each. great performances started as a catering employment service for women in the arts, and is now a full-service catering business with annual revenue of $35 million. it caters corporate and private events and operates eight cafes, including dizzy's club coca-cola at jazz at lincoln center.  performers make good catering employees, ms. neumark said. they can maneuver through a crowd with grace and improvise if there is an unexpected request or problem.  last month, great performances announced the awards at a cocktail reception at jazz at lincoln center, where the assembled were more accustomed to serving food than being catered to. all three recipients work as captains, intermediaries between client, party planner and servers.  one recipient, christopher carlson, plans to reintroduce a scandinavian-inspired children's accessory line he started with his mother in the early 1990s. he was forced to suspend the business when his mother died of breast cancer in 2001, he said. garry novikoff, a singer and songwriter, plans to complete a cd of his own music.  judith e. glaser, founder of benchmark communications, a workplace consultancy with offices in manhattan and norwalk, conn., that advises corporations on leadership and team building, praised the program. she said employees were motivated by more than money alone, and in fact ranked it below new challenges and recognition. she said the grants could pay off not just for the recipient, but also for the company. ''this kind of reward has psychic power that is well beyond economics,'' she said.  for ms. christi, who lives on the upper west side, working at great performances was not part of her plan. ''i was a singer going around the world doing my thing, living a very fulfilling life,'' she said. but with the recession and the 2001 terrorist attacks, her work dried up, and she lost her savings in the stock market. ''i was on the edge of being destitute,'' she said.  a friend told her about great performances. it was tough for ms. christi to take an entry-level job as a coat checker after supporting herself as a singer. but she embraced the work. she has been promoted several times, and she relishes the creative connection shared by so many colleagues.  ms. christi said the grants help boost employee morale. ''this is a very special way for the corporation to give back to the employees,'' she said. ''they are showing respect to the talent of the staff.''  home front this column about the local economy appears every other week. e-mail address: homefront@nytimes.com.  