in trying times, papers retreat from washington   david lightman, a washington-based reporter for the hartford courant, knows how to grind it out, sometimes writing two or three articles a day. he is hustling even more than usual these days, now that his newspaper has cut its washington bureau to one person from five.  ''when congress is here, you go nuts,'' he said. ''you cover everything, every day, every hour.''  faced with declining advertising revenues and competition from the web, midsize, regional dailies across the country have been retrenching in recent years to focus on local news. that has scaled back their washington coverage, and their national ambitions.  ''there was a time when every paper regarded it as a point of pride to have their own voice on every official story in washington,'' said peter s. canellos, the washington bureau chief for the boston globe, which is owned by the new york times company and has shrunk its bureau to 10 people from 12. ''but readers have so many other ways to get the basic news now. for that reason, and reasons of diminishing resources, covering every official story is a luxury that many can no longer afford.''  the dallas morning news, a property of the belo corporation, recently cut its bureau to 4 reporters from 10. the tribune company, which owns the los angeles times and the chicago tribune, consolidated its newspapers' once separate, once independent washington bureaus a year ago, along with its broadcast division, into one high-tech center. it cut about 30 percent of its reporting slots at the nine papers that are in the new bureau, with the ax falling disproportionately on the hartford courant; newsday (to 5 reporters from 10) and the fort lauderdale, fla., paper (to one from two).  journalists generally lament such cuts, saying they can lead to generic articles from news services and less investigative or original reporting.  ''we were trying very hard to do original stuff, and we were able to do more with more people,'' said timothy m. phelps, the bureau chief for newsday.  but some say the cuts are useful because they mean less redundancy and can force a smarter use of resources, since newspapers long ago lost their monopoly on the washington scoop.  ''you've got to get the most out of the dollars you have, and if you've got to sacrifice anything, washington is one area where you can do it,'' said robert w. mong jr., the editor of the dallas morning news.  that is because of the glut of news out of washington from so many sources. unlike in most cities, events all over the highly wired capital are broadcast live and transcripts are instantly available. congressional committees webcast their hearings. scores of industry newsletters track incremental steps in legislation. the supreme court releases same-day audio recordings of some cases. public-interest groups do original research and are making raw data available on the web.  ''almost nothing that happens in washington is fresh in the next day's paper unless it breaks at 10 o'clock at night,'' said bennett roth, a reporter in the washington bureau of the houston chronicle.  the nation's capital is still a priority for many papers, with the size of bigger bureaus like those of usa today, which is owned by the gannett company, and the new york times remaining stable. so has the associated press's bureau, which supplies most american papers with their washington news. some companies, like mcclatchy and medianews, which own midsize papers, have added to their bureaus as their parent companies have acquired additional papers.  but with layoffs and buyouts throughout the industry, regional papers are finding parts of their washington report expendable.  ''this is hard for journalists to accept,'' said jay rosen, a blogger and journalism professor at new york university. ''but the value-added of their coverage has to be higher than it's been.'' midsize papers in particular are getting squeezed, he said, ''because it's hard for them to be local enough to add value and national enough to add value.''  john aloysius farrell, bureau chief of the denver post and of the medianews chain, said his eight papers covered their local delegations and regional issues.  ''will the political discourse be shattered because there isn't one more person writing the same things as everyone else from the white house press room?'' he asked.  obviously not, he said, but he does see two dangers in downsizing. if a paper is covering only its congressional delegation, that delegation can set the agenda for the coverage. the other is the loss of too many ''real reporters,'' which, apart from the potential for leaving important subjects uncovered, he said, would dry up the raw material that is spun out on the web.  ''the bench used to be deeper everywhere,'' he said, ''and at some point you have to worry that there's no bench at all.''  media  