can they block it like brodeur?   despite the fact that pucks often ricochet off their heads, hockey goaltenders are widely considered the einsteins of the ice. ''goalies are the most intelligent hockey players out there,'' said sonya dibiase, a product manager at the hockey company, a montreal-based division of reebok international.  in addition to being avid students of technique, goalies are absolute geeks when it comes to selecting their equipment, ms. dibiase said: ask a goalie what he thinks of a new stick or leg pad, and you are liable to hear an exhaustive -- and possibly exhausting -- reply.  the hockey company is preparing for these net-minding scholars to render their opinions on the rbk xpulse 10.0 goalie blocker, a $299 cushion designed to deflect high-velocity shots. worn on the same hand that grasps the stick, the new blocker is meant to serve the needs of today's more limber goalies.  ''the butterfly style of goaltending is really big now,'' said ms. dibiase, referring to a technique in which goalies lower their knees to the ice while thrusting their lower legs back toward the goalposts.  members of the hockey company's goaltending division noted this trend back in january 2005, when they began surveying canadian goalie schools before developing the new blocker.  the schools' instructors stressed the need for a blocker that could repel pucks a considerable distance. ''it's a faster game today,'' ms. dibiase said. ''with a blocker, you need to make sure the rebound is far enough away from you that you have time to recover.''  rebound distance is affected by both the density and thickness of a blocker's foam insert. the hockey company designed an insert that was just one-quarter of an inch thick; the insert might have been made even thinner by using a different foam, ms. dibiase said, but such a blocker would probably have been too light. ''you need a certain amount of thickness to be able to control the torque, the twisting of the palm,'' she explained.  toward the end of 2005, prototypes were distributed to high-level junior teams in quebec. the teams' goalies were asked for feedback on the blocker's performance; they did not mince words. they complained, for example, about the hockey company's plans to make the blocker's glove detachable. ''the goalies felt that when it was removable, it wasn't stable enough,'' ms. dibiase said. ''so we ended up sewing it back in.''  the rbk xpulse 10.0 goalie blocker will start appearing in retail stores this month, although national hockey league professionals, including martin brodeur of the new jersey devils, have been wearing it since november.  the blocker's sales, along with those of several other hockey products under the rbk xpulse brand, will be closely tracked in a town far from canada's hockey heartland: herzogenaurach, germany, home to the adidas group. adidas completed the purchase of reebok international last january for $3.8 billion. that was less than two years after reebok, which is based in canton, mass., bought the hockey company for $204 million.  since being acquired, reebok has focused on establishing itself as the choice of savvy hockey players -- a title also coveted by a title also coveted by the reebok rival nike and its nike bauer hockey subsidiary.  in addition to starting its rbk xpulse line, reebok is joining with the n.h.l. to open a 6,700-square-foot retail store in midtown manhattan this fall -- professional hockey's answer to the national basketball association's flagship store on fifth avenue. it does not take a goalie to see the logic in reebok's move.  openers: the goods  