for a boy stumbling over words, a dog is the ideal reading partner   the problem -- like many children, the little boy had learned to recognize common words from memory in kindergarten, and to sound out simple words -- the first steps toward reading. most children catch on fairly easily after this, figuring out how to use the meaning of words and sentences as a guide to greater fluency. but at age 9, when he was a third grader at a school in rural massachusetts, this boy had never made that leap. while most children his age could read simple chapter books, he could not even read the short phrases in a picture book.  the solution -- at the beginning of the school year, his teacher, eileen brennan, paired the children in his class and asked them to read aloud to one another. the boy would hesitate over the first unfamiliar words, ms. brennan said, and then take so long to read anything that he and the partner would both give up, or run out of time.  the boy refused to read aloud to ms. brennan, she said. he would chat, and describe the picture, then spend long minutes sounding out the first few words until she provided them so he could move on.  he had been tested for vision, hearing and reading disabilities, but none had been identified. his family was not highly educated, ms. brennan said, ''not school people particularly, and i don't think there was lots of time at home for reading.''  for a few weeks, the teacher watched the boy, getting to know him better. ''he was not too swift academically,'' she said, but was ''attractive to his peers'' and ''well liked.''  ''he was an appealing child,'' she continued. ''he'd come stand at the corner of my desk and chat with me about the foster kids who lived with his family. he talked a lot about his dog, something like a st. bernard. he liked to draw. he'd walk up to my desk while i was busy with odd jobs, and slip a drawing he had just made for me onto my desk.''  ''he never acted reluctant or angry about reading time,'' ms. brennan added.  she developed a hunch about what was holding this child back. first, she said, he was not getting enough practice reading, and learning to read and practicing reading are intertwined. second, because he was not practicing, he was not improving, and that was undermining his self-confidence. he was so worried about sounding stupid in front of other people, she decided, that he clammed up. he was a strong little boy, and when he shut down, there was not much she could do.  in early october, ms. brennan announced that each day the children would have half an hour to read alone. choosing the place in the classroom to read soon became as important to the pupils as choosing the book. each day they rushed to claim the best spots -- under a desk or against the radiator just under the window that looked out on an internal quad. but the most popular place was near the teacher's small terrier, barnaby, who came to school with her every day. during lessons and during lunch, barnaby was in his crate, but at reading time he was out.  in mid-november, ms. brennan realized that the boy had successfully avoided reading aloud for nine weeks. and so she suggested that he read near barnaby, promising him first choice for that spot.  she also suggested that rather than read just to himself, he read aloud to the dog. this proved to be the key.  every day until mid-april, the child walked purposefully and calmly over to the bookshelf and selected ''go dog go'' by p. d. eastman, settled himself near barnaby, and recited the book to the dog while pointing to the words and looking over the pictures. by june the boy was picking a wide range of picture books to read to barnaby, popping out of his chair eagerly for read-aloud time. and he was willing to read, smoothly and fluently, to ms. brennan as well.  lessons is a new feature that will examine problems teachers encounter in the classroom and how they deal with them.  lessons susan engel is a psychology professor and director of the teaching program at williams college. contact her at e-edu@nytimes.com if you have a teaching problem to share.  