hurdles in harvard yard and the world beyond   matters of honor  by louis begley  307 pages. alfred a. knopf. $24.95.  louis begley's latest novel, ''matters of honor,'' is a kind of pale, male version of mary mccarthy's novel ''the group'' -- moved from vassar to harvard, from the class of 1933 to the class of 1950-something. it is also devoid of mccarthy's biting, satirical wit and keen eye for social distinctions; none of its central protagonists emerges as a compelling or even believable individual.  mr. begley's three heroes are all variations on familiar college types: archie, an amiable army brat who likes to drink too much and drive too fast; henry, a brilliant but insecure classics major who wants to put his immigrant family past behind him; and the narrator, sam, an aspiring novelist who comes from the black-sheep branch of a prominent new england family. all three go about reinventing themselves in the course of the novel. all three try to social-climb as they negotiate the snooty 1950s world of eating clubs and dinner dances, black-tie parties and white-shoe firms. and all three, like so many of mr. begley's previous heroes, aren't quite what they first seem.  whereas mr. begley demonstrated in earlier books, like ''wartime lies'' and ''about schmidt,'' that he could create deeply moving, emotionally detailed portraits of individuals trying to come to terms with their pasts, he inexplicably uses none of these skills in this novel. instead of mapping his heroes' inner lives as he has done in the past, he gives us a stilted first-person account in which sam lays out his memories of his two freshman-year roommates. it's a narrative strategy that is undermined by sam's unreflective, strangely secretive personality and that results in highly opaque portraits of all three men.  sam tells us about having a nervous breakdown during college and going to see a psychoanalyst, but he tells us little about what he learns about himself, save the facts that he was adopted as a child and that he has always felt estranged from his parents. we gain no insight into his feelings of alienation, no insight into his conflicted relationship with his extended family, no insight into his dreams, ideals or desires. for that matter, we do not even learn whom he is dating; instead, there are cryptic asides like this: ''a bond i had formed with a japanese writer causing me to spend the winter and early spring in kyoto, i was in rue tournon not more than three months a year.'' as for sam's career as a novelist, it is described in strictly careerist terms: we learn how well his books do and how people respond to him as a writer, but we get only the most cursory sense of what his books are about or their relationship to his life.  in any case, it comes as something of a surprise that sam is successful as a novelist, given his dreary depictions of his two college friends. archie never becomes more than a cardboardy cutout figure -- a well-meaning, not-too-bright social climber with a dislike of ''heavy conversations,'' a fellow who ''wanted to wear a club tie -- the right tie, not all clubs being equal.'' in a brusque flash-forward, he is quickly disposed of in a car accident: drunken lunch, blind turn, beer truck.  considerably more space is devoted to henry, who is the real focus of this novel, but he, too, comes across as a patchwork doll made up of various characteristics that never cohere into a believable person. like maciek from ''wartime lies,'' he was a jewish child in nazi-occupied poland and he wants to try to forget his past; but unlike that earlier hero, his wartime experiences and the scars they have left on his heart are never made remotely palpable to the reader.  there is lots of talk about henry's possessive, unbalanced mother and his eagerness to distance himself from his family. and there is lots of talk about the anti-semitism henry faces at harvard and in the wider world. unfortunately, all this talk feels curiously abstract, as though henry were a case study rather than a flesh-and-blood human being. his friendships with sam and archie feel like a synthetic mix of neediness and detachment, and his decades-long infatuation with margot -- his ''long-term project,'' as he calls her -- is never made plausible either.  while the last pages of this novel pick up speed and momentum, they are predicated upon even more bizarre behavior on henry's part -- his abrupt disappearance, after a headline-making business deal, from the lives of his friends and colleagues. though this is presumably meant to represent the culmination of his efforts to reinvent himself, it feels as arbitrary as the rest of his actions. what's more, his vanishing means little to the reader: unlike schmidt and maciek, he never engages our sympathy or concern, but remains, like the other characters in this stilted novel, a walking, talking cipher.  books of the times  