sliced, diced and polished to perfection, cutaway displays reveal all   the swirl and sizzle of an auto show present huge challenges for automakers trying to demonstrate complex new features. grabbing the public's attention -- and holding it despite the interactive video displays and thumping soundtracks from competitors' displays -- demands more than dazzling paint or bright lighting.  but one of the industry's oldest presentations, the cutaway model, still holds the power to fascinate, and with some modern-day enhancements, to explain quickly the most difficult mechanical concepts. an engine dissected to reveal its inner workings -- typically with pistons rising, cams spinning and valves opening -- draws showgoers who marvel at the x-ray view of this process.  ''it always makes a job easier for anyone who's trying to demonstrate anything,'' said nick cappa, spokesman for advanced technology of the chrysler group, who organizes much of the display work for the company's shows and press conferences.  this is the world of the artists and specialists whose mission is to show the slowly spinning insides of a six-speed transmission or the pumping heart of a v-8 engine. their work is more cerebral than the careful placement of an engine block -- or an entire car -- on a bandsaw. there are tricks of the trade; oil pans are a great place to hide electric motors, plastic springs ease the movement of the engine, neutral colors minimize the impact of ugly metal edges.  these displays are known in the industry as demonstration cutaways, though most of the small world that handles or makes them calls them properties, or props. they range from a simple nonmoving component to a fully articulated car with its engine, transmission, drive shafts and axles all spinning and shifting, often with special lighting effects built in.  modeled cutaways may seem a quaint anachronism, but as cars have become more complex, consumers can see less and less of the mechanical systems. today's crowded engine compartments and plastic shrouds make a look under the hood difficult, mr. cappa said.  people like larry easton help customers sneak a peek. he is part of a team that has built many cutaways and vehicles for msx international's special project build unit.  ''i've been doing this for 22 years,'' mr. easton said. ''it started when somebody came up and said, 'hey, you want to cut this up and make it look good?' ''  mr. easton's work has taken place largely behind an unobtrusive, slightly rusted door marked special projects at the back corner of msx's facility in auburn hills, mich. (most of the employees of the special projects unit of msx were recently hired by roush industries.) out of a nearby freight door have rolled 78 ride vehicles for walt disney's theme parks. they also restored the montgomery, ala., bus on which rosa parks refused to move to the back.  at the end of last month, he and most of the 70-person unit at msx were finishing auto show vehicles for daimlerchrysler, including a cutaway of the lower half of a car for a display meant to show the all-wheel-drive hardware.  ''last year we did a six-speed transmission and a belt drive, a continuously variable transmission,'' he said. ''we cut that wide open so you could see that clearly.''  mark tomlin, general manager of the special projects unit, said every project was different, and, instead of working from a plan, his teams tended to do their work and then have a draftsman document it.  ''these guys are pretty special,'' mr. tomlin said. ''i'll go to them and say, basically, 'this is what we have, and this is what we need it to do, and i'll check back with you in a couple of days to see what we've got.' ''  that might involve using an old record turntable with custom pulleys to move a rotating display or creating elaborate welded structures to hold a heavy engine in midair without being obtrusive.  display makers tend to be brand-specific, because (like auto suppliers) they work with technology that must be kept under wraps or concepts that are meant to give a competitive edge to one automaker. often, they work on a product for which there are no manuals yet. mr. tomlin's group, for instance, created power sliding doors and liftgates as concept displays for delphi, the auto parts supplier, years before the features were introduced on minivans and sport utility vehicles.  the builders often must be experts at destruction, too. for this year's show, the h. b. stubbs company was given a buick enclave and told to show off its roomy interior. so they cut the luxury crossover s.u.v. in half, lengthwise.  stubbs was already skilled at severing buicks. last year, the company sliced a lucerne into six cube-shaped displays, including cuts through the engine. to avoid gaffes like leaving just one-eighth of a cylinder hanging, stubbs takes the engine apart before cutting. reassembly can be innovative.  ''there's a few tweaks we have to do backstage; i guess if you put that whole engine back together, there might be a few parts that wouldn't necessarily be there,'' said larry dziurman, senior account director of stubbs.  the cutaways are meant to tell a story, said robert albitz, a senior vice president with the george p. johnson company. the company designed the entire exhibit for general motors at this year's detroit auto show.  because the mechanically inclined are drawn to the articulating displays, carmakers must avoid jerky motion or wear patterns. that means that exhibit builders take some extraordinary measures to keep things moving.  getting rid of metal valve springs and replacing them with low-tension plastic ones is a tactic used for engine displays. gears that need to be seen in motion are typically ground down to give clearance for paint or coatings; where gears must still mesh, the metal is polished, not painted.  almost all of the moving equipment in the real world is designed to run in a swirling oil bath, but in the display world all that oil is missing. that means that the exhibit builders must substitute teflon and silicone to reduce friction in some bearings.  color is used carefully. some metals need to be emphasized, so aluminum castings are typically painted silver. other metals, like cast iron, need to be de-emphasized and are often painted black. gears and pistons must be coated, sometimes with chrome, to look like the parts of a fine watch.  ''you don't want to get too funky,'' mr. albitz said  cutaways, of course, are just an element in a whole exhibit. the first priority of exhibit designers, he said, ''is to showcase the vehicle itself.''  ''every element of what we would call the customer journey on that show floor is very planned and purposeful,'' mr. albitz said. ''most people don't have minutes to stay there. on the other hand, you may have real car enthusiasts and gearheads. they may stay there intrigued for 10 or 15 minutes. the goal is to make sure that it's an engaging and compelling story.''  detroit auto show  