u.s. prohibits all transactions with a major iranian bank   the united states, moving to raise pressure on iran, on tuesday barred american financial institutions from doing business with a major iranian bank after concluding that it had been involved in illicit weapons programs.  the move against bank sepah, announced by the treasury department, also affected north korea, which american officials said had used the bank to facilitate payments to a north korean group that exports missile technologies.  the announcement applies to domestic and foreign branches of american banks, as well as to american citizens working at overseas banks that deal with bank sepah anywhere in the world. the department also said that no american bank can transfer dollars to bank sepah or its branches and subsidiaries in rome, london, frankfurt and paris.  the treasury announcement was the second time in the last year that a major iranian bank had been barred from any dealings with the american financial system. it is the first specific move against an iranian bank since the imposition of sanctions on iran by the united nations security council on dec. 23.  last year, the united states took similar action against bank saderat, another of iran's major institutions, citing what it said was the bank's involvement in financing terrorism. both bank saderat and bank sepah, cited for financial transactions linked to weapons proliferation, are state owned or controlled.  though the two banks have virtually no direct links to american banks, the designation means that no american bank can help facilitate -- by transferring dollars, for example -- any transaction between a european bank and bank sepah. thus if an italian or german bank wanted to supply dollars for a transaction involving bank sepah, it would be unable to do so because american banks would be barred from transferring them.  american experts say these steps effectively extend the reach of american law to other countries, though to only a limited degree.  ''by taking this action, the united states is putting immense pressure on our allies and trading partners to treat bank sepah the same way we do,'' said judith lee, a partner at gibson, dunn & crutcher specializing in sanctions law. ''it is an effort to make u.s. actions against iran extraterritorial.''  european countries have opposed moves by the united states to apply the principle of extraterritoriality, a term referring to cases when american law can affect dealings entirely within another country. but the bush administration recently has stepped up its use of various laws and directives to press forward with the concept.  for example, since oil is traded in dollars, the reach of american directives could be significant, many banking experts say. in theory, tuesday's action would prevent bank sepah from facilitating an oil sale in which dollars are used. iran has already announced that, because of american directives, it has begun selling oil for euros rather than dollars.  ''bank sepah is the financial linchpin of iran's missile procurement network, and has actively assisted iran's pursuit of missiles capable of carrying weapons of mass destruction,'' said stuart levey, the treasury under secretary for terrorism and financial intelligence.  mr. levey said bank sepah had been involved in transactions for iran's aerospace industries organization and two iranian missile companies. these three entities were mentioned in the security council resolution approved in late december calling on all countries to avoid doing business with various groups in iran.  mr. levey also said the united states had been in touch with authorities in britain, france, italy and germany to discuss the need to persuade local financial institutions to stop doing business with bank sepah.  unlike the united states, mr. levey said that european countries, which have not enacted laws like those passed here, ''don't have specific authority to act as the united states does'' against european banks or businesses engaging in transactions with other banks and businesses linked to terrorism or weapons programs.  nevertheless, treasury officials say treasury secretary henry m. paulson jr. and mr. levey have pressed european authorities and banks to try to isolate both bank sepah and bank saderat.  mr. levey said that the branch of bank sepah in rome had had significant involvement in financial transactions related to iran's missile program, and that italian authorities had been alerted to the problem.  there was no immediate comment from the press office of the italian embassy in washington on whether italy was taking any separate actions in consonance with the united states actions.  when the united states moved against bank saderat last year, many banking experts predicted that it was only a matter of time before washington took action against other financial institutions in iran.  american officials say already intensive diplomacy has been stepped up after the security council resolution adopted in late december as part of a campaign to get iran to stop enriching uranium in what the west has charged is a clandestine nuclear weapons program.  that resolution ended up being weakened at the request of russia and china, and some american officials say they need to shift tactics and use other means to exert financial pressure on iran.  