europe union proposes cleaner, more competitive energy market   european union officials on wednesday challenged governments to loosen their grip on national energy sectors, calling for a fresh wave of competition and investment in infrastructure and technology to ease dependence on powerful exporters like russia and to combat global warming.  the region needs a new ''postindustrial revolution,'' said the european commission's president, josé manuel barroso, announcing a number of energy proposals. ''we have already left behind our coal-based industrial past. it is time to embrace our low-carbon future.''  the package of proposals is one of the largest ever presented by the commission, although it reflected changes by france and germany, which oppose the breakup of their national electricity companies.  european union officials also backed away from earlier, more ambitious targets for cutting emissions after energy-intensive industries and labor groups warned of threats to profits and jobs -- especially if competitors in the united states and elsewhere did not follow suit.  many of the proposals, which also aim to encourage the use of renewable fuels for cars and to improve the energy efficiency of buildings and home appliances, are to be debated by european union leaders at a summit meeting in march. if they approve the package, many of the measures would still require the commission to draft formal legal proposals.  the plan, called an energy policy for europe, sought to echo the postwar integration of important industrial sectors, namely coal and steel, that eventually grew into the union's single market. but it fell far short of proposing a unified power market, one that could be overseen by a single regulator, operate on a common grid and benefit from a common front in dealing with energy suppliers.  christian egenhofer, a senior research fellow at the center for european policy studies in brussels, said it would be unrealistic to unify energy policy in a trade bloc of 27 disparate countries, some rich, some much poorer. france, for instance, relies on nuclear power for 80 percent of its electricity, while others, like poland, depend almost entirely on coal for electricity.  in another sign that the vision of transforming the way europe consumes energy is meeting resistance, commission officials also backed away from earlier recommendations to require that emissions be cut to levels that environmental experts say are critical to keeping down rising temperatures.  under pressure from industries like steel, where executives fear losing business if europe adopts stricter regulations than the rest of the world, the union recommended cutting emissions by 20 percent from 1990 levels by 2020, rather than the 30 percent sought by its environment commissioner.  the commission pushed ahead with proposals to encourage the ''capture,'' or trapping, and storage of carbon dioxide emissions, including possibly making it mandatory for all new coal-fired power stations after 2020 to incorporate the new, cleaner technologies.  the european union also highlighted the benefits of nuclear energy as a way to curb carbon emissions. but widespread public skepticism about the safety and price of nuclear technology led the officials to back away from pushing member states to use nuclear power as a primary tool against climate change.  