early rout is challenge to fox team   fox sports's first year of carrying bowl championship series games has hardly been the happy collegiate football tortilla chip bash it intended when it acquired a four-year package of the fiesta, orange and sugar bowls, and the newly added national championship game, for $320 million.  all three of its games last week rated below a 10.0, with the nadir the 7.0 for the orange bowl, the lowest ever for a b.c.s. bowl game. the combined viewership of 38.8 million was down 27 percent from last year, when abc televised all three of the games fox now has and the rose bowl.  the only bright spot so far has been the rose bowl, still an abc property, which attracted 24 million viewers (9.6 million better than fox's best performing bowl, the sugar), still good despite a drop from 35.6 million last year when vince young led texas to the national championship.  fox has been hampered by an orange bowl with two teams, wake forest and louisville, that were not well known; a fiesta bowl in which boise state, another small-market university, beat oklahoma in a sensational game that attracted only 13.7 million viewers; and a national championship pairing in which neither team had a player as familiar as young or southern california's reggie bush and matt leinart were last year.  and then florida jumped to an astonishing 34-14 lead against ohio state in the first half of last night's national title game.  that was not a propitious situation to keep viewers watching.  nothing in the second half, which ended with the gators' 41-14 victory, would bring casual viewers to their tvs in serious numbers.  thom brennaman, charles davis and barry alvarez returned to call the game for fox, a week after calling the fiesta bowl.  it was clear throughout the first half that davis could have handled the analytic load himself. davis, who is on loan from tbs, digested the plays quickly and offered fast, smart, pointed commentary. he was almost always the first analyst to speak and tried regularly to bring alvarez into the mix. but alvarez frequently sounded shaky, nervous and tentative, providing often obvious analyses.  as florida lined up at the ohio state 1 with 23 seconds left in the second quarter, alvarez said that if the buckeyes ''can stop them right here, they can probably get a field goal.'' davis ignored that banality to suggest, correctly, that the gators might run a pass option play, which tim tebow did, tossing a 1-yard touchdown pass to andre caldwell.  davis showed a talent for one-liners worth jotting down.  ''the florida offense comes at you from enough angles to buckle your high school trigonometry teacher,'' he said before kickoff.  he later suggested that the fast-moving florida offense had caused the reaction time of the ohio state defense to slow down.  ''cloudy minds equal slow feet,'' he said rather memorably.  spotting emmitt smith, the former florida running back and champion ballroom dancer, on the gators' sideline, davis asked, ''are the gators going to win everything this year -- football, basketball, 'dancing with the stars'?''  after florida moved to a 14-7 lead, davis said that the crispness of the gators' play was so different from their jittery pregame warm-ups. alvarez then pretty much repeated the observation. alvarez was prone to saying things like ''it's important for the ohio state offense to stay on the field,'' after florida extended its lead to 21-7. well, of course, that's true, but did it require saying?  alvarez, the former wisconsin coach and still its athletics director, saw the seams in the ohio state zone defense that florida quarterback chris leak was able to exploit. but davis zeroed in better on what leak was doing, describing how the gators were isolating their receivers against the buckeyes' linebackers.  alvarez was also prone to referring to a couple of players by their numbers instead of their names, a failing of neophytes to the tv booth. but a neophyte should not be in the booth for bowl games.  to his credit, alvarez suggested that ohio state should rush three men, to tighten coverage by the linebackers and secondary, and the buckeyes soon made the switch. ultimately, it did them no good.  brennaman demonstrated his improvement from the fiesta bowl, where he was very good but occasionally indulged in clichés. and in his second bowl game in a week, he again showed that he can modulate his voice, letting it rise and fall, depending on the play. he also kept both analysts in play, but he should have needed to summon only davis, not the former coach.  tv sports e-mail: sportsbiz@nytimes.com  