what's on wednesday night   9 p.m. (13, 49) china from the inside for all of china's vaunted power, much of the country remains a mystery to the outside world. this four-part documentary travels from the great wall, temples in tibet and the border areas of muslim xinjiang to courtrooms, newspaper offices and a women's labor camp to paint of a portrait of its 1.3 billion people in all their contradictions. tonight's episodes look at the communist party, at 9; and the country's women, who have one of the highest suicide rates in the world, at 10. the series continues on jan. 17.  8 p.m. (13, 49) science investigators this special, one of three being considered for development as a new science series by pbs, aims to put a 21st-century spin on the age-old subject. among tonight's topics: neanderthal dna, knuckleball pitches, ipods powered by bacteria, a better bionic arm for a veteran of the iraq war and an electric race car.  8 p.m. (cbs) armed and famous whom, exactly, would you really trust these celebrities to protect and defend? erik estrada, la toya jackson, jack osbourne, jason (wee-man) acuna and trish stratus undergo police training to become reserve officers in muncie, ind., and then go on patrol with the officers who traditionally ride with the new trainees. mr. estrada brings the most experience to his new role from his old days as officer poncherello in 119 episodes of ''chips.''  9 p.m. (major networks) presidential address president bush unveils his new strategy for the war in iraq.  9 p.m. (oxygen) tease lisa rinna, she of the artfully tousled do, is host of this new competition series, in which two hairstylists face off in each episode in snip-and-blow challenges for the ultimate goal of competing against a master stylist. first up: a celebrity look-alike contest.  10 p.m. (tvland) tv land myths and legends what former lover inspired carly simon to write ''you're so vain''? is the ghost of a 9-year-old boy lurking in the movie ''three men and a baby''? and did the cast of ''green acres'' really barbecue and eat the pig that played arnold ziffel? this new series aims to separate fact from fiction on these and other burning questions of our time.  10 p.m. (oxygen) the janice dickinson modeling agency when the cat was away, the mice appear to have played. or so ms. dickinson discovers when she returns from her summer vacation in this season premiere to find the agency is disarray. and just who are all those new models knocking on her door?  tonight's tv listings  