colleen saidman and rodney yee   it's as difficult to categorize colleen saidman, an owner of yoga shanti, a papaya-color studio in sag harbor, n.y., as it is to hold a headstand for the duration of the beatles song ''let it be,'' a challenge often presented in the classes she teaches.  to begin, ms. saidman, who is also a model, is fearless, especially when it comes to wearing orange, diving into the cold ocean, laughing loudly, going barefoot or making radical changes in her life.  she grew up in indiana, worked at a fast-food restaurant, ran on the boys' track team and regularly wrote to mother teresa asking about the meaning of life.  in her packed classes she tiptoes between the mats, making adjustments and dabbing rose oil on the foreheads of students. she has been known to startle them with poems about death. ms. saidman, 47, has come close to death herself more than once. at 15 she was run over by a car, and in 1989 she was struck by lightning while camping.  ''with colleen you can expect extreme situations,'' said ed zello, one of her five brothers, all tall. he added that most people who are around her long enough suffer ''orthopedic trauma'' of some kind from trying to keep up.  ms. saidman tells her students not to follow or imitate her, particularly not her love life.  in 1998 she was living in soho with her first husband, a fashion photographer, and their daughter, rachel. she was beginning a new career as a yoga teacher when a friend took her to a class in manhattan taught by rodney yee.  mr. yee, 49, has become known for his retreats, many held in places like mexico and india, and for his videos and cds. he is meticulous about anatomy and alignment: even his signature ponytail looks perfectly aligned with his spine.  halfway through his class, however, ms. saidman walked out. she said she found him humorless and ''totally arrogant.''  he offers a different explanation: ''she knew her life was going to change, and she didn't want to change it.'' if mr. yee's teaching could be reduced to one notion it would be, ''don't run away from discomfort, in a yoga pose or in life.''  he wasn't always so steady. his sisters recall he spent his childhood on an air force base in oklahoma, speed-eating hamburgers while reading archie comics. he later became a ballet dancer, a vegetarian and a yogi. in 1987 he and two partners opened the piedmont yoga studio in california. mr. yee also married, and the couple had three children.  a year after ms. saidman bolted from his class, a friend took her to another one mr. yee was teaching. this time she loved it.  ''i thought he could teach me what i needed to learn,'' she said. ''he went much more into subtleties like getting in touch with the corner of your eye or the center of the armpit.''  she became a devoted student of his and formed a close student-teacher relationship, which remained platonic for years. then, in 2002 at a yoga conference in nashville, ms. saidman and mr. yee found themselves sitting next to each other in a crowded hot tub after a day of twisting poses.  ''she put her thumb on my forehead, right on the third eye, and literally i felt something i'd never felt before,'' mr. yee remembered. ''it was almost like: 'who are you? what just happened?' that was the turning point. there was something between us that was unavoidable.''  still, they didn't want to break up their marriages, which they said were not unhappy. ''i walked away from rod many, many times,'' ms. saidman recalled. ''i told him not to call me. i said, 'whatever we have with our spouses, we have to give it a real try.' ''  he could never go for more than a week without talking to her. ''to not call colleen was unbearable,'' he said. ''i just lost it. i can preach all i want, but when love hits you, it just devastates everything. everything was blown down.''  he eventually told his family he had fallen in love. ''he said she was a model,'' his son, evan, 16, recalled. ''victoria's secret came to mind. i thought: 'stupid model. typical.' but then i actually met her, and she's so different. she's really out there. she's a lot like dad. they're both messy. they're spontaneous and loud, but they can really sit with silence.''  about ending her marriage, ms. saidman said: ''sometimes the voids are not so obvious until you meet someone who fills those voids. having said that, i wouldn't recommend doing what we did to anyone. i have two friends who are tempted to leave their marriages right now, and i've told them: 'run! unless it's absolutely necessary, don't do it.' ''  three years ago mr. yee moved into her shingle-style house in east hampton, n.y., and rumors swirled around them and yoga shanti. students quit, disillusioned. there was even an article about them in new york magazine, ''an illicit yoga love story.'' ms. saidman said, ''for us to be together, it couldn't have been a harder path.''  today they seem perfect counterbalances for each other: she never lets him become too mechanical or scientific, always reminding him of saints, miracles and mysteries. he doesn't allow her to become overspiritual, imprecise or pollyannalike.  a few weeks ago, while trying to define happiness, she said: ''the only way to be happy is to be of service to another. at the airport, i helped this woman who was balancing all these kids and bags. that made me a lot happier than the cashmere sweater i bought that day.''  he quickly interjected: ''i don't know about that! i think we're getting into self-delusion here.''  while two yogis might be expected to marry in a place known for spirituality -- bali or at an ashram -- they were wed in lake las vegas, a resort in henderson, nev., 17 miles from the gambling strip.  lake las vegas, set in the middle of the desert, is beautiful but not exactly natural. it has a golf course, artificial waterfalls and even a skating rink melting in the sun.  the rev. david st. john, a priest of the national catholic church of north america, performed the ceremony in the tuscan-style chapel fiorenza, which overlooks the lake. the bride explained why they chose to marry near las vegas: ''we're all about balance. we need some chaos and artifice in our lives.''  there was neither a yogi nor a model among the 45 guests. sharp-witted schoolteachers -- all family members -- predominated.  ms. saidman wore a gold-color donna karan dress. like almost all the clothes she wears, it would have looked like a halloween outfit on most other women. it was loosely wrapped around her with ropelike straps and had a fishtail hem.  ''it's part mermaid, part egyptian goddess,'' she said. the bride glowed more and more throughout the ceremony, as if on a dimmer switch that was slowly being turned up.  during the reception next door at the ritz-carlton the bride and bridegroom kissed and held onto each other. ''rod and i wake up every morning like, 'i can't believe we get to be together,' '' she said. ''we are touching 24 hours a day.''  mr. yee added: ''it makes people sick. people are like, 'can you please not be so in love? can you hide it?' no, we can't hide it.''  weddings/celebrations: vows  