t. rowe sticks to basics and finds success again   with the retirement of george a. roche, its chairman and president, at the end of 2006, the last of a generation of executives at t. rowe price associates has stepped aside, making way for three new leaders.  investors will be forgiven if they failed to notice.  the retirements, like just about everything at t. rowe price came with little fanfare. if the departing executives celebrated their company's recent stock performance and its mutual funds' results -- and they had reason to -- they hardly did so in public.  only a few years ago, critics were calling t. rowe price a dinosaur, as its stock pickers refused to bet on many of the hottest technology names. as the market spiraled upward, many customers left, and funds shrank. net flows of investor cash into the company's funds fell by more than 50 percent from the end of 1997 to the end of 1998, according to the financial research corporation in boston. they fell again by more than half from 1998 to 1999.  but t. rowe price has come lumbering back. according to morningstar, the average return of its funds was 9.85 percent, annualized, over the five years ending nov. 30, edging out rivals like american funds, fidelity investments and vanguard.  with that success has come new customer cash. t. rowe price collected nearly $40 billion in net inflows from the beginning of 2002 through october last year, nearly double its amount from 1995 through 1999. at the same time, the company's stock price has been rising, returning a cumulative 155 percent for the five years that ended dec. 29. that run has been powered by growing earnings, which reached $430.9 million in 2005.  members of the company's executive committee say the firm's success stems from sticking with the principles established by thomas rowe price when he started the firm in 1937: picking solid stocks and putting customers first. ''mr. price said, 'if the client succeeds, the firm will succeed,' '' said edward c. bernard, the new vice chairman.  the firm hasn't always succeeded. spend a day at price's headquarters in baltimore, and you hear repeatedly about the day it hit bottom during the tech boom. it was march 6, 2000, four days before the nasdaq peaked. that morning, the wall street journal published an article chiding the company for lackluster results, saying, ''the gears of the investing machine that helped make t. rowe one of the nation's 10 biggest mutual-fund firms have gotten stuck.''  mr. roche, the retired chairman, remembers the office's pall: ''we were lagging and losing business. our sci-tech fund is excellent, but it really got pummeled. it was up 100 percent in '99, but the average sci-tech fund was up 130.''  mary j. miller, manager of the tax-free income fund and now also director of fixed income, was urging clients to move into her sector, which seemed ready to rise. ''i went to a few and said, 'this would be a great time to increase your exposure to bonds,' '' she said. ''one said: 'are you crazy? i just made 150 percent on my stock portfolio.' i left with my tail dragging.''  but with the market's turn, t. rowe price clawed back. the t. rowe price equity income  fund, managed by brian c. rogers, limped through 1999, returning only 3.8 percent as the market soared. then, in the bear-market years of 2001 and 2002, he beat both morningstar's value-fund index and the standard & poor's 500-stock index. today, the equity income fund is the company's largest, with $23 billion in assets.  ''in your career, there are times when you look like a genius and times you look like an idiot, and some of that is beyond your control,'' mr. rogers said. ''i knew in 1999 that i wasn't as stupid as i looked, and i knew in 2001 and 2002 that i wasn't that smart.''  morningstar gives t. rowe price a top rating for stewardship of investors' money. it dings it only for not closing bloated funds soon enough. ''above all else, the thing that characterizes them is a judiciousness,'' said jeffrey b. ptak, a morningstar analyst. ''they don't trend-chase, and they don't roll out gimmicky products that are going to blow up on investors.''  in the early '70s, the company invested mostly in growth stocks. its founder had been an originator of the growth-investing philosophy. so it stuck with its stock recommendations even as share values climbed to nosebleed levels, then plummeted. ''we took our clients off a cliff because we allowed our belief in growth stocks to become a religion, and we stopped listening to fundamentals,'' said james a. c. kennedy, the new president and chief executive. that taught staffers at t. rowe price to heed factors like earnings and cash flow and to shun momentum investing.  a similar cautiousness extends to corporate matters. the succession planning that culminated with mr. roche's retirement began in about 2002, when the board identified mr. rogers, mr. kennedy and mr. bernard as its next generation of leaders.  with the series of retirements and promotions, mr. rogers became chairman and chief investment officer, and continues to manage the equity income fund. mr. bernard, who manages sales and distribution, was tapped to be vice chairman. and mr. kennedy, formerly director of equities, rose to president and c.e.o.  they have spent much of their careers with the company. ''i'm about to hit 19 years, and i'm the new boy,'' mr. bernard said. under their direction, they say, t. rowe price will hew to its time-tested ways.  but the investment management market, especially for mutual funds, is changing. t. rowe price will have to evolve with it, said matthew j. snowling, a senior analyst at friedman billings ramsey in arlington, va.  t. rowe price depends on the domestic stock market; more than 70 percent of its mutual fund assets are held in domestic equities, according to morningstar. but americans who invest are increasingly looking abroad, mr. snowling said. what's more, newly wealthy people in china and india want to play the market, too.  ''you have to be careful because there's a graveyard full of companies that have tried to expand internationally and failed,'' he said. since 2000, when t. rowe price bought out the share of london-based robert fleming holdings in their international joint venture, the company has been expanding its international investing and distribution. even so, its biggest foreign fund, t. rowe price international stock, remains a laggard, failing to match the average return for its morningstar category last year or for the five years ending dec. 29.  mr. roche said the company had begun to shore up the fund. ''we're strengthening the personnel, expanding the research and putting in more portfolio managers,'' he said.  t. rowe price will also need to beef up its fixed-income capabilities, said mr. ptak of morningstar. as baby boomers retire, they are likely to shift assets into bonds. when that happens, they will be wooed by bond giants like pimco and western asset management, which enjoy huge economies of scale.  thus t. rowe price will probably need to make acquisitions to expand its bond base, mr. snowling said. the company has $1.2 billion in cash and marketable securities and no debt but has been reluctant to spend its hoard or to borrow.  ''i'm never going to argue that a strong balance sheet is a bad thing,'' he said. ''but they could be a little more aggressive in their capital management.''  here, too, managers at t. rowe price said that they were addressing the concern -- cautiously, of course. mr. bernard pointed out that early last year, the company acquired the mutual fund division of caterpillar, the construction-equipment maker. he added that it would continue to grab good deals as they arose. ''i wouldn't say we feel a compelling mandate to acquire,'' he said. ''our primary interest is in acquiring assets that can get merged into our mutual funds,'' rather than entire fund groups.  buying other fund companies and allowing them to continue to operate autonomously would risk diluting t. rowe price's corporate culture, mr. bernard said. that is also why t. rowe price has not sallied into hedge funds, he said.  hedge funds typically receive a flat fee of 2 percent of assets plus 20 percent of profits, whereas t. rowe price takes only a flat management fee; the expense ratio on its domestic stock funds averages 0.79 percent, compared with a sector average of 1.41 percent, according to morningstar.  ''if we take this one little group and say we're going to have you run funds based on 2 and 20, we've totally upset the apple cart,'' mr. bernard said. ''now everybody in the equity group wants to go down the hall and work with them.''  another thing that won't change with the new management is t. rowe price's old-fashioned style of investing, mr. bernard said. hedge-fund managers can flaunt the latest strategies, but the people in baltimore remain content with the button-down basics.  mutual funds report  