under pressure, pennington falls a few plays short   chad pennington limped to the jets' buses after sunday's game, the gait of a man whose body was sore and tired.  he had been belted throughout the afternoon at gillette stadium, forced to pick himself up, adjust his helmet and reattach his chin strap.  when it was finally over, pennington's body told the tale.  ''you realize all of the sweat and blood, for real, and tears that you've put into it,'' pennington said after the jets' 37-16 loss to the new england patriots in an american football conference playoff game ended their season. ''you're just shocked. you can't believe it's over.''  for pennington, who had spent much of his day having patriots defenders blur his vision, his game was a microcosm of his career with the jets. he mixed brilliant play with the occasional mistake and, true to his brief history, he was injured.  on the jets' second possession of the game, pennington spun away from a patriots rush and hyperextended his left elbow as he tried to brace his fall.  he shook his arm for several seconds and walked to the sideline, where he was fitted with a black sleeve. he had to sit out a play because of an injury timeout before returning to the huddle.  he completed his next pass, an 8-yarder to laveranues coles, and seemed to spark the jets, who had watched him rehabilitate his throwing shoulder twice after surgery. ''all of the things that he's been through, it was good to see him get back up,'' jets tight end chris baker said.  coach eric mangini said: ''you saw chad's toughness. he got hit pretty hard a couple of times and he got right back up. his approach and his leadership throughout the week was outstanding.''  at times, pennington matched patriots quarterback tom brady in moving his team down the field, only to have the jets' offense stall inside the new england 20-yard line and be forced to settle for field goals.  but pennington also connected on an array of passes, including a dart over the middle to jerricho cotchery, who spun to the outside and turned the completion into a 77-yard touchdown pass that gave the jets a 10-7 lead in the second quarter.  in the second half, though, the fortunes of pennington and the jets changed. with his team trailing by 20-13 in the third quarter, pennington tossed the ball backward toward cotchery on the sideline, but patriots linebacker rosevelt colvin batted the ball down.  patriots defensive lineman vince wilfork scooped up the live ball, which set up a patriots field goal that gave new england a 23-13 lead.  ''i can't tell you how many times i've thrown the ball in college -- that's the first time that's ever happened to me,'' pennington said. ''i have to learn from it. whether it's a lateral or not, you need to recover it and not give the refs the chance to make that decision.''  with the jets trailing by 30-16 in the fourth quarter, pennington misfired on a throw down the right sideline, where cornerback asante samuel stepped in front of receiver justin mccareins, intercepted the pass and dashed 36 yards for the touchdown.  ''just like every n.f.l. game, and especially in the playoffs, it normally comes down to probably a handful of plays,'' said pennington, who completed 23 of 40 passes for 300 yards with one touchdown and one interception. he was also sacked three times. ''they made a couple more plays than we did and gained an edge.''  the game over, several of pennington's teammates approached him on the sideline to congratulate him on the season. he had started a career-high 17 games, picking himself up off the ground at several points in the year to lead the team.  for a change, pennington will head into an off-season under his own power and without an arduous rehabilitation ahead of him. his right shoulder is intact, and he waved his left arm throughout his postgame interview, showing that the hyperextended elbow would heal in time.  ''i told him that he's an inspiration to us all,'' cotchery said. ''my words probably didn't even have enough meaning.''  pennington said: ''you can receive a lot of compliments from people, but when you receive a compliment from a teammate, that's the ultimate. there isn't anything except a super bowl ring that means as much as that does.''  pro football  