barring owners from meetings   q. my condominium does not allow residents to attend board meetings. i understand why a board would not want residents present when common-charge arrears are discussed, but our board says residents may not attend any board meetings at all.  the condo's attorney said that attorney-client privilege prevents the board from allowing this. can this be true? i know people in other condo communities who are allowed to attend board meetings.  a. ''there is no legal requirement for a condo board to allow unit owners to attend board meetings,'' said kenneth jacobs, a co-op and condo lawyer with offices in yonkers and manhattan. ''and there is no 'attorney-client privilege' that would require matters discussed in a board meeting to remain confidential unless the condo's attorney were present, and that rarely occurs.''  mr. jacobs contends that there may be sound reasons for barring nonboard members from meetings. ''the privacy of unit owners must be protected,'' he said, ''and many topics come up besides arrears that could inadvertently embarrass a unit owner.'' in addition, he said, board members must be free to express their personal views without worrying whether those views might antagonize their neighbors.  mr. jacobs noted that some boards do allow unit owners to attend meetings before the board goes into executive session. ''usually, though, the topics addressed at that portion of the meeting are carefully chosen to avoid privacy concerns or sensitive building issues,'' he said. while most boards allow owners to review meeting minutes, he added, they are typically heavily edited to avoid privacy concerns.  the plumbing stops up, and owners get the bill  q. recently, the two apartments below me had a plumbing problem. there are four apartments on the same septic system, including my own. normally, the co-op is responsible for plumbing problems, but our president felt that since the problem was caused by paper towels blocking the system, and since only my apartment and my next-door neighbor's were occupied when the problem occurred, the co-op should not pay for the repairs.  the president then had us billed, each for half the cost. my neighbor and i deny any responsibility. what can i do if the co-op continues to bill me?  a. eva talel, a manhattan co-op and condo lawyer, said that a co-op's proprietary lease generally determines who pays for repairs when there is damage in the building. ''while we do not know the terms of the proprietary lease in this co-op, leases generally require the co-op to maintain the building in good repair, and the co-op is therefore normally responsible to pay for repairing damage to buildingwide systems,'' she said.  but ms. talel added that proprietary leases also generally provide that where damage is caused by the negligence of an apartment owner, the owner is responsible for the repairs. ''the determination of whether damage to a building system resulted from the act of a tenant-shareholder cannot be arbitrary and should be supported by reasonable inquiry and consultation with a professional,'' ms. talel said.  so, if the sole basis for billing the letter writer and his neighbor is the president's supposition that one of the two caused the problem, that would probably be insufficient. ''if the shareholder continues to be billed, he should write to the board and its managing agent, register his objection and request removal of the charge from his maintenance bill,'' ms. talel said. ''if the co-op takes legal action to collect the bill or attempts to condition a sale of the apartment upon payment of the bill, a court would likely reject the co-op's actions.''  jay romano  q & a  