the colts say manning just wants perfection   peyton manning views the forward pass as an extension of his very being, the result of a life spent punching the clock in the family business.  when he was in high school, manning would cheat sleep and study game film while his peers pursued other endeavors. as a college recruit, he catalogued the particulars of various football programs, memorizing the names of the quarterbacks on the roster and the systems they ran.  even now, in his ninth season with the indianapolis colts and in the midst of his seventh trip to the n.f.l. playoffs, manning treats touchdowns as his birthright and incomplete passes with the body language of a child with a broken toy.  ''i've never been around anybody like him,'' colts receiver brandon stokley said tuesday at the colts' practice facility, where the team was preparing for its american football conference second-round playoff game saturday against the ravens in baltimore. ''he wants to be perfect, and that's what you want from your quarterback, a fiery person and somebody who strives to be perfect.''  colts tight end dallas clark said of manning, ''whether that's upbringing or internal, i don't know.''  if manning's younger brother, eli, runs on stoicism and blank stares as the giants' quarterback, then peyton manning is a football player of many faces -- in the huddle, at the line of scrimmage, even on the sideline. in his quest to win a super bowl after years of postseason disappointment, manning spends his game days in constant, and sometimes frantic, motion; he points out defenders, waves his arms and searches for weak spots in the secondary and for excellence in himself.  it is manning, 30, who carries the memories of the playing career of his father, archie, and an encyclopedic knowledge of the quarterback position. it is manning who plays football in the manner of an extrovert, engaging his receivers in sideline discussions of how they can all do their jobs better.  ''i think it's critical,'' manning said. ''i think it's probably been more prominent the past number of years since we've gone to the no-huddle offense. at certain points, it's really the only time that we get to communicate what is going on out there on the field. a lot of teams do that when they come back to the huddle before the next play, but we don't have that chance. we're trying to keep the tempo going and trying to constantly get plays run, so the sideline is a good time to communicate.''  stokley said that manning's desire to be flawless probably exceeded that of every player in the locker room. they all burn to win, he said, but none have manning's unique biography, or his burdens.  in some ways, manning's manifestations were born long before he put on a colts uniform.  ''i think he feels accountable to his teammates,'' said stokley, who is out with an injured achilles' tendon. ''he wants to prepare as much as he can so when he goes out there and the game is over, he has no regrets.''  stokley added: ''i think it's the way he grew up. you grow up in that situation, i'm sure that's where it came from.''  when the colts lose -- as they have in four consecutive postseasons -- the light shines brightest on manning. his completion percentage and quarterback rating in the postseason (62.1 and 87.6) trail his numbers in the regular season (64.0 and 94.4), but playoff teams often bring the best defenses in the league.  ''football is the complete team sport,'' colts defensive end dwight freeney said. ''if peyton throws four touchdowns, it's not just peyton. if peyton has three interceptions, it could have been a bad route or protection. it's every guy.''  even in the colts' 23-8 victory over the kansas city chiefs in their first-round game on saturday, manning had to answer for his three interceptions, which came on a day when he completed 30 of 38 passes for 268 yards and a touchdown.  manning said the mistakes were miscommunications between him and receiver marvin harrison that could be remedied with ''better throws and better decisions by me.''  when he faces the ravens on saturday at m&t bank stadium, manning will find himself at the center of a drama with several storylines, including the colts' return to the city they fled in 1984.  manning's grasp of football history is firm. during his news conference tuesday, he detailed how he first came to know of johnny unitas, the storied colts quarterback who won three championships, including super bowl v after the 1970 season.  ''people would always ask my dad, 'who were your favorite players growing up?' and he said mickey mantle and johnny unitas,'' manning said. ''since i haven't seen every quarterback that's ever played, and my dad said johnny unitas was the best to ever play, that's kind of what i go with as well. i was appreciative of the fact that he watched me play, and he told me he kind of enjoyed watching me play.''  on saturday, manning will lead a team whose postseason failures are never far from the conversation. to some, what once seemed to be inevitable marches to the super bowl for the colts have become waits for the inevitable playoff loss.  even in a team sport, the kudos or the blame will probably fall to manning, whose voice rises above all others in the colts' huddle and beyond.  ''i've never really tried to explain it or justify it by any means,'' manning said of his critics. ''i've always looked at it as, the colts won, or if we lose, the colts lost. the times we've lost in the playoffs, cut and dried, i don't think our team was good enough. other people have other explanations, other answers, but that is how i seem to view it.''  pro football  