married or not, gay couple's separation agreement is held valid   a gay couple may have been mistaken in thinking they were legally married, but they still have to honor the terms of their separation agreement, which is the equivalent of any other type of contract, a judge in new york city has ruled.  the couple, steven green, 41, a real estate developer, and david gonzalez, 29, now a lawyer but a student at the time they met, began living together in 2001, a decision last week in state supreme court in manhattan indicated.  they shared mr. green's house in westchester county and a pied-à-terre on central park south, according to the court papers and to mr. green, who responded to questions about the case by e-mail. mr. green, who said he also owns a home on nantucket, produces independent films and runs ''a small charter airline,'' was the wealthier of the two men, and showered his partner with gifts, including a ski house and two cars, according to court papers.  on valentine's day in 2005, the couple were married in massachusetts, where unlike new york, same-sex marriage is legal. but within a few months, the relationship soured, and mr. green's lawyer drafted a separation agreement, which both parties signed in september 2005, the court papers said.  under that agreement, mr. gonzalez transferred title of his ski house to mr. green, and mr. green agreed to pay his former partner $780,000, according to court papers. the following january, mr. gonzalez filed for divorce in manhattan, and mr. green countersued, claiming that their marriage had never been valid and demanding the return of the $780,000.  in her decision, justice phyllis gangel-jacob agreed that the marriage had not been valid, because new york law did not permit gay marriage, and she dismissed mr. gonzalez's claim for divorce.  but justice gangel-jacob found that the separation agreement between the two men was a valid contract. new york courts have long held that contracts between unmarried people living together are as enforceable as those between people who are not living together, she said.  ''while cohabitation without marriage does not give rise to the property and financial rights which normally attend the marital relation,'' justice gangel-jacob wrote, citing case law, ''neither does cohabitation disable the parties from making an agreement within the normal rules of contract law.''  mr. gonzalez's lawyer, eric wrubel, said yesterday that the decision was important in the wake of the decision by new york's court of appeals in hernandez v. robles last july, which found that there is no right to gay marriage in new york under existing law. ''for homosexual couples, in order to protect themselves and have orderly protection of their assets, they can now rely on agreements,'' mr. wrubel said. through his lawyer, mr. gonzalez declined to comment.  mr. green's lawyer, yonatan levoritz, said he planned to appeal.  in his e-mail messages, mr. green said he was a board member of empire state pride agenda and hoped that gay marriage would become legal in new york. ''but until such time, the idea of not recognizing my marriage, yet upholding the marriage separation agreement, is ludicrous,'' he said.  