the coming escalation in iraq   to the editor:  re ''latest plan sets a series of goals for iraq leaders'' (front page, jan. 8):  the american people have spoken, the iraqi people have spoken, and all we get is escalation and more of the same from the white house.  congress must not fear ending the war and the occupation the only way it can, and finance only an orderly withdrawal before more lives and billions are wasted.  tom miller  oakland, calif., jan. 8, 2007  to the editor:  in addition to the powers granted him under our constitution, and an additional few he has cooked up on his own, president bush now also has the authority to steer the iraqi government toward peace, as stated in his new ''plan.''  do we, the american people, have the power to set goals for him? do the iraqi people have the power to set goals for us?  constance mckee  woodside, calif., jan. 8, 2007  to the editor:  re ''bush plan for iraq requests more troops and more jobs'' (front page, jan. 7):  how many more americans and iraqis must be maimed and killed, and how many more billions of dollars must be wasted before president bush either summons the courage or is forced by events to admit that his mission in iraq has failed and is only fomenting more hatred and violence around the world?  mr. bush's character and legacy are on the line while america and the world wait.  john d. hilberry  new york, jan. 7, 2007  to the editor:  since polls have shown that most iraqis want us to leave, i propose that we ask the iraqi government to hold a referendum on whether or not american troops should withdraw from iraq, giving the iraqis choices of when and how soon.  such a vote would allow us to leave with grace and decency, saving face, and at the same time give iraqis a voice in their future and another chance at democracy.  we cannot bring back the 3,000 americans already dead, but decency requires that we prevent more needless deaths.  enough is enough! should we instead allow this president to continuously make egregious errors in the conduct of this war until the number of dead approaches that of vietnam?  sadie penzato  highland, n.y., jan. 7, 2007  to the editor:  david brooks (''making the surge work,'' column, jan. 7) seems to be hinting that the fiasco we have created in iraq is the fault of gen. george w. casey jr. and gen. john p. abizaid. it was their ''light footprint'' strategy.  mr. brooks writes, ''casey and abizaid are impressive men, and bush deferred to their judgment.''  president bush has made abundantly clear who the ''decider'' is. it was george bush, on being told of a dangerous insurgency growing in the early stages of our invasion, who said, ''bring 'em on!''  it has been the bush administration that has made clear from the beginning that voicing criticism or opposition to its policies, on anything, would be a career ender.  the responsibility, and the legacy, of the horrible mess in iraq rests on one and only one person's shoulders: george w. bush.  mr. brooks is correct in saying it is way too late for any escalation, (''surge'') to bring about a stable, unified iraq. i doubt that it can bring about even a stable three-state result. there are simply no military options left, except to leave.  ralph averill  new preston, conn., jan. 7, 2007  to the editor:  the new year is starting out unusually: i find myself agreeing with a david brooks column.  guiding my thinking is former secretary of state colin l. powell's warning to president bush before the 2003 invasion of iraq: you break it, you own it.  mr. brooks is right that it is too late to fix iraq (to win). it would also be irresponsible simply to withdraw american troops and leave the iraqis to a horrendous fate. we must minimize the damage we have caused, and his solution would do that.  it includes using adequate force levels to help those fleeing to sectarian homelands; to erect buffers between shiites and sunnis where possible; and to provide security in areas that remain mixed.  left to his own devices, president bush will not do this. it is up to members of the house and the senate, therefore, to hold hearings and to bring pressure on the president to change course in a pragmatic direction.  william rose  new london, conn., jan. 7, 2007  the writer is a professor of government at connecticut college.  to the editor:  david brooks, in his defense of the promised surge, asks readers to ''picture the person you love most in the world'' and then imagine that person living amid the terror that now defines iraqi society.  yes, but isn't the question also: are you willing to see ''the person you love most in the world'' die or be maimed in the service of what mr. brooks calls ''the task of salvaging something''?  anyone who cannot answer yes to that question has no right to send someone else's loved one on this mission, whatever it's called.  joan kelly bernard  new york, jan. 8, 2007  