the neediest cases; keeping a girl off the streets, and on the road to success   ''she's not going to be in the street, that's for sure,'' geneva burton said decisively as she nodded toward her granddaughter, brittany rivera, 14. there are drugs on the streets of their bronx neighborhood, said ms. burton, 70. she lost her daughter to them and vowed not to lose her granddaughter, too.  ''my daughter got involved with drugs at an early age,'' ms. burton said. her daughter, dana burton rivera, was 16 when her mother noticed a change. she started on cocaine and wound up on crack, an addiction it pained ms. burton to witness. ''it was like she was kidnapped against her will,'' ms. burton remembered.  brittany was born addicted to cocaine and spent seven weeks in the hospital before she was released to her grandmother. brittany spent her early years with her grandmother, although her mother lived in the same building and was close by. ''i was 4 or 5 when i lived with my mother,'' brittany said, ''and that week when i was 6.''  brittany's mother, ms. rivera, got clean at 21. ''squeaky clean,'' ms. burton said. ''when she left it, she left it for good.'' brittany moved in with her a year or so later, and in january 1998 ms. rivera gave birth to twins. but while she had survived addiction, the years of drug abuse had taken their toll.  ms. rivera died suddenly, less than two weeks after brittany's sixth birthday. she went into the hospital with back pain, and died from complications stemming from her years as an addict. ''august the 15th, my child was gone,'' ms. burton said. the twins just were 7 months old, and ms. burton was heartbroken. ''i loved her beyond human understanding,'' she said. ''they didn't come sweeter than her.''  brittany now lives with her grandmother, and she carries her mother's high school graduation picture in her wallet. the likeness is striking. brittany, pleasant and well spoken, is a freshman at st. michael academy, an all-girl roman catholic high school in manhattan. her first report card shows an 85 percent average and positive comments from teachers. on wednesdays after school, she stays for global community, in which students discuss world events.  catholic school is important to ms. burton. she hopes it will help keep her granddaughter safe. ''the environment is better,'' she said. ''environment to me is very important. i don't see how you can separate a child from environment.''  she feels that the school will provide the discipline that brittany needs to succeed. brittany interjected, ''it's important to me -- i like the school.''  but paying for it is a challenge. high school costs $550 a month, and ms. burton has not managed to keep up. ''i can pay january,'' she said, but she has fallen about $1,000 behind since school began in september. making ends meet on her retiree income is a continual challenge. ms. burton receives $1,200 a month from the new york telephone company, where she worked as an operator until 1991. she also receives $600 from social security. brittany receives $154 a month in social security survivor benefits from her mother's death. their rent is $919 a month, and public assistance covers $300.  after ms. burton fell behind on her consolidated edison bill in august, catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund, stepped in to help. it arranged a $200 energy grant from con edison, and used $95 of neediest cases money to prevent a turn-off. ms. burton has again fallen behind, and this month an additional $130 in neediest cases money was used to keep the power from being turned off. ''i'm grateful; it's going to help me a lot,'' ms. burton said.  this month, ms. burton goes to family court to seek custody of the twins, william brandon sykes and breanna geneva sykes, who turned 9 on saturday. ms. burton saw them regularly until last year, when their father went into drug rehabilitation. they have been living with their father's partner. ''i want them back in my life pretty regularly,'' ms. burton said.  brittany is looking forward to being older and being able to go to the movies alone, and to talk to boys on the phone. ''don't rush it, brittany, it's coming,'' ms. burton said.  she is trying to teach her granddaughter as much as she can, now. ''i'm in the evening of my life; she's in the morning,'' she said. ''i'm not going to be with her always. i try to teach her the best i can.''  ms. burton is hoping that brittany will make her way safely through their neighborhood and out into the world beyond. ''it's o.k. for me, you know, 'cause i'm pretty strong,'' she said. ''i want her to get a good education so she can move on.'' but it might take some outside help to keep her granddaughter in the school ms. burton thinks best.  previously recorded: $6,231,937.08  recorded tuesday: 131,865.00  total: $6,363,802.08  last year to date: $6,071,392.38  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  