the lure of living above it all   it is a fine feeling to step into the elevator of an apartment building, press the button marked ''ph'' and take a ride to the top -- or at least near the top. and at a time when the wealthiest new yorkers are getting even wealthier, there are more buildings in manhattan with many more of these elevator buttons that bespeak the privileges of penthouse living.  christine harris, a 34-year-old director at ubs global asset management in manhattan, expects to experience that feeling when she and her boyfriend move into their $2.5 million 11th-floor penthouse on the northern edges of chelsea when the apartment is completed next summer.  speaking by telephone over the clatter of the ubs trading floor, ms. harris calmly envisioned opening her apartment to friends for french feasts and glasses of pinot, and unwinding after work on her private 700-square-foot terrace.  ''it's just nice to come home on a summer night and have a bottle of wine when you're in all of this madness in the city,'' she said.  while many manhattan developers are scrambling to find buyers for their newly constructed and converted luxury apartments, they say they're having little trouble selling their penthouses, which have become the trinkets of choice in the wake of the city's record wall street bonus season. these apartments, which have accounted for just 2.5 percent of the sales transactions in manhattan over roughly the last two decades, are now often selling faster than the cheaper studio, one- and two-bedroom apartments.  at ms. harris's new building, the onyx at 261 west 28th street, bronfman haymes real estate partners has contracts to sell all three of the building's penthouses, while 30 of the other 52 units remain unsold.  at 170 east end avenue (at 88th street), skyline developers sold one penthouse for $12 million, and the one next door for $14 million. skyline's president, orin wilf, said he had turned down an offer of $14.5 million to see if he could get $16 million for each of the two remaining penthouses. fifty-one of the 93 units are unsold in the building. he said he had negotiated on prices for apartments on the lower floors in the past.  mr. wilf says he thinks that the penthouses will sell even better when buyers see the completed apartments. ''we're in no rush to sell them,'' he said while standing in one half-constructed penthouse over the barks of dogs in carl schurz park, 19 stories below.  even at 15 central park west (at 61st street), all 15 penthouses in the project's two buildings have been sold for prices as high as $45 million, while about 30 of the building's 202 units remain unsold. ''i wish we had 20 more to sell,'' said william lie zeckendorf, a co-chairman of zeckendorf development.  penthouses, which once were identified more with bachelors and newlyweds seeking terrace space for their cocktail parties, are even attracting the stroller crowd, which seems to like the extra bedrooms and terraces found in the newer residential buildings.  when gregory o'hara, a private equity investor, needed to relocate his family to new york from miami, his wife, glorimar, started looking for homes that would give them some outdoor space for their 14-month-old son, henry.  the couple bought a $5.5 million triplex at 5 east 13th street. standing in the penthouse she will move into next month, ms. o'hara described her plans to set up a swing set, sandbox and outdoor movie theater on the terrace as henry grinned and toddled his first tentative steps.  ''it may be great for a bachelor, but it's great for a family,'' ms. o'hara said. ''we have lots of outdoor space.''  brokers say that wall street and hedge fund executives are often the first in line for penthouses, because the apartments confirm their ''master of the universe'' status among their neighbors.  maureen carroll, who previously worked on wall street and who now has her own brokerage firm specializing in selling apartments to wall street executives, had one client turn down an apartment when he found out there was a better one in the building.  the ''second best'' notion apparently contradicts these executives' self-image. ''they're not going to live in a building where they're the second-largest shareholder or there's another unit that's larger,'' ms. carroll said. ''the game doesn't stop when you go home at night.''  average prices for penthouses in manhattan jumped by 16.6 percent to $2.3 million in 2006, from $2 million in 2005, according to data collected by the miller samuel appraisal company. the number of deals jumped to 225 in 2006, from 184 in 2005. jonathan j. miller, the company's president, predicts these numbers will grow in 2007 because most penthouse buyers like ms. harris have not yet closed on their new condominiums.  these strong penthouse sales are persuading more developers to push the limits on how they define penthouses, and in some cases, they are making them more lavish than ever before. shaun osher, the chief executive of core group marketing, which is handling the onyx, is advising developers on the 25 other projects his company represents, to design all of their penthouses with more elaborate finishes so that they can ask even higher prices.  josh guberman, the president and chief executive of the core development group (which has no relation to mr. osher's firm), sold the o'haras their triplex at 5 east 13th only 48 hours after sales began last summer. he said he now planned to divide one penthouse in his next project, on the upper east side, into two duplexes, which will be priced at $5.5 million each.  edward minskoff, the president of edward j. minskoff equities inc., sold five penthouses at 101 warren street in tribeca at prices ranging from $4 million to $20 million within 10 days of its opening last april. since then, he has sold about 150 of the building's 227 apartments. he is now building more apartments on top of the building than he had originally planned.  donald j. trump, who has been trying to sell his penthouse on the 31st and 32nd floors of 502 park avenue (59th street) for $32 million on and off for the last two years, is now enlarging the master bedroom suite to about 1,400 square feet, up from 665 square feet, by enclosing an existing terrace and building a new terrace on top. he said he now planned to list the apartment at $42 million because the new terrace space will be on the higher floor and will open from the living room.  while mr. trump's penthouse is, in fact, on the top two floors, he contends that the definition of a penthouse has now become broader, a point his peers have also caught on to.  ''penthouses are starting to go lower and lower in terms of the top of the building,'' mr. trump said. ''the top three, four or even five or six floors of the building can be defined as penthouses. the key is the number you put on the elevator.''  mr. trump says he typically builds six floors of penthouses in his towers. mr. minskoff calls the apartments on the 34th and 35th floors at 101 warren ''sky homes'' and the apartments on the 32nd and 33rd floors penthouses.  on the other hand, at the onyx, matthew bronfman and evan haymes stick to a strict interpretation: only the apartments on the top floor, the 11th, are called penthouses.  there are also penthouses in far shorter buildings. mr. guberman refers to the apartments on the top floor of his six-story building at 5 east 13th street as penthouses, and he plans to do the same for his upper east side duplexes.  michael morris, a professor in columbia's psychology department and the head of a social intelligence program at its business school, said the trend in penthouses revealed a marked preference for displays of conspicuous consumption. he said the people buying the penthouses exhibit their wealth by purchasing real estate that is physically higher than their neighbors', even if their apartments offer little more than views of surrounding buildings.  in many cases, he said, such buyers would rather have a penthouse on a high floor of a new building than an apartment in a prestigious but shorter building like the dakota. ''it's a very simple marker of status,'' professor morris said. ''it's very easy to see. it's very easy for other people to see.''  but some penthouse buyers reject the idea that their purchases have anything to do with status. they say that newly constructed penthouses typically offer the most room, highest ceilings and most expansive terraces. they emphasize the privacy that such spaces can create in the heart of manhattan.  maria bosoni and her husband, alexandre, have put down a deposit for the $12 million penthouse on the 19th floor of 170 east end avenue. the bosonis currently live in a penthouse in the bloomberg tower.  ms. bosoni sees no special cachet in the ''penthouse'' designation. ''it makes no difference to us,'' she said. ''it's just that the penthouse is the better apartment. it makes for a better apartment because of the square footage and the height.''  brokers agree that while their buyers are pretty direct about what they want from their penthouses, they also like the fact that newly built versions have more room than those of the past.  servants were typically the city's earliest inhabitants of apartment buildings' top floors, because getting up there involved climbing so many stairs. few new yorkers wanted to spend time on terraces because of the black soot spewing from the elevated trains.  kathy sloane, a senior vice president of brown harris stevens and the broker for mr. trump's apartment at 502 park, said that buyers who think they want a prewar penthouse may not like what they find.  ''penthouses were more difficult to sell because they're often quirky,'' she said. ''they weren't designed to be penthouses. people weren't necessarily ready to take on the task of making a great penthouse out of a lot of rooms.''  developers are also expanding the definition of penthouse to link it more to lifestyle than to height. mr. guberman is adding play areas to the fifth-, sixth- and seventh-floor apartments at a second east side project, at 433 east 74th street, to attract family buyers. he plans to call the seventh-floor apartments penthouses and the fifth- and sixth-floor units ''flex'' penthouses.  ''a penthouse talks to the world of exclusion and privacy,'' mr. guberman said. ''it doesn't really matter if it has five stories or eight stories. once you get up there, it's about having your own oasis separate and removed from the balance of the building.''  mr. minskoff, the creator of sky homes and penthouses at 101 warren, said that even he can be confused by the definitions he has come up with. ''they're all very large apartments with high ceilings almost at the top of the building,'' he said. ''i'm not sure if you can absolutely differentiate.''  mr. trump is cautious about how long the penthouse craze may last and won't say how many penthouses he may build in his next new york project, a condo in soho that won't be completed for two and a half years. but he contends that penthouses will always have more allure than brownstones, with their understated charms.  ''i live in a beautiful penthouse because i love the views,'' mr. trump said. ''i look at brownstones: you're looking at garbage cans, and you look at air-conditioning units. you just can't compare.''  