what would you do?; new yorkers doubt that their response to a crisis would be, 'hey, not my problem'   a man falls from a subway platform, a toddler tumbles from a fire escape -- two quintessential new york nightmares.  three men race to the rescue. one jumps onto the tracks to save the fallen man. the two others position themselves to catch the child.  new yorkers helping new yorkers: how quintessentially new york is that?  the reflexive willingness to pitch in, to involve themselves in other people's lives at crucial moments, seems so at odds with the decades-old (or maybe centuries-old) stereotype of new york as a hard-nosed, hardhearted place where everyone is on his own, where even innate do-gooders squelch the impulse to do something to help out. if you fall on the tracks, that is your problem.  has new york changed? have new yorkers changed? were the stories that made headlines last week anomalies, or is altruism catching on? is there suddenly a kinder, gentler new york?  to answer those questions, five other questions were asked of new yorkers last week. each of the five questions required them to imagine harrowing and potentially dangerous situations:  if a child fell off the staten island ferry, would you jump into the water?  if an elderly woman was being mugged, would you intercede?  if someone was being attacked by a pit bull, would you distract the dog?  if a woman in front of a burning building was screaming that her child remained inside, would you go in?  if a friend was marrying the wrong person, would you say so?  the answers prompted their own what-ifs. what if you cannot swim? and, if you tell your friend the woman of his dreams is all wrong for him, will he tell you he never wants to speak to you again?  but most of the people questioned said that yes, they would intervene, or at least try to.  they also suggested that new yorkers, who helped each other through the trauma of the 9/11 attacks and inconvenience of the 2003 blackout, may be less likely to hesitate about individual acts of kindness or courage than they once might have been.  ''we are a little more brave,'' said jimmy arias, 40, the manager of a flower shop on the upper east side of manhattan. ''in each neighborhood, they have people that aren't afraid to get a little more crazy in how they act. in other places, outside new york, they are more quiet.''  the impulse to do something was echoed by police commissioner raymond w. kelly, who answered the same questions in an interview on friday.  ''my bias is towards action,'' he said. ''i think you want to be able to look yourself in the mirror. anything you can to do help people you can help, it should be done.''  and so, on the staten island ferry, said mr. kelly, the bystander should ''look for a life preserver you can throw.''  ''use common sense. it depends if you can swim,'' mr. kelly said.  ''i say, yes, better to be a good samaritan than someone who is ashamed of themselves the next day,'' he said.  the woman being mugged? ''i think you intercede, make noise, call for help, call 911,'' he said. ''yes, you intercede, make certain the perpetrator knows you're there, assess your physical capabilities. my bias again is towards action.''  what about the pit bull? should you distract the dog? ''sure,'' mr. kelly said. ''don't stand idly by. you have to help your fellow man when they need help.''  the burning building poses great risks. should you do something, or just stand on the sidewalk, watching? ''with sufficient caveats,'' he said, ''you have to take action -- make sure the fire department is called.''  as for going in, he again urged common sense but added, ''i think at the end of the day, you've got to take action.''  but the question that involved no apparent immediate physical danger -- about the best friend and the marriage -- stopped the action-oriented commissioner. (the word ''apparent'' is intended to cover for bridegrooms or brides-to-be whose reaction to unwanted advice is to get physical.)  ''now you're talking about really dangerous territory,'' mr. kelly said. ''i don't know. i think i might step back on that one. physical involvement and bravery, i would encourage, but that's treading on very thin ice.''  maybe that is because that situation calls for a different kind of thinking from the other four situations, or the two accidents last week.  ''if you look at the history of most people who are designated heroes in the military and in other places,'' said dr. charles goodstein, a clinical professor of psychiatry at new york university school of medicine, ''most of the time they say the reaction they had was without any mental preparation. it was spontaneous, it was without much consideration for the practicalities, the realities of the moment. i think they're honest when they say they don't think of themselves as heroes, they just reacted to something they saw as an emergency.''  still, he said, people are people. ''i'm not sure if i put 50 construction workers on that platform, they would jump in,'' he said. ''i'm not sure how many would jump in. that man had something else going for him.  ''what we know in most cases,'' dr. goodstein said, ''is that people will probably be so self-absorbed that the life of another human being doesn't count for very much.''  the same point was suggested by one of the people who were asked the five questions. ''you can say, 'sure, i'd go in,' '' said mike, who said he was an 80-year-old retired telephone-company worker and would not give his last name, ''but i really can't say.''  jay diaz, 48, an army veteran and former ambulance driver who lives in brooklyn, said that he would help in every situation he had been asked about. just consider how he reacted eight years ago, he said.  he heard a woman screaming and saw smoke pouring from an apartment building at suydam street and knickerbocker avenue in bushwick, brooklyn. the woman said there were children inside, mr. diaz said.  he and a friend ran in and broke down a door, mr. diaz said. it led to an apartment in which two small boys were cowering under a table.  mr. diaz wrapped himself in wet towels, gathered the boys under the towels and carried them outside, he said.  ''if i hear about kids in danger, i'd do anything for them,'' he said.  the mayor did not give him a medal and talk-show producers did not call. he said that the police officers and firefighters at the scene had congratulated him, and he received free medical treatment for smoke inhalation.  ''that was all the recognition i needed,'' he said.  often, there is the unknown. jerry tierstein, a cabdriver from brooklyn, said that he and a friend had heard a woman screaming. ''we didn't know if she was getting raped or whatever,'' he said. ''i ran in, expecting to face the rapist. it happened her kid fell in the bathtub.''  his friend, who knew first aid, ''got the kid breathing again'' while mr. tierstein ran outside to signal for help.  tommy barone, 29, a former army specialist who served in bosnia, said his military training had prepared him to help in almost any situation. so he easily answered the questions about the burning building, the ferry and the mugging. but not the one about the pit bull attack.  ''pit bulls are pretty tough,'' said mr. barone, a pit bull owner himself who lives in springfield gardens, queens. ''once a pit bull locks its jaws into someone, i'm not sure there's much you can do.''  edward butcher, 64, who lives in ridgewood, queens, said he knew his limits. he was injured in vietnam and uses a wheelchair. so he said he could not save children in a burning building, and as for a child falling from the staten island ferry, ''i never learned to swim, and i can't learn now.''  but he is not helpless, he said. if he saw an unarmed robber mugging an elderly woman, ''i'd kick him in the shin with my good leg,'' mr. butcher said.  he would not hesitate to take on the pit bull, either. ''i'd grab the dog and rip out his throat,'' mr. butcher said. ''it wouldn't take a hero to do that.''  the one thing he would not do, even though he could, would be to advise a friend not to marry someone.  ''i told my cousin once what i thought of his fiancée,'' mr. butcher said, ''and he broke a beer bottle on my knees. i still have the scars.''  