brown returns to the n.b.a. with a smile   larry brown, whose dream job of coaching the knicks turned into a nightmare last season and led to a hiatus from the n.b.a., resurfaced with the philadelphia 76ers on monday, looking relaxed, offering a smile and saying that he had no immediate plans to return to coaching.  brown met with reporters in a formal setting for the first time since the knicks dismissed him last june. his new title, announced saturday, is executive vice president of the 76ers, who have the worst record (9-24) in the eastern conference. they can use some help, and brown said he was glad to provide it.  ''i'm happy i'm back doing something,'' brown said from a lounge at the philadelphia college of osteopathic medicine, where the 76ers practice. ''i feel like i've got a lot to offer. and i was always treated great here, so i just want to contribute in any way i can.''  brown, a hall of famer who coached the 76ers for six seasons and took them to the 2001 finals, will be primarily responsible for assisting their front office in personnel decisions. he said that he might even help coach maurice cheeks with teaching the younger players.  brown, 66, and his family moved back to philadelphia at the end of the summer. he had been informally advising the team on personnel matters, including the trade of allen iverson to the denver nuggets last month.  ''i was having a great time,'' brown said. ''first time i ever spent thanksgiving with my family. first time i ever went on a vacation at christmas. i got to take my kids to school every day; pick them up. only thing hard was i missed being at practice and being in the locker room.''  brown has never been just an executive, though he tried to negotiate to become one. when he was coaching the detroit pistons in the 2005 playoffs, he spoke to the cleveland cavaliers about becoming their president. that contributed to his firing, freeing him to become knicks coach.  despite a reputation for molding teams into winners during 33 seasons as a head coach, brown was unable to turn around the knicks, whom he guided to 23 victories.  brown, born in brooklyn and raised on long island, never seemed at home with the knicks. he alienated players by using 42 different starting lineups, and he publicly criticized stephon marbury. in private, brown clashed with the team's president, isiah thomas, over personnel decisions.  when the knicks fired brown, they withheld the $41 million remaining on his five-year deal. james l. dolan, the chairman of madison square garden, said brown had violated his contract by, among other things, trying to negotiate trades.  a settlement was reached in late october, and brown received an $18.5 million payout. neither side spoke publicly about the settlement. ''i'm not looking back on it at all,'' brown said of his 331 days as knicks coach. ''that's over.''  when asked about the 15-21 knicks, he offered nothing but compliments.  brown said the knicks ''are going to get better and better. david lee's played great. they got a good young group and i think they've done a great job. and the way this division's going, you win two in a row, you could be in first place.''  the 76ers will look to rebuild through the draft. they have three first-round picks, including two they received in the deal for iverson. brown said that he advised the team's president, billy king, about trading iverson but that it was really the team's decision.  brown also said that he had advised nuggets coach george karl and one of denver's assistants, doug moe, about trading for iverson. moe said last month that brown had disclosed to him late in the process that he was advising the sixers, too. brown is a close friend of karl and moe.  brown said that if he attended sixers games, he would sit in the stands with king and watch nervously like everybody else. he added that he planned to travel to watch players and coaches on other teams.  and what about the itch to coach again?  ''at this moment, no,'' brown said. ''i didn't come here to be involved in the coaching. after last year, i think i need to step away from coaching for a while. i'm 66, so i don't know if that's what i'm looking to do.''  the sixers' first two games with brown will be against the detroit pistons in philadelphia on tuesday and against the knicks in new york on wednesday.  pro basketball  