slimmer time in the age of the internet   richard stengel, the managing editor of time, took his wife and kids out to dinner friday night.  as historic moments go, not a big deal, but it does reflect a seismic change. time magazine, which has been coming out every monday for over 36 years, hit the streets on friday instead.  mr. stengel said in his editor's note christening the issue that they made the switch because, ''i believe that getting the magazine on newsstands on friday helps us set the news agenda.''  other than teeing up the sunday morning talk shows with some fresh grist, it is hard to see how that will happen. but unlike revolutions that have been announced before at time magazine only to fizzle, this time change is coming from above.  time inc. management, with the help of air cover from the consultants from mckinsey, is trying to cut costs to reflect brutal realities in the mass magazine business. at the end of the month, there will be significant layoffs at the magazine division, and it will not end with time's 280 editorial employees. other magazines at the division of time warner will also re-engineer and cut as well.  at time, mr. stengel moved swiftly. in the last six months, the huge rate base of time magazine has been cut by almost 20 percent, the street date has been moved, and at the end of the month, the standard editorial model -- a centralized, well-paid cadre processing every bit of copy that comes in the door -- will be kaput, replaced by a leaner enterprise build on star voices who presumably will get less editing.  and a tremendous amount of effort has been expended on time's new web site, which makes its debut today. it is thought by many at the magazine that the highly regarded editor there, josh tyrangiel, will one day take over whatever time magazine/time.com becomes.  of course, there are those who would argue that in a society that seems to have no general interest (other than, say, paris hilton and the super bowl) there is no room or need for a general interest magazine. but mr. stengel said he will not be imprisoned by the tyranny of big numbers in making changes at time.  ''i think it is a false choice to say that something that is mass has to be dumbed-down.'' he said. ''we want to be accessible, but we want our readers to know that we understand they are smart.''  to do this, he is prepared to eschew time's historically olympian editorial voice, and more recently, a default to cover articles that track trends in lifestyle, and to present point-of-view journalism, booking ''revered economist jeffrey sachs'' and ''great modern historian and harvard university professor niall ferguson'' as contributors. some of the other new and fresh voices at time include william kristol, walter isaacson, and michael kinsley, not exactly an underexposed group.  in the current issue, the new order seems long on convention, if not consistency. two somewhat declawed hawks of the war in iraq, mr. kristol, the editor of the weekly standard, and peter beinhart, the former editor of the new republic, are given significant space to argue that american greatness is still a pretty great idea.  mr. kristol is flogging a plan by frederick kagan, a military analyst who is a pet rock for the neocons, while a few pages away the veteran time writer michael duffy (who describes the weekly standard as ''the neocons house organ'') calls out mr. kagan as one of the authors of the so-called surge plan that will commit yet more american troops to iraq.  mr. stengel sees no problem with what seems like a u-turn in the middle of his magazine. ''i am giving the reader two interesting takes and saying to them, you are smart enough to figure it out and i will help you do that.''  that word -- you -- has been a pretty big deal at time lately. you were recently named the magazine's person of the year. and you, or at least ''you,'' were mentioned 14 times in mr. stengel's note announcing a number of editorial changes at the magazine.  but who are you, exactly, and how many are there of you? the magazine mr. stengel is building seems to be the journalistic offspring of magazines like the atlantic and the economist, although with shorter articles and a higher metabolism.  but those magazines are much more niche affairs. print publishing is becoming a business built on rich people who read. information that can be digitized and commoditized, like the kind of data that weeklies historically traded in, ends up being consumed on the web (at time.com, mr. stengel hopes).  magazines that are prospering now offer an environment that cannot be replicated online. you cannot open your browser and have an experience akin to the september issue of vogue, with its hundreds of pages of brutally trendy ads mixed in with aspirational articles. the thingness of a magazine, its physical properties, have become increasingly important.  that is part of the reason that condé nast is betting tens of millions on a new high-end business magazine -- portfolio -- at a time when the web is full of every manner of business information being pushed and pulled at and by consumers.  in its current state, a thin weekly on increasingly thin paper, time magazine is not much of a thing to behold. mr. stengel said that more will be revealed over the next few months when the redesign of the magazine and the web site are complete.  ''we want our magazine to be much more, to be seen as a premium product, a special and beautiful thing,'' he said on the phone friday night. so far, that is mostly reflected in the price, which increased to $4.95 in november.  for a tough-minded, well-written niche magazine, $4.95 is a good deal, but if the magazine becomes a brochure mostly advertising the time.com web site, it may seem a bit pricey.  the media equation  