middle school: it's, like, awkward   to the editor:  re ''trying to find solutions in chaotic middle schools'' (''the critical years'' series, front page, jan. 3):  it's a shame that the situation in the schools in your article rings so true.  the ages between 10 and 13 are an odd time because this is when children start to change, and some start to feel extremely uncomfortable with themselves. segregating them into middle schools can reinforce that.  the nice thing about k-through-8 schools is that the children in the middle grades have an opportunity to mentor the younger children.  separating out the fifth through eighth graders and then sending them on to high school means that they go through an adjustment of being the youngest three times instead of twice.  it can be beneficial for younger children to interact with the older ones if there are clear expectations on both sides.  i was fortunate when i was in high school to be allowed to tutor some younger students. what i learned from that has affected my work today in that i know that people don't learn at the same speed or in the same way.  i did not get that in middle school because we were segregated from the younger students and the older students as well.  in addition, it's nice to see where one has been (first grade) and where one is headed (eighth grade) while one is in sixth grade.  older students can learn so much from interacting in a supervised situation with young students. it can give them a wonderful feeling of community that is not present in many places today.  a. l. alterman  hastings-on-hudson, n.y.  jan. 3, 2007  to the editor:  your article articulates some of the challenges of early adolescence that the middle school movement, at its inception, sought to address.  early adolescence is a stage of development when bodies and minds are changing more rapidly than at any other time in life, when emotions are unstable and relationships with peers become the driving force in life.  the article described a school system that is sadly missing the educational mark for early adolescents.  at this stage of life, children need safe schools in which they are actively engaged in challenging learning experiences that build their understandings of themselves and their world. an effective middle school curriculum must build on the interests of this age group to capture their attention.  these are the heart of the middle school, which no change in grade configuration can replace. the developmental needs of young people must be taken seriously if we are to create successful middle schools.  it is painful to read of consistent failure when there is so much that middle schools could be doing. successful approaches are being used across the country. we need to be using more of these in new york.  sue ruskin-mayher  new york, jan. 3, 2007  the writer is director of middle school general teacher education at the bank street college of education.  to the editor:  you do an excellent job highlighting the difficulties encountered by middle schools. one thing you do not mention, however, is the frequently used policy of social promotion.  all too often, students learn that they will be passed on to the next grade regardless of whether or not they pass their classes.  as a result, many middle schools do not instill a sense of academic accountability in their students.  the end result is a large number of ill-prepared high school freshmen and increased numbers of dropouts as these students fail to earn credit toward graduation.  if school administrators are serious about reforming our middle schools, an alternative to social promotion, other than retention, needs to be developed.  adam berlin  lawrence, n.y., jan. 3, 2007  the writer is a social studies teacher at lawrence middle school.  to the editor:  hmmm, they seem restless and undisciplined. why not direct that excess energy toward learning or training at some point during the school day? what about dance, theater, singing, knitting or kickball? to the point that they're worn out.  and maybe even feel good about having learned something they can see and feel. and even appreciate classes where they just sit for a while.  mary garber  richmond, va., jan. 3, 2007  