metropolitan diary   dear diary:  our manhattan-born-and-bred eighth grader thinks she might enjoy a high school with a campus atmosphere. so a few weeks ago, my husband and i found ourselves sitting in the parents' lounge of a bronx high school while our daughter was being interviewed.  we wanted to see the students in action, so we left the lounge for a lovely old carved bench in the main corridor, a perfect perch from which to watch teenage energy in motion.  while we were taking in the scene, a young lady, unable to contain her curiosity, approached us and whispered, ''so what did you guys do to deserve detention?''  susie case  dear diary:  what with all the construction going on at the juilliard school these days, there are, of course, a lot of signs in the hallways about the work. one of the more interesting ones i've spotted, posted on the door of a newly constructed office, reads: ''future temporary home of chamber music chairman.''  richard lewis  dear diary:  walking on 10th avenue between 52nd and 53rd streets, my daughters, robin and june, brought our attention to what we thought was the squeaking of brakes but turned out to be the whinnying of a horse pulling a carriage. two drivers were holding the reins and the horse was rearing its head, going up on its hind legs and repeating its whinnying over and over.  my son, glenn, and i were behind my husband, rich, and my daughters, and we were paying close attention to this little drama when one driver jumped out of his seat and, landing on the ground, turned to the horse and said: ''o.k., o.k. i'll buy you an apple.''  as he said it, he ran toward a small corner store that actually had a large row of big red apples in the window.  the horse got his apple and was quiet as a mouse.  shirlene cohen  dear diary:  two stories:  1. i'm walking my dog in our west side neighborhood when i peer into the lobby of a neighboring building and see a handwritten sign tacked up on the wall. the sign reads: ''whoever is stealing my wall street journal, would you please stop? if you can't afford the 75 cents, maybe it's not working out for you anyway.''  2. my wife and i are touring the ''bodies'' exhibition at south street seaport, looking at the nervous system. two elderly women are in front of us, and one says to the other ''yeah, my aunt betty had problems with the nerves in her arms. terrible pain up and down the arm. it was diagnosed as nostalgia.''  erik kolbell  dear diary:  my husband, john, and i had taken our three children -- myles, 7; amanda, 4; and tommy, 1 -- to the tisch children's zoo at the central park wildlife center. we were happily giving feed pellets to the goats when i noticed a little boy (equally happily) shoveling the pellets into his own mouth.  before i could warn him that he would make himself sick, his mother grabbed his hand out of his mouth, and upbraided him with the following words: ''don't eat those, silly; they're not kosher.''  julie kornfeld  dear diary:  i noticed a homeless woman in her mid-40s looking at the fruit and vegetables at a corner stand in the mid-50s in manhattan. finally, i walked over to her and asked if she would like to choose something from the assortment.  she answered: ''oh, yes. i would love a bunch of those green grapes.''  ''great,'' i responded. the fruit vendor picked out a bunch of green grapes, put them in the bag and handed them to her. she looked in the bag and then looked at me.  ''you know,'' she said, ''this is a lot of grapes. won't you share them with me?''  there i stood in the middle of manhattan eating the best grapes ever with this delightful, generous woman.  june aaronson  dear diary:  one day in the fall my grandson, tom, was riding west on a highway in new jersey to visit his uncle, who lived partway up a mountain. suffering from the boredom inherent to all 4-year-olds in transit, he asked his father how many more blocks to uncle tim's.  his dad explained that in the city it was blocks, but that in the country, it was miles, and since miles were longer than blocks, it would take a while.  tom pondered this information and then asked, ''but what floor does he live on?''  jenny dwyer  metropolitan diary  