today in business   a bold new toyota -- toyota is making some surprisingly aggressive moves this week at the international auto show as it moves into markets long dominated by its american and european rivals. and they mark a notable shift for a company where conservatism has been a watchword. [page c1.]  too quick off the line -- each year, in the weeks before detroit automakers parade their new designs at the auto show, selected groups of reporters assemble for sneak previews. but the car companies have found it more difficult than ever to keep a lid on their closely guarded designs, forcing them to rethink how they disseminate early information. [c3.]  record sales at volkwagen -- group vehicle sales at volkwagen, europe's biggest carmaker, advanced 9.3 percent in 2006, to a record 5.73 million units, thanks to brisk growth around the world and across its brands. [c3.]  convergence in the cellphone -- the world of desktop computing is finally going mobile, and the shift can be seen in the explosive growth of wireless data for cellular carriers. the newest screen is adopting more and more characteristics of a personal computer. and many believe that the next big shift will be the convergence of many forms of communication encompassing voice, e-mail, instant messaging and video telephony. [c1.]  hiring for online coverage  -- the offices of the politico, the (mostly) online news venture starting publication in two weeks, looks like a standard newsroom -- reporters tap on computers at adjacent desks while banks of televisions hum overhead. but unlike a standard daily newspaper, the politico will be devoted to a single topic: national politics. another big difference: it is hiring. [c1.]  while bureaus shrink -- faced with declining advertising and competition from the web, midsize regional dailies across the country have been retrenching in recent years, scaling back their washington coverage and their national ambitions. [c8.]  a microsoft venture with ford -- for bill gates, left, the chairman of microsoft, the consumer electronics show has become an annual forum to mix product announcements with computer-filled visions of future microsoft-based technologies. this year he is unveiling a partnership with the ford motor company to build microsoft technology into several ford models. [c5.]  early look at video game battles -- the most widely watched report on holiday video game sales is not out until thursday, but early hints suggest that it may hold a few surprises. at the consumer electronics show in las vegas, makers have announced that they are shipping more consoles and selling more games than expected, providing an early look at what may be a multiyear battle among sony, microsoft and nintendo. [c4.]  take-along satellite dish -- rick rosner, the creator and producer of numerous television series, likes to surround himself with television -- so much so that he invented a portable satellite dish that folds up like a piece of luggage and can be toted on camping trips or to tailgate parties. [c1.]  freshening up old spice -- can an agency known for offbeat campaigns that appeal to younger men, for brands like nike, espn and miller high life, freshen the stodgy image of the old spice line of men's grooming products? [c6.]  iraq confirms a source exists -- after weathering six weeks of criticism for quoting an iraqi police captain whose existence had been called into question, the associated press won a vindication last week when iraq changed its story and acknowledged that, yes, jamil hussein does work there. [c8.]  frank and frank on wealth -- robert frank, a reporter who covers private wealth for the wall street journal, and robert h. frank, an economist and professor at cornell university (who also contributes to the new york times), have both written books dealing with the culture of wealth in the united states. [c8.]  a two-hanky, jumbo tub movie -- people watching ''love story,'' the lachrymose 1970 romance, ate on average 28 percent more buttered, salted popcorn than those watching ''sweet home alabama,'' a 2002 comedy, according to a survey described in the journal of marketing. [c3.]  china hints at flexibility -- china may increase the flexibility of the yuan if its trade surplus continues to expand this year, china's central bank governor, zhou xiaochuan, said a meeting of central bank governors from the group of 10 nations. [c2.]  britain, too, loves dvr -- british sky broadcasting's sale of more than two million digital video recorders showed the international appeal of a technology that wrests control of television schedules out of the hands of broadcasters and into the homes of viewers. [c4.]  