large beasts, mean weapons and a terrifying judge   many people believe that energy conservation is the way to deal with dwindling energy resources, but capcom's action game lost planet: extreme condition offers a different solution -- kill house-size spiders and suck out their glowing orange blood to power advanced weapons that can be used to kill even bigger spiders.  taking place on the frozen planet of e.d.n. iii, lost planet follows a soldier named wayne and his attempts to eradicate the akrid, the planet's diverse population of savage monsters. akrid take many forms besides the big spiders, including giant scorpions, 50-foot plants that fire missile seeds and flying jellyfish that explode when shot. the larger creatures are almost impossible to kill unless wayne can find a v.s., a giant robotic tank that walks on two legs and can handle two powerful weapons. fortunately these are almost everywhere, often left behind by the gangs wayne must also battle.  lost planet has a great sense of scale. wayne travels through vast snowy fields and canyons and sometimes encounters creatures as big as a city block. both the life support system wayne carries and the v.s. are fueled by the akrid's thermal energy blood. once wayne's supply of bug juice runs out a single blow can kill him, but otherwise any damage to wayne is automatically healed.  the akrid are tough, but conveniently all their weak points glow bright orange, making it easy to know where to shoot (a rather unlikely evolutionary development). in the case of spiders you can even shoot their legs off, making them much easier to kill. once they are dead, an orange pool of thermal goo is left behind to fuel your equipment.  for the most part you don't really need to kill the akrid; if you know where you're going you can often just run past them. the first time i played each mission i would explore carefully, killing everything that attacked as i tried to figure out where i needed to go. but once i knew where the exit was, i could often run through a big section of the game in a couple of minutes.  running won't help when you encounter each mission's final supermonster or enemy v.s. these battles are brutal; i would die several times just figuring out a basic strategy and then die a few more times while i perfected my technique. beating the big monsters can be utterly exhausting but also tremendous fun.  while the battles are epic, the story is less so. the animated cinematic sequences that separate missions are slickly produced and well acted but not remotely engaging. the story is generic, and perhaps is present not because the developers had a story they wanted to tell but just because they thought one was obligatory; you tolerate rather than enjoy it.  the gameplay, on the other hand, is a blast. action is nicely varied, with all sorts of interesting enemies and levels that range from taking on a few ''snow pirates'' (the game calls the gangs pirates even though they don't appear to have ships) as you explore a town to taking on dozens of giant monsters in a vast expanse of snow.  the game looks great and is beautifully designed. you can use a gizmo to scale buildings and mountains quickly, you can fire at boulders to make them fall on monsters, and you pilot various v.s. units that have a range of features but can all be equipped with rocket launchers, laser guns and other weapons.  giant spiders are bad, but contestants from ''american idol'' might argue that simon cowell, the talent show's famously savage judge, is much scarier. those who will never have the opportunity to be personally insulted by mr. cowell can now be insulted by his virtual representative in blitz games' singing game karaoke revolution presents: american idol.  previous attempts to turn ''american idol'' into a video game have been abysmal, the game equivalent of those contestants whom mr. cowell reduces to tears on the show. this effort is much better, mainly because it is simply a new edition of the always entertaining karaoke revolution series shined up with some ''american idol'' gloss.  as in any karaoke revolution game, you sing into a microphone along with a pop song like ''just the way you are'' or ''crazy little thing called love.'' a graph indicates whether you are hitting the notes correctly; the more accurately you sing, the better your score.  you are represented by a singer on a stage; an audience cheers when you hit the notes and boos when you don't. you can customize your virtual singer with various clothes, and if you have the playstation 2 eyetoy camera, you can take a picture of yourself and the game will create a virtual you to dress up in the game's fancy attire.  the eyetoy can also show your image on a big onstage screen. it allowed me to watch my virtual self in a zoot suit hamming it up in front of a big screen showing the real me slumped on the couch, singing off key.  the main differences from previous karaoke revolution games are the sets, which now mimic those of the tv series, and the judges, who will grimace when you hit a bad note or smile when you do well, and will then critique you. the judges consist of mr. cowell, randy jackson and some woman named laura who looks a lot like paula abdul, who apparently didn't want to license her image to the game.  the judging is interesting; judges can break down a song, noting that you started well but lost it in the middle or that you were generally on key but weren't overly impressive.  each critique is simply a few stock phrases strung together, but it is generally convincing unless a judge's remarks seem contradictory or one judge blasts you and then the next judge says ''i totally disagree'' and also blasts you. the judging doesn't make this karaoke revolution game substantially different from its predecessors, but it adds a little fun.  once you're been criticized, you will be told whether you've made it to the next round. you don't need to sing that well to make it through the audition, but by the finals you will need to give a pretty solid performance.  as in the real series, the singer's biggest challenge is mr. cowell, who hated almost everything i sang unless i set the judging mode to easy, in which case he would tell me i was just what the show needed. while he is realistically prickly, his insults are disappointingly generic. i've watched a couple of episodes of ''american idol'' and recall mr. cowell having a caustic wit; but in the game he isn't witty, he's just mean.  still, listening to him tell me i should give up singing forever did allow me to feel what many ''american idol'' contestant have felt before me; a strong desire to feed him to a gigantic thermal-powered spider.  lost planet: extreme condition  developed and published by capcom for xbox 360; for ages 13 and up; $59.99 ($69.99 for limited collector's edition).  karaoke revolution presents: american idol  developed by blitz games and published by konami digital for playstation 2; for ages 10 and up; $39.99 ($54.99 including microphone).  game theory e-mail: herold@nytimes.com  