suspensions after brawl animated the knicks   fists flew, mayhem reigned and the knicks were sentenced to three weeks of unmitigated suffering for their transgressions. wasn't that the idea when the national basketball association penalized them for brawling with the denver nuggets last month?  the punishment was swift: suspensions for four players, totaling 21 games and $253,000 in lost salary, and a $500,000 fine for the franchise. but the last of those suspensions has ended, and the knicks appear no worse for the experience. in fact, they are unmistakably better off.  the knicks won 6 of 10 games during the suspensions. their enigmatic point guard, stephon marbury, found his stride again. their new sensation at power forward, david lee, became more sensational. jamal crawford became a force again. eddy curry flirted with dominance.  like unruly students -- as if they were the n.b.a.'s own bart simpson -- the knicks finished writing, ''i will not start brawls that embarrass the league'' 1,000 times on the chalkboard, only to end up smirking and oddly valiant when it was all over.  ''we're a better team now,'' marbury said tuesday, echoing the unanimous sentiment of knicks' players and coaches.  the why and the how of the knicks' improbable turnaround with a depleted roster depends on who is explaining it. but there is no debating the bottom line.  the knicks had not won six games in any 10-game stretch since last january. they needed 17 games to earn their first six victories this season. their record after the dec. 16 brawl was 9-17. they are a more palatable 15-21 heading into wednesday night's home game against the philadelphia 76ers -- the knicks' first game with a full roster since the fight.  lee, who averaged 10.3 points and 14.1 rebounds during the past 10 games, recalled the daunting feeling the knicks faced after the suspensions were issued. they were about to play the utah jazz at madison square garden, and had only eight players in uniform. in addition to the suspended players (nate robinson, jared jeffries, mardy collins and jerome james), the knicks were missing two injured starters, quentin richardson and steve francis.  ''we had hardly enough guys to do two-line layups,'' lee said of the pregame warm-ups. ''it seemed like we were rebounding, dribbling out and then dribbling back in to shoot our own layups.''  the knicks beat the jazz in overtime that night, with lee passing to marbury for a driving layup at the buzzer.  ''i think you saw the true character of our team that day,'' lee said.  in the next days, the knicks also beat charlotte (in double overtime) and two eastern conference powers, chicago (in regulation) and detroit (in triple overtime). there was a sense among the players that the brawl, the suspensions and the universal criticism directed at them had made the knicks a more tightly knit group.  coach isiah thomas has consistently dismissed that idea, and he did again tuesday.  ''we didn't need that fight to remind us that we were against the world,'' said thomas, who insisted that even before the fight, the knicks ''were right on the verge of starting to play well.''  ''i don't think it's because you got into a fight or something like that that made you play well,'' thomas said. ''a lot of teams get into fights and a lot of people get into fights, and that don't make them play well.''  the nuggets illustrate that point. they have lost 6 of 10 games -- 5 straight at one point -- since the brawl, despite acquiring allen iverson from the 76ers after the incident. the nuggets' incumbent star, carmelo anthony, has another five games left in his 15-game suspension.  coincidentally or not, the knicks' resurgence has spread into the stands. in four home games since the brawl, attendance has averaged 18,732, with two sellouts (19,763). in the previous 14 home games, the knicks averaged 17,579, with three sellouts (including the night of the brawl).  the dynamic at the garden has changed so drastically that thomas -- who earlier this season chided fans for booing too much -- now says the knicks have regained their home-court advantage.  ''definitely looking forward to getting back in the garden,'' he said. ''the last couple games we've played there have been exciting, the fans have been great. and they've given us a big lift and given us a big advantage at home.''  rebounds  knicks officials and the agent for steve francis denied a report that they were discussing a contract buyout. ''that's never been discussed,'' isiah thomas, the team president, said in response to the report in tuesday's new york post. jeff fried, who represents francis, called the report ''a false statement'' and said that buyout talks ''have never even been contemplated.'' francis is making $15 million this season and is owed $34.5 million over the next two seasons. speculation about francis's future has gone on for months, because he has a large contract and has been an awkward fit next to stephon marbury. the speculation grew last week when francis left the team to rehabilitate his sore right knee in houston. thomas said he expected francis to return once the knee was ready. ''if it's up to me, he'd do it tomorrow,'' thomas said, adding, ''we definitely want him back.''  pro basketball  