kathryn berger, michael herrington   kathryn lisa berger and michael kelly herrington were married yesterday by the rev. lynn e. bourbeau, an interfaith minister, at the castle on the hudson, a hotel in tarrytown, n.y.  the bride, 36, is the executive director of the concierge club glenpointe in teaneck, n.j., condominium town houses for residents 60 and older. she graduated from boston university and received a master's degree in social work from fordham.  she is the daughter of pam and william r. berger of scarsdale, n.y. the bride's father is an accountant in scarsdale, who was until 1992 a controller in new york at the precious metals division of the sumitomo corporation of japan. her mother is an educational technology consultant.  the bridegroom, 35, is a district manager overseeing five apartment buildings in new york for the related companies, the real estate business in new york. he graduated from stephen f. austin state university in nacogdoches, tex.  he is a son of patricia and richard t. herrington of orange, tex. his mother is the curator of the w. h. stark house museum and his father is a real estate appraiser there.  ms. berger and mr. herrington met in 2004, when they both worked for a company that manages retirement complexes, and she was helping with a problem at the complex he ran in raleigh, n.c.  of their first telephone conversation, he said: ''it wasn't like we were being unprofessional, but there was a connection as we spoke. we wound up speaking for a good long time, much longer than we would have if we were just two professionals talking about a project.''  when she arrived at his workplace in raleigh, she was looking forward to meeting him -- that is, until she noticed a sculpture with mr. herrington's name on it, showing a man older than the one she spoke to on the phone.  ''he saw me looking at it with a shocked look, and then i turned around and saw him, and he was so cute,'' she remembered.  the sculpture had been commissioned by the residents to thank mr. herrington for his work, but the artist made him look like a contemporary of theirs.  ''she was really like, ooh, aah, disappointed and went from slumped shoulders, when she turned around, to 'hey, how are you?' '' mr. herrington said.  weddings/celebrations  