gerard beekman, michael kaminsky   gerard jacques beekman and michael sean kaminsky celebrated their partnership yesterday at their apartment in carroll gardens, brooklyn. friends and family spoke about mr. beekman and mr. kaminsky and toasted them.  mr. beekman (above, left) is 31. he is an architectural designer and a project manager at ferguson & shamamian architects in manhattan. he graduated from rhode island school of design. he is a son of danielle maury beekman and stephen f. r. beekman of geneva. his father is a financial consultant.  mr. kaminsky, 36, is a film director and producer, whose work includes ''gay sex in the '70s'' (2005). he also was the senior associate producer last year on ''too hot not to handle,'' a documentary about global warming produced by hbo and shown in april. he graduated from the university of british columbia and is a student in the master's degree program in media and communications at the european graduate school in saas-fee, switzerland.  he is the son of sheila w. kaminsky and carl j. kaminsky of winnipeg, manitoba. his mother retired as a special education teacher at earl grey elementary school there. his father retired as an accountant in the manitoba provincial taxation department, in winnipeg.  mr. beekman and mr. kaminsky met in august 2000, when the crowd in a manhattan bar pushed them into each other. while they simply exchanged a look then, when they saw each other again three days later, mr. beekman asked mr. kaminsky for his number.  but their first date was a near disaster.  ''we set up a lunch date, which i thought was very noncommittal,'' mr. beekman said.  then, he remembers, mr. kaminsky showed up 20 minutes late. ''i thought it was very rude, and i was at that point really not interested in someone who was that rude,'' he said.  mr. kaminsky tells precisely the same story -- except with mr. beekman as the late arriver.  ''so we had this really awkward lunch,'' mr. kaminsky said. ''both of us were mad that the other didn't apologize.''  it turns out that both had arrived on time but were waiting, impatiently, on opposite sides of the cafe.  they bumped into each other yet again about three weeks later, mr. beekman recalled. ''and that night, we hit it off,'' he said.  mr. kaminsky said that neither broached the subject of that first date for months, and when they finally discovered the misunderstanding, they had a good laugh about it.  weddings/celebrations  