in testing for gifted programs, a few knots   a new admissions process for highly coveted gifted-and-talented programs in the new york city elementary schools has been riddled with glitches, including last-minute notice of entrance exam dates in some areas, fraying the nerves of parents already frazzled about finding schools for their children.  on the upper east side of manhattan, the parents of a 4-year-old were given just three days' notice that their son would be tested -- on a sunday morning -- for the gifted programs in district 2 in manhattan. they canceled the boy's plans to attend a friend's birthday party.  in bensonhurst, brooklyn, a 7-year-old whose parents applied online was wrongly designated to take the admissions exam in chinese. officials told her father -- who called to ask why she had not received a test date, as her classmates had -- that she would be rescheduled for a test in english but did not provide a new date or location.  and in the bronx, the director of gifted programs in region 1 could not be reached yesterday. her voice mail box was full, and a curt message, apparently left before the holidays, tells parents that testing will begin on jan. 6, and that they should expect information by mail during the first week of the month. parents generally have had two weeks' notice for the testing, which continues through this month.  schools chancellor joel i. klein imposed the new admissions process this school year, saying it would ensure fairness in allotting spaces in the gifted programs, which are highly sought after by parents, often as an alternative to what they perceive as mediocre neighborhood schools.  anna commitante, the official in charge of citywide gifted programs, estimated that about 11,000 students had submitted applications, which were due on dec. 1.  in some parts of the city, things appeared to be going smoothly, most notably on the upper west side, which has a long history of fractious battles over gifted programs and admissions rules. officials suggested that the intense focus on gifted programs on the west side had led to better handling of the new process.  but in an interview yesterday, ms. commitante described an admissions process so chaotic and disorganized that officials were still not sure how many students had applied. in some cases, she said, parents submitted up to three applications per child -- by internet, by mail and by hand to the school.  sorting through these multiple applications and verifying that students met residency requirements caused delays in sending notifications about test dates, she said.  ''we were dealing with this data that had to be cleaned up,'' she said. ''that was always the glitch in getting the letters out.'' she added, ''we are moving along really nicely now, but for that first weekend of testing it was really tricky.''  still, ms. commitante said she was surprised by the extent of the problem, apparently a result of the process being handled partly by the central administration and partly by regional offices. she said she learned of parents' complaints yesterday after she called regional offices in response to press inquiries.  while the chancellor's office selected the admissions criteria -- a reasoning exam called the otis-lennon school ability test and an in-class performance assessment called the gifted ratings scales -- and set the testing dates, officials in that office said scheduling and notification of parents was left to officials in the system's 10 regional offices.  ms. commitante said that in some cases students had not kept their appointed times. ''many of them in fact didn't show up,'' she said, but ''were contacted and given a new time.''  she said officials had no choice but to offer a makeup exam. ''we have no way of knowing why they didn't show up,'' she said. ''when you have a lot of parents calling and then they get to a voice mail box that's full, when parents tell you they are trying and they couldn't get through, what do you tell that parent?''  she said makeups would also be offered to permit religious observance, though the letter noted only health and family emergencies.  in some areas, letters about testing dates, which also included practice tests, were apparently delayed amid the crush of holiday-season mail.  ''i was alarmed because i received everything else but i didn't receive a test date,'' said lise aug, whose son, kieran, 4, is applying for kindergarten. ms. aug said that she had received a practice test, but that after the holidays her son's nursery school told her that most parents had also received a testing date.  she called the regional superintendent's office and left a message. ''they called me back, and they did e-mail me the information,'' she said. ''that was thursday. our test was on sunday.'' ms. aug said she had already helped kieran take the practice test but he had to skip the friend's birthday party.  in washington heights, laurie gerber said her family's plans to attend a jewish educational retreat over the long holiday weekend for martin luther king's birthday had been disrupted by late notice that her daughter, radia, 4, will have to take the admissions exam this saturday.  rather than cancel, and lose more than $1,000, she said, her husband will drive radia to the city from saugerties, n.y., and back -- 100 miles each way.  ''the worst part about it,'' ms. gerber said, ''is that she is going to be right out of a car ride for two hours. that's not her freshest, best moment. and it's in the middle of a crazy weekend where she won't have rested the night before because we'll be in a different place.''  