bush to propose restoring iraqi factories to create jobs   a new effort to revitalize iraqi factories that make vegetable oil, fertilizer, road signs and sulfuric acid -- among the world's most outdated and decrepit -- is expected to be at the center of the plan for the nation that president bush will present wednesday.  but even before the measures are announced, iraqi political and business leaders have been expressing skepticism that any effort to transform a system of state-owned enterprises that has fallen so far into dysfunction could become an engine for job creation in iraq.  the administration describes the steps as a way to employ more iraqis and to keep them away from more destructive pursuits such as joining the insurgency or fighting in a militia.  among the economic measures under consideration is new support for a program that allows local american military commanders to finance small reconstruction projects.  but recent statements by administration officials suggest that the plan is also likely to include an effort to revive parts of what was a vast iraqi military and industrial base before it was destroyed by war, sanctions and looting.  that plan would involve pumping expertise and money for reconstruction into enterprises still owned by the iraqi government, or privatizing some or all of the companies to force them to become more competitive.  either way, iraqi political and business leaders were dubious about the prospects for success. ''i doubt it very much in view of the current challenges and dangers facing the country,'' said mehdi hafedh, a member of parliament and a former planning minister.  the state-owned enterprises are already a huge drain on iraq's budget, mr. hafedh said, and most of them produce little or nothing. many are filled with no-show jobs.  ''the americans should have made some consultations because this is ridiculous, frankly,'' mr. hafedh said. ''what iraq needs to do is reduce the number of employees in the state sector.''  the focus on jobs and reconstruction is in many ways a return to the earliest days of the occupation, when the top american administrator here, l. paul bremer iii, pressed the idea that economic initiatives were as important as military action in stabilizing the country and convincing ordinary iraqis that the invasion would have tangible benefits for them.  that philosophy led to a reconstruction program financed by $30 billion in american taxpayer money that had a marginal impact on the quality of life here, attracted ceaseless attacks on rebuilding projects and produced little but derision among iraqis.  in addition, american officials, who declined to comment before the president's speech, have never produced evidence that those enormous expenditures have lessened the attractions of the insurgency.  nor have those officials solved what appears to be a logical flaw in the plan: how does the united states get credit for reconstruction projects when it must keep its participation secret to prevent attacks on those projects?  the employment picture in iraq is without a doubt grim, said batea al-kubaisi, a government economics expert. depending on how it is measured on the chaotic streets of iraq, the unemployment rate ranges from 30 percent to 60 percent, mr. kubaisi said.  given those numbers, making use of the state-owned companies has distinct attractions. overall, the 192 companies employ more than 500,000 iraqis, which amounts to roughly half of all iraqi government employees, mr. hafedh said.  but while the companies may appear alluring in reducing unemployment and sparking the economy, businessmen here said they are far from a solution.  many of those employees actually do nothing but collect monthly paychecks and go home, says mahmoud othman, an iraqi businessman who favors increasing support for the companies and privatizing some.  ''they are still on the payroll of the government although they have nothing to do,'' mr. othman, who is not to be confused with the iraqi politician of the same name. ''they were not dismissed for social reasons.''  the very names of the companies have the musty air of government institutions in a closed nation: the general company for vegetable oils, the state company for battery manufacturing, al-mishraq sulfur industry company.  and any remaining illusions about the status of those companies would be shattered by evaluations by mr. bremer's administration here when privatization was in the air in 2003.  a company that produced metal castings, traffic signs and military medals was so damaged in the invasion, one evaluation said, that the ''sign factory is only one that doesn't need to be completely rebuilt from the ground up.''  the sulfur company had ''heavy damage to offices, plant and equipment,'' the evaluation said. ''entire facility is almost completely destroyed.''  other companies, like a heavy engineering business called nasco, have been damaged less severely but have different problems: nasco is in doura, now one of the deadliest districts in baghdad.  the pentagon official at the center of the program to revitalize the state-owned enterprises is paul a. brinkley, the deputy undersecretary for business transformation, who has surveyed some of the companies in iraq.  ''what we are doing is assessing these factories,'' mr. brinkley told american forces press service last week. ''we are bringing in expertise. we are bringing international industry to bear to create demand for these factories.''  mr. brinkley told the service he hoped that within a year, around a quarter of the $4 billion that the united states spends to support its troops in iraq -- food, fuel and outfitting of bases that is mostly bought outside the country -- could be spent instead on the iraqi companies. some iraqi officials, including layla kadhum, the minister of labor and social affairs, appeared to support the initiative.  ''if these ideas are applied, they will have a great role in diminishing the violence that the country is witnessing, because a great part of the violence is caused by the unemployment,'' ms. kadhum said.  others sounded notes of alarm, particularly if mr. bush planned the sort of privatization that was tried and abandoned as unworkable early in mr. bremer's tenure.  ''i hope the president doesn't make that the linchpin of his short-term strategy,'' said basil rahim, an iraqi financial expert, ''because that's just going to backfire on him.''  the struggle for iraq  