presenting the arts to new audiences   ''quiet on the set,'' bellows charisse a. brown, a statuesque actress with a dramatic upsweep of hair, as she paces back and forth in front of her eager young students. she praises one for reading without his script, then admonishes another for going out of character.  the students, aged 13 to 15, are rehearsing a scene from a play they wrote themselves about a young black waitress who dreams of becoming a dancer in the racially polarized 1960s. and for a moment, as the actors fully inhabit their characters -- bursting with personality and moving with a preternatural fluidity -- you could almost forget that they are juvenile detainees in baggy jumpsuits, housed in woodfield cottage, a detention center in valhalla, for teenagers facing criminal charges.  through the efforts of the westchester arts council, ms. brown is introducing these troubled teenagers to theater and, more broadly, the transformative power of art. as she shakes the hand of each student at the close of her weekly workshop, her large eyes well with tears after one doesn't want to let go.  ''i have no kids, and i feel a little bit motherly over them,'' ms. brown admitted earlier.  the westchester arts council, a nonprofit group with more than 100 affiliate arts organizations in the county, has a roster of artists -- scores of dancers, dramatists, painters and slam poets -- whom it matches with schools, mental-health facilities, day care programs, homeless shelters, elderly centers and the detention center where ms. brown holds her workshops. the artists, who are paid $150 for a half day or $300 for a full day, might work with a group for one event or for the whole year.  the teaching-artists program is part of the council's overall effort to make the arts more accessible. ''a lot of people will say that when they hear the words 'museum' and 'performing arts center' that it's both impressive and intimidating,'' said janet t. langsam, the executive director of the council. ''this decentralizes some of the arts activities and brings it out in the community. and some of the perception of our being unwelcoming disappears.''  throughout the region, arts organizations that once conjured up images of landscape exhibitions and chamber music concerts attended by the tweedy set are working hard to take culture, in all its forms, to the broadest possible public.  ''there was a desire to be much more inclusive, to reach out,'' said ms. langsam, who is joined in her quest by heads of arts councils in connecticut and new jersey and on long island -- all inspired by the rapidly changing demographic makeup of the suburbs.  david a. miller, executive director of the new jersey state council on the arts, said 20 percent of the state's residents are foreign born. ''new jersey may be the most culturally diverse state in the country,'' he said.  in the 1990s, the state council created a folk arts apprenticeship program through which young artists can study under master artists within their culture. to date, the council has financed more than 75 apprenticeships, centering on disciplines as diverse as african-american storytelling and puerto rican bomba music, ukrainian embroidery and bengali drumming.  more recently, it established six regional folk-life centers, housed in existing museums or arts centers across the state. ''they are important research arms,'' mr. miller explained. ''they allow us to reach into areas to find out where the communities live and what their cultural expressions are.''  this winter the new jersey council is introducing a new grant category, building arts participation. groups that currently receive operating support from the council are invited to submit proposals for programs and projects that diversify their audiences.  susan m. gogan, executive director of wheatonarts, a nonprofit cultural center in millville, n.j., plans to apply for a grant to pay for a study on the relationship between cultural identity and arts participation. in the past decade, wheatonarts, through its down jersey folklife center, has worked with 45 ethnic groups in southern new jersey.  experience has shown that despite an impressive turnout for one-time events with particular cultural slants, those in attendance have been unlikely to frequent other kinds of programs.  ''one of the points is to define the barriers to participation in our audiences,'' ms. gogan said of the study. ''but we also want to identify the barriers within our own organization in terms of how we think about our audiences, how we operate.''  mr. miller called the process of diversifying audiences a long-term investment. ''it's largely about making relationships with new communities, and that can take time -- and then it's about trust,'' he said. ''one of the best signs of trust in a community that has felt excluded or on the margins is when they can see that an organization is not only welcoming them into the seats but onto their boards and among their docents.''  from greenwich, conn., to huntington on long island, heads of art programs and institutions have been on something of a tear to diversify their offerings as well as their audiences in an effort to both reflect and celebrate the remarkable influx of cultures that has transformed the suburbs in recent years.  on long island, the huntington arts council revitalized its 41-year-old summer arts festival, which features nightly performances in the town's heckscher park, by luring new talent. last summer, in addition to the usual jazz and classical offerings, the council booked plena libre, a grammy-nominated puerto rican big band; samite, a ugandan-born vocalist and multi-instrumentalist, and sol y sombra, a spanish dance and flamenco company.  referring to the latest immigrant groups to arrive in sprawling huntington, florence l. dallari, assistant director of the arts council, said: ''it's very hard to get some of these cultures to come to an event. but this summer we saw a big change in the support of people coming to the festival.''  at the westchester arts council's headquarters in white plains, the current exhibition, ''folk arts: expressions of the spirit,'' features works by westchester residents representing a range of traditions and nationalities: middle eastern-influenced mosaics by haifa bint-kadi; meticulously rendered ukrainian pysanky egg painting by lesia kozicky; japanese calligraphy by yoshiko katsumi; indian rangoli floor designs by kalindi patel; and mexican folk altars by miguel cossio, to name a few. at an opening reception in december, los palalia, a band from veracruz, mexico, performed while partygoers noshed on indian samosas and chinese pork dumplings.  one of the artists, ms. bint-kadi, who is palestinian-american, left pennsylvania several years ago to be closer to the new york arts scene. she settled on westchester after learning about the resources available through the arts council. they include studio space for rent in its building, as well as workshops with master artists and artist-in-residence positions in local schools.  ''you can definitely see my culture in my work -- i don't hide it,'' said ms. bint-kadi, standing in front of a mosaic depicting the traditional image of the hand warding off the evil eye. ''they celebrated that and said: how can we help you succeed as an artist in a way that makes people appreciate your culture and your art form? an agent wouldn't necessarily do that.''  in connecticut, the greenwich arts council, a 34-year-old nonprofit organization, has formed partnerships with the new lebanon hamilton avenue public elementary schools, which, despite their location in one of the wealthiest towns in the country, have diverse student bodies. fifty-five percent of the students at the new lebanon school, for instance, are hispanic, and one in four students there are eligible for a free or reduced-price lunch.  in the past three years, dozens of fifth-grade students from both schools have been trained to become docents, or museum tour guides, said frank juliano, executive director of the greenwich arts council, which mounts 12 shows a year and produces concerts and theatrical events.  ''we ask them: 'what do you see? how does it make you feel? where was the artist standing when he did this? why did he do that?' '' he said. ''then they take their classmates on a tour with the same kind of questioning, and they come back with their parents. what we teach them is visual literacy -- that there are no right or wrong answers when you are talking about art.''  in november, the arts council presented a latino storytelling workshop and performances for 300 students from both schools. ''it was an opportunity for kids to see and experience how culture is passed from generation to generation,'' said gene nyitray, new lebanon's principal.  in the spring, the council will send dancers into the schools for a novel ''multiple intelligences'' program, with two eight-week sessions planned for each school. the program is designed to teach math through the use of movement and music, mr. juliano said, helping youngsters who are not standard rote learners.  schools are a special focus for the westchester council, too, particularly those in less affluent districts. one of ms. langsam's first big initiatives when she assumed charge of the council was the procurement of a national endowment for the arts grant for $250,000 that allowed it to leverage an additional $750,000. the money enabled the council to place artists in schools in greenburgh, mount vernon, yonkers, white plains, peekskill and new rochelle, working across the curriculum in subjects that would not, on face value, lend themselves to an arts approach.  ''sometimes it's an area they're having the most trouble teaching,'' said joanne mongelli, deputy director of programs at the arts council. ''so if it's colonial studies, the children might explore the differences between colonial virginia and colonial new england by doing an ad campaign, working with a writer and videographer.''  ms. brown said she had been ''totally booked'' ever since she signed on with the council as a teacher-artist. on monday, she visits clear view school day treatment program in briarcliff manor, a school for emotionally disturbed children. on tuesday, she works with elementary-age children in an after-school program in yonkers on storytelling and public reading. on wednesday, it's off to woodfield cottage, on the same campus as the westchester county jail. on thursday, she returns to clear view and heads to the coachman family center, a homeless shelter in white plains, in the evening. on friday, it's back to woodfield.  in trying to take the arts to the broadest audiences it can, the westchester council has shaken up its traditional definitions of art and culture -- a rethinking reflected in ms. langsam's approach from the beginning.  in the early 1990s, after accepting the job as executive director, ms. langsam, who was formerly president and chief executive of the boston center for the arts, found herself admiring the neatly laid stone walls gracing the roadsides as she drove between white plains and her new home in armonk.  historically the handiwork of european masons, stone work in westchester is undergoing a resurgence, ms. langsam said, thanks to central and south american craftsmen. so the council secured a grant from the new york state council on the arts and created a traveling exhibition called ''conversations in stone,'' in which stonemasons used slide presentations to talk about their work to various community groups.  ''it's a way of saying to working-class people that this tradition you're involved in has real cultural value,'' ms. langsam said. ''it's about reaching out to people who have culture but don't even know they have it.''  