few rules, but to the fighters, pure sport   the two men circled each other, neither making any commitments. they were in a boxing ring in the bronx, the exact location known to the promoter, the fighters and the roughly 100 spectators who were sitting in bleachers around them, completely quiet.  one of the men, craig parker, shot in like a human steam shovel, wrapping his arms around the hips of the other, mike milian. but a few deft moves later, mr. milian had his opponent on the canvas and, with the crowd screaming him on, began thrusting his knees into mr. parker's head.  this kind of action might look familiar to anyone who has glimpsed programs like ultimate fighting championship on cable television, but with a couple of notable distinctions. the fight in the bronx had even fewer rules, and it was, in all probability, against the law.  the promoter, peter storm, has held about 10 such events in new york city since 2003. he calls them the underground combat league, and they belong to a class of sport sometimes called mixed martial arts, ultimate fighting, extreme fighting or cage fighting. but many new york lawmakers likened them to human cockfights, and in 1997, banned them from the state.  although rules vary by event, the fighters are often allowed to strike any part of the body except vital areas like the throat, the eyes and the spine. they can use their fists, elbows, knees and legs. a fighter can win several ways, including by judges' decision; with moves called ''submissions'' that get the opponent to surrender by putting pressure on a joint or his neck; and by knocking him out cold.  mr. storm, a martial-arts trainer, bodyguard and former club promoter who sometimes participates in his own events, maintains an air of indifference about potential legal problems.  he said legalized fights like those in other states -- and those on television -- are less interesting than his because they shackle the fighters with too many restrictions.  his objective, he said, ''is to let people know that it can be done here and to give fighters a place where they can craft their skills.''  ''i might be patting myself on the back prematurely,'' he said, ''but i do believe i deserve support. i think i'm doing the right thing.''  mr. storm said he had never been bothered by the authorities. he uses no advertising, but the events are not completely secret. the word is passed over the internet and by mouth. their results are even posted on a web site, fcfighter.com, that records thousands of mixed martial arts fights in the united states each year.  on a recent sunday evening, mr. storm allowed a reporter and photographer to chronicle the fights only on the condition that their location not be revealed.  bleachers were rolled out, and the crowd took the shape of a sports marketer's dream: mostly young men, some of them fighters themselves. between fights a d.j. named majik juan spun hip-hop and techno music at deafening levels.  a green chair sat against one wall, below a portrait of jesus christ walking on water in a broken frame. on the chair, a sign in blue marker warned, ''nobody sits in this chair, ever, this means you!''  there were no regulations or sanctioning bodies to be concerned with. there appeared to be no medical staff to tend to the gravely injured, and there was no promoter's insurance to pay for their care. mr. storm charges admission, but said he usually made no money after expenses. he said only once has a fighter had to be carried out by emergency medical technicians; he had a concussion.  the prohibitions were few and simple. no hitting the eyes. no hitting the groin. and no ''fishhooking'' fingers into the opponent's mouth for purposes of pulling his cheek: hardly a mortal wound, but a painful one.  before the main fight, between mr. milian and mr. parker, came the leone brothers, anthony and andrew, and their respective opponents, richie torres and felix rodriguez.  the leone brothers fought with a similar strategy, called ''ground and pound,'' in which they used wrestling moves to get the fights to the canvas and rained down punches. both scored their first victories, despite fighting more experienced opponents.  ''i tried to get the job done, and i came up short,'' mr. torres said. ''it's o.k. i thank god that i'm able to do this, and i'm blessed to walk around. a lot of people can't say that.''  the sport became major entertainment in the early 1990s with the ultimate fighting championship, a series of pay-per-view events that drew large audiences and a fierce outcry. initially, the rules were very lax, prohibiting only eye gouging and fishhooking. but to make the show more palatable to lawmakers around the country, the u.f.c. and similar events began restricting more moves, like head butts, elbows to the spinal column or back of the skull, and knees to the head of a downed opponent.  other productions, many of them more liberal in their rules, are legal in new jersey and connecticut, as well as in other states. they were legal, too, in new york for about a heartbeat. in 1997 the legislature officially condoned the fights, ordering the state athletic commission to draw up rules to govern them. but when the commission passed so many restrictions as to render the extreme fighting idea meaningless, lawmakers reversed themselves and banned the sport.  asked about mr. storm's recent event, a spokesman for the bronx district attorney's office said it knew nothing about the event or about mixed martial arts in general. he referred questions to the athletic commission. a spokesman for the commission responded by referring to the law and saying that it would track down and close the show if it knew about it in advance.  the law made holding such an event a misdemeanor, carrying a maximum jail sentence of one year; a repeat offense within five years is a felony carrying up to four years in prison. it also established civil fines of up to $10,000, or $20,000 for a repeat violation.  in an interview, mr. storm at first said that the law did not apply because he did not pay the fighters, but the athletic commission said the law also banned amateur competition. when pressed about the legality, mr. storm said that since he did not pay the fighters, the authorities would have nothing to gain by getting involved. he said the worst they would do is pressure venues that hold the fights by barring them from holding legal events like boxing.  ''i think as adults we should make up our own minds about what we're going to do as far as competitors' competing, and not let a governing body who's only worried about money decide our careers,'' he said.  his undercard fights, with the leone brothers, both ended in the first round with the opponents tapping the canvas in surrender. but the main event turned out to be the showcase mr. storm had hoped for.  both men were experienced fighters and also coaches: mr. parker in ronkonkoma, on long island, where he coaches the leone brothers, among others, and mr. milian at a boxing gym in chelsea.  mr. parker and mr. milian struggled for the full three rounds, with mr. milian maintaining dominance on the ground and landing a number of convincing strikes. when time was called, there was no doubt about who had won.  as the d.j. packed up his music, mr. milian put on his street clothes and knit cap and filed out quietly with the spectators. mr. parker sat exhausted and dejected on the edge of the ring, then lay down on the canvas. he was surrounded by his entourage, no one saying a word.  