mayor vows to crack down on new orleans violence   reeling from a spate of killings that threatens this city's economic lifeline, tourism, officials gathered at the site of the year's first murder tuesday evening and promised to redouble crime-fighting efforts.  eight people have been killed in the new year, putting the city well on track to keeping its place as one of the country's most violent. the killings, along with an economy still struggling to recover from hurricane katrina, and the onset of mardi gras festivities next month, lent urgency to tuesday's vow, one heard periodically here when murders spike.  each day's killings have become the preoccupation of new orleans residents fearful that the police are at a loss. the shooting death in her home last week of a young filmmaker, helen hill, has especially drawn attention, as has the killing of a local musician, dinerral shavers, on dec. 28.  a citizens' march on city hall to demand stronger measures is planned for thursday.  mayor c. ray nagin announced tuesday that to free the police for foot patrols -- officers rarely leave their cars here -- sheriff's deputies would be enlisted to cruise neighborhoods.  police checkpoints for drugs and alcohol will be set up from 2 a.m. to 6 a.m., a measure that avoids a curfew, which business owners opposed.  with the district attorney looking on, mr. nagin said there would be a renewed focus on prosecuting murder cases in a city where only a few such cases end with a jail sentence.  ''we will put all of our resources to focus on murder and violent crime,'' mr. nagin said. ''i stand before you saying, enough is enough.''  virtually all of the city's political, law-enforcement and tourism leaders were gathered under the television lights in the incongruous setting, a tumbledown block in the central city neighborhood, the city's most violent.  residents of the area, curious about the unusual commotion, stood silently at the fringes of the gathering as politicians and law-enforcement officials addressed the crowd.  ''let me say to the thugs out there, this isn't your city,'' the president of the city council, oliver thomas, told those gathered. ''if this was your city, you wouldn't be shooting down our brothers and sisters.''  the spike in killings began the same day that the police chief, warren riley, suggested that the city was becoming safer because the total number of murders in 2006 was lower than in preceding years.  