what's next for a mysterious stench? theories, punch lines and cyberspace   they could no longer smell it, but they could still talk about it.  the mysterious stench that settled over manhattan on monday was long gone yesterday. but city officials were still trying to figure out where it had come from, and it led to an extraordinary round of speculation in which no theory seemed too implausible to consider, no possibility too flaky to imagine. rotten eggs? a chemical added to natural gas?  commuters, internet bloggers and standup comedians filled a trove of ideas, some wacky, some sinister, some even believable.  ''it was good theater for you,'' mayor michael r. bloomberg told reporters in washington, where he testified before a senate committee on domestic security.  ''and for jay leno, but after that -- '' he added, interrupting himself as he tried to keep those late-night talk show hosts and their punch lines straight. ''or was it letterman? one of them.''  senator claire mccaskill, a democrat from missouri who appeared with the mayor at a news conference, was no help. ''it might have been leno or letterman,'' she said.  on the internet, bloggers complained that officials could not find the odor's source. ''the 'authorities' likely lack the capability to identify things that people think smell like an industrial chemical, which are actually gases from nearby swamps released due to peculiar sequences of weather conditions and trapped by an atmospheric inversion,'' one blog reader at nytimes.com/empirezone declared. ''i'd be hard pressed to think of a sensor algorithm that says, 'aha! swamp gas!' ''  others recalled smoggy clouds that had descended on new york in the 1950s and '60s. they mentioned secret army experiments in the 1950s that they said had involved releasing bacteria in san francisco. they wondered about the weather.  so did el niño have something to do with the odor? one person posted a message on a blog on nytimes.com saying that he had smelled the same odor while driving through louisiana and wondered if a weather front had carried it to the new york area.  ''this weather front had strong northerly flow and was pulling warm, moist air from the gulf of mexico and channeling it north-northeast,'' he wrote.  or what about stars -- the celebrity, not the celestial, kind? there were bloggers who blamed rosie o'donnell, the talk show host who has been feuding with donald j. trump over -- well, that is another story.  and then there was the explanation from someone who identified himself as george s. on the empire zone blog: ''the animal that has taken residence on top of donald trump's head, masquerading as hair, has finally died.''  others brought up geopolitics, referring to the long-running tensions between new york and new jersey and the reflexive tendency of new yorkers to blame new jersey for things like smells that drift across the river.  ''there has always been a war between new york and new jersey,'' dave frieder, who lives in west milford, n.j., and specializes in photographing bridges in the new york region, said in an interview.  ''i don't know why the two states should hate each other. new york needs new jersey and new jersey needs new york. i can't understand why they're always fighting. look at the statue of liberty. it's physically in the state of new jersey on the map, but it's in new york harbor. it's like a 50-50 deal. i can't understand why they're always bickering.''  but the bickering went on yesterday. the blog say uncle observed, ''seems that ny can never take responsibility for anything that happens to it. their gun problem? blame georgia.'' and the smell? ''blame new jersey.''  that drew a response from someone identified as ben, who said: ''i'm going to have to side with ny on this. i blame everything on nj, it just makes life simpler.''  evelyn margolin, a restaurant manager who lives in weehawken, n.j., said in an interview that she had heard the smell originated in a swamp. even though she said she had heard this on television and the report was serious, her first reaction was, ''that must be a pretty big dead body.'' bah-dum dum.  that was yesterday. on monday, when she opened her door and smelled the smell, she figured there was a gas leak on her street. that had happened before, she said. so she called the gas company.  ''the guy said, 'oh, yes, it's everywhere. we know about it. don't worry,' '' she said. ''he said, 'it's all over the news,' as if to say, how stupid am i to call the gas company.''  and all the brouhaha about whether new jersey was the source left mark sceurman, an author of ''weird n.j.: your travel guide to new jersey's local legends and best kept secrets,'' sounding unexcited.  ''to me, it's just swamp gas,'' he said in an interview. ''i smell it all the time. i could have told you right away.''  