a superpowered defense, or a chunk of kryptonite at the table?   as has been observed by many, if we all enjoyed x-ray vision, this game -- not to mention life -- would lose almost all of its appeal. but at the bridge table sometimes it is possible to play, or appear to play, as if one were blessed with superman-style eyesight. the diagramed deal, which was played late last year on bridge base online (www.bridgebase.com), gave east a chance to look as if he had just emerged from a phone booth with bulging muscles.  north's two-spade cue-bid showed at least three-card heart support and game-invitational or better values. (jump raises in competition are pre-emptive, showing a weak hand with good trump support. but i prefer to play that this cue-bid shows exactly three-card support, and to bid an artificial two no-trump with four-card or better support. knowledge of the ninth trump can be so important. i estimate that when you have a nine-card, not eight-card, fit, you will score one more trick in the play about 80 percent of the time.)  east's double, with no spade honor and scant values, was debatable. south, hoping to buy the contract, jumped straight to four hearts without disclosing his second suit.  west started the defense with his lowest spade, showing an odd number of cards in the suit. south, after winning with the ace, led his low diamond. west went in with his ace and played another spade. declarer won with his king and led a low heart to west's bare ace. south trumped the spade-queen continuation and played a heart to the queen on the board.  if east had won this trick and returned, say, a diamond, declarer would have won in his hand, played a club to the ace on the board, drawn trumps by taking the marked heart finesse and run the diamonds to make his contract. appreciating that possibility, east held up his heart king, then won the subsequent trump lead from the board. with the defense needing one more trick, what should east have done now?  this was the end position:  agreed, west made two unhelpful spade discards. he should have pitched his two clubs, showing that he had a doubleton by throwing first the six, then the three.  even so, east should have thought about south's distribution. declarer was known to have two spades, five hearts and (because west won the second trick with the diamond ace) at least three diamonds including the king and queen. if south had a void in clubs, giving him 2-5-6-0 shape, strangely enough, a club return would not cost. to get back to his hand, declarer would have to ruff a club, which would establish east's heart ten as the setting trick.  if south had two clubs, it would be best to lead a diamond, waiting for the club king to be the setting trick. but if south was 2-5-4-2, west would have been 1-5-6-1. surely he would not have overcalled one spade, preferring to make a michaels cue-bid. (he would have overcalled one heart with two hearts, showing at least 5-5 in spades and either minor. and, yes, he might have done that with his actual hand.) scratch that possibility.  if south had a low singleton club, shifting to any club would work. but if south had the singleton club jack, the only winning lead was the club king, forcing declarer to take the trick on the board.  that was the correct -- and winning -- defense, but at the table east led a diamond. south gratefully took the trick, drew the last trump and ran the diamonds to make his contract. lois lane was not pleased.  bridge  