home depot board faces new outcry   now that the board has ousted home depot's chairman and chief executive, robert l. nardelli, shareholders are expecting big changes at the home improvement retailing giant.  but the biggest hammer could fall on the board itself, warn some corporate governance advocates.  when home depot announced the departure of mr. nardelli last week, it also said that three directors -- including one who has been on the board for nearly three decades -- would remain on the board even though they were due to retire this spring after having reached the mandatory retirement age of 72.  corporate governance watchdogs say the move illustrates that home depot's board, whose members have been criticized for their close ties to one another and to mr. nardelli's former employer, general electric, is doing a poor job of succession planning for itself.  furthermore, these critics argue that the three directors, milledge a. hart iii, john l. clendenin, and claudio x. gonzalez, played crucial roles in approving mr. nardelli's excessive pay package that ultimately led to his ouster.  ''we were told the g.e. crony group that brought in nardelli and paid him highly were going to start to move off of the board as they hit retirement age,'' said richard ferlauto, director of pension and benefit policy at the american federation of state, county and municipal employees. ''all last fall we were told that this board was going to evolve significantly because of the mandatory retirements. now that's not happening.''  the outcry over mr. nardelli's compensation, including his $210 million exit package, could result in another aggressive campaign to withhold votes from home depot's directors at the company's annual shareholder meeting this spring.  or, if a competing slate of directors is put up against the incumbents, as one shareholder activist, ralph v. whitworth, has threatened to do, shareholders could throw their support to them if they believe they are qualified for the job, said mr. ferlauto.  the threat of a proxy fight could cause home depot's board to cut a deal with mr. whitworth, and that could result in the company shedding its construction supply business, which shareholders have been unhappy with, or adding mr. whitworth's nominees to the board.  brad shaw, a spokesman for home depot, played down the prospects of a proxy battle, saying, ''home depot's board has acted in the best interests of shareholders and is confident shareholders recognize this.''  in a statement, home depot's board said it was necessary for the three directors to remain on the board for one more year in order to provide mr. nardelli's successor, frank blake, with their expertise and deep knowledge of the company. it added that kenneth g. langone, home depot's co-founder and the lead director, still intends to retire from the board as scheduled in may 2008, when he will be 72.  the company also said it hired an executive search firm last year to help identify candidates to replace the retiring board members. home depot did name one new director to its board in mid-november, helen johnson-leipold, the chairwoman and chief executive of sports products company johnson outdoors.  yet, the board should have already named several other replacements for its retiring directors by now, say some critics, who contend that the directors are still firmly on the hot seat as proxy season approaches.  the person driving the changes could be mr. whitworth, who runs relational investors, a fund that owns about $1 billion worth of home depot stock. in december mr. whitworth announced plans to form a shareholders' committee to examine the company's strategy and to nominate two individuals, including himself, to the board.  last week, despite mr. nardelli's departure, mr. whitworth signaled that his stance and intentions had not changed. he declined yesterday to comment for this article.  if relational decides to put up a slate of competing directors, home depot shareholders might be willing to support those candidates because of mr. nardelli's $210 million payout package, much of which was put in place by the board in his original 2000 employment contract, as well as the waiver of the mandatory retirement age for the three directors.  ''relational could take a stance that home depot is, in fact, entrenching the status quo by not replacing these directors, and that gives them another opportunity to generate press over the subject and to try to manage an upcoming proxy vote,'' said andrew d. shiftan, a managing director at investment bank morgan joseph & company.  mr. shiftan noted that in the 10 or so campaigns that relational has waged against companies since 1997, it has often agreed to concessions with the company in exchange for board seats and other changes.  a spokesman for home depot declined to comment on relational, pointing to a statement made by the company late last year that said it planned to arrange a meeting with relational shortly after the first of the year to discuss its concerns.  shareholders have long been frustrated with home depot's stock price, which slumped under mr. nardelli. last wednesday, the stock surged on news of his resignation, but has since fallen 4 percent.  last year, shareholders aimed a clear sign of their frustration at home depot's board. of the shareholders who voted, 30 percent or more withheld their votes for 10 of the 11 directors, including mr. hart, mr. clendenin and mr. gonzalez.  ''people who withheld votes from the directors last year remember who was there when the compensation contract was approved,'' said james p. melican, chairman of proxy governance, a firm that advises large shareholders on corporate governance issues.  for instance, one of the directors whose retirement was waived was mr. clendenin, the retired president and chief executive of bellsouth. mr. clendenin joined home depot's board in 1996 and had a close relationship with a co-founder, bernard marcus, and their paths often crossed at social and business functions in atlanta, according to a person close to the board.  mr. clendenin was chairman of the compensation committee that signed mr. nardelli's employment contract in december 2000. one of the lawyers sitting on the other side of the table helping mr. nardelli negotiate the contract was frank l. fernandez. mr. fernandez was later named home depot's general counsel. mr. fernandez declined to comment for this article.  it was at electronic data systems, where mr. hart was president, that he and mr. langone became familiar with one another. as an investment banker, mr. langone helped take the company public in 1968 and was a large e.d.s. shareholder for years.  when mr. langone was approaching individuals to provide seed money for home depot in its early days, mr. hart became an early investor in the company and got a board seat. (another former e.d.s. executive, richard h. brown, later became a home depot director as well. mr. brown left the board before last year's annual meeting.)  under stock exchange guidelines, mr. hart is not considered an independent director as home depot conducts business with an insulation company owned by mr. hart.  the third director who was set to retire this spring was mr. gonzalez, the longtime chairman and chief executive of kimberly-clark de méxico, a unit of kimberly-clark. mr. gonzalez joined home depot's board in 2001 and, as a director on g.e.'s board, he was very familiar with both mr. nardelli and mr. langone, who was also a g.e. director.  mr. gonzalez, who received the highest number of withheld votes last year at 36 percent of those cast, was a member of the compensation committee last year when it changed its long-term incentive plan for executives to include the effects of share buybacks when measuring earnings per share for compensation package. as home depot has been buying back its shares in recent years, such a change would have the effect of boosting the chief's pay.  moves like that have some shareholder activists declaring that the departure of mr. nardelli simply is not enough to right all that is wrong with home depot.  ''home depot's nomination committee and compensation committee needs to be reformed,'' said mr. ferlauto. ''the next task is to rebuild the board in a way that creates trust with shareholders and much greater transparency to the decision-making process of the board.''  