two views of artists, two visions of the world   ''i'm very careful not to have ideas, because they're inaccurate,'' the artist agnes martin says in mary lance's touching documentary about her, but it's a lie. ms. martin was full of ideas, and she dispenses them engagingly in the course of the film, ''agnes martin: with my back to the world,'' made from 1998 to 2002.  ms. martin, who died in 2004 at 92, moves slowly and sometimes labors to breathe in the film, but she is pleasant, stimulating company, whether talking as she works or sitting for an interview. as evidenced by a companion piece about the artist kiki smith on the bill at the film forum, documentaries of this type can seem determined to present their subjects as mumbling mysteries: ''hey, they're artists; way too rarefied for the rest of us.''  ms. martin, though, comes across simply as an interesting neighbor who happens to paint for a living (a bit of a surprise, since her writing about art was somewhat impenetrable).  she talks about her early childhood on the plains of saskatchewan. ''when a train came into vision at 9 o'clock, it was still leaving at noon,'' she recalls. ''it took that long to go across the prairie.'' and by the end of the film, ms. lance has gently led you to connect that comment with ms. martin's signature style of work: broad horizontal bands of subtle hues.  her remembrances of her years in new york and new mexico are lovely to hear, as are her bits of philosophy. (''i think everyone is born 100 percent ego, and after that it's just adjustment.'') her comments about why she considers herself an abstract expressionist but rejects the label of minimalist are enlightening, and her explanation of why she worked for years on 6-by-6-foot canvases but then downsized is beautifully bittersweet.  ''i wanted it to be big enough so that it was as big as the person looking at it, so that they could as though step into it,'' she says of the 6-by-6. ''but now that i'm old -- 86 -- i can't turn the 6-by-6 canvas over. so i changed to 5 by 5. but i paint the same.''  ''kiki smith: squatting the palace,'' by vivien bittencourt and vincent katz, is not as compelling because it doesn't give as generous a glimpse of ms. smith, preferring a fragmentary approach that obscures rather than illuminates. the film focuses on ms. smith's preparation of sculptures and other materials for an eight-room installation at the fondazione querini stampalia in venice in 2005.  the pairing with the martin film is interesting in that it shows just how different artists' methods can be. ms. martin is pictured making detailed calculations on the spacing of her painted bands, while ms. smith's vision is sketched on a napkin, and her approach to executing it is something like an act of surrender.  ''i know that in my little notebooks on scraps of paper, everything is beautiful,'' she says. ''it all works seamlessly. and when you get there, it's all like a nightmare. the main thing in making art often is letting go of your expectation and your idea.''  kiki smith  squatting the palace  opens today in manhattan.  directed by vivien bittencourt and vincent katz; directors of photography, tom piper, ms. bittencourt and mr. katz; edited by mr. piper; produced by edgar howard and the checkerboard foundation. playing with ''agnes martin: with my back to the world'' at the film forum, 209 west houston street, west of avenue of the americas, south village. running time: 45 minutes. this film is not rated.  agnes martin  with my back to the world  opens today in manhattan.  produced and directed by mary lance; director of photography, dyanna taylor; edited by ms. lance and brad wolfley; music by steve peters. running time: 57 minutes. this film is not rated.  film review  