paid notice: deaths   wallach, ira d.   wallach--ira d. the 92nd street y board and staff mourn with heavy hearts the passing of ira wallach, beloved father of longstanding board member kenneth wallach. our hearts and prayers are with ira's adored wife, miriam, their children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren. may they and the entire wallach family be comforted among the mourners of zion and jerusalem. fredric mack, president michael goldstein, chairman sol adler, executive director $(6$)wallach--ira d. the central park conservancy's board of trustees and staff mourn the loss of ira wallach--a longtime friend and benefactor of central park and many other new york cultural institutions. he and his wife, miriam, funded the recent renovation of literary walk, and in the mid 1990s, their generosity made possible the restoration of the undulating landscape just north of the children's zoo and the creation of wallach walk. we send our heartfelt condolences to the entire family and in particular, miriam and daughter-in-law, mary, who is a conservancy trustee. the board of trustees central park conservancy a.j.c. smith, chairman douglas blonsky, president $(6$)wallach--ira. the board and staff of people for the american way foundation grieve the death of friend and colleague ira wallach. ira was passionately a man of his time, with global interests and a deep commitment to protecting the u.s. constitution and fostering a society in which education and the arts can flourish in freedom. in his years as a people for the american way foundation board member, ira was generous with his time, wise counsel, and financial support. we remember him with great respect and affection, and extend our condolences to miriam, the loving partner in ira's life and life's work, and the rest of his family and friends. norman lear, founder ralph g. neas, president $(6$)wallach--ira d. the trustees and staff of the american museum of natural history are deeply saddened by the death of ira d. wallach, a great new yorker, an engaged citizen of the world, and a man of the utmost intelligence, decency, and generosity of spirit. his devotion to learners of all ages, but especially the children of new york, is most visible here in the miriam and ira d. wallach orientation center, which offers an illuminating introduction to the story of life on earth; but it is nowhere more powerful than in his commitment to enabling new york city public schoolchildren to visit the museum for free. we extend heartfelt condolences to ira's wife miriam, their son and museum trustee kenneth l. wallach, their daughters sue wachenheim and kate cassidy, and the entire wallach family. lewis w. bernard, chairman ellen v. futter, president $(6$)wallach--ira d. the trustees and staff of the new york public library deeply mourn the passing of one of the most cherished and devoted members of the library family, ira d. wallach. with exemplary dedication and generosity, mr. wallach, his wife, miriam, and their family have had a major impact on the library and the people we serve in so many ways-revitalizing and sustaining our exhibitions program, building and preserving our collections, serving education and scholarship, and expanding access to our resources through digital technology. we are enormously proud that one of the library's single greatest collections was named by the trustees as the miriam and ira d. wallach division of art, prints, and photographs. in addition to the exceptional generosity of mr. and mrs. wallach to the library, ira wallach will also be fondly remembered as a wise and trusted counselor to the library's presidents. we extend our heartfelt condolences to his beloved wife of 68 years, miriam wallch, and to his children, grandchildren, and greatgrandchildren. mrs. vincent astor, honorary chairman catherine c. marron, chairman samuel c. butler, elizabeth rohatyn, marshall rose, chairmen emeriti paul leclerc, president $(6$)wallach--ira d. the columbia college board of visitors and the board of directors of the columbia college alumni association mourn the passing of ira d. wallach, columbia college class of 1929, a devoted alumnus whose wisdom and generosity benefited generations of columbians. he will be missed by all who knew him and worked with him. the members of the boards extend their deepest condolences to miriam wallach and family. $(6$)wallach--ira d. with deep sorrow, the partners and staff at weiser llp mourn the passing of our friend, client, and philanthropist, ira d. wallach. we also join in expressing our deepest sympathies to all members of the family. weiser llp $(6$)wallach--ira d. the faculty and students of the department of art history and archaeology and the directors and staff of the avery architectural and fine arts library and the miriam and ira d. wallach art gallery of columbia university mourn the loss of a generous and enlightened friend and extend deepest condolences to his family. ira and miriam enabled the arts to realize their potential at columbia. $(6$)wallach--ira. the board and staff of the national book foundation note with great sorrow the passing of ira d. wallach, father of our board member ken wallach. we extend our deepest sympathy to all the members of his family. deborah e. wiley, chairman harold augenbraum, executive director $(6$)wallach--ira, d. the trustees, staff and volunteers of the educational broadcasting corporation (ebc), licensee of thirteen/wnet and wliw new york, mourn the loss of ira d. wallach, a great friend to thirteen/ wnet. a longtime and generous supporter, he did much to further thirteen's mission of providing the best public affairs programming to public television viewers across the country. we are particularly grateful for ira's help in launching and maintaining our ''wide angle'' series. our heartfelt sympathies are with his wife miriam, his son ken and the entire wallach family. we join them in remembering this wonderful man who touched countless lives with his passion to make the world a better place. james s. tisch, chairman william f. baker, president $(6$)wallach--ira d. the officers, board of directors, and staff of uja-federation of new york mourn the loss of ira wallach, beloved husband of miriam wallach and father of kenneth wallach. the wallach family has set a shining example of philanthropic leadership and deep devotion to the jewish community, and have left a legacy of hope for countless individuals touched by their generosity. we extend our deepest sympathies to the entire family. morris w. offit, president susan k. stern, chair of the board john s. ruskay, exec. v.p. & c.e.o.  