falcons introduce petrino as head coach   the atlanta falcons are gambling that bobby petrino will have more success than recent college coaches who have jumped to the n.f.l. petrino, 45, was introduced yesterday as the falcons' head coach after an impressive four-year run at louisville.  the last two college coaches who were hired to lead n.f.l. teams quit after two seasons. steve spurrier, hired by the washington redskins to much fanfare, went 12-20 in 2002-3; he returned to college in 2005 as the head coach at south carolina. nick saban was also a disappointment with the miami dolphins, going 15-17 the past two seasons before taking the coaching job at alabama last week.  so why would the falcons sign petrino to a five-year deal worth $24 million? they were enamored with his high-powered offensive teams at louisville and his reputation as an innovative play-caller who can get the most out of playmakers like falcons quarterback michael vick. petrino replaced jim mora, who was fired last week after compiling a 26-22 record in three seasons in atlanta.  at a news conference in atlanta yesterday, the falcons' owner, arthur blank, called petrino ''a playmaker and difference maker.''  ''bobby knows how to motivate, he knows how to teach, he knows how to get the best out of his athletes,'' blank said, adding: ''he'll push mike vick to even higher levels. he'll work with our wide receivers, our running backs, and he'll work with all of our talent on defense and make them all better.''  blank also said that ''bobby has the potential to be here a very long time, which is important for me.''  in his four seasons at louisville, petrino was 41-9, including 12-1 this season after a 24-13 victory against wake forest last tuesday in the orange bowl. petrino spent three seasons in the n.f.l. as an assistant with the jacksonville jaguars, including one as offensive coordinator.  the falcons are at a crossroads, finishing 7-9 this season and missing the playoffs for the second consecutive year. vick is the team's franchise player and one of the league's most exciting talents. but the falcons have lacked consistency during vick's career, and atlanta has a talented backup quarterback in matt schaub. among petrino's most important challenges will be to sort out the falcons' future at quarterback and to find better ways to utilize vick's talents, if he remains the centerpiece of their attack.  ''i think offensively, our philosophy is going to be very aggressive,'' petrino said. ''i've been able to work with quarterbacks, receivers, running backs and guys that can make plays. i know that there is that core ability here.''  he added that ''one of my critical hires will be our defensive coordinator.''  petrino said he was eager to work with vick. ''i know he's a tremendous competitor,'' he said, adding: i would like to stand up here and say, this is what we are going to do with michael and this is how we are going to utilize him, but the truth of the matter is that you don't know that until you get out there and work with him.''  petrino did not sound intimidated by the challenge of coaching in the n.f.l., saying, ''i truly believe that i am totally prepared for the job.''  dolphins intrigue -- a plane owned by wayne huizenga, the miami dolphins' owner, flew to costa rica on sunday, then returned to fort lauderdale, fla., according to flight records. pete carroll, the southern california coach, has been on vacation in costa rica. the same plane was used to take dolphins officials to several cities to interview candidates to replace nick saban. the dolphins declined to say whether huizenga met with carroll. (ap)  dolphins interview gailey -- georgia tech coach chan gailey said yesterday that he had been interviewed by the miami dolphins and was waiting to hear if he was still a candidate to replace nick saban. gailey, a former dolphins offensive coordinator, is on a long list of candidates that also includes the former atlanta falcons coach jim mora. the dolphins received permission to speak with gailey, 55, after saban was hired at alabama. (ap)  jaguars hire coordinator -- jacksonville hired the former arizona state coach dirk koetter as its offensive coordinator yesterday. he becomes the third play-caller in five seasons under coach jack del rio. koetter replaced carl smith, one of five assistants fired last week after the jaguars lost their final three games to finish 8-8 and miss the playoffs. (ap)  around the league -- lito sheppard, philadelphia's pro bowl cornerback, will miss saturday's second-round playoff game against new orleans with a dislocated right elbow. ... steve sarkisian, the southern california quarterbacks coach, became the first candidate to interview for the oakland coaching job. (ap)  football  