once again, a postseason matchup for the patriots turns on a defensive play   it was right there in the scouting report. when jets quarterback chad pennington lines up under center, it often means a quick pass to the outside. and if a pass rusher cannot get to the quarterback, the report said, he should at least get his hands up to try to knock down a pass.  so when linebacker rosevelt colvin and the rest of the patriots' defense saw pennington under center late in the third quarter sunday, they were on alert.  to that point, the jets had moved the ball with startling ease. they trailed by 7 and controlled the ball at the new england 48-yard line. but as pennington turned to his left, looking to throw a lateral to receiver jerricho cotchery, colvin threw his hands in the air. he batted down the ball, but reacted as if he could not believe he did not intercept it. as he fell to the ground, he heard the crowd cheering.  ''we've been having a few scuffles, so i thought that was it,'' colvin said. ''i was like, oh, was that a lateral?''  it was, which patriots coach bill belichick realized immediately. he began waving frantically, and defensive tackle vince wilfork picked up the ball and rumbled 31 yards to the jets' 15-yard line. in that moment, with colvin on the ground, the game had turned on a patriots defensive play, as it so often does in the playoffs.  the patriots kicked a field goal on the ensuing drive to go ahead by 10 and ended up beating the jets, 37-16. but the game did not become a blowout until midway through the fourth quarter, after the third time the jets failed to score a touchdown from inside the new england 20.  the patriots followed with a touchdown drive, then new england defensive back asante samuel returned an interception for a touchdown with 4 minutes 54 seconds left to seal the victory.  the patriots allowed the second-fewest points of any team this season (second to the ravens, who play the colts on saturday in a second-round game). their offense often struggled to find a rhythm this season, but their defense held them together. new england may have the best front seven in the n.f.l. -- an intelligent, physical unit that can pressure the quarterback and stuff the run with equal skill. and the patriots have overcome another injury-riddled season in the secondary.  their defense in the red zone has been stifling, allowing only 12 touchdowns in their opponents' 35 drives inside their 20, a touchdown percentage of 34.3 percent. (the patriots' offense, which was hardly at its best for most of the season, still managed 36 touchdowns on 60 drives inside the 20, a success rate of 60 percent.)  colvin, in talking about the patriots' ability to hold the jets to three short field goals sunday, said: ''three times four is 12, and that definitely makes it closer. you put the fire out. it's always huge to hold a team to field goals.''  wilfork is the relative newcomer, a third-year player who at 6 feet 2 inches and 325 pounds is a bulldozer of a nose tackle. when linebacker tedy bruschi was asked if he could put into words what wilfork meant to the defense, he replied simply: ''no, i can't. that's the best answer i can give you.''  the jets run the kind of offense that could frustrate less-disciplined defenses. they dink and dunk their way down the field, testing the patience of defenders who just want to get off it. when the patriots received their game plan last week, the first priority, colvin said, was to stop the run. that is routine for most teams, but the jets do not have a consistent running game.  still, the idea was to put the jets into third-and-long situations, because they have little ability to gain big chunks of yardage on deep passing plays, particularly when pennington is under pressure. on sunday, he was, and the plan worked. pennington was sacked three times, and the jets converted only 3 of 11 third-down attempts. that meant that they ran 60 offensive plays, compared with 73 for the patriots.  the patriots might have had more dominating defenses in their championship seasons, and their defensive speed will certainly be tested by chargers running back ladainian tomlinson on sunday. but they are also a standard by which the jets are judged.  jets coach eric mangini was the patriots' defensive coordinator last season, and he has taken what he learned in new england to new york. still, the learning curve is obvious. jonathan vilma essentially plays the same position as bruschi. in the teams' two meetings in the regular season, vilma had 13 tackles; bruschi had 22. on sunday, bruschi totaled nine tackles to vilma's six.  ''we hope to strive to the patriots' level,'' vilma said. ''that's been six years, seven years in the making, and i know the first year they weren't perfect at it.''  for much of this season, though, the patriots' defense was pretty close, because it followed the game plan.  pro football  