e-mail gaffe publicizes job seekers in albany   gov. eliot spitzer made his name, in part, on indiscreet e-mail messages, as any number of executives who were pursued by the attorney general's office in recent years can attest. now his administration has sent out an indiscreet e-mail message of its own: an e-mail response to people seeking jobs as spokesmen included the e-mail addresses of 227 other job applicants, including reporters and local and city government employees.  ''my initial reaction was to laugh -- they sent it out to a bunch of reporters,'' said one applicant, who, along with several others, was granted anonymity so as not to get them in trouble with their current bosses or to scotch their chances of being hired. ''my next reaction was that it was kind of unprofessional.''  the e-mail response was sent out tuesday night to people who had applied to become public information officers through a web site that the transition team set up. ''thank you again for your interest in becoming a part of new york's future,'' it tells the job seekers. many of their names and employers could be easily inferred from their e-mail addresses.  in interviews, several applicants said that they were worried that the job seekers could find themselves in trouble with their current bosses, who might view job-hunting as disloyal. others, who have public affairs experience, spoke about the technical aspects -- and the importance of configuring an internet mailing list to shield the other e-mail recipients.  ''they need to be prepared for some blowback if they included everybody's address,'' one said.  the aspirants came from different sections of the state. some are journalists, others work in public relations, some work in business, and others work in branches of city, state or local government.  christine anderson, governor spitzer's press secretary, called the mailing ''an inadvertent and unfortunate mistake'' and apologized to those who were inconvenienced.  mr. spitzer, of course, was successful at using internal e-mail messages to build cases against merrill lynch and others when he was the state's attorney general. he subpoenaed boxloads of printed e-mail in his investigations. his biography, ''spoiling for a fight,'' by brooke a. masters (times books, 2006), quotes him as saying at the beginning of one inquiry: ''get me the damn e-mails! all of them.''  not everyone who hopes to work for the spitzer administration was dismayed at the disclosure. one applicant saw it as a positive, saying that at least now he could see whom he was competing against for the limited number of jobs.  by wednesday afternoon, the administration was working on another e-mail message to those whose e-mail addresses were accidentally shared. each message, officials said, will have only one recipient on it.  