french, with a twist of wagner   it is hard to say why works that were once staples of the concert repertory lose popularity. a good example is césar franck's symphony in d minor. this once ubiquitous work was the focus of the conductor leon botstein's concert with the american symphony orchestra on sunday afternoon at avery fisher hall.  titled ''pioneering influence: césar franck,'' the program explored this belgian-born frenchman's shifting position in the canon by examining his impact on three french composers who came after him. and the audience got to hear some rarely performed, intriguing works by albéric magnard, paul dukas and ernest chausson.  born in liège in 1822, franck settled in paris, where he gained wide respect as a teacher and organist, only later winning a following for his compositions. like many french musicians of his day, he had neo-classical leanings but was powerfully influenced by wagner.  in the program notes mr. botstein says that franck's originality stemmed partly from his approach to structure and syntax. while hewing loosely to traditional forms, he found ways to generate structures through the use of cyclic themes, not unlike wagner's leitmotif technique.  magnard's ''hymn to venus'' (1904) begins with tremulous, sustained harmonies that recall spacious, mystical passages of ''parsifal.'' franck and his followers did not completely buy into french impressionism; ''hymn to venus'' seems to skip from wagner right past debussy's ''pelléas'' to the world of schoenberg's lush early symphonic poem ''pelleas und melisande,'' composed in 1902-3.  dukas, fated to be known forever as the composer of the delightful and clever ''sorcerer's apprentice,'' once commented that in composing a symphony, too much attention is devoted to matters of structure and not enough to the quality of the musical ideas. lucid structure is certainly not a hallmark of his symphony in c (1896). the three movements teem with melodies and thematic riffs that are continually developed and recycled. but the sheer exuberance of the music captivates you. i liked best the slow movement, with its continually surprising harmonization of poignant and elusive melody.  chausson's ruminative and rapturous ''poème de l'amour et de la mer,'' a 20-minute setting of two poems by maurice bouchor for mezzo-soprano and orchestra, combines french elegance with wagnerian murkiness. jane irwin's rich, dark-hued and sizable voice proved ideal for the music.  the concert ended with the franck symphony. just by placing it in this programmatic context, mr. botstein was able to convey freshly the innovative strokes of this moody, impetuous and keenly dramatic 1888 work. the allegretto movement, like some cross between a wistful slow movement and a schumannesque scherzo, was especially striking.  though the overall sweep and layout of the four pieces came through well in mr. botstein's capable performances, i wanted more textural clarity, differentiation and nuance in the playing. still, he and the skillful musicians deserve much credit for tackling a substantive program of challenging, mostly unknown and, it turned out, fascinating works.  music review  