abbas tells party he'll proceed with elections   the fatah faction of the palestinian authority president, mahmoud abbas, held a large rally on sunday in a gaza city sports stadium, marking the group's 42nd anniversary with a show of strength and defiance after days of bloody clashes with the rival hamas movement.  tens of thousands of fatah supporters made it one of the largest fatah rallies in gaza in many years.  mr. abbas told fatah political leaders in bethlehem on sunday that he intended to proceed with his demand for early presidential and parliamentary elections, and that he had lost hope in negotiating a unity government with hamas, which won a parliamentary majority a year ago. hamas has rejected early legislative elections as illegal and as a form of a coup and has vowed to boycott and disrupt them.  on saturday, mr. abbas said he would consider the hamas-led parallel police force known as the executive force to be illegal if it were not quickly integrated into other palestinian security forces under his command.  hamas rejected that call, too, saying that the gaza-based group, the executive force, was legal and necessary, and that in fact hamas had plans to more than double its size -- to 12,000 men. hamas leaders warned mr. abbas that efforts to disband the executive force would be met with violence.  mr. abbas also said saturday that he was changing security personnel. while he did not make clear who would hold the top post, the united states has been urging him to appoint muhammad dahlan, the former security chief in gaza, to lead all security forces in the palestinian authority. mr. dahlan is especially despised by hamas, and he is not especially popular among many other palestinians, who believe that he is corrupt and too close to the united states and israel, despite his vehement denials. but mr. dahlan commands the loyalty in gaza of many of fatah's armed men, incorporated into various security services.  mr. dahlan said at the rally that there would be a new policy. ''if anyone from fatah is attacked, we will hit back twice as hard,'' he said, as the crowd shouted ''shiites, shiites,'' intended as a riposte to hamas, which, like fatah, is sunni, but is also fervently religious and has close ties to shiite iran. mr. dahlan responded, ''don't say 'shiites,' say 'criminals.' ''  agence france-presse said that its photographer, jaime rázuri, 50, from peru, was released sunday evening after six days of captivity after being kidnapped in gaza city on monday. mr. rázuri was released to news-agency representatives at mr. abbas's compound. he said: ''it was not a five-star hotel, but it was very good. i was treated very well.'' mr. rázuri said he was fine and ''very happy to be released,'' and thanked all those who had tried to help him.  in israel, intraparty rivalries also intensified, with former prime minister ehud barak announcing that he would run for the chairmanship of the labor party, challenging the current leader and defense minister, amir peretz, in primaries on may 24.  mr. barak has been out of politics for nearly six years, since ariel sharon defeated him in 2001. he will face competition from mr. peretz; ami ayalon, another former general; and ophir pines-paz, a popular legislator and former minister.  separately, israeli forces arrested two palestinians on sunday morning in the balata refugee camp in nablus. the palestinians then led them to two suicide-bomb belts in their apartment that were ready for use, the israeli military said.  