an angel is pulled closer to earth   the stained-glass windows in the eccentric building at 4 downing street in the clinton hill section of brooklyn are made from discarded salt shakers, ashtrays and coffee tables, bottles dug up in the backyard and the detritus of neighborhood car accidents. it is only from the inside that you can see the windows' brilliant colors.  arthur wood, 75, who made the windows, hasn't been inside in a while. he and his wife, cynthia, 69, were evicted on oct. 17, after a rooftop fire led city inspectors to find the house in violation of building codes.  yesterday, in a conference with the brooklyn supreme court, the woods agreed to submit engineering plans by next wednesday to dismantle the building's 40-foot rooftop structure, the main violation. the woods have also entered into a tentative agreement to share ownership with a local developer, shahn andersen, who would turn most of the building into condominiums, according to a spokeswoman for city councilwoman letitia james. the broken angel, as the house is known, would include some form of community space, along with living and studio space for the woods.  this isn't what mr. wood wanted; he hoped to raise the money to bring the building up to code and keep it for himself. but he was running out of time and afraid the buildings department would tear down his home. ''i have to do something,'' mr. wood said. ''everything i own is there: paintings, thousands of dollars worth of equipment.''  the building could be brooklyn's answer to antonio gaudí's whimsical, unfinished sagrada familia basilica in barcelona. mr. wood, an artist, considers the building his primary canvas, as well as the home where he and his wife reared two children.  they bought the building, the former brooklyn trolley headquarters, in 1979, and it has been a work in progress ever since.  there is a clear view of the house from the upper windows of the pratt institute's school of architecture a few blocks away. brent m. porter, who has taught at the school for 35 years, took on the broken angel as his cause, even though, he said, ''architects do not consider it to be architecture.''  ''it's outsider art,'' he said.  ''many people, on their rooftops, build gazebos, roof decks, trellises,'' he continued. ''the problem here is arthur wood built several gazebos, several roof decks, several trellises. the whole thing is a giant sculpture.''  while conceding that parts of the building were not fireproofed and lacked the requisite permits, mr. porter and some of his students set out to prove that the house was structurally sound. using mr. wood's plans and a series of interior photographs taken by his son christopher -- all currently on view in an exhibition at pratt -- they documented the building's condition in detail.  ''i had seven students actively involved, sometimes till 2 in the morning,'' said mr. porter, who lives in the area and is also a co-chairman of the clinton hill society's landmarks committee, which represents the neighborhood's historic district.  mr. porter's efforts also reflect his memory of how the broken angel affected his daughter, christina, who died at 21 in 2005 after a skiing accident. ''i saw in my daughter's eyes the joy that she and her friends drew from this building,'' he said. ''and i see a similar kind of respect my students have felt for the avant-garde in their lives.''  vladimir j. charles, a pratt alumnus and neighborhood architect, volunteered to convert mr. wood's hand-drawn designs into digital architectural plans that comply with building codes. ''it was always like the odd structure out on the horizon, this one man doing this construction and getting away with murder,'' mr. charles said. ''now i'm a professional, and there is still that connection. turning our back on those guys would have been completely and utterly ridiculous.''  ''basically,'' he added, ''this building is talking back to the rest of the neighborhood.''  the architects were not alone in stepping up. the comedian dave chappelle, who used the building as a backdrop for his 2005 concert film, ''block party,'' told new york 1 news that he was willing to be the host of a benefit concert to raise money for the work needed on the building.  ms. james, the councilwoman, is also a lawyer and is representing the woods in court. ''the community has an interest in this building because it's an icon,'' she said. ''the issue is resources.'' there is a criminal case pending against the woods because they refused to leave immediately when served with the eviction order. mr. wood, who said he planned to file a lawsuit for wrongful arrest, called those papers ''defective.''  the couple are staying with friends. they return to the broken angel to feed their three dogs, which remain inside, but have access to the adjacent lot owned by the woods.  not everyone considers the broken angel worthy of rescue. on blogs, several people argued that the woods should have abided by city rules. if mr. wood were really an artist ''instead of a nutty guy who likes to flagrantly disregard building codes,'' read one posting last month, ''he'd simply sell the empty lot and use the proceeds to fix up his 'art.' ''  the property -- the subject of a 1991 short documentary called ''broken angel,'' shown at the sundance film festival -- has been on the market with massey knakal realty services for $1.4 million, with the adjacent lot listed for $425,000. in putting the property on the market, christopher wood said, ''i forced my father into it because i wanted him to cover all his bases. i don't want them to lose everything and have nothing to show for it.''  the elder mr. wood said he knew he would eventually have to compromise, but he was determined not to sell and walk away. ''that would mean the building would be who knows what,'' he said. ''it certainly wouldn't be broken angel, and that's upsetting. it's such a wonderful location and it would be really nice to have it lit up at night, looking the way it's designed to be. the light changes and it's really a beautiful place.''  ''of course,'' he added, ''it has to be finished.''  