trading math class for corsets and minis   six years ago a couple i know took their son, then 8, and daughter, 5, to a resort on the isle of elba, where, on the final night of their stay, the children participated in a talent show. such was the resort staff's understanding of talent that the little girls were asked to wear bathing suits and swoon over a 10-year-old playing a lifeguard, while the little boys removed the slickers they were wearing in a simulated striptease to the tune of ''it's raining men.'' in a moment that left my friends feeling vaguely litigious, their son appeared onstage by himself to perform tom jones's ''sex bomb.''  an experience like this might renew anyone's appreciation for the comparative sexual puritanism that, however strained, still girds the culture of contemporary american child rearing. but, oh, how that foundation has come under assault, as the world of the fourth-grade suburbanite has come to look ever more like a nightspot designed by the creative directors at gucci. the louche invasion of preadolescent consciousness continues with the arrival of ''high school musical: the concert.''  what is ''high school musical: the concert''? it's the very, very loud (the doors at the fillmore east loud) traveling stage version of the disney channel movie, which made its television debut last year, and remains, in the opinion of many young girls, perhaps the greatest entertainment product ever created by man. the story revolves around a teenage boy and a teenage girl -- he's really good at basketball, and she's really good at math and science -- who come to resent the roles in which they have been typecast, fall in love and defy the social ecology by performing in their school musical. forty-three million people around the world have seen the movie so far, and its soundtrack was the best-selling album of 2006 in the united states.  the live version, which reprises the songs from the movie but not the dialogue and plot, is in the midst of a 40-city north american tour, and it made its most recent stop at the continental airlines arena in east rutherford, n.j., on monday night. most of the lead actors from the movie -- ashley tisdale, vanessa anne hudgens, corbin bleu -- appear in the stage show but don't look like their screen selves. the girls look as if they are auditioning for a date with donald trump.  ms. tisdale, who plays an ambitious snob in the movie, with a penchant for pastel blazers, here dances provocatively in a corset and tiny plaid mini-skirt. as the 10-year-old female friend i brought with me proclaimed: ''she's wearing a corset. but she said her grandmother was here!''  still, what must be most disconcerting for the thousands of little girls who will see the show is the spectacle of ms. hudgens, the movie's shy, studious geek, suddenly materializing in a strappy silk cocktail dress, thrusting her legs and generally comporting herself as if she were tina turner.  this is where the show works at cross purposes with the movie's just-be-your-real-self message. in the fake world of television, ms. hudgens's character, gabriella, is an aspiring nobel prize winner. as her real self, she would appear to be an aspiring sex goddess. if real is supposed to be better than fake, then dressing like a sex goddess must be better than mastering physics.  and yet, in spite of all this, the most sinister aspect of the ''high school musical'' enterprise is not its raciness.  the concert seems to exist primarily as a vehicle for promoting the solo albums of the show's budding stars. here are a lot of dopey songs: buy some more. throughout the stage version, an m.c., lucas grabeel, who also appears in the movie, conducts little chats with the performers that go like this: ''wow, what was it like recording your own album?''  and there is something ingenious or untenably sneaky about the disney channel making movies about teenagers learning to love musicals at a time when it seriously got into the business of making made-for-tv movie musicals. ''jump in!'' is the next in this vein. if the marketing were any more obvious, children would jump off.  theater review  