hey, a parking space! but which way in?   with the row of parked cars in front of his shop looking altogether skewed, barry greenberg was bewildered. some were parked front first, others had been backed to the curb, and every car was angled against the flow of one-way traffic on west 100th street in manhattan.  ''whatever the policy is, it doesn't make sense,'' mr. greenberg said yesterday.  for mr. greenberg, manager of the barry london glass and shade company at 17 west 100th street, and for others on a broad stretch of west 100th between amsterdam avenue and central park west, the shock of the new has come with a radically altered approach to angled parking in the city.  rules first introduced in 1994 by the department of transportation in the boroughs outside manhattan, and now being gradually implemented in manhattan, require motorists who park in angled spaces to back in.  backing in is the easier, and surely safer, approach, because the angles of the spaces are being redrawn. those who cling to tradition and park with their front bumper forward must negotiate a turn of more than 90 degrees. then, when they leave, they face an even more daring maneuver to back out into traffic.  people who park front-forward in the back-forward spaces risk a $65 fine below 96th street in manhattan, or $45 elsewhere in the city. but the rules apply only where the city has redrawn the lines for angled parking, and the new lines are generally created only when streets undergo maintenance or repaving. ''it is safer not to have to back into traffic,'' said craig chin, a spokesman for the department of transportation.  but there was still a problem on west 100th street yesterday, since the city, which redrew the parking lines on the north side on thursday, had yet to do so on the south side and had not posted any signs telling motorists that they must back in.  at midafternoon yesterday, about half the cars were parked front-first.  ''it is very strange,'' said jose batista, a resident of the frederick douglass houses, at amsterdam avenue and west 100th street, who had navigated his nissan maxima into a space in front of mr. greenberg's shop.  ''when you pull out, maybe there's another car,'' he said, as he slapped his car's roof.  mr. chin said the absence of proper signage on the newly configured stretch of west 100th street was an oversight. ''we will have somebody out there this week,'' he said.  in the meantime, anyone who is ticketed for parking frontward in a backward space is free to challenge the summons with the parking violations bureau, he said.  ink  