a secretive aerospace company sheds a bit of light on its rocket program   jeff bezos finally gave the world a peek at his rocket.  the billionaire founder of amazon.com has an interest in space, and more than enough money to pursue his interests. in 2000, he registered a company, blue origin, and hired rocket scientists. but the company has been obsessively secretive.  the last time mr. bezos gave out any kind of real information, he walked into the offices of the van horn advocate in west texas to tell the editor that he had bought 165,000 acres nearby and would be testing rockets there. when the company performed the first test launching on nov. 13, it made no announcement.  and that was it, pretty much, until last week, when the blue origin web site (www.blueorigin.com) showed the first pictures and video of a gumdrop-shaped test craft, dubbed goddard, rising from the west texas launch site to 285 feet and then, eerily, returning gently to the pad.  the announcement was, for the most part, a come-on for rocket scientists -- or, as mr. bezos put it on the site, ''hard working, technically gifted, team-oriented, experienced'' aerospace engineers -- to continue development of what the company calls its ''new shepard'' spacecraft.  that craft, as the site says, will be ''designed to take a small number of astronauts on a suborbital journey into space.'' the pace is deliberate, with commercial trips starting as early as 2010, according to the page, which ends with the company's motto, gradatim ferociter, which (very roughly) translates as ''step by step, fiercely.''  the goddard has a science-fiction sleekness. videos show the craft taking off and landing again with a loud whooshing sound. in one view, one of the nine rocket nozzles jitters as it maintains the ship's attitude. goddard resembles the dc-x, another vertical-takeoff-and-landing craft under development in the 1990s by mcdonnell douglas for the defense department and nasa until the government pulled the plug. several members of the dc-x team now work for mr. bezos, said william gaubatz, the former director of the project, and ''their ingenuity shows in the results.''  mr. bezos is entering a field that seems more crowded by the day. sir richard branson, the founder of virgin atlantic airways, says he will take tourists to space in a ship created by burt rutan, the legendary designer whose spaceshipone was the first privately financed craft to send a person to the edge of space. several other companies are working on projects of their own. but blue origin is ''the most secretive of the group,'' said john carmack, a computer game designer and founder of armadillo aerospace near dallas.  mr. carmack's company is testing its own spacecraft and is as open as mr. bezos' is closed, with monthly updates. ''i'm thrilled to finally see something'' from blue origin about its ship, he said. ''i was really close to giving somebody a little money to go out there with a telephoto to get a photo of it.''  