ideas & trends: illuminating; incandescence, yes. fluorescence, we'll see.   when i found out last week that wal-mart, america's biggest company, was putting a push on compact fluorescent light bulbs, hoping to make them a new lighting standard at home because they use 75 percent less energy, last 10 times longer and would save me $30 over the life of each bulb, i thought to myself, what's not to like?  well, fluorescent light's not to like, many people might say.  what's the problem? for one, it's not incandescent.  in trying to replace -- depose -- incandescent light bulb light, you're asking people to disengage from a gravitation as primal as the attraction to the sun's light or fire, which are incandescent. like the bulb and its filament, they make light from heat, to create a glowing focal source, or a ''flame.''  fluorescent bulbs activate a gas inside a tube, lighting a fluorescent coating that glows and creates an even, diffuse light without a center. born in a lab, they don't have much traction on the human experience since the dawn -- incandescent -- of man.  more important, incandescence operates on the red, or warm, end of the color spectrum. fluorescence works at the opposite end, with cool blue. incandescent light burns warmly with radiance, like a flushed, happy face. it smolders, hearth-like, when it's dimmed. fluorescent light coats surfaces coolly like ash, looks pale when dim. and not all bulbs will dim.  but fluorescent light's greatest setback in conquering the home might be its own great success with having conquered the workplace and other commercial spheres. people's associations with it are not only not good, they're actively bad. anyone who has ever sat under flat fluorescent light in an office cubicle, a waiting room, a government bureau, a cheap restaurant or a dirty motel understands this pretty well. you equate fluorescent light with your boss, license renewal, indigestion and divorce. not beautiful sunsets, blush wine, fireside s'mores, and candlelit dinner dates. an ''incandescent'' evening.  to be fair, fluorescent light has improved in its 150-odd years. ''early on, it buzzed, hummed, it flickered, it looked really institution-like,'' said russell leslie, a professor at rensselaer polytechnic institute in troy, n.y., and associate director of its lighting research center. ''technology has overcome all these problems.'' still, he added of fluorescent light in homes, ''despite all those efforts, there hasn't been huge penetration.''  wal-mart believes that advances in the quality of the light of compact fluorescent bulbs, and a lowering of prices, in the last five years, will attract customers seeking long-term savings. the bulbs now generally range in price from $2 to $4; incandescent bulbs are generally 25 to 60 cents.  professor leslie said he thought most people's resistance was in the mind.  ''with current technology, you can't distinguish the difference unless you see the light bulb,'' he said. ''we've done tests.'' compact fluorescent light bulbs, with their tight twist of tube, look like ray guns, a saturday night special from another planet. you feel like you're arming the house, not lighting it, when you screw them into the lamps as i did, producing a light on a table that was pleasant, calm and softly clinical, like being across the desk from a park avenue doctor.  even with fluorescent light's better approximations of incandescence, i wondered if it might need friends in high places -- decorators and designers who would lead the way, as they do in issues of taste in the home.  gary gordon, a lighting designer in new york, has designed lighting for a lot of high-stakes, look-good situations: the art dealer larry gagosian's house and galleries; the cosmetics empire estée lauder's executive offices. mr. gordon, who endorses fluorescent light's environmental aspects, said he had used it in the old-school form of long straight tubes. but he's not a particular fan of compact fluorescent bulbs.  ''because of their small tube diameter, there's a limit to the quality of color rendering that can be packed into the tube, so they're not too flattering to the skin,'' he said of how they light people -- light's most critical arena.  big, big problem. (mr. gordon has consulted professionally with royal philips, the light-bulb manufacturer, to try to solve it.)  ''people don't look too healthy,'' he explained. ''human beings base their well-being on how others appear, to establish how we feel about ourselves.''  in other words, you're not o.k., i'm not o.k.. though as professor leslie at the lighting research center has demonstrated, people can't pick out the type of light a lamp is producing without seeing the bulb, seeing skin in its light is a giveaway. mr. gordon said: ''just stick your hand under it. retail, four-star hotels, restaurants have figured this out. you won't find the gap using compact fluorescent light bulbs to sell clothes.''  mr. gordon has also worked for the white house. susan whitson, press secretary to laura bush, said she believed the president and first lady's living quarters were lighted with a combination of incandescent and fluorescent bulbs, depending on the area. she added that mrs. bush was a stickler for going around and turning off the lights that weren't being used. (i guess she feels at home.)  in new york, jamie drake, mayor michael r. bloomberg's decorator, uses compact fluorescent light bulbs in the antique ceramic glazed table lamps in his own personal office on east 62nd street, but he shades them with custom-made tie-dyed silk chiffon shades with pink silk linings.  ''it ameliorates the somewhat slightly unappealing color,'' mr. drake said.  it could be that america splits along cultural lines in the debate. in asia, people are more comfortable with fluorescent light, said mr. gordon, the designer, who has clients there.  ''asians have developed an architecture that makes use of diffused light sources,'' he explained. rice-paper windows and room-dividing walls in japanese houses, for example, spread light evenly, with few shadows, unlike incandescent light, which has a source point, like the flame of a candle.  professor leslie, at the lighting research center, said the debate could develop a political dimension, too, not unlike the price of oil and america's response to the types of cars it drives.  ''incandescent bulbs are guzzlers,'' he said of the electricity they use, in comparison with fluorescent bulbs. ''if you want your guzzler, fine. but with increasing trouble meeting energy demands -- there are now brownouts, blackouts everywhere -- who's going to want a power line in their backyard for new corridors of power supply?''  the debate could also never arrive. professor leslie said that the united states department of energy is investing most of its research money in l.e.d., or light-emitting diodes, a source of light that lasts 100,000 hours and can be configured into any shape.  ''we're going to have to stop thinking about sockets,'' he said.  illuminating  