port authority cancels ad deal for george washington bridge   geico's gecko won't be waving to drivers at the george washington bridge after all.  in a swift reversal, the port authority of new york and new jersey said yesterday that it would halt plans to place billboards and other advertisements from geico, the big auto insurer, at the bridge's toll plaza, tollbooths and approach roads.  the turnaround comes less than a week after the port authority said it had signed a two-year deal with geico valued at $3.2 million. the advertisements would have been the first at a bridge operated by the port authority, which has been seeking new sources of revenue to offset its rising costs.  but reaction to the ads, some of which would have featured geico's signature mascot, a green gecko, came quickly. preservationists and some local officials criticized the deal, complaining that the displays would have destroyed the aesthetics of the landmark bridge. the mayor of fort lee, where the toll plaza is situated, said that the port authority might have run afoul of local laws governing the placement of signs.  but other politicians, including the state senate president, richard j. codey, had more practical concerns: they said the port authority could have held out for more money.  ''you have an incredible number of people going over the bridge,'' mr. codey said, referring to the 57 million eastbound drivers who cross the span each year. the price, he said, ''seemed to be out of whack.''  mr. codey said the port authority did not tell him about the sponsorship program, which was agreed upon in 2005 while he was governor. he said the details of the bidding process on the geico contract should have been disclosed earlier.  a spokesman for gov. jon s. corzine said his office planned to review the port authority's sponsorship program because it was approved under the previous administration. and stephen sigmund, a port authority spokesman, said the authority's top officials, including the new executive director, anthony e. shorris, and the chairman, anthony coscia, had discussed over the weekend whether to pull out of the arrangement and made their decision yesterday.  geico said it would not contest the authority's decision to pull out of the contract, which was signed in december.  ''we're sorry that they got the push back they got, but we will withdraw,'' said bill roberts, executive vice president of geico. ''we were concerned that we would be perceived badly. we want to be a good corporate citizen, but any time you do something new, it takes careful consideration.''  neil m. cohen, the deputy speaker of the general assembly, complained that as a regulated insurer, geico should not have been given ''prime advertising assistance by a bistate government agency.''  the advertising plan ''was a slippery slope that would have prompted lawsuits, caused embarrassment and driven up costs for the port authority in the long run,'' mr. cohen said in a statement.  one group that is sure to be disappointed is the advertising firms that were expecting to receive $800,000 for their work putting the deal together.  in backing out of the arrangement, the port authority said the revenue from the advertisements was not worth the hostility the plan had received.  ''we misjudged the negative reaction to this,'' mr. sigmund said. that reaction, he added, ''was becoming a distraction to the agency, which faces big and serious issues over the next decade.''  despite the criticism, he insisted that the deal was ''competitively priced.''  he said that the agency, which currently receives less than $30 million a year in these kinds of arrangements, would continue to look for new advertising and sponsorship as part of its goal of raising $100 million in such revenues.  still, as new jersey looks to the sale or lease of some of the state's assets to ease its financial burden, the loud and swift response to the contract with geico was emblematic not just of the cumbersome leadership at the port authority, an agency with strong political allegiances to the heads of two states, but also of the broader difficulty quasi-public agencies face when trying to privatize the facilities they operate.  indeed, the storm over the geico ads may be just a taste of the emerging debate over governor corzine's exploration of whether to sell or lease state assets like the new jersey turnpike and the garden state parkway.  ''if something like this of a small nature could generate such controversy, the highway privatization is sure to as well,'' said martin e. robins, the director of the alan m. voorhees transportation center at rutgers university.  mr. robins added that the port authority was particularly vulnerable to criticism because the governors of new york and new jersey hold immense sway at the agency.  ''the state governments have a huge amount of influence, and they are not afraid to exercise it,'' he said. ''the port authority is a handy punching bag.''  