corzine urges 'risks' and 'dreams' to aid state   from leasing the new jersey turnpike to selling unions on the notion of shared sacrifice, gov. jon s. corzine challenged legislators in his state of the state address on tuesday to ''risk more than others think is safe'' and ''dream more than others think is practical'' to help ease the state's considerable fiscal difficulties.  describing the state's property taxes, the highest in the nation, as ''the cork in the bottle that constrains new jersey's resources and attention,'' mr. corzine told legislators, ''we must act. we must act now. the common good demands nothing less.''  in tones that were alternately self-effacing and serious, mr. corzine renewed his promise to cut property taxes, which now average $6,000 a household each year, by up to 20 percent for 95 percent of the state's 2 million homeowners.  at the same time, he urged senate and assembly members to cap local property tax growth at 4 percent a year; the current average rate is 7 percent.  and he insisted, as he has for months, that the state could save money by creating a new position of state comptroller, by asking local governments to pool resources and by engaging in tough collective bargaining on pension and health benefits for state employees.  the one idea that he acknowledged was very controversial, yet also ''bears the greatest potential,'' was what he referred to as ''asset monetization,'' his preferred term for selling or leasing state assets and using the proceeds to reduce debt and ''free up billions of dollars of cash flow for capital investments.''  although he did not identify any assets, administration officials have long mentioned toll roads, like the new jersey turnpike and the garden state parkway, or any valuable state land, like property adjacent to train stations and sports stadiums.  ''in the property tax context, if we pay off the state's credit card bills and reduce the size of our mortgage, we can restore our financial credibility, and use existing tax receipts to pay for services and tax relief rather than principal payments and interest charges,'' said mr. corzine, a former co-chairman of goldman sachs.  not surprisingly, the speech -- his first state of the state address since he took office a year ago -- dwelled largely on property taxes, an issue that has dominated the public agenda since mr. corzine delivered a similar address on the same subject in july.  not long after the governor delivered his speech, republicans, as well as some union leaders, were quick to criticize it.  still, there was no mistaking a growing sense of urgency among legislators, from fellow democrats and from republicans alike, that substantive changes were needed or that the public would hold them accountable when all 120 lawmakers face re-election in november.  ''it was a good speech, but we've heard it before,'' said senator joseph m. kyrillos jr., a republican from monmouth county who is a former state party chairman. ''we've got to translate some of the sensible and obvious ideas that the governor has talked about into action. the governor needs to be a wild man on these issues.''  on a lighter note, mr. kyrillos pointed out that mr. corzine had delivered a similar message in his inaugural address a year ago -- and on the same stage at the war memorial. ''we've got to stop meeting like this,'' he said.  mr. corzine began his speech by striking a more conciliatory and self-deprecating tone than he has in the past. wearing his trademark navy blue sweater-vest, he elicited more chuckles than usual with a smattering of inside jokes.  he also said he had learned that ''jersey girls don't pump gas'' -- a reference to his short-lived and highly unpopular proposal to introduce self-service gas pumps to the state -- one of only two that still shun the practice.  when mr. corzine listed some of the accomplishments of his first year in office -- providing funds for stem-cell research, reforming the child-welfare system, supporting same-sex civil unions and creating needle-exchange programs for people who are h.i.v. positive or have aids -- he drew several rounds of polite applause.  he also highlighted a number of other priorities, including renewing the garden state preservation trust, which allows the state to buy up farmland and open space; addressing gang violence; and reconfiguring the formula by which schools are financed.  but at the 19-minute mark of his 46-minute speech, mr. corzine started talking about the intricacies of his property tax proposals and selling or leasing state assets, and no one applauded until almost 20 minutes later.  the democratic-controlled legislature has already missed a self-imposed deadline of jan. 1 to pass a package of property tax reforms, and now legislative leaders say they will complete that task before mr. corzine's budget address on feb. 27.  daring the lawmakers to keep their word, the governor warned that if they failed, he would ask the public to tackle the task at a special constitutional convention this fall.  the assembly speaker, joseph j. roberts jr., later praised the speech as upbeat and optimistic, said that he was encouraged by the specifics on property taxes, and offered qualified support for the concept of selling some state assets, although he said he was concerned about the prospect of higher tolls and diverting drivers to other roads.  ''he zeroed in on what is the no. 1 challenge facing our state, laid out a road map in order for us to achieve it, and i don't think he could have been more direct or more forceful,'' mr. roberts said.  mr. corzine has been careful not to embrace the sale or lease of any particular asset. he intends to use the money earned to pay off the state's multibillion-dollar debt.  while the democrats, at least for now, embraced mr. corzine's proposals, republicans were sharply critical. the senate minority leader, leonard lance, said he was concerned that the democrats would try to borrow their way out of operating deficits.  and criticizing mr. corzine's fiscal management during his first year in office, mr. lance said the state was ''worse off than it was a year ago'' because of soaring property taxes.  ''i don't know how anybody can give the administration a passing grade yet in that matter,'' he said.  then there was the comic element to tuesday's speech. many legislators, who were grouped on stage behind mr. corzine and could not hear the speech, could be seen craning their necks over one another's shoulders to peek at the few advance copies in the hands of their colleagues.  ''when somebody's giving a 45-minute speech,'' said state senator thomas h. kean jr., a republican from union county, ''you'd like to be able to hear.''  