paid notice: deaths   resnick, mildred   resnick--mildred. the officers, trustees, clergy and staff of temple israel of the city of new york are deeply saddened by the passing of mildred resnick, mother of michele cohen, a devoted member of our congregation. we extend our sincerest condolences to michele and her husband, martin cohen, chairman of our board of trustees, as well as to their children, todd, adam, mollie and barrie. may her name be remembered always as a blessing. beth lee, president rabbi david j. gelfand  $(6$)resnick--mildred rothstein, of ellenville, new york and aventura, florida passed away on january 8, 2007 at age 90. loving wife of of the late louis resnick, devoted mother of myrna jargowsky wife of harold jargowsky, sheryl ronan wife of michael ronan, and michele cohen wife of martin cohen. ''meme'' to most but especially her grandchildren stacy and david jargowsky; amy aini, kerry and torey ronan; todd, adam, mollie and barrie cohen. grandchildren-in-law jacob aini and pauline o'connor. greatgrandmother to joseph, jared, elyse and jaqueline aini; and camryn and jordon ronan. beloved aunt mil to her nieces and nephews, sister-in-law to marcia and harry resnick, pauline rosenblum and ruth resnick. she was a special friend to most who knew her and unforgettable to all who met her. mildred was born february 23, 1916 in kerhonkson, new york. she was the sixth of seven children. she was raised on a farm in kerhonkson, moved to ellenville when she and louis resnick were married on february 7, 1943. they raised their three daughters in ellenville, ny, while starting channel master corporation. philanthropist, community activist and devoted democrat she was a major force in numerous community activities, among which were new paltz university, suny delhi, ulster county community college, and yeshiva zichron moshe. for 40 years mildred and lou were dedicated to the ellenville regional hospital; they were there at the beginning and recently with their support, the hospital was able to break ground on the new state-of-the-art emergency department. as a gift for her 90th birthday, the hospital board honored her by naming the women's health center after her. in lieu of flowers the family requests donations be made to the mildred resnick women's health center, ellenville regional hospital po box 688, ellenville, ny 12428.  $(6$)resnick--mildred. the officers, board of directors, and staff of uja-federation of new york mourn the passing of mildred resnick, beloved mother of michele cohen. the cohen's deep commitment to the jewish community and other humanitarian concerns is based on uncompromising standards of tzedakah. such compassionate generosity places the highest value not on the giver, but on the overwhelming influence of the gift, making a profound impact on our ability to care for those in need. we extend our heartfelt condolences to michele and martin; to their children, and to the entire family. morris w. offit, president susan k. stern, chair of the board john s. ruskay, exec. v.p. & c.e.o.  