setting the bar on earnings   the flow of earnings reports will pick up this week, but the earnings themselves are expected to show a dip in growth from past quarters. any impact on share prices may depend on investors' expectations about those expectations.  standard & poor's estimates that earnings for companies in its 500-stock index rose by 9 percent, year over year, in the fourth quarter. that would be a healthy gain, but also the worst one in nearly five years, said sam stovall, s.& p.'s chief investment strategist.  ''this would be the first quarter in 19 where we've had a single-digit advance,'' he said.  but it has not been 19 quarters, or even two, since analysts last forecast single-digit growth.  earnings estimates started off low for just about every quarter during the four-year bull market and then nudged up continually as fresh numbers came in. s.& p.'s forecast is close to those of other research firms, mr. stovall noted, but investors may still be disappointed if results meet expectations and nothing more.  ''earnings are not going to grow at double digits forever,'' he said. ''the real question is: is wall street prepared for the first single-digit advance in 19 quarters?''  one of the first big-name companies to report is alcoa, which mr. stovall likened to a corporate iowa for its status as a periodic bellwether.  s.& p. projects 150 percent earnings growth for aluminum producers, of which alcoa is the biggest, and a result in that neighborhood on tuesday would augur well for fourth-quarter earnings generally, and for 2007 economic activity, he said.  no triple-digit, or even double-digit, gain is foreseen for smaller companies. after increasing earnings at an annual rate of 17 percent or more in each quarter of last year, the s.& p. 600 index of smaller companies is expected to show growth of just 5 percent for the last quarter.  the gap in earnings growth is just one reason that mr. stovall expects investors to find larger companies more appealing than smaller ones this year. smaller companies' run of outperformance is looking long in the tooth after seven years, he said, and indications of softening economic conditions could steer investors toward the comparative safety that blue chips are thought to offer.  ''it's getting later in the stock market and economic cycle,'' he said. ''when sailing into an impending storm, sailors prefer a larger ship.''  data watch -- the highlight of a thin post-holiday economic calendar may be the report on wednesday of the nation's trade balance for november.  a bloomberg news poll of economists forecasts a widening deficit, to $60 billion from $58.9 billion in october.  retail sales for december, to be reported on friday, are expected to rise by 0.6 percent after a 1.0 percent increase in november.  market week  