the dome gains weight and settles down   bruce nelkin decided in the 10th grade that he would someday live in a geodesic dome, after seeing a picture of one in a science book. ''it looked like something out of 'star wars,' '' mr. nelkin said. ''i thought it was the coolest thing i'd ever seen, and i said to myself, 'when i grow up i'm going to build one of those.' ''  in 2003 he finally did. now mr. nelkin, 45, an internet marketer, and his wife, deana, live in a house made of two adjoining domes in pleasantville, n.y.  the pale gray hemispheres stand out like twin spaceships on a tree-lined street where all the other houses have pitched roofs. but inside, the house looks unexpectedly terrestrial, with overstuffed couches, hardwood floors and rustic fireplaces much like those of its neighbors.  the nelkins are among a growing group of americans who are building dream homes in the shape of geodesic domes, once a symbol of youthful rebellion but now one of aspiration for aging baby boomers.  hemispheres are sprouting up among the mock tudors and colonials of upscale neighborhoods across the country, from veneta, ore., where a company called oregon dome is building a development of 2,000-square-foot spec domes on suburban lots for around $200,000 each, to asheville, n.c., where american ingenuity, a florida company, is starting to put up an all-dome community. like tofu and yoga, the dome has evolved from countercultural funkiness to middle-class respectability.  first popularized in the 1950s by the designer and inventor buckminster fuller, who died in 1983, geodesic domes have long been appreciated by environmentalists for their energy efficiency and the way they provide the maximum amount of space with a minimum of material. in the 1960s and '70s, hippies built them in the wilderness, painting them in psychedelic patchworks; their rounded contours were seen as a retort to all things square or right-angled in western society.  the domes of the flower power era were rarely more than a standard 24 feet in diameter and cost less than $1,000 to build, according to jay baldwin, an early dome builder and dweller. but many new domes are sprawling mansions of more than 10,000 square feet, built on budgets of a million dollars or more.  ''the domes have gotten bigger and more expensive as people's incomes expanded,'' said dennis johnson, who founded natural spaces domes, a dome building company in north branch, minn., in 1978. in the past decade his clients have quadrupled in number, to about 200 a year.  like most modern homeowners, dome owners want plenty of space.  ''they want another bedroom,'' said robert singer, the president of timberline geodesics, a dome manufacturer in berkeley, calif. ''they want the home office, they want the entertainment room, they want the extra space in the basement, they want the large custom kitchen.''  two years ago, mr. singer said, his factory needed to run only seven months a year to meet the demand. now it operates full time to produce more than 50 houses annually, and he still can't fill all the orders.  many people are also requesting surprisingly conventional architectural accessories: dormer windows, cedar shingles, carriage lamps, gambrel-roofed entryways.  they want to stand out from the pack, it seems, but not too much; they want to reclaim their youth, but aren't willing to sacrifice the comforts of middle age. (mr. nelkin put a cupola on top of his dome, because, he said, it made the place look ''more homey'' and less like the kind of basic unembellished dome ''you might see in an oil refinery.'')  companies that sell kits for large-scale domes offer custom options like cupolas, balconies, rectangular additions for extra rooms and even matching minidomes for pets. but early dome builders like mr. baldwin see the new customized domes as bastardizations of fuller's concept.  ''i call them elephant droppings,'' he said. ''fuller's idea was that of a machine-made object, a pure geometry.''  most dome dwellers are not so picky.  tina gerard and wes dehnke, who own a 45-foot-diameter dome in river falls, wis., love its shape and the triangular framing inside. but when they were planning it they thought the outside looked too naked.  not anymore.  ''the castle turrets give the dome a whole other dimension,'' ms. gerard said.  pleasantville, n.y.  bruce nelkin and his wife, deana, an insurance underwriter, spent about half a million dollars building their double dome on a 1.64-acre lot in westchester county.  constructed by american ingenuity of rockledge, fla., which specializes in energy-efficient domes, the house is covered with four-inch-thick concrete panels and has seven-inch-thick polystyrene wallboard on the inside for added insulation.  it has 2,300 square feet of living space, including three bedrooms, a library and two offices, and although mr. nelkin admitted that they have had some trouble with leaks, he said the heating bills are minuscule.  the nelkins, left, who have a toddler and a baby on the way, designed the inside of the house for comfort. both science fiction fans, they were taken by the futuristic look of domes, but they modeled the interior on a vermont ski lodge.  ''purely futuristic would be cold and hard and too utilitarian,'' mr. nelkin said.  natural bridge, va.  pieter and jolanta van dijk plan to retire to their new double dome, a 4,200-square-foot house being built on 30 acres in western virginia, overlooking rolling farmland.  for the van dijks, who have lived in saudi arabia, indonesia and nigeria, the house represents a turning point.  ''we felt like we finally needed to shoot roots,'' said mrs. van dijk, 56, a native of poland.  the larger dome will house the main living area and a master bedroom; the smaller will contain a garage and a workshop where mr. van dijk plans to make most of the furniture for the house.  apart from the foundation, roofing and electrical work, the van dijks are doing all the labor themselves.  ''we needed a challenge,'' mrs. van dijk said.  ''if you have the right tools, it's not that difficult,'' added her husband, a 58-year-old dutch-born civil engineer, speaking by phone from dubai, where he is supervising the construction of a factory. ''you don't need a crane,'' he said, and all the parts are color-coded.  although the couple won't move in until the house is finished later in the year, mrs. van dijk, above, who studies spiritual healing, said she already has a strong connection to the house.  ''it feels better to be in a round space,'' she said. ''everything is open and flowing. you can't hide in the corners.''  bulverde, tex.  for larry sunn, a contractor, building a dome is ''a prestige kind of thing -- it's not like anybody else's house.''  he and his wife, margie, both 62, have never been hippies, and the 8,400-square-foot triple dome they are building in the texas hill country north of san antonio -- with a longhorn steer carved in stone over the fireplace, a holster for the hair dryer in the bathroom and a sink the shape of texas -- has cost some $1.3 million so far, they estimate.  this is the couple's second dome. they used to live in a 3,400-square-foot dome in california that mr. sunn built in 1980. they liked that one so much that when they retired and moved to texas in 2003, they decided to build another.  mr. sunn, above, noted that part of the dome's appeal, in addition to the ease of heating and cooling, is its structural soundness, which makes it resistant to storms and other natural disasters.  ''we aretrying to use the house to prepare us for catastrophe,'' he said. (they have installed a generator, a propane tank and a 5,000-gallon water tank, just in case.)  the combination of three domes allows enough space to accommodate workshops for mrs. sunn's embroidery business and mr. sunn's furniture making, in addition to living quarters.  and there are two garages, each with doors on both sides, so the sunns never have to back out.  murrysville, pa.  rob thompson, a retired computer software entrepreneur, idolized buckminster fuller and wanted to be an inventor when he was a boy. so when he was looking for a new project after retiring early and getting a divorce, he decided to design and build his own dome.  last fall, after two years of construction, mr. thompson, 52, far right, finally moved out of his 19th-century victorian house and into his new triple dome, near right.  the house, more than 10,000 square feet, sits on a wooded two-acre lot outside pittsburgh, its three domes circled like wagons around an open courtyard and connected by narrow corridors. the structure, which mr. thompson said cost $1.1 million to build, has six bedrooms as well as a kitchen and a great room -- and a 210-gallon fish tank built into the wall between them.  outside are a pond with waterfall in the central courtyard, a running and cycling track and a greenhouse where mr. thompson raises vegetables hydroponically. and the indoor pool, top, has its own dome -- ''for the kids,'' who are 11 and 13, mr. thompson said. ''i don't want them out roaming the streets.''  sedona, ariz.  when david walske, a 50-year-old writer, and his partner, rick goldstein, a 51-year-old film editor, built their vacation dome in the mid-1990s on a one-acre lot in the arizona desert, they saw it as a symbol of anarchy, mr. walske said, or at the very least, ''doing your own thing.''  the construction cost was about $200,000, mr. walske estimated -- not bad for a 2,500-square-foot house with two rectangular additions (an entry and a kitchen), a 30-foot-high ceiling and views of sedona's famous red-rock buttes.  domes have a reputation for being hard to sell, but last year, when mr. walske and mr. goldstein offered it on craigslist, it went for $670,000, roughly comparable to what a conventional, similar-size house on a one-acre lot in the same area would sell for, according to roy grimm, a sedona real estate agent. (mr. walske and mr. goldstein are now renovating a house near seattle.)  the buyers, john and cindy schofield, who relocated from bucks county, pa., where they were living in a 140-year-old victorian, maintain that they weren't trying to stand out, no matter what their friends thought. (''i didn't know you had a little hippie in you,'' one friend said.) they just wanted a house with character, mrs. schofield said.  