leadership tries to restrain fiefs in new congress   less than 24 hours after taking over as speaker, representative nancy pelosi summoned the new chairmen of five committees with responsibility for various aspects of iraq policy to her office to review and coordinate plans for hearings and inquiries.  the gathering on friday would have been unthinkable when democrats last controlled the house. in the days before the 1994 republican takeover, all-powerful democratic chairmen ruled their committees with impunity, doing what they wanted, when they wanted, with little regard to the views of the speaker or others in the upper ranks.  now the new democratic leaders of the house and senate want to avoid a return to that era by forging a working relationship with the men and women who will actually write the bills and lead the congressional investigations. top lawmakers acknowledge that finding a way to keep the overarching goals of the party from clashing with the objectives of the independent chairmen will be crucial to keeping democratic control from spiraling out of control.  ''the challenge of maintaining a coherent message even though the power in the senate is so diffuse is probably our major challenge,'' said senator charles e. schumer of new york, the senate's third-ranking democrat.  already there are signs of discord. senator max baucus of montana, the finance committee chairman who has been a headache for past democratic leaders, says he will plunge ahead with hearings next week on giving the government power to negotiate medicare drug prices with pharmaceutical companies -- a top democratic priority he has opposed and one the house plans to speed through with no new scrutiny.  ''if we want to do legislation, i want to get the facts first,'' said mr. baucus, who broke with colleagues in the past on the bush administration's tax cuts.  senator joseph i. lieberman of connecticut, who won re-election as an independent but kept his seniority within the democratic party and will lead the homeland security panel, is making his colleagues nervous as they consider his differences with many of them over the war and antiterror issues.  in the house, representative charles b. rangel of new york, who as chairman of the ways and means committee will be the gatekeeper for critical tax and social policy, suggested friday that he might revisit new democratic rules forcing lawmakers to disclose their sponsorship of tax breaks for small enterprises. and representative john d. dingell of michigan, the chairman of the energy and commerce committee, has broken with fellow democrats over the years on an issue likely to return in this session, imposing tougher mileage standards on automakers.  ''i am a member of the team and i am going to be a team player, but it is too early to see how it is going to develop,'' mr. dingell said of the new relationship between leadership and the chairmen.  during four decades of democratic rule ending in 1994, committee chairmen amassed almost unchallenged authority, often becoming more feared and influential than the elected leadership. they were nearly impossible to budge from their perches, and the concept of term limits was unimaginable. in a move that caught some new democratic chairmen by surprise, house rules pushed through by the democrats this week retained the six-year limit on chairmen imposed by republicans, but the leadership reassured lawmakers they would revisit the restrictions when there was less attention focused on the dawn of the democratic era.  mr. dingell is a holdover from those days of dominant democratic chairmen, men like dan rostenkowski on ways and means, jack brooks on judiciary and jamie whitten on appropriations. those and other lawmakers saw themselves as legislative forces and the leadership as a nuisance to be negotiated on the way to the floor. mr. dingell said his contemporaries in the days before republican rule were descendants of earlier strong-willed chairman like wilber mills.  ''we simply carried on a tradition which was there, which was accepted, which was proper and which, very frankly, worked,'' mr. dingell said.  but the delegation of such power to the chairmen came with a price. republicans derided democrats as arrogant and pushed the image of out-of-touch democrats as a campaign slogan, riding it and democratic gaffes to majority status in 1994.  once installed, the new republican leadership moved quickly to centralize power in the offices of speaker, majority leader and whip. they stripped chairmen of the power to control their own legislation, enacted term limits and forced prospective chairmen to plead their case with the leadership and bolster it with a record of campaign contributions.  incoming democrats said republicans went too far in diminishing the authority of chairmen and fostered arrogance at the leadership level.  now democrats say they hope to strike a more productive balance, giving chairmen some leeway as long as they operate in concert with their fellow committee leaders and with the leadership's approval.  ''it is the right mix,'' said representative barney frank, democrat of massachusetts and chairman of the financial services committee. ''we have to work together and we don't want to do things that are discordant, but the leadership should not micromanage.''  as an example, mr. frank said he informed mrs. pelosi that he intended to schedule oversight hearings quickly on administration problems in replacing housing along the gulf of mexico after hurricane katrina. mr. frank said he also planned initiatives to help lower-income americans buy housing and to give corporate shareholders more say in executive compensation.  representative henry a. waxman of california, the chairman of the oversight and government reform committee -- renamed to put the emphasis on oversight -- said he had no qualms about clearing his agenda with the leadership and believed such cooperation should not impinge on his own goals.  ''i don't think it is inconsistent,'' said mr. waxman, who said his panel would most likely begin hearings this month. ''we are going to pursue the most important theme we can deal with: whether taxpayers' money is wasted through fraud and abuse.''  through the meeting she convened on friday and conversations with other lawmakers, mrs. pelosi has shown she considers herself firmly in charge of the house and is not going to let the chairmen set the pace.  the initial democratic legislative program is not being routed through committee -- perhaps not even the rules committee. but mr. frank and others said the new chairmen were comfortable with that approach if it helped to make a quick impression. in general, house leadership aides said they believed they could keep the chairmen and the rank-and-file moving in tandem, though they expected some feuds. representative steny h. hoyer of maryland, the majority leader, has scheduled the first weekly meeting with house chairmen for tuesday.  tom daschle, the former senate majority leader who occasionally found himself at odds with committee leaders during his tenure, said communication was essential in a legislative body where lawmakers could be such independent operators.  ''the key is to just try to realize you are going to have low-maintenance and high-maintenance chairs and you have to work with both,'' mr. daschle said. ''you have to personalize your relationship with each or you are going to have trouble.''  mr. daschle, a close ally of senator harry reid of nevada, the new majority leader, said he was confident mr. reid had the skills to manage the sometimes delicate relationship. some incoming chairmen agree.  senator christopher j. dodd of connecticut, the chairman of the banking committee, said mr. reid had already diplomatically sounded him out on his plans. ''we are very much in sync on this,'' said mr. dodd, who is considering legislation to protect consumers from credit card marketing fraud and high-risk mortgages. ''i am not going to do anything without letting harry reid know what we are going to do.''  mr. baucus said he sees himself in broad agreement with mr. reid.  ''nine times out of 10, harry reid and i will agree,'' he said. ''but when we disagree, i have to do what is right. i am elected by the people of montana, and they are my employers.''  correction:  january 13, 2007, saturday  a front-page article on sunday about the power of committee leaders in congress misspelled the given name of a former democratic chairman of the house ways and means committee. he was wilbur mills of arkansas, not wilber.  