brooklyn man, 38, dies after jolt from police taser   the day after a disturbed man died after being shocked with a taser stun gun in queens by a police sergeant, a city police official yesterday provided a fuller account of the moments before the man apparently went into cardiac arrest.  the man, blondel lassegue, 38, a former schoolteacher, struggled with the police on sunday afternoon in a kitchen of a house near kennedy international airport. family members at the house said late yesterday that they would issue a statement today about the circumstances of mr. lassegue's death.  the nassau county medical examiner's office, which is investigating the death, said the cause had not been determined.  the sergeant who shot mr. lassegue appeared to have been following departmental guidelines, said chief michael collins, a new york police department spokesman. the taser is widely used by police departments to subdue people, although there have been questions about its safety. amnesty international says more than 220 people have died after being shot by tasers.  mr. lassegue, a deeply religious man who lived in flatbush, brooklyn, had a history of mental illness and, according to family members, had recently stopped taking his medication, chief collins said. four times in recent years, the police had been summoned to incidents involving mr. lassegue in brooklyn, he added.  shirley donis, mr. lassegue's sister, described him as a scholarly man who spoke seven languages, including the creole of his native haiti, had a master's degree in psychology, and studied theology. two weeks ago, she said, he went to las vegas to be ordained a pentecostal minister. she said he was a kind, gentle person.  ''he's a giver,'' she said. ''he doesn't go out. he's always preaching. he always says you need to go to church.''  on sunday afternoon, the police said, mr. lassegue visited his aunt and uncle at 240-12 141st avenue in rosedale, queens, on a tidy street lined with boxy houses and miniature lawns. he began behaving erratically, refused to leave and at one point grabbed a 1-year-old child, chief collins said.  the aunt called other relatives at mr. lassegue's home in brooklyn, who called 911, chief collins said.  a caravan of police cars and ambulances drove up around 5 p.m., drawing the attention of neighbors. sandy ronquillo crossed the street to the lassegue house and was met by mr. lassegue's uncle, clausel lassegue, who told her his nephew was ''acting crazy.''  chief collins offered the following account of the events inside the house:  four officers approached mr. lassegue in the kitchen to try to calm him down. he eventually agreed to be placed in handcuffs and taken to a hospital, but after the police had cuffed his left hand, he lashed out with his right, punching a sergeant in the face repeatedly.  the officers wrestled mr. lassegue down. ''they have his hands behind his back,'' chief collins said. ''they're sitting on his legs as he's kicking in the air.''  a second sergeant warned mr. lassegue that he would shoot him with the taser if he continued to resist. when he did, the sergeant fired a taser dart, which typically delivers a shock of 50,000 volts.  the officers were able to finish handcuffing mr. lassegue. paramedics had arrived, and they ''declared him o.k.,'' chief collins said. the paramedics left the room.  the police officers were preparing to carry mr. lassegue ''from the building when he becomes unresponsive,'' chief collins said. the paramedics were called back, but were unable to revive mr. lassegue. he was taken to franklin hospital medical center, just over the nassau county line in valley stream, where he was pronounced dead at 6:39 p.m.  the sergeant who was struck and the other three officers were treated for minor injuries. the 1-year-old child was unharmed. the names of the officers and sergeants were not released by the police.  the spokeswoman for the nassau county medical examiner's office, diane markunas, said that an autopsy was performed yesterday but that a finding on the cause of death awaited the results of toxicological and other tests.  the taser gun, which fires barbs attached to fine wires and is used by more than 10,000 police departments around the world, has been the subject of conflicting studies about its safety.  officials at taser international, which makes it, say that it has been tested on volunteers about 200,000 times, and that tests financed by the united states justice department found that the taser did not change heart rhythms or damage hearts. but a university of wisconsin study found last year that the guns' shocks applied directly to the hearts of healthy pigs could cause them to stop beating. chief collins said he did not know where the taser dart struck mr. lassegue.  correction:  january 10, 2007, wednesday  an article and headline yesterday about the death of a disturbed man who apparently went into cardiac arrest after being shot with a taser stun gun during a struggle with new york city police officers misidentified his borough of residence in some copies. he was from brooklyn, not queens.  