paid notice: deaths   vladeck, judith p.   vladeck--judith p. died in nyc on january 8th. a pioneering advocate for the rights of women, minorities, older workers, and all working people. she was a founding partner of the law firm of vladeck, waldman, elias and engelhard. a 1947 graduate of columbia law school, shewas the widow of stephen c. vladeck, a distinguished labor lawyer and founder of the firm. she is survived by her daughter and law partner anne vladeck, her sons bruce of nyc, and david of washington d.c., her daughters-in-law fredda vladeck, and mary pendergast, and five grandchildren: elizabeth, stephen, abigail, joseph, and thomas vladeck. a memorial service will be scheduled in the near future.  $(6$)vladeck--judith. the attorneys and staff of cary kane llp, mourn the passing of judith p. vladeck. her practice of law truly advanced the condition of women, workers, and unions in our society. she was an exceptional attorney: brilliant, charming, and determined. for those of us who were graced with the privilege of having worked with her, mrs. vladeck will always be remembered. we extend our condolences to anne, her daughter, and to bruce and david, her sons, as well as to her entire family. larry cary walter m. kane george a. kirschenbaum charles pergue  $(6$)vladeck--judith p. it is with profound sadness that we mourn the passing of our beloved senior partner, judith p. vladeck. mrs. vladeck was a pioneer for justice in the workplace and a true giant of the profession. in the course of her 60 year career, mrs. vladeck handled many benchmark cases dealing with sex, race and age discrimination and fearlessly challenged entire industries to change their ways. the efforts of mrs. vladeck did much to shape the labor laws of this country and improve the treatment of employees. mrs. vladeck touched the lives of countless clients and colleagues with her wise counsel and her thoughtful mentoring. we will never forget her. we extend our deepest sympathies to her daughter and our partner anne, as well as her sons bruce and david and her five grandchildren. vladeck, waldman, elias & engelhard, p.c.  $(6$)vladeck--judith. greater new york hospital association (gnyha) mourns the passing of judith vladeck, beloved mother of bruce vladeck, interim president, university of medicine and dentistry of new jersey, former united hospital fund president, former gnyha board of governors member, and esteemed colleague and friend. judith vladeck was a giant in new york's legal community and a longtime friend of gnyha. we send our deepest sympathies to bruce and the entire vladeck family. kenneth l. davis, m.d. chairman, gnyha kenneth e. raske, president gnyha  