new jersey's millstone   for new jersey's policy makers, the key to success in 2007 hangs on two words: property taxes. if the democratic-controlled legislature and gov. jon corzine can reduce and stabilize property taxes for the foreseeable future, they will be hailed for an achievement that has eluded trenton for years. if they do not, they will create even more dissatisfaction and cynicism from new jerseyans long fed up with high taxes and official corruption.  on paper, 2006 was a year of significant accomplishments. mr. corzine and the democrats enacted a long-stalled measure establishing a stem cell research program financed primarily through bonds, established civil unions for gays, and finally, after years of indifference, joined the 49 other states in approving a system of clean needle exchange to help drug addicts avoid the additional peril of aids. nevertheless, 2006 has to be considered a disappointment because the state did nothing about its crushing property taxes, which remain the highest in the country.  to get an idea of how bad things are, consider that 45 percent of the state's total tax revenue is raised from property taxes, compared with an average of about 30 percent for the rest of the nation. the owner of just a modest home in new jersey pays $6,000 a year or more in property taxes.  after boldly promising property tax reform by the end of the year, mr. corzine and the legislature failed to do much of anything. much of the fault lay with the governor himself. after challenging legislators to be bold in coming up with ways to cut spending, he undercut his party's leaders just as they were applying pressure to reluctant legislators to support a savings package that would help pay for tax reductions.  the package included proposed cuts in pension and health benefits for state employes. when mr. corzine announced that he would prefer to handle these matters through collective bargaining with the state employees' union, the legislation stalled and, with it, any momentum for tax reform by the governor's original dec. 31 deadline.  mr. corzine has set a new deadline of feb. 27. the challenge of reducing state employee pension and health benefits is now his alone. but unless he can persuade state employee representatives at the bargaining table to commit to some lasting cuts, it's difficult to see how he can stabilize property taxes for more than a year or two, if that.  both houses of the legislature are scheduled to reconvene tomorrow to consider other bills essential for property tax reduction, all of them controversial. for starters, there are bills to impose about a 4 percent ceiling on annual property tax increases, which many local officials and teacher representatives do not like, and to establish a state comptroller to monitor all state spending. mr. corzine says both measures must pass before he will go along with the legislature's wish for property tax rebates starting at 20 percent for families earning $100,000 or less. democratic leaders said last week that they would support the proposals.  other measures aimed at saving money would change the formula for state aid to school districts, encourage the consolidation of school districts and municipal services, and give county school superintendents greater powers to control spending by school districts.  obviously, there are other pressing needs that must be addressed in 2007. one is the urgency to replenish the soon-to-be-exhausted bond fund for purchasing tracts of open space. mr. corzine, though supportive of preserving open space, understandably had hoped to defer action on this until he could bring order to the state's overall fiscal mess. but unless new jersey, the most densely populated state in the nation, moves quickly to buy available land, there will be no desirable tracts left to save.  the legislature must also give renewed attention to ethics reform, which the governor singled out for priority in his inaugural address but which has made little progress since then. despite a continuing scandal at the state's medical college and the jailing of one of the state's most powerful democratic political leaders, several essential bills, including those to ban dual office-holding by elected officials and take away the pensions of public officials convicted of corruption, remain bottled up.  then there is the need for the state to give support to newark's newly elected reform mayor, cory booker, who represents the city's best and probably last chance for resurgence. mr. corzine can help him immensely by making sure that any new state school aid formula does not undercut the current emphasis on giving financial help to urban schools and their students.  for the next two months, however, mr. corzine and the legislature must focus on property tax reform. there are promising signs, including mr. corzine's frank confession that his record for 2006 was ''incomplete,'' thereby suggesting a willingness to learn from past mistakes; and another is that his democratic party has large enough majorities in both the senate and assembly to pass a tax reform package. the challenge now is to enact it.  new jersey  