the neediest cases; a mother helped the homeless. then she joined them.   it was like going through the looking glass. not long ago, brenda francis, who had worked in shelters helping the homeless, found her world turned upside down when she and her teenage son, bryant dukes, were suddenly left without a home.  it was a result of a chain of unfortunate events, spiraling out of control from the heart attack and sudden death in 2003 of maurice dukes, 51, her longtime partner and the father of her two children. ''he died the day after valentine's day,'' recalled ms. francis, 50.  they met as teenagers in the early '70s in fairy tale style on the grand concourse in the bronx, outside the building where ms. francis, then in high school, lived with her sisters and her mother, who worked for the port authority. ms. francis fondly remembered the diner her grandparents owned on linden boulevard in queens, george's, where james brown's son used to eat.  after ms. francis graduated, she joined the army reserve. in 1975, she and mr. dukes had a daughter, shartel dukes, who now has a family of her own.  brenda francis always knew that she wanted to help people. throughout her career, she enjoyed steady employment as the office manager at volunteers of america, a shelter in the bronx, and at several other shelters. she also worked as a consultant, helping nonprofit organizations set up their tax exemption status. mr. dukes received disability assistance because of kidney problems.  their son, bryant, now 14, is an eighth grader. he loves basketball and hopes to become a graphic designer. bryant started off in preschool and kindergarten at a private school, which both mother and son remember fondly as a rigorous environment where he was taught french and spanish. but at $4,000 a year, ms. francis could not continue to pay.  the family lived in manhattan, on riverside drive and 135th street, until a young woman was raped and murdered in their building. seeking secure and affordable housing, they moved from borough to borough until settling in the bronx in 1996.  after mr. dukes's death, ms. francis slipped into depression and, with less income, fell behind on the rent. the family had little savings. what they did have paid for mr. duke's burial. ''he still doesn't have a tombstone,'' ms. francis said.  although they never wed, ms. francis called mr. dukes her husband. she said the reason she did not marry was her feminist politics. ''back then i didn't believe in marriage,'' she said, noting that if they had married, she would have been better protected financially.  to cushion the downward spiral that she felt coming, she put the family's belongings -- the contents of six rooms -- into storage, while she and bryant went to stay in the home of a friend, a pastor. she thought the situation would allow her to get back on her feet.  instead, ms. francis said that she found the lifestyle unsuitable for her son, and in september 2004 they moved to a bronx shelter.  what was strange about her plunge, she said, was that she had heard the same story many times from people she had counseled. citing the difficulties of negotiating the welfare system, ms. francis said that shortly after arriving at the shelter, she found a two-bedroom apartment with a big kitchen, and hoped to relocate by putting her shelter assistance toward it. ''i like to cook,'' she said. ''it was the nicest place i'd seen for this neighborhood.''  although the apartment met all of the transfer guidelines, ms. francis said, her application was denied.  ms. francis and bryant transferred to volunteers of america, where she had worked and where she felt safer. there, her old energy kicked in and she started doing taxes for other shelter residents. ''all i brought was my old trusty word processor,'' she said.  by june 2005, ms. francis had saved some money and found an apartment in the wakefield section of the bronx. but when she and her son got to their new home, they slept on the floor because they did not have the $850 needed to retrieve their belongings from storage, having received only $250 in public assistance.  ms. francis contacted community service society of new york, one of the affiliate charities of the new york times neediest cases fund. the fund came to the rescue with $600 to help her rebuild her home.  finding a safe and nurturing place for her son remains a challenge, she said, calling the public high schools in the neighborhood ''places i wouldn't send my dogs and cats to.''  ms. francis is more determined than ever to help. ''i'm going to run for office to make a difference,'' she said. ''i want to change welfare and stop the throwing away of taxpayer money.''  back on her feet, operating an administrative business out of her home office, ms. francis said she was planning to run for the state assembly in 2008. ''it happens,'' she said. ''you never know.''  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  previously recorded: $5,782,266.54  recorded friday: 273,255.91  total: $6,055,522.45  last year to date: $5,546,619.56  