a sizzling six months for technology shares   someone somewhere must have rung a bell last summer.  in mid-july, technology stocks, many of them moribund for years, suddenly woke up and began a rally that lifted the nasdaq composite index by more than 18 percent by year-end. even sluggish behemoths like cisco systems and microsoft, which had barely stirred for years, joined the advance.  but how long can the rally last? previous tech surges, in 2003 and 2005, eventually faded, and even with the recent advance, the tech-laden nasdaq still ended 2006 at less than half its bubbly march 2000 peak. mindful of such short-lived catch-up rallies and of tech's traditional year-end strength, some managers of the fourth quarter's best-performing tech mutual funds urge caution.  ''we've had a very good rally; we might see some profit-taking in the early part of this year,'' said dan c. chung, portfolio manager of the sm&r alger technology fund , which was up 10.7 percent in the quarter.  ''the easy money has been made,'' added arieh coll, manager of the eaton vance growth fund, who has made some. his fund was up 14.3 percent for the quarter.  but the earnings fundamentals for many technology stocks appear strong, and some fund managers say a host of developing product sectors could sustain a longer rally. technology companies in the standard & poor's 500-stock index achieved median earnings growth of about 14 percent in the third quarter, versus the period a year earlier, said dirk van dijk, director of research at zacks equity research. expectations run high for 2007 as well, with analysts polled by zacks expecting a median gain of 16 percent for tech companies in the s.& p. 500.  at the market peak in 2000, many large tech companies sold at 60 times or more expected earnings. most multiples are now in the 17-to-18 range, said telis d. bertsekas, manager of the mfs technology fund, adding that such numbers are reasonable for companies with ''premium growth profiles.'' his fund was up 10.2 percent in the fourth quarter.  christopher k. mchugh, lead portfolio manager of the turner new enterprise fund, which was up 8.6 percent in the quarter, remarked that ''time does cure all things,'' even the post-bubble collapse of technology stocks. the rally has fed off of new consumer electronics gadgetry, which has broadened the base of technology sales, he said. citing the ubiquity of ipods and digital cameras, mr. mchugh said, ''six years ago there was no digital lifestyle as we know it today.''  he expects technology to be one of the top-performing industry groups this year. among his big winners last quarter was nvidia, the maker of graphics chip sets used in pcs, hand-held devices and video game players. nvidia should benefit from microsoft's new vista operating system, which puts a premium on graphics. another plus for nvidia was the announcement in july that advanced micro devices would buy ati technologies, which also makes graphics chips. that deal could help nvidia win business from intel, he said. ''intel will be reluctant to use ati graphic chip sets in the next generation because they're owned by their competitor.''  analysts expect nvidia to earn $1.39 a share for the full 2006 calendar year and $1.65 for 2007. ''i definitely think there's upside to that $1.65,'' mr. mchugh said. nvidia shares were up 18.9 percent for the fourth quarter.  the most encouraging tech story for many investors was the revival of cisco systems. from march 2000 to october 2002, the company's shares tumbled to less than $9 from $80, then struggled to crawl back. ''in the last quarter, people decided cisco has emerged from the networking downturn stronger than most of its competition,'' said mr. chung, who said he began buying the stock just over a year ago at an average cost in the ''high teens.'' cisco climbed to $27.33 from $23 in the fourth quarter.  mr. bertsekas of mfs technology also owns cisco. he said its growth potential exceeds that of other large-cap techs, including microsoft, because cisco has benefited greatly from its acquisition of scientific-atlanta, a maker of cable set-top boxes. this has given cisco a stronger presence in the cable market, in addition to its position as a supplier of equipment to telecom companies. ''they're the arms merchants in the war between cable and telecom companies,'' mr. bertsekas said.  also flourishing on sales to two industries is memc electronic materials, whose silicon wafers are used by semiconductor and solar cell producers. memc, whose share price has nearly doubled this year and posted a 6.8 percent gain for the fourth quarter, is the largest holding in the eaton vance growth fund. ''demand in solar is growing at 100 percent per year,'' creating a shortage of wafers, said mr. coll, the fund's manager. ''if the solar demand keeps growing at these phenomenal rates, the shortage could get worse.''  though memc and others are expanding their production capacity, mr. coll does not expect that expansion to be complete until 2008.  the eaton vance fund also had a big winner in research in motion, the maker of the blackberry. it introduced a new model called the blackberry pearl, which could reach a broader consumer market than older models that appealed primarily to business users.  mr. mchugh began buying the stock for his fund in september and says he does not expect to sell soon. he says he believes that r.i.m. may soon announce a technology licensing or joint product development deal with apple computer.  still, tech stocks generally have come a long way, so mr. mccoll said it would be wise to be cautious. ''the risk-reward ratio for tech stocks in the summertime was excellent,'' he said. ''one should be more careful now.''  mutual funds report  