the neediest cases; mother and two teenagers make the most of cramped spaces and unlimited goals   life is tight in the small apartment. tight physically. tight financially. but there is still room for large aspirations.  ''i want to have combined majors in mechanical and computer engineering and a minor in business,'' dorichel rodriguez, a high school senior and one of two teenage daughters living in the apartment with their mother, said recently.  sitting at a table in the compact living room, dorichel, 17, told of having completed applications to 15 colleges, including three in the ivy league, and of beginning the suspenseful wait to hear from them.  ''i want to be a robotics technician,'' she said. ''i'm interested in artificial intelligence.''  her sister, marielle, 15, a high school freshman, said she did not know what kind of career she wanted, though she likes astronomy and aerospace engineering. in any case, she is sure she wants to go to college.  next to her on the couch, their mother, dorila rodriguez, 57, a factory worker who speaks only spanish, said through dorichel that she wanted her daughters to have college educations so that they would be able to support themselves, ''no matter what happens.''  the couch is where dorila rodriquez sleeps in the one-bedroom apartment in hamilton heights, a neighborhood in upper manhattan immediately south of washington heights. the daughters use the bedroom, sleeping in a bunk bed. the kitchen is tiny.  ms. rodriguez and her daughters immigrated from the dominican republic in 1998, joining ms. rodriguez's husband -- the girls' father -- who came to the united states earlier. the couple have since divorced, and ms. rodriguez and her daughters have had to make limited means go a long way.  ms. rodriguez said that she brought home less than $1,000 a month, after taxes, from her job at a factory that produces body care products. the family gets nearly $300 worth of government food stamps each month, and more than half the total of about $1,300 goes to pay the $738 a month rent.  dorichel's earnings from two after-school jobs -- a total of about 10 hours a week at $7.50 an hour -- help a little, and the family has medicaid coverage for doctors' bills. but unforeseen expenses can still be hard to deal with, as in one recent instance.  ms. rodriguez and her daughters have the status of noncitizen residents of the country, and in august, dorichel discovered that she had lost her resident alien card, the important document known as a green card, which permits noncitizens to live and work legally in the united states. the family did not have the $260 in fees needed to replace it, and the children's aid society, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund, tapped the fund to cover the fees.  this short-term aid was only one of the ways that children's aid has played a role in the family's life. both daughters participate in the organization's hope leadership academy, an after-school program that is based in east harlem and draws teenagers, mainly from upper manhattan and the bronx, with its educational, cultural and recreational programs.  it also offers its participants training to become peer educators, a role in which they lead workshops and give talks at school and community group sites on subjects like sex education, drug abuse, gang violence and racism.  dorichel joined the leadership program after learning about it during her freshman year at manhattan center for science and mathematics, a public high school, also in east harlem, where children's aid is among the organizations that collaborate on a variety of after-school programs.  as a peer educator in the hope leadership program, dorichel conducts a weekly session on sex education and pregnancy prevention. she thinks she can be more effective than an adult in getting the points across, she said, because the teenage audiences ''relate to me more than to an adult.''  recently, she won a $5,000 community service grant for the program from the new york jets. she said she would use the money for items like books and videos and possibly to organize a conference on sex education in which groups that focus on the issue would participate.  marielle became involved with the leadership program last year, while still in middle school, and takes its culinary, dance and drama classes. both sisters have separately gone on group trips to germany that the program organizes and that organizations in germany pay for.  dorichel said the trip to germany was a ''great experience'' that showed her the commonalities of teenagers in different cultures.  ''it's a different country and a different language,'' she said, ''but i found that a lot of them are into hip-hop.''  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556- 1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  previously recorded: $6,055,522.45  recorded monday: 176,414.63  total: $6,231,937.08  last year to date: $5,834,053.56  