blasts from the bebop past of an elusive trumpeter   disappearing acts are not uncommon in jazz, but dizzy reece is an extreme case. a jamaican-born trumpeter who first made his name in london in the mid-1950s, mr. reece briefly enjoyed a reputation as a formidable voice in hard bop. he made four strong albums for blue note in the eisenhower era, three with top-shelf american rhythm sections. but then came a period of struggle, followed by unexplained oblivion. for much of the last 40 years, mr. reece has essentially led a nonpublic life.  small wonder that his concert on friday night at the rubin museum of art had all the makings of a triumphant return. it was his first headlining appearance in new york in many years, and the museum's auditorium was impressively packed. in addition to his re-emergence, mr. reece was announcing the release of ''nirvana,'' an album recorded 40 years ago. it was also his 76th birthday, another cause for celebration.  unfortunately, he was leading a pick-up quartet that seemed unrehearsed and undernourished. his trumpet playing, though competent on a technical level, sounded similarly off. and instead of playing material from ''nirvana'' -- which, with its eastern haze of sitar, koto and tambura, might have been appropriate in a museum of tibetan art -- he opted for the familiar comfort of by-the-book bebop.  but he didn't take much comfort in it, despite the ministrations of the pianist mike longo and the bassist lee hudson. mr. reece seemed troubled by the chord structures of standards like ''you stepped out of a dream.'' during an eight-bar stretch of his solo in ''star eyes'' he held his trumpet at waist level, eyes downcast, as if waiting for the song's bridge to pass. undermined by the unsteady drumming of jimmy wormworth, ''on green dolphin street'' found mr. reece without much to say; at one point he quoted '' 'round midnight,'' the set's previous tune, in a way that defied harmonic sense.  the most frustrating aspect of the performance was the fresh memory of mr. reece in his prime. two years ago his blue note albums were reissued as a comprehensive and compelling three-disc set (''mosaic select: dizzy reece,'' available at mosaicrecords.com). they make an airtight case for his talent, as does ''asia minor,'' a 1962 album for prestige that's still in print. mr. reece's old output also attests to his considerable gift as a composer, sadly unacknowledged on friday night.  given the rigors of his instrument and the challenges of the music, no one should expect mr. reece to be battle-ready after so many years off the scene. but he still has some obstacles to surmount, as he seemed to realize incrementally as the night wore on. three songs into the second set, he was looking at his watch and musing that his time must be up. turning to mr. longo, he gruffly suggested ''something short'' as a final song.  though the audience had thinned, the remaining listeners gave mr. reece a generous round of applause. ''we hope to see you another time,'' he said. looking a bit ashen, he added: ''it always can be better. next time, we'll probably take it a little further out.''  music review  