the preteen: betwixt and bedeviled   the debate over how to educate young adolescents is about as stubborn and mercurial as a 13-year-old.  first, educators created junior high schools, believing preteens needed to be treated like adults. but those students weren't ready to be treated as high school students, either. so reformers created the concept of middle schools, which were supposed to be a warm bath to ease the transition. now, an increasing number of schools across the country, including in baltimore and philadelphia, are shifting the middle grades back to elementary school.  but some research suggests that may not be the solution, either. so the age-old issues persist, with some variation from decade to decade: surging hormones make students irritable and sleepy. they struggle to relate to their peers and gain independence from their parents. to hear some parents tell it, one day their babies are innocent elementary schoolers in overalls, the next they're dressing like paris hilton and simulating sex on the middle-school dance floor. how do you solve a problem like adolescence? is there anything schools can do?  the move toward middle schools, after the push for junior high that started in the late 19th century, was supposed to create environments that were more serious than the story-hour life of elementary schools, though less impersonal and confidence-zapping than the controlled chaos of high schools.  while middle schools still have their defenders, they have fallen out of favor after various studies showed that they actually sapped self-esteem and fostered bullying. and academically, performance on standardized tests plummeted from fourth to eighth grades.  some argue the problem is adolescence itself. but jaana juvonen, a psychologist at the university of california, los angeles, and an author of a 2004 rand corporation report largely critical of middle schools, said that claim ignores international evidence. canadian students, for example, outperform their counterparts in the united states, and report liking school better. ''if it were truly biological,'' she said, ''we would see similar kinds of behavior happening across similar cultures.''  returning middle grades to k-8 schools, she believes, would address some behavioral problems. because some girls look like women at 13, ''we assume that they are more cognitively and socially mature, but we may be misled,'' she said. the earlier these students are put among older students, she added, ''the earlier they start doing various kinds of risky behavior.''  leon botstein, president of bard college and a longtime proponent of restructuring high schools, criticizes middle schools as ''babysitting masked as learning.''  ''the curriculum has been so dumbed down, there's no alternative to the allure of pop culture,'' he said. ''the bumping and grinding on the dance floor is not a reflection of moral degradation; it's because there's a vacuum.''  the same problems don't exist, he said, among students who take a deep interest in extracurricular activities like chess or music. mr. botstein, who has long argued to abolish the last two years of high school, would reorganize schools into two segments: kindergarten through sixth grade, and 7th through 10th grades. but even those who argue for changing grade structures warn that it may not be the complete answer. in a study of the philadelphia schools, which have a mix of middle and k-8 schools, academic achievement remained consistent between the two models, said christopher weiss, a sociologist at columbia and an author of a paper comparing them.  ''no one has ever really been happy with the kind of schooling dedicated to ages 12-15,'' mr. weiss said, ''we're in this constant churning. in 20 years we could be having the same conversation about the return of the middle school.''  rather than moving students between buildings or reconfiguring grades, he said, it might make more sense to spend money to hire more guidance counselors, or to consider curriculum changes.  ms. juvonen argues that ''looping,'' where the same teacher follows the same group of students through several grades, could help provide extra support. and research shows that volunteering may work: children who used to being helped take pride in becoming the helpers.  proponents of middle schools also argue that too much focus has been on the organization of schools.  ''historically, there's been this notion that middle-school advocates were advocating for a more personalized environment, and that's it,'' said anthony jackson, a co-author of ''turning points,'' a 1989 carnegie corporation report considered the most vigorous defense of the middle school. ''that's never been the case.''  in a follow-up report in 2000, the authors emphasized the need for more academic rigor, including higher standards and more teacher training.  ''people heard the message about a more personal environment, but they didn't hear the part about why we're doing it, which is that we need to be able to instruct kids better,'' he said. ''you can move people into different boxes pretty easily, but the real changes are much harder.''  the nation  