arrest of activist troubles hartford officials   the arrest of a political activist and freelance journalist at the inaugural parade of gov. m. jodi rell last week has raised questions about a state law enforcement list of people who pose potential threats to the government.  the activist, kenneth krayeske, 33, was arrested during the governor's parade in downtown hartford last wednesday, after the hartford police said they saw him step toward mrs. rell in a threatening manner. he was charged with breach of peace and interfering with an officer.  according to the arrest report, the city police had been briefed by the state police and the connecticut intelligence center, which includes federal, state and local law enforcement personnel, about ''possible threats'' to the governor from political activists, including mr. krayeske. it could not be determined which agency created the list. neither the state police nor the intelligence center would comment about it on monday.  mrs. rell and several democratic leaders questioned the arrest on monday, asking the state police to provide more information. they said they were ''troubled'' and ''disturbed'' by news reports of the arrest, which surfaced on friday.  in a letter to the state public safety commissioner, leonard c. boyle, the head of the connecticut state police, mrs. rell, a republican, asked for an explanation of how mr. krayeske first came to the attention of state law enforcement personnel.  ''in providing security and protection, we cannot permit the rights of individuals to be trampled,'' mrs. rell wrote. ''the parade was a public event, and moreover, an event at which public participation was invited. people also have a right to protest -- and that right is one of the fundamental freedoms of our state and nation.''  according to the police report, mr. krayeske sped to the parade route on his mountain bike and quickly jumped off it to walk onto pearl street as the parade was passing.  but a lawyer for mr. krayeske, norman a. potts, disputed the police account, saying his client had been acting as a journalist. mr. krayeske stepped to the middle of the street and took several photographs of mrs. rell, which he later posted on the internet, mr. potts said. other journalists and supporters marched alongside the governor during the parade.  mr. krayeske, who helped run the gubernatorial campaign of clifford w. thornton jr., the green party candidate, has been arrested in the past for civil disobedience. in a post on a local political blog, mr. krayeske suggested that he was planning to protest at the governor's inaugural ball.  according to the police report, officers monitoring the parade recognized mr. krayeske from a photograph provided by the state police and the connecticut intelligence center. democrats harshly criticized the actions of law enforcement officers, saying they would hold a hearing to determine how the list had been created and who is on it.  representative michael p. lawlor, chairman of the general assembly's joint judiciary committee, suggested that the police had detained mr. krayeske to prevent him from showing up at the inaugural ball.  ''i think this was motivated more by politics than it was by law enforcement,'' he said. ''this is not the profile of an assassin.''  nancy mulroy, a spokeswoman for the hartford police department, defended the arrest, saying, ''in this day and age, you cannot expect to act with erratic behavior and not expect law enforcement to take notice.''  correction:  january 11, 2007, thursday  an article on tuesday about a controversy over the arrest of a political activist, kenneth krayeske, during the inaugural parade of gov. m. jodi rell of connecticut, misstated his age and misstated the surname of his lawyer. mr. krayeske is 34, not 33, and his lawyer is norman a. pattis, not potts.  