this time, a true strategy for iraq?   to the editor:  re ''past time to get real on iraq'' (editorial, jan. 9):  i agree that president bush must present a truly new strategy on iraq, but how will we know if it is new, inasmuch as the present strategy, if it is a strategy at all, is ill defined, nebulous and unclear to me and many other americans?  mr. bush has talked of ''victory'' and ''finishing the job'' but has been unable to explain those terms to make them comprehensible.  let us hope that ''the new way forward'' is indeed a strategy and not just ''stay the course'' all dressed up in different clothing.  chase webb  gresham, ore., jan. 9, 2007  to the editor:  you urge president bush to acknowledge that there are no remaining military solutions. i beg to differ.  placing iraqi soldiers along the borders of iran and syria would greatly diminish the number of foreign insurgents and weapons entering iraq. and america's recent investment in technology to secure our own borders could help iraq do the same.  ryan houston  san jose, calif., jan. 9, 2007  to the editor:  you write, ''if the voters sent one clear message to mr. bush last november, it was that it is time to start winding down america's involvement in this going-nowhere war.''  there was more to the message than that.  keeping in mind that the president has repeated on a number of occasions that his successor will inherit this war, and his plans for escalation confirm this strategy, the antiwar message sent by the voters clearly states that the newly elected members of congress must do all within their power to bring an end to this war that has so dishonored our country and that nothing should be ''off the table.''  morris roth  fort lee, n.j., jan. 9, 2007  to the editor:  the only way the war in iraq will be won is through intensive, well-focused military operations led by united states military forces supported by iraqi troops.  the proposed united states troop ''surge'' is essential to quelling the violence and killing off the insurgents and the forces of al qaeda in iraq. the sooner we can get these troops there, the better.  those in congress who oppose the increase are doomed to defeat in their attempts to lose this war. this is a war that can be won.  we should be emboldened by the events in somalia, where the islamists are on the run and heavy casualties are being taken by qaeda forces.  assuming that the american military is unleashed in iraq, we can have the same victorious results as in somalia, and destroy the iraqi incubation grounds for radical islam.  i completely support the american troop buildup in iraq and believe that our troops should be given the freedom to win the war.  bob jack  north las vegas, nev.  jan. 9, 2007  to the editor:  re ''quagmire of the vanities'' (column, jan. 8):  paul krugman is right: gambling on the iraq war is much easier ''when the lives at stake are those of other people's children.'' except that it is my son, a 20-year-old united states marine stationed in falluja, whose life is being gambled with.  it is my son whose blood may yet protect the egos of men who won't admit that they were wrong. and it is my son whose 3,000-plus comrades-in-service have already paid the ultimate price for fighting another nation's civil war.  after four years of pointless, fruitless, uninstigated combat, if president bush indeed escalates the ''sacrifice'' of other parents' beloved children -- against all reason, against the will of the electorate and without any personal sacrifice to call his own -- it would not be vanity. it is called tyranny.  donna j. anton  hayle, england, jan. 8, 2007  to the editor:  i would like to suggest another reason besides vanity that president bush and his advisers won't let go of their ''surge'' idea in iraq.  to do so would be to face up to the enormity of their error -- some 3,000-plus of america's finest and untold numbers of iraqis killed all because of our leadership's blind ignorance.  better to try to prove to oneself that this was not in vain, one more time, even if it means sacrificing still more people for nothing.  george kalbouss  columbus, ohio, jan. 8, 2007  to the editor:  at the risk of giving the president more credit than he deserves, i would suggest that shrewd politics shaped his ''surge strategy'' as much as the dysfunctional traits suggested by paul krugman.  president bush's request for more troops presents the democrats with a true dilemma. if they support the surge, then they share the blame when the strategy fails. and if they do not support it -- say, by cutting off money -- then the president can gleefully blame them for undercutting his ''winning strategy'' just when it was going to turn the tide in our favor.  jay kirschenbaum  new york, jan. 8, 2007  to the editor:  re ''in days before hanging, a push for revenge and a push back from the u.s.'' (news article, jan. 7):  how inept are we? a genocidal maniac comports himself with dignity at his execution and is elevated to martyrdom.  we and our iraqi allies, who failed to anticipate that some shiite witnesses might heap scorn on saddam hussein and celebrate his execution with cellphone videos, are portrayed throughout the arab world as disrespectful incompetents.  it is incomprehensible how our leadership allowed us to lose the war of perceptions to a dead mass murderer.  arnold lakind  north brunswick, n.j., jan. 7, 2007  