antismoking group gives new york high marks   new york ranks second in the nation in the strength of its antitobacco laws, and new jersey and connecticut are also well above average, according to a report to be released today by the american lung association.  but the annual rankings, given as letter grades a through f in four categories, show how far the country remains from achieving the lung association's goals. even some states with the highest average grades over all received f's in some areas, and 18 states received f's in three out of four subjects, or in all four.  over all, new york had three a's and a b. for the second year in a row, maine had all a's, the only state to earn those marks.  new york moved up the rankings by nearly doubling its spending on antitobacco programs in the budget passed last spring to more than $87 million, with the money paying for things like television ads urging people to quit smoking. new york had received an f in that category in 2005, but on the new report card, it is one of nine states to get an a.  even most of the high-scoring states fall far short of what the federal centers for disease control and prevention recommend that states spend on antismoking efforts. new jersey and connecticut both received fs for spending on antitobacco programs, as did most states.  new york got an a for banning smoking in workplaces, restaurants and bars. new jersey, which enacted such a law last year, also got an a in that category, and connecticut a b.  the report card favored states with high cigarette taxes, and new jersey got an a, with the highest tax in the country, which rose last year to $2.575 a pack. connecticut and new york received b's. for the first time, the report says, the average state tax topped $1 a pack last year.  when new york raised its tax to $1.50 a pack in 2002, it was the highest in the country; now, it is not in the top 10. but the grade did not take into account local taxes like the one levied by new york city, which is also $1.50 a pack. the combined state and local tax of $3 is one of the country's highest.  new york and connecticut were among five states to get a's for laws to prevent minors from buying tobacco products. new jersey got an f.  