recalling rosemary clooney, fondly and lyrically   come gather round the kitchen table and soak in the showbiz tales of your wise and funny grandma rose: that describes the welcoming spirit of a typical late-career performance by the singer rosemary clooney, who died in june 2002. by that time, she had evolved from a demure '50s ''thrush'' into an embracing, matriarchal force of nature. an audience became her extended family, encouraged to rest its collective head in her lap as she poured out musical bedtime stories for grown-ups. though written by others, those stories, told in her voice, came across as nuggets of personal experience.  because clooney was a peerless reader of such yarns, it made sense that lyrics & lyricists, the 92nd street y's long-running popular-music series, should make a detour from its usual focus on songwriters to examine the career of a singer whose interpretations had the naturalness and fluency of spoken conversation. rooted in the steady pulse of big-band swing, that conversation allowed plenty of room for reflection but none for self-pity.  ''the last girl singer: rosemary clooney and her way with words,'' which opened lyrics & lyricists' 2007 season, was also the first full-scale new york concert tribute to clooney since her death. deborah grace winer, a friend of clooney's who has written extensively about her, gathered the singer's band, led by the pianist john oddo, along with a strong cast that included james naughton, john pizzarelli, paula west, karen ziemba and clooney's daughter-in-law debby boone.  carefully matched with their material, the singers offered their personal variations on clooney's humane outlook. at sunday evening's show (the third of five), ms. west, scooping notes from the bottom of her thick jazz contralto, offered the finest performance, a penetrating ''god bless the child,'' accompanied by mr. pizzarelli's spare guitar.  that interpretation followed the evening's saltiest anecdote, in which ms. winer told about an afternoon a pregnant clooney spent with billie holiday, drinking gin and orange juice and smoking cigarettes. at the end of their visit, holiday asked to be godmother of the unborn child and remarked, ''it takes a bad woman to be a good godmother.''  in other memorable performances, mr. naughton channeled his inner joe williams for a rugged ''i ain't got nothin' but the blues.'' the high point of the novelty section found ms. ziemba twinkling and twirling her skirt and dancing a comic tarantella as she sang ''mambo italiano.''  mr. pizzarelli crooned and played a light, delicate ''dindi.'' ms. boone, considerably more poised than in her cautious 2005 cabaret tribute, ''reflections of rosemary,'' at feinstein's at the regency, offered renditions of ''i wish it so'' and ''but beautiful,'' whose plainspoken directness mirrored clooney's. throughout, ms. winer wove the songs together with meticulously assembled songwriting information and biographical tidbits.  if the show was one of the more successful lyrics & lyricists concerts, the format, in which singers are stiffly shuffled into pairs and groups who self-consciously enter and exit, needs rethinking. there must be a way to circumvent the series's air of dancing-school formality to allow a spirit of relaxation to take over the stage. that sense of release was something clooney could conjure simply by strolling into a room and being herself.  music review  