treasury bills scheduled for this week   the treasury's schedule of financing this week included today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills tomorrow.  at the close of the new york cash market on friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.04 percent. the rate on the six-month issue was 5.08 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 4.77 percent.  the following tax-exempt fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:  tax exempt  tomorrow  oyster bay, n.y., $60 million of general obligation. competitive.  virginia housing development authority, richmond, $98.6 million of revenue bonds. competitive.  wisconsin, $158.4 million of general of general obligation bonds. competitive.  wednesday  beaverton, ore., school district, $143.8 million of general obligation bonds. competitive.  new york city department of education, $51.3 million of revenue bonds. competitive.  thursday  south carolina department of transportation, $283.3 million of revenue bonds. competitive.  tax exempt  one day during the week  alpine, utah, board of education school district, $111.3 million of debt securities. ubs.  blount county, tenn., public building authority, $135.1 million of debt securities. morgan keegan.  boise state university, $87.6 million of general revenue and refunding bonds. lehman brothers.  bryan, tex., independent school district, $51.7 million of debt securities. rbc capital markets.  central bucks school district, doylestown, pa., $108.2 million of debt securities. mellon financial markets.  cumberland county, pa., municipal authority, $63.5 million of revenue bonds for the diakon lutheran social ministries project. ziegler capital markets.  el paso county community college district, $70 million of debt securities. bear stearns.  gainesville, ga., redevelopment authority educational facilities, $83.4 million of refunding revenue bonds for riverside military academy. ubs.  hawaii county, $119.4 million of general obligation bonds. a.g. edwards.  hillsborough county, fla., public schools, $65 million of certificates of participation. citigroup.  jacksonville, fla., electric authority, $108.5 million of st. john's river power park system refunding revenue bonds . jpmorgan.  lancaster county, pa., hospital authority, $95.6 million of debt securities. goldman sachs.  los angeles unified school district, $1.3 billion of general obligation refunding bonds. merrill lynch.  mississippi home corporation, $50 million of single-family mortgage revenue bonds. ubs.  murrieta valley unified school district, murrieta, calif., $90 million of general obligation bonds. ubs.  north carolina medical care commission, $262.6 million of debt securities. bank of america.  orlando, fla., utilities commission, $116.2 million of revenue bonds. goldman sachs.  pearland, tex., independent school district, $107.9 million of debt securities. rbc capital markets.  pennsylvania state university, $175 million of debt securities. pnc capital markets.  san antonio electric and gas systems, $127.9 million of revenue and refunding bonds. morgan stanley.  santa clara county, calif., tobacco settlement fund, $120 million of debt securities. citigroup.  sherwood, ore., school district no. 88j, $100 million of general obligation bonds. seattle-northwest securities.  springfield, mass., $140 million of general obligation state qualified bonds. ubs.  st. louis, $250 million of airport revenue refunding bonds. lehman brothers.  st. louis, $105 million of airport revenue refunding bonds. merrill lynch.  tennessee state school bond authority higher educational facilities, $130 million of bonds. ubs.  university of california medical centers, $440.1 million of revenue bonds. lehman brothers.  washington state housing finance commission, $54.5 million of single-family mortgage revenue bonds. ubs.  