drowned poet was inspired by the wilds   hugh ogden's voice resonated clearly last wednesday on his answering machine at home in glastonbury, three days after his body was found in rangeley lake in oquossoc, me.  mr. ogden, a poet and professor of english at trinity college in hartford for 40 years, had fallen through thin ice and drowned dec. 31. he apparently tried to ski across the ice from one of the lake's islands to the mainland, where his car was parked.  his face and his biography were still visible on trinity's web site, and his voice remained on his office answering machine, evidence that co-workers, friends and family had not yet absorbed the news of his death.  the author of seven books, including last year's ''turtle island tree psalms,'' mr. ogden, 69, was a popular teacher whose visage evoked an ebullient albert einstein. a carpenter, gardener, and lover of all things literary, he bought an island on rangeley lake about 35 years ago, said his daughter, cynthia ogden, of chevy chase, md., and he often skied across the lake to his island once jan. 1 arrived, the date when the lake typically freezes.  this winter, though, officials from maine's department of inland fisheries and wildlife had broadcast warnings about thin ice and open water in many areas.  mr. ogden worked to bring poetry to the masses, teaching poetry to students throughout connecticut and massachusetts, and reading to residents of nursing homes and to inmates in prisons.  the wilds of maine inspired him, his daughter said, and, by himself, he built a guest house, a snowmobile garage, a woodshed and a boathouse on his island.  ''i think really he couldn't sit still,'' she said. ''he was someone who was always active and busy, unless you were having some deep discussion about the meaning of art.''  fellow poets remembered mr. ogden as enthusiastic and generous. ''he had a wild streak, a kind of thoreau-like enthusiasm and passion for the outdoors,'' said rennie mcquilkin of simsbury, a poet and the director of the sunken garden poetry festival, held each summer at the hill-stead museum in farmington. mr. ogden was the first poet to read his work at the inaugural festival in 1992. ''he was always looking for the truth that is in the wilderness,'' mr. mcquilkin said.  steve foley, an english teacher at south windsor high school, was a student of mr. ogden's at trinity in the 1970s. ''he was the only teacher i've ever had who could make a class sort of gasp with wonder,'' mr. foley said.  mr. ogden wrote often of nature. one of his recent poems, ''what sunday means,'' now seems eerily prescient. it reads in part:  say that in this moment you're  happy with your new love, that  you step in his steps on week-  old lake-ice where water still  pools as the ice creaks and  shimmers  say you're happy  stepping where he's stepped  as he picks his way carefully  onto the frozen surface but,  when you step on the same crack  he's stepped on and it creaks,  your gasp is the harbinger  of that panic-cry over all  your hedged bets and everything  you can't control when the next  crack he steps on v-necks and  breaks so that his shoes and  pants sink and he's swinging  the oar he's carrying around  his head and down to the ice  in chest-high water and you're  on your stomach pulling that  oar and him back up, realizing  it's all luck, a blessing whose  grace slips towards you or  away because you can't be sure  early-winter ice will hold long  enough for you both to reach shore.  