savoring a taste of life in the big time   in the argot of the soccer world, they are known as minnows -- clubs from the lower divisions who often change into giant-killers, waiting and dreaming of headline-grabbing upsets in domestic cup competitions.  in england, those tournaments are the fabled football association cup, open to any club team in the country (674 entered in 2005-6), and the carling cup, limited to the 92 professional clubs that comprise the top four leagues.  last week brought some surprising results in the f.a. cup as charlton, which is struggling in the premier league, was ousted by nottingham forest of league 1 (the third tier), and sheffield united, another premier league club, was bounced by another league 1 team, swansea city.  today in the carling cup, wycombe wanderers, a team that went professional only in the 1980s and is currently in league 2, will play host to the first leg of its home-and-away semifinal against a premier league giant -- chelsea -- at cozy adams park, capacity 10,000. the return match is scheduled for jan. 23.  today's game will be a huge payday for wycombe, which will pocket nearly $1 million from television rights and also a share of the gate receipts.  ''a big game, of course,'' paul lambert, wycombe's scottish manager, said in a telephone interview late last week. ''my players know exactly what's going on, and they will be fine.''  the club is from the city of high wycombe, about 30 miles west of london, and was founded by furniture makers in 1887, hence its nickname, the chairboys. through the years, wycombe (pronounced wick-em) stubbornly adhered to its amateur roots. but it got serious in 1990, when the club hired as its manager a little-known but promising irishman, martin o'neill. o'neill went on to lead glasgow celtic and is now the manager of aston villa of the premier league.  ''what martin did for wycombe is nothing short of fantastic,'' said lambert, who played internationally for scotland 40 times. ''if we could get a little bit of that celtic magic here, we would do it.''  against chelsea, which is in second place in the premier league and which bounced lowly macclesfield from the f.a. cup last weekend, 6-1, lambert harbors few illusions.  ''everybody will have to play exceptionally well,'' he said in a soaring understatement. ''the gulf between us is massive, and we can't even compare ourselves to chelsea -- it's night and day. but the lads will give it a good go.''  major league soccer  and then there were three.  the anschutz entertainment group, which at one time operated more than half the teams in m.l.s., has sold its interest in d.c. united for $33 million in cash to a consortium of real estate developers. a.e.g. retains the rights to operate three m.l.s. clubs: the los angeles galaxy, the chicago fire and the defending champion houston dynamo.  the group that bought d.c. united includes brian k. davis and christian laettner, the co-managing members of blue devil partners and the former co-captains of the duke university basketball team. davis and another member of the group, victor b. macfarlane, are the first african-americans to operate an m.l.s. team.  ''soccer is the no. 1 sport for people of color all around the world, but not here in the u.s. -- yet,'' macfarlane said monday at a news conference in washington. ''we want to be part of the change that is now on the horizon. we would love to help make soccer the sport that african-americans and other children of color first look to for recreation and entertainment.''  the new owners hope to build a soccer stadium by 2009 across the anacostia river from the washington nationals' new stadium.  also, m.l.s. will hold its draft of college players in indianapolis on friday. the draft will be televised live by espn2 at noon eastern.  new york red bulls  steve jolley, the team's veteran defender, announced his retirement last week after 10 seasons. jolley has been accepted to graduate school at columbia university and has also taken a job in the global private client division of merrill lynch.  united states  after considering more than 70 players over the past year, coach thomas rongen named his 20-man roster for qualifying games for the under-20 world championship. the tournament will be played in canada this summer.  but one of the players rongen truly wanted -- midfielder michael bradley -- will not be making the trip to panama for games against haiti, guatemala and the host nation jan. 17-21. bradley, the son of bob bradley, the interim coach of the senior national team, was not released by his dutch club, heerenveen.  ''we had planned on getting michael, and felt with his and danny szetela's international and m.l.s. experience that we were well covered, but after learning michael would not be with us, it left us with a hole in our depth chart,'' rongen said in a statement from u.s. soccer.  the women's national team will begin a five-day training camp tomorrow in california in preparation for the four nations tournament in china later this month.  the men's national team, which will play denmark in carson, calif., on jan. 20 and mexico in glendale, ariz., on feb. 7, has added a game against guatemala in frisco, tex., on march 28 to its schedule. u.s. soccer plans to add another game, against an opponent to be determined, on march 25. the american team will also play host to the concacaf gold cup from june 6 to 24 and compete in copa américa in venezuela from june 26 to july 15.  around the world  necaxa is the only club that has clinched a spot in saturday's finals of the interliga, a tournament that will send two mexican clubs to the copa libertadores. the winners of saturday's games in carson, calif., will advance. toluca, the winner of the clausura (closing tournament) in 2006, has already qualified to play in the copa, the south american club championship.  brazil is scheduled to play portugal in an international friendly at arsenal's emirates stadium in london on feb. 6. on the same day, greece will play south korea at fulham's craven cottage, also in london.  soccer: extra time  