poets, playhouses and artists are among grant winners   no one decides to become a poet for the paycheck. so when steven gehrke learned about a month ago that he had won a $20,000 grant from the national endowment for the arts, he knew his bills would be paid next summer while he worked on his fourth collection of poems.  ''there is so little money in poetry that this is a huge deal,'' mr. gehrke said.  an assistant professor of english at seton hall university, mr. gehrke, 35, is among 10 new jersey recipients of recently announced n.e.a. grants totaling $205,000, chosen from 46 applicants. among the state's theaters, the grants will help pay for experimental work at montclair state university; production of the musical ''bar mitzvah boy'' at the paper mill playhouse in millburn; and a new play at the mccarter theater in princeton.  they will also underwrite articles in sculpture magazine; fellowships for glass artists at wheatonarts and cultural center; dance new jersey's efforts to promote dance; the writing of james hoch, a poet from mahwah; the new jersey performing arts center's outdoor summer concert series; and the black maria film and video festival's multistate tour.  mr. gehrke's book will relate his own life to that of eugene o'neill, the nobel prize-winning playwright known for his tortured family life and self-destructive ways. mr. gehrke, too, has endured his share of personal trauma. starting at 14, he underwent three kidney transplants in 10 years, and he says that he went through a self-destructive period of alcohol and drug abuse.  ''it's essentially my attempt to meld his biography with my biography and try and find some psychological connections between o'neill and myself,'' he said of his project.  the state's largest n.e.a. grant, $40,000, went to montclair state university for a variety of arts and cultural projects, including its creative edge theater program. among the artists coming to the university's alexander kasser theater this season is jan fabre of belgium, the author and choreographer of ''je suis sang'' (''i am blood''), a production about the nature of bloodlust, which will be presented on jan. 25, 27 and 28.  ''they're recognizing what montclair is trying to do in embracing the work of artists that don't easily fit conventional performing arts categories,'' jedediah wheeler, the executive director of arts and cultural programming, said of the n.e.a.  at wheatonarts (formerly wheaton village) in millville, which celebrates southern new jersey's glassmaking roots, a $25,000 grant will help pay for residency fellowships for 12 glass artists. they will receive a stipend, housing and round-the-clock access to glassmaking facilities.  ''glassmaking is pretty difficult,'' said susan m. gogan, executive director of wheatonarts. ''it's not something you can do in your home. here, the artists can come and work on their own visions.''  a $25,000 grant to sculpture magazine will pay writers' fees and other costs associated with articles about little-known artists and public art. the 18,000-circulation magazine, based in washington but affiliated with the international sculpture center in hamilton, publishes 10 issues a year. ''one of the reasons the n.e.a. support is so important is we try to cover what is currently out there,'' said the editor, glenn harper, ''which means it's hard to predict what we'll be covering in the future.''  the mccarter's theater's $25,000 grant will help pay for the may 4 to june 10 production of ''mrs. packard,'' written by emily mann, the theater's artistic director. the play recalls the story of elizabeth packard, whose husband had her committed, against her wishes, to an illinois mental hospital in the 1860s. the production will travel to the kennedy center in washington in june. although mccarter is a perennial recipient of n.e.a. grants, ms. mann was no less enthusiastic this time around.  ''it's not really the size of the award that matters,'' she said. ''what the n.e.a. is, really, is a stamp of approval.''  