palestinian asks dissolution of hamas's military police   after two days of intense fighting between hamas and his fatah faction, the palestinian authority president, mahmoud abbas, demanded saturday that hamas-run paramilitary police be integrated into fatah-dominated security forces.  hamas warned mr. abbas that he was making a mistake and that it would resist any effort to disband the group, known as the executive force. the hamas interior ministry immediately announced that it had plans to double the size of the executive force to 12,000 men and called on palestinians to join it.  mr. abbas made his demand after the deaths of many fatah men in clashes with the executive force over the last two days. in his statement on saturday, mr. abbas called the force illegal and said it ''will be treated as such if it is not immediately integrated into legal security services as stipulated by basic law.''  it is not clear whether mr. abbas's statement is simply declaratory or whether he would order his security forces to take action against the paramilitary group if hamas did not meet his demands.  a hamas government spokesman, ghazi hamad, said that ''to take such a decision under pressure and the current tense conditions is a mistake that will not contribute to peace and to resolving existing problems.'' the spokesman for the hamas interior ministry, khaled abu hillal, took a sharper tone, saying, ''we warn against making any move, which will be met with force.''  mr. abbas tried unsuccessfully to ban the executive force once last year, finally agreeing with hamas prime minister ismail haniya to integrate it into the palestinian authority.  but hamas and interior minister said siam have kept effective control of the force, which is dominant in gaza, arguing that the fatah-dominated security services were lax, corrupt, badly trained and failed to keep order in the territory.  the hamas force currently consists of more than 5,000 well-armed and well-trained fighters.  mr. abbas is the commander-in-chief of all armed men in the palestinian authority, but where the authority of the prime minister and interior minister fit into the equation has been a confusion ever since the job of prime minister was invented as a way of reducing the power of the late yasir arafat.  mr. abbas was the first prime minister and complained, when he quit after four months, that mr. arafat would not relinquish control over the security services. that struggle over the security forces is more complicated now because both the prime minister and interior minister are from hamas.  hamas is also making efforts to expand the force to the occupied west bank, where it is much weaker, given the regular presence of israeli troops.  the bush administration is asking congress for $86 million to improve the equipment and training of mr. abbas's presidential guard and to expand the group, which has 3,700 members. american officials describe the effort as a way to balance hamas and deter it, but say they are not trying to finance a civil war.  mr. abbas, in principle, controls the 45,000 security forces on the palestinian authority payroll, but it is unclear how many of them come to work, let alone obey his commands.  separately, the dagmoush clan in gaza kidnapped several hamas members saturday. the clan, which is believed by gazans close to hamas to have captured an agence france-press photographer this week, is said to be insisting that it will not release the man, jaime razuri of peru, until hamas hands over fighters who the dagmoush say were responsible for killing clan members.  late saturday, three members of a pro-hamas family, the diri, were killed by gunmen from the dagmoush clan and five were wounded, witnesses and family members said.  two hamas officials were also seized in the west bank, including the deputy mayor of nablus, mehdi hambali. in ramallah, masked gunmen abducted an interior ministry official, ihad suleiman ghidhan. he was found alive an hour later with three bullets fired into his legs.  fatah gunmen from the aksa martyrs brigades forced a strike in the west bank city of hebron, preventing stores from opening to protest hamas's attacks in gaza.  