spitzer and assembly near deal on how to choose comptroller   the spitzer administration and democrats in the state assembly are close to agreeing on how to review candidates for state comptroller, a politically charged selection process, state officials said on monday evening.  the plan, which is still being negotiated, calls for creating an outside panel of experts -- former state or city comptrollers, for example -- and asking the panel to forward a short list of qualified candidates to the entire legislature for a vote, said several democrats who were granted anonymity to describe the private negotiations.  the choice of a comptroller to replace alan g. hevesi, who resigned in disgrace, has been a flashpoint between gov. eliot spitzer and the assembly. the governor has said he would like an outsider with financial experience, while some lawmakers are vying for the post and others warn that the governor should not be allowed to choose the fiscal officer who will audit his agencies and monitor his budgets and contracts.  while aides to mr. spitzer have said they would like the new comptroller to have financial expertise and to come from ''outside government,'' mr. spitzer signaled on monday that he would be open to considering a candidate from the assembly.  ''i have never said that one of them couldn't be a good comptroller, or one of them might not end up being a good comptroller,'' mr. spitzer said. ''what i have said is that we need to look for certain standards and qualifications, and begin with a question relating to qualifications, rather than membership, and then we go from there.''  while the state constitution gives the legislature the power the choose the next comptroller to fill the vacancy -- and the assembly democrats have the deciding vote, since they constitute a majority of the legislature -- the spitzer administration has been trying to recruit candidates and to influence the final decision.  candidates will be invited to speak at a joint legislative hearing. some details of the agreement must still be resolved, including who would serve on the panel, and how brief its list would be. once the list is forwarded, though, it will still fall to the assembly to choose a candidate from it -- and it is unclear how much deference assembly democrats intend to give to the new governor's wishes.  