paint my sidewalk blue   congratulations!'' cries dolly, our republican neighbor, a few days after the election, and my wife and i pause warily on the sidewalk outside her house. our street is noted for its calm bipartisanship, and dolly in particular is well-known for her good nature and graciousness. but still, we hesitate for a moment. ''oh,'' my wife says. ''um thanks!'' and we exchange glances. congratulations?  i guess we're still trying to get used to the concept of ''winning.'' as democrats in ohio, victory is a sensation we've been unfamiliar with for quite some time, and i have to admit that it makes me a little suspicious. ''oh, snap out of it,'' my wife says, and i put my hands in my pockets as we continue on down the street.  of course, it's not easy to be jubilant given the state of affairs in ohio, or in the country, or in the world. december comes on drizzly and warmish in a kind of eerie, global-warming way, and that first blush of excitement seems to mute quickly. mike dewine, the defeated incumbent senator, spends his final days in congress delivering eulogies for service members killed in iraq and afghanistan. meanwhile, bob taft, the departing governor, rounds out his unpopular, scandal-ridden tenure with one last humiliation -- on dec. 27, the ohio supreme court formally reprimands him for his failure to report nearly $6,000 worth of gifts. around the same time, newspapers begin to report that a cleveland-size ice shelf had broken clear of the coast of ellesmere island in the canadian arctic, though apparently mr. taft had nothing to do with this.  our neighbor susan is usually reliably cynical this time of year, but she says that she's been feeling pretty happy since the election. ''i would actually characterize myself as giddy,'' susan says, and she tells me that she's even begun to warm to our new senator, sherrod brown, who now seems admirably enthusiastic and energetic, especially since he doesn't have to continue to repeat the phrase ''fight for the middle class'' in every sentence. he seems more solidly progressive than she thought at first.  sue is one of several people i know who believes that the 2004 election was stolen, and that voting irregularities in ohio were primarily at fault. she had been very pessimistic about 2006 as well. ''and there were plenty of problems,'' she says.  in cleveland, voting machine breakdowns led to delays and long lines at many polling places. there also continued to be questions about the reliability of the electronic voting systems. major discrepancies were reported in several counties, including cuyahoga, where there was a disparity of almost 17 percent between the unofficial vote tally reported immediately after the election (562,498 votes) and the official tally reported in december (468,056 votes).  it is troubling and worrisome, susan agrees -- but this time, it seemed, the inconsistencies hadn't been enough to counteract the number of democratic voters who went to the polls. ''i felt like there was a real surge of energy,'' susan tells me. ''almost like a grass-roots movement.''  my friend peggy disagrees. '' 'movement' is strong word,'' she says. peggy is a retired law school dean, a little past 60, more than a bit skeptical, and she looks at me wryly. ''what are they going to pull off, really?'' she asks. ''where's the leadership? seriously. nancy pelosi? harry reid?''  the two of us are shopping at the west side market on yet another warm late december day, walking through the busy aisles and selecting produce from various stands, pausing to look at a case full of beautiful breads or interesting sausages.  ''i guess i've become apolitical,'' peggy says, and shrugs. ''i just don't think that a meaningful discussion of what's important in life is going to reside in politics. i don't suppose that's really going to help your article.''  ''no,'' i say. ''not really.'' the two of us sit down in the balcony above the market, sharing a piece of strudel, and we look down onto a throng of people, buying up food for their new year's eve parties.  ''i don't mean to be discouraging,'' she says. ''i mean, i do keep voting every year -- just like i keep on washing the dishes and lighting the candles -- i guess partially it's just a ritual that we go through.''  ''but not all of it,'' i say.  ''no, of course not,'' peggy says, looking at me sidelong. ''you can always hope that things are going to change.''  we sit there for a moment longer, and she cuts off a piece of pastry with her plastic fork, scrutinizes it, then takes a bite. christmas music is still playing from some loudspeaker somewhere.  ''anyway,'' peggy says. ''it's a new year, isn't it?''  battlegrounds dan chaon is the author of the novel ''you remind me of me.''  