to get to carnegie hall, play bach or pay your $1   what does $1 buy in new york city? generally speaking, not much. but that was the ticket price for a concert by the bachiana chamber orchestra at carnegie hall on saturday night. the event was intended to draw attention to amazon rain forest conservation. it also drew more than the usual number of curiosity seekers, as evidenced by intermittent camera flashes before the concert and the boisterous children who trotted up and down the aisles.  joão carlos martins, the founder and conductor of this brazilian ensemble, had a successful career as a pianist in the 1960s before a calamitous series of injuries and illnesses robbed him of his ability to play professionally. he organized this 27-member group in 2004 and has used it to promote charitable causes.  the first half of the program was devoted to bach, with whose music mr. martins has long been associated. transcriptions of ''jesu, joy of man's desiring,'' ''awake, the voice commands'' and ''we thank you, thank you god'' were comfort food, rich and caloric compared to the lean cuisine of period-conscious groups.  string players applied vibrato liberally, offering a warm, fuzzy opulence that sometimes thwarted precise articulation; the oboists and bassoonist projected boldly, while a harpsichordist gently tinkled. bach's orchestral suite no. 1 lacked rhythmic buoyancy, but mr. martins compensated with attention to dynamic contrast.  the young belgian composer stefan meylaers performed as piano soloist in the world premiere of his ''suíte amazonas.'' passages reminiscent of rachmaninoff, gershwin and sentimental film music were arranged into an amiable 16-minute pastiche, in which brief dissonances merely foreshadowed the imminent arrival of new melodies. eschewing virtuoso display, mr. meylaers offered the congenial note-spinning of new age pianist-composers like john tesh and yanni.  the program concluded with three brazilian works, the most familiar of which was the prelúdio from villa-lobos's ''bachiana brasiliera no. 4.'' alberto nepomuceno's ''serenata'' had the rustic grace and charm of a grieg miniature. players slapped rhythms on their instruments in guerra peixe's driving ''mourão,'' enticing several children to clap along until adult companions made them stop. too bad: the kids had the right idea.  recalled for an encore mr. martins took to the piano for an arrangement of bach's ''air on a g string'' and chris brubeck's ''variations on themes by bach.'' to gentle string accompaniment he painstakingly picked out the melodies, radiating contentment at the modest dignity of his offering.  music review  