rise in child abuse reports has family court reeling   the surge in child abuse and neglect reports in the year since nixzmary brown was killed has overwhelmed judges and lawyers in new york city family court, government officials and lawyers for children testified at a city council hearing yesterday.  a grim picture of crowded and harried courtrooms emerged from the hearing, which was held on the first anniversary of the killing of nixzmary, whose death at age 7 despite repeated warning signs of abuse galvanized calls for child welfare reform and prompted mayor michael r. bloomberg to pour money into the city's administration for children's services.  last year the number of children involved in new abuse filings rose 63 percent, to 1,285, and the number involved in new neglect filings soared 163 percent, to 11,224, while the number of family court judges -- fixed in state law at 47 -- has not changed since 1991, according to court statistics. (there were 6,128 new abuse and neglect cases last year; there are two children in each case on average.)  family court judges are appointed by the mayor for 10-year terms; some criminal and civil court judges have been assigned temporarily to family court to handle the increase in cases. the judges have the sole power to order a child removed from a home and placed in foster care -- or to reunite a child with the birth family or terminate parental rights and free a child for adoption.  the state's child abuse hot line recorded an 11.5 percent increase in calls last year, and a 30 percent increase in the city, gladys carrión, gov. eliot spitzer's choice to lead the state office of children and family services, wrote in a statement presented at the hearing. she attributed the rise to greater public awareness and to increased training of educators, health care workers and other ''mandated reporters'' who are legally obligated to tell the government if they suspect a child has been mistreated.  ms. carrión said that the burden on family court had also grown because of a state law, the permanency bill, which took effect in december 2005. in addition to a previous requirement that the court hold hearings immediately after a child is removed from a home, the new law requires that a court review of the child's case occur every six months -- for as long as the child remains in foster care -- and that each review be completed within 30 days.  ronald e. richter, a deputy commissioner at the administration for children's services, who oversees lawyers who represent the city in family court, said the agency had expanded training for lawyers, had given them blackberry devices to communicate better with the court and had lifted a residency requirement to make it easier to recruit and keep lawyers. since january 2006, he said, the agency had hired 64 lawyers; factoring in attrition, the number of lawyers has grown 21 percent.  in september, the city's public advocate, betsy gotbaum, issued a report finding that the agency's lawyers often go into family court without adequate preparation. she found that the agency had a 22.6 percent annual attrition rate among lawyers, leaving junior lawyers to handle 50 to 150 cases each.  other lawyers painted a stark portrait of the family court system.  karen j. freedman, executive director of lawyers for children, a nonprofit group that handles 4,000 child welfare cases in the city each year, said that court reviews of children's cases, known as permanency hearings, often last less than 10 minutes.  on tuesday, the calendar for one family court judge in manhattan listed cases concerning 56 children, she said, asking, ''how can the court possibly devote the appropriate amount of time and attention to each of these children in a single day?''  tamara a. steckler, the lawyer in charge of the legal aid society's juvenile rights practice, which has about 120 lawyers representing more than 26,000 children, said some of her most seasoned lawyers, with more than five years of experience, have close to 400 clients each. the national standard is 100 clients per lawyer.  with the surge in cases and the requirements of the new state law, the average legal aid lawyer now appears in family court 22 to 25 times a week -- not counting the days when he or she is assigned to appear in court to handle new cases.  the state's chief judge, judith s. kaye, has supported mr. bloomberg's call for more family court judges.  david bookstaver, a spokesman for the state's court system, said: ''clearly, more judges would be of help. the family court judges have hundreds of cases on their dockets; they work incredibly hard with some of the court system's most crucial cases: those involving young children. they have met the burden, but they are overworked.''  