drexel claims a spot on the philadelphia stage   the daskalakis athletic center, the drexel dragons' cramped home gym, is a brisk four-block walk from the palestra, the arena on the university of pennsylvania campus that has been a basketball shrine for generations.  the 2,500-seat d.a.c. might as well have been in the next county, or invisible. for many years, drexel has been the sixth division i men's basketball team in a city dominated by the big five -- penn, temple, villanova, st. joseph's and la salle.  for the last 20 years, when a big five team has agreed to a game against drexel, the dragons have always agreed to travel, sometimes as little as four blocks.  ''that's one of the things i'm trying to stop,'' drexel's coach, bruiser flint, said before practice wednesday. ''we've wanted to be like them so much that we sort of let them dictate what goes on.''  now flint has clout. this has been an off year for the big five, in part because flint's talented and tenacious dragons (12-2) have defeated temple, villanova and st. joe's. the dragons have also beaten syracuse, then ranked 23rd, on the road last month.  ''we feel like we can beat any team on our schedule, if we play to our full ability, our full potential,'' said frank elegar, a junior center who is the team's leading scorer.  drexel received votes this week in the associated press news media poll and the espn/usa today coaches' poll. fans are eager to fulfill flint's wish to ''pack the d.a.c.''  drexel is expecting a capacity crowd thursday night for its colonial athletic association game against hofstra (11-4). fans were turned away at the door on dec. 28 before the dragons beat george mason, a final four team last year.  ''it was very, very obvious that they were playing with passion and that they had the people playing at both ends of the floor that you need to be a championship team,'' george mason coach jim larranaga said in a telephone interview tuesday.  the scene at drexel is quite different from the one that flint observed in 2001.  during his job interview, he leafed through some old drexel basketball photographs. he said he noticed that no fans were seated behind the basket. he asked if there were no seats behind the basket. he was told there were bleachers, but there were never enough people to warrant pulling them out. now there are.  the dragons are glad people are enjoying the moment, but they have other priorities.  ''i don't really think we're playing for respect,'' said bashir mason, a senior guard from jersey city. ''we're just playing basketball.''  flint was hired by drexel less than a month after he resigned as the coach at massachusetts, where he had coached five seasons. he said he had good teams at umass, but he maintained that he did not have the tools to build a longstanding program.  flint, 39, a philadelphia native who played at st. joseph's, has assembled a big, quick team that has fulfilled his theme for the season -- don't cheat yourself -- particularly after blowing a late lead and losing to rider on nov. 27.  not long after taking over at drexel, a program that has produced one bona-fide n.b.a. player, malik rose of the knicks, flint realized he would have to begin signing players who were bigger and faster, even if it meant he had to develop unpolished athletes.  three years ago, flint recruited elegar, a 6-foot-9, 180-pound center who was overshadowed at the perennially powerful st. raymond's high school in the bronx. flint said he liked the way elegar ran the floor and caught the ball.  ''for us, at our level, we've got to take a chance on a player like that,'' flint said.  elegar has added 40 pounds and is averaging 14.6 points and 7.2 rebounds. mason and dominick meija are outside-shooting threats. chaz crawford, a 6-10 senior, can rebound and block shots.  ''i've been as impressed with bruiser this year, watching film leading up to the last couple of games, as ever before,'' james madison coach dean keener said tuesday.  drexel made it to the national invitation tournament three times in the last four years, but flint is aiming higher. the dragons have not played in the n.c.a.a. tournament since 1996, when rose led them to a first-round victory over memphis.  drexel is hoping to move into a converted armory across the street in a few years. perhaps a big five team will agree to play them at the d.a.c. before then.  ''if you want to get respect from the other teams, you've got to beat them,'' flint said.  basketball  