a lot of uncertainty, except on wall street   uncertainty is usually bad news in business, and there was plenty of uncertainty this week. but stocks rallied nonetheless, suggesting investor optimism, in part because of acceleration of the sustained fall in energy prices.  health care -- gov. arnold schwarzenegger proposed guaranteeing health care insurance to all 36 million californians, using a mix of private and public insurance. he said it would cost $12 billion and be paid for, in part, by taxing businesses, doctors and hospitals.  businesses with at least 10 employees but no health insurance would pay 4 percent of their total social security wages to subsidize the purchase of coverage by the working uninsured. hospitals would pay 4 percent of their revenue to help cover higher reimbursements for those who treat patients enrolled in medi-cal, the state's medicaid program. doctors would be assessed 2 percent of their revenue.  three other states -- maine, massachusetts and vermont -- have also taken steps to provide broad health coverage for their citizens, but because of california's size its move is likely to accelerate debate on the issue across the country this year.  trying again -- having failed to generate much excitement with its first venture into cellular phones -- the rokr, made in cooperation with motorola -- apple tried again, this time keeping the engineering in the house.  the result was the iphone, a combination cellphone, music player and personal digital assistant that promises to seamlessly and elegantly integrate all those functions in a sleek device that fits in a pocket. apple's chief executive, steven p. jobs, showed the iphone at the macworld conference in san francisco.  while other, cheaper gadgets perform similar functions, the announcement drove apple's stock up and those of its new competitors down. analysts said that was because the iphone integrates the functions more smoothly, using the os x operating system from the macintosh computer.  apple said the device would cost $499 or $599 when it goes on sale in june.  katrina lawsuit -- a federal court judge in mississippi said state farm insurance had failed to show that a policyholder's house was destroyed by flooding caused by hurricane katrina in 2005 and not by winds, as the homeowner claimed.  the judge, l. t. senter jr. of federal district court in gulfport, miss., ordered state farm to pay the full value of the policy, $233,292. the jury said state farm should also pay a $2.5 million penalty.  lawyers for the homeowners argued that the house was knocked off its foundation and torn apart by winds -- a hazard covered as a fundamental part of home insurance -- and that flooding had merely scattered the debris. state farm said floodwaters, which were not covered by the policy, caused the damage.  the decision throws into question settlement talks intended to resolve hundreds of lawsuits filed after the hurricane, the costliest in american history.  profit gap -- after a dismal holiday season capped a year of declining sales, gap, the casual clothing chain, hired investment bankers to explore whether to sell the company, in whole or in parts.  a sale of gap would be one of the largest buyouts ever in the retail industry. the company's current market value is $16.4 billion, and analysts expect that a buyer would have to pay more than $18 billion.  sales at gap's more than 3,000 stores have fallen every month for the last year, culminating in an 8 percent drop in december.  private equity firms, flush with billions in cash from institutional investors like pension funds, are considered the most likely bidders. the bankers' report is expected as soon as the end of the month.  proxy war -- escalating its battle to buy its rival, caremark rx, the pharmacy benefits manager express scripts said it would nominate 4 directors to caremark's 11-member board to try to derail a lower competing bid by the drugstore chain cvs.  in louisiana, a public pension fund sued caremark for having rejected express scripts' $26 billion offer in favor of a $21 billion offer from cvs. the suit says the cvs bid improperly benefits caremark executives at the expense of shareholders.  caremark's current directors have recommended that shareholders approve the cvs deal at a special meeting before the end of march. shareholders will not be able to vote for express scripts' board members until the regular annual meeting, in may.  up in the air -- us airways raised its unsolicited bid for delta air lines by more than 20 percent, to over $10 billion, hoping to persuade delta's creditors to support its proposal over the standalone reorganization plan that delta has endorsed. hours later, delta said it was discussing a merger with northwest airlines, apparently to fend off us airways.  the rival bids reflect the improving fortunes of airlines, which are starting to post profits again after half a decade of huge losses. they may signal the start of a wave of consolidation in the industry.  the senate commerce committee will meet on jan. 24 to look into the potential effects of airline mergers.  chÁvez quake -- investors in north and south america reacted with alarm after president hugo chávez of venezuela threatened to nationalize the country's telephone and electricity companies. the caracas stock exchange's main index fell by almost 19 percent.  among the companies affected is verizon, which owns 28.5 percent of compañia anónima nacional teléfonos de venezuela. it had agreed to sell that interest for $676 million in april; but the deal has not closed so verizon still owns it.  if mr. chávez seizes private assets without compensating owners, companies could sue in the united states, where venezuela owns assets, including citgo, the energy company.  oil shock -- robust stockpiles of gasoline, heating oil and diesel fuel helped drive energy prices to their lowest levels in 18 months. crude oil prices have declined by nearly one-third since peaking at more than $78 a barrel last july.  they have fallen 13 percent this year alone, closing friday at $52.99 a barrel in new york.  some analysts forecast that prices will stabilize near current levels through this spring.  most popular -- following are the most-popular business news articles on nytimes.com from jan. 6 through jan. 12:  1. attack of the zombie computers is growing threat  2. apple introduces innovative cellphone  3. apple waves its wand at the phone  4. firms fret as office e-mail jumps security walls  5. when buying a diamond starts with a mouse  links are at nytimes.com/business.  five days  