comings & goings   poor mary, queen of scots. the infant ruler cried on her coronation day. her second husband murdered her adviser in front of her. and later, she was imprisoned for 19 years by queen elizabeth i (her first cousin), who then sentenced her to death. even mary's beheading was full of drama, requiring three swings of the ax. the palace of holyroodhouse in edinburgh, where mary lived, prayed and -- most scandalously -- saw her adviser killed, is now inviting the public to take a gander at her private chambers, as well as those of her murderous husband, lord darnley. new additions to the chambers, which reopened last month after a six-year restoration, include an oak-paneled oratory and a 17th-century portrait of mary (below), painted by an unknown artist, which hung at windsor castle for 300 years (www.royalcollection.org.uk).  tomorrow, the langham hotel in london is scheduled to open a swanky bar, artesian. named after a 360-foot-deep artesian well that once provided water for the property, this watering hole specializes in rum and was designed by david collins, who also created the modern looks behind the blue bar at the berkeley and claridge's bar at claridge's hotel (www.langhamhotels.com).  wanderlust, a company based in oakland, calif., is offering a new getaway from march 3 to 9, called ''a winter's moon over yosemite valley.'' scheduled so that participants will be able to visit yosemite national park during a full moon, the seven-day tour includes round-trip tickets aboard a vintage streamliner train (all meals and beverages included), a one-night predeparture stay in oakland, two nights at the ahwanhee or yosemite lodge and three nights of lodging, as well as dinner and a show, in san francisco. rates start at $1,995 a person. for more information, call (877) 625-1717 or visit www.wanderlustevents.com. . starting feb. 15, all delta flights (www.delta.com) from la guardia airport in new york to chicago will land at midway airport instead of o'hare. midway is closer to downtown chicago, which should cut down on travel time. ... globetrotters reluctant to share private information on borrowed computers might be interested in roboform2go. the software, which is designed to be carried around in a u.s.b. drive, organizes passwords, address books and banking and credit card information. it can be downloaded from www.roboform.com for $39.95.  hilary howard  