my doctor the lobbyist   my ob-gyn phoned, urging my support for a ballot measure requiring parental notification for teenage girls seeking abortions. i subsequently received calls from two antiabortion organizations asking me to support the measure. i suspect that my doctor gave them my number. is that legal of her? ethical?  kristin fidler, portland, ore.  it is not legal for a doctor to pass along patient information to political activists (although, as you suggest, it is not certain that yours did so). arthur caplan, chairman of the department of medical ethics at the university of pennsylvania's medical school, says that without a patient's consent, it is against the law for a doctor to divulge any personal information to any third party ''unless it is directly related to patient care, which this use most certainly is not.'' this is a prudent policy. doctors can be effective only if they have a great deal of information about their patients, something patients are more likely to provide if their privacy is protected.  your ob-gyn went astray ethically the moment she picked up the phone to importune you herself. caplan declares, ''calling patients in a physician's care to support a doctor's political or philanthropic cause is out of bounds.'' such calls can seem coercive -- or at least exasperating -- and risk subverting the doctor-patient relationship, thereby compromising the quality of care.  this is not to stifle nonmedical conversation but to demand tact and sensitivity and to let the patient define the terms of the relationship. for example, if a patient initiates a political conversation, a physician may join in. a physician may even display literature promoting a cause right in the waiting room. what's key is to be wary of making a patient uncomfortable or inhibited. (one tip: there cannot be a free exchange of ideas if the patient is naked and the doctor is not -- or, even worse, if it's the other way around.)  update: fidler informed her ob-gyn that she would not see her again and would find another physician.  my partner and i sell t-shirts via the internet that we print with short slogans -- some we thought up ourselves, others we found on web sites of quotations. occasionally we get angry letters from people who claim to have devised one of these slogans. our intellectual-property lawyer says we have no legal obligation to compensate these people, but is there an ethical obligation to do so?  mark mackaman, redmond, wash.  if you profit directly from someone's work, you have an ethical obligation to pay that person even when the law does not compel it. but is that your situation? you must make a good-faith effort to find out -- an ambiguous injunction but one that includes doing a google search for the slogan, contacting the operators of any web site where a slogan might have originated and consulting books of quotations. you should also hear out anyone who approaches you with a serious avowal of authorship.  not every such claim is valid, of course. people can convince themselves that they created a phrase that has been circulating for centuries -- ''have a nice day,'' for instance (which only seems to have circulated for centuries). in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it's a good bet that your t-shirt was written by shakespeare or wilde, or is found in the bible, or on a hallmark card ghost-written in his youth by an impecunious dr. johnson.  the way we live now: 1-14-07: the ethicist  