knicks look at the sixers and see a reflection   while unsure just yet where they are going, the knicks got a long, hard look last night at where they have been. the team on the opposite bench lacked personality, direction and hope, and it was not so long ago that the knicks suffered from a similar disease.  whatever they are destined to be, the knicks seem convinced they are no longer in the class of the philadelphia 76ers -- a team that on any given night is expected to lose. despite some shaky moments in the second half, the knicks cruised past the 76ers, 106-99, at madison square garden.  it was the knicks' third straight victory, all of them coming against the league's bottom-dwellers (following road wins in portland and seattle).  eddy curry led the charge again, with 20 points and 10 rebounds. quentin richardson, playing for the first time in a month, came off the bench to hit five 3-pointers and finish with 19 points. the knicks shot 53 percent from the field and also got strong performances from stephon marbury (24 points) and channing frye (17 points).  the knicks improved to 16-21 and remain in the n.b.a.'s lower half. but they are not vying for the league's worst record anymore, which is something.  ''i think we've gotten to a point where we're not looked at as one of those teams that you're supposed to beat,'' coach isiah thomas said before the game. ''i know we've gotten better as a basketball team, and i know next month we'll be better than we are this month. but we've gotten to the level where i think we're starting to get some respect around the league, that it's not a 'gimme' anymore.''  that description is more applicable to the 76ers (9-26). it has been three weeks since they traded allen iverson to denver, committing themselves to a bleak season and a high lottery pick. the 76ers lost their fourth straight game and afterward announced they had reached a buyout agreement with their other marquee player, forward chris webber. he will be officially waived today.  the 76ers got 18 points from samuel dalembert and 16 points from joe smith, who was acquired in the iverson deal. but they trailed by double digits for most of the second half, and by 12 with 35.6 seconds left. louis williams hit a 3-pointer at the buzzer, making the final score deceiving.  the knicks welcomed back richardson and nate robinson, and the roster was close to whole for the first time in a month. richardson missed 11 games because of a back injury. robinson served a 10-game suspension stemming from last month's brawl with denver.  it took richardson no time to get reacclimated. he made his first shot, a 3-pointer late in the first quarter, and hit consecutive 3-pointers early in the second quarter as the knicks pulled away. they led by as many as 24 points in the half.  richardson made 7 of 12 field-goal attempts and said his back ''felt good all the way through.'' he said the team's director of player care, dr. lisa callahan, was more concerned than he was.  ''i kept looking over at doc, because she was worried the whole game,'' richardson said. ''i gave her the thumbs up.''  robinson, who was cheered by the home crowd, missed all three of his attempts in a relatively subdued 13 minutes.  the 18,931 in attendance did not include larry brown, the 76ers' newly named executive vice president. the 76ers announced his hiring four days ago, seven months after he was fired as the knicks' coach.  thomas, who battled brown over a number of personnel issues, said there would be no awkwardness when they inevitably meet again.  ''we're in a business where there are bad breakups and good marriages all the time,'' thomas said. ''that's sports. it's never personal. sometimes things just don't work. and i'm sure we'll always be professional and respectful, but that's sports.''  rebounds  chris webber and isiah thomas have a close friendship, but it seems unlikely that they will soon become partners on the knicks' bench. webber will soon be a free agent after reaching a contract buyout with the 76ers. ''our job is to be interested in players that have been released, that have been waived, bought out, traded,'' thomas said. but the knicks do not figure to be the best fit. webber will be 34 on march 1 and badly wants to win a championship before he retires. the knicks are years away from contention. webber is no longer a dynamic athlete, but he remains a solid jump-shooter and a gifted passer who could help several upper-echelon teams. other possible destinations include miami, detroit, dallas, the lakers and chicago.  signing webber also does not fit with the knicks' stated goal of developing their young big men -- eddy curry, channing frye and david lee. webber would be a fine tutor, but playing him would only deprive those three of valuable playing time.  asked if the knicks remained committed to their youth movement first and foremost, thomas said, ''without a doubt.''  the knicks have now won five straight games at the garden, matching their longest streak of last season (jan. 2-13).  jerome james was placed on the inactive list to make room for quentin richardson.  basketball  