it's like 'hee haw,' only nakeder   just because there are hay bales and gas pumps, patty melts and twangy music, not to mention more american flags than you could find anywhere this side of a wal-mart plant in guangzhou, there's no reason to assume that ''the naked trucker & t-bones show,'' which has its premiere on wednesday on comedy central, is in any way similar to the ''blue collar comedy'' franchise, which seems at first glance to be its forebear. nothing could be further from the truth.  dave (gruber) allen (best known as counselor rossi on ''freaks and geeks'') and david koechner (a former ''saturday night live'' cast member who played the rowdy sportscaster champ kind in the film ''anchorman'') started performing together as these characters nearly a decade ago, taking the stage at a hip hollywood cabaret called largo and spinning largely improvised yarns about their twisted long-haul adventures, subversive shaggy-dog tales interspersed with equally twisted musical interludes. yet beneath all the good ol' stupid-guy, yee-haw nonsense something darker, smarter and weirder was going on -- something closer to ''fear and loathing in las vegas'' meets a red sovine trucking song.  ''i was down in chiapas, mexico, delivering 15 tons of frozen digiorno pizza to the zapatistas,'' mr. allen, as the naked trucker, would tell the audience, recounting the night he first met gerald (t-bones) tibbons, the surprisingly well-read drifter-psychotic who would become his permanent driving companion. ''they saw the rising crust as a metaphor for their struggle.''  returning from mexico, the naked trucker would continue, he had to veer off the road on his way to a wendy's north of san diego to avoid hitting an immigrant family (''i did a sean hannity on that baby, cranked it to the right'') and ''found myself on a blue highway, my engine smoking like a japanese businessman outside the tom bradley terminal at lax.''  out in the desert he first encountered t-bones, who had been engaging in american indian religious rituals ''near the china lake gunnery range'' that involved peyote buttons dipped in ranch dressing. threats and hallucinations had apparently led to an ugly incident with a ball-peen hammer, and t-bones ended up running down the highway shoulder, drinking sweet wine and forcing the naked trucker to pull over and pick him up.  ''excuse me, transient,'' the trucker claims to have said. ''did you just fire a flare gun at me?''  t-bones explained to the audience: ''i didn't know what to say because i was holding a recently discharged flare gun. so i said, 'no, man, some dude just ran up and said, ''hold this.'' ' ''  in truth mr. allen and mr. koechner first met in 1996 while mr. allen was doing a guest writing stint on ''snl,'' but they didn't really get to know each other until a year later, when they were both in the cast of a country-music road movie called ''dill scallion.'' in the course of hours spent on a tour bus, they discovered their shared comic sensibilities (including a love for monty python, the marx brothers and the improv-based anarchy of ''sctv''). they also discovered that they had these simpatico characters they'd been doing separately for years.  the naked trucker first appeared in 1992 as an offshoot of mr. allen's work with the higgins boys and gruber, a des moines troupe that had a short run as hosts on the comedy channel, a precursor of comedy central. the idea, which mr. allen credits mostly to steve higgins, one of the higgins boys and later a ''saturday night live'' producer, was to perform comedy versions of trucking songs featuring -- what the heck -- a nude singer. that would be mr. allen, whose easygoing stoner vibe has remained essentially the same ever since.  ''i think it was a freedom thing,'' he said, trying to remember why it seemed a good idea that the trucker be naked, except for shoes, socks, a hat and a well-placed guitar. ''the line that either dave higgins or steve higgins came up with was, 'he's not a slave to the textile industry.' to truly be free, you got to take off your duds.''  mr. koechner first conjured up t-bones tibbons -- a volatile drifter with delusions of grandeur and a proclivity for ill-conceived scams -- during a chicago improv performance in 1994. he was based, at least in the beginning, on a drifter mr. koechner remembered from his teenage years in tipton, mo. (population 2,000), a self-proclaimed roofer with no visible means of support who used to hang out at the local cafe and spent his nights loitering around the town's only four-way blinking stoplight, thus earning himself the nickname four-way george.  ''he was a sketchy guy,'' mr. koechner said. ''the local sheriff was kind of warning him to move along, and george said to me one night: 'if he wants to come with his gun, that's o.k. 'cause i got raaaa-zers.' and i thought, razors? how is that going to be a fair fight?''  in the fall of 1997 t-bones started showing up at the naked trucker's largo performances, at first interrupting the show from the audience and then becoming a regular part of the act. even though both had burgeoning careers -- mr. koechner as an actor and mr. allen as a writer-performer -- they kept going back to largo weekly to do their ''naked trucker and t bones'' revue, 90-minute free-form riffs that drew sellout crowds and loyal partisans, many of whom were influential hollywood writers, agents and producers. it seemed inevitable that the show would get turned into a movie or a tv series, an hbo special at least. there was a brief attempt, more than five years ago, at selling a sitcom version to abc.  ''we got a lot of excitement right away, '' mr. koechner said, ''and we've had it in and out of development in several forms, but they've never quite gone over. for years every hollywood producer in town would be coming through the door, but no one ever stepped up and said, 'i'm doing it.' who knows why? i think even the people at comedy central said: 'yeah, it works. but what is it?' ''  lauren corrao, comedy central's executive vice president for original programming and development, said: ''one of the things that may have gotten in the way was that the show was too long and loose to imagine which elements might work on television. the problem was always, what do you focus in on for the television version?''  the solution, for which mr. allen and mr. koechner give great credit to their writer-producer collaborators, norm hiscock and donick cary, was to model the show after ''the smothers brothers comedy hour'' from the 1960s.  and in fact ''the naked trucker & t bones show'' is a mutant variety show, with onstage banter leading into filmed versions of trucker tales, weekly ''hitchhiker of the week'' bits featuring guest stars like will ferrell and a guy in a bear suit, and at least one musical number, with lyrics every bit as demented as the rest of the show. there is, for instance, ''my american dream,'' which praises the idea of an america where ''you're free to smoke a bowl while you're smokin' a virginia ham,'' an america that is ''iowa corn, the little bighorn, a red juicy georgia peach./and a fraternity guy in a wet tighty-whitey competition in daytona beach.''  ''what i'm hoping,'' ms. corrao said, '' is that people realize this show is not what it may appear to be. it may look, at first, like broad blue-collar humor, but it's not. it's actually smartsocial satire. we think it will appeal to the 'blue collar comedy' audience but also to people who watch 'the daily show' and 'the colbert report.' ''  mr. koechner offered his theory as to why this might be the right moment to introduce ''the naked trucker & t-bones'' to a national television audience. ''maybe it's representative of the times we live in,'' he said. ''in times of war there are things that go unspoken that perhaps shouldn't be, so some way or another, some subversion has to happen. like the cabaret scene that developed in prewar germany.''  to which mr. allen added, ''just so you know how cabaret, '30s berlin this really is, i should tell you that i am a woman dressed as a naked dude.''  television  