the best we can hope for   nobody will quibble with president bush's line wednesday night that in iraq, ''victory will not look like the ones our fathers and grandfathers achieved; there will be no surrender ceremony on the deck of a battleship.''  of course, that calls to mind his victory landing on the deck of the carrier abraham lincoln off the coast of california in may 2003, which he followed with a speech declaring that, ''in the battle of iraq, the united states and our allies have prevailed.''  but let's not digress. mr. bush has now scaled back his strategy for victory to a strategy for the best-we-can-hope-for. so, it must be asked, what exactly is the best we can hope for?  ''in the best-case scenario, we'll be in iraq for 15 or 20 years,'' said stephen biddle, author of ''military power: explaining victory and defeat in modern battle.'' he offers the example of the balkans, where everyone seems to have forgotten about the united states troops who have been there for years, helping keep a peace brokered in dayton, ohio, in 1995.  under the best result mr. biddle said he could imagine, the united states would cajole or force warring shiites, sunnis and kurds to agree to the standard-cookbook negotiated ending to a civil war. there would be some kind of power-sharing deal among the key combatants, yielding an uneasy cease-fire that would have to be policed for a long time by outside peacekeepers, since no warring side would trust another.  sounds like paradise, doesn't it? except, mr. biddle said, ''if i had to bet my house mortgage on a scenario, it wouldn't be on that one.''  before we get to the outcome on which mr. biddle is willing to bet his piece of the american dream, we should, at least, examine the second, optimistic resolution that iraq experts offer. this is the ending which, they said, president bush should embrace with both arms -- if he can get it.  remember the spanish civil war? the best america can hope for, some experts said, would be for iraq to turn into today's version of the spanish civil war.  for readers without immediate access to wikipedia, the spanish civil war lasted three years, from 1936 to 1939, when the nationalists, led by francisco franco, defeated the loyalists of the second spanish republic. the death toll was huge -- estimates put it between 500,000 and one million. people in just about every european country were passionate about the fight: the loyalists got weapons and volunteers from the soviet union, while the nationalists received help from italy, germany and portugal.  but, in the end, the spanish civil war stayed spanish. the europeans sent money and arms and even volunteers, but they didn't let the war engulf the continent. (probably because the continent was busy getting engulfed in world war ii, but let's not be too technical.)  the biggest worry in iraq is not that iraq will descend into a civil war -- most experts say that is a done deal -- but that an iraqi civil war will not stay iraqi. the fear is that a civil war will engulf the entire region, with saudi arabia and jordan defending the sunnis, iran backing the shiites, and iraqi kurds declaring their independence, a move sure to draw in turkey, which has its own restive kurdish population.  ''there's a difference between the saudis providing help and them actually sending in forces; there's a difference between everybody playing in the troubled waters of iraq and actually allowing it to spread beyond iraq's borders,'' said gideon rose, managing editor of foreign affairs magazine. ''given the alternative, the spanish civil war was better than world war i.''  the spanish civil war script doesn't bode well for iraq itself. the death toll would be enormous, and iraqi sunnis, who make up only about 20 percent of the population, would face particular hardship. but such a war wouldn't become world war iii. the united states would eventually pull its troops out, the iranians would finance the shiites, and the saudis would support the sunnis, but neither neighbor would engage militarily itself.  america's image abroad would suffer a blow, but not a fatal one, and in the end, the united states would still be the sole world power. ''that's the best we can expect,'' mr. rose said. ''disaster in iraq, problems in the middle east and a several-year period to recover the losses in american foreign policy.''  critics have been unstinting in their disapproval of mr. bush's plan to send more than 20,000 additional american troops, mostly to baghdad, where they will embed with iraqi brigades.  the idea is that the presence of the american troops will prevent the iraqi soldiers, who are mostly shiite, from slaughtering the minority sunnis. eventually, the thinking goes, the sunni population in baghdad will come to trust the iraqi soldiers, and reconciliation will happen between iraqi sunnis, shiites and kurds.  the problem with mr. bush's plan, said vali nasr, a senior fellow at the council on foreign relations, is that it doesn't provide enough american troops to do much more than stay the course, to use mr. bush's now-abandoned lexicon. the way mr. nasr sees it, 20,000 additional troops is too few to change the dynamic on the ground, but enough to escalate tensions further.  ''the best we can hope for is pretty much the same thing we've had for the last year,'' said mr. nasr, author of ''the shia revival: how conflicts within islam will shape the future.'' ''more of the same for another two years, but keep in mind that it could potentially get much worse.''  that worst-case scenario is pretty scary, mr. biddle said. in that picture, the united states would pull its troops out of iraq, the civil war would accelerate, and the shiites, financed by iran, would conquer one sunni village after another, driving the sunnis over the borders and into refugee camps in saudi arabia and jordan.  there would be a huge refugee crisis in the sunni arab countries, where a dispossessed, bitter and highly politicized refugee population would appeal to saudi and jordanian rulers to make a last stand for sunnis in iraq. but since it would have taken about 5 to 10 years to get to this point, guess who, by then, would have acquired a nuclear bomb?  iran.  ''in the worst case, you could be looking at a couple of nuclear weapons dropped on major cities -- baghdad, riyadh, tehran,'' mr. biddle said.  that possibility makes the one that mr. biddle views as most likely seem almost palatable. here it is:  ''we get out, the civil war escalates,'' mr. biddle said. ''it's funded by all sides but they don't send their own troops across the border. the war just bumps along for 5 or 10 years and everybody eventually gets so weary that diplomacy finally gets going, and there's a cease-fire, power-sharing deal. during that period, iraqi oil output crashes, there's huge instability in the region and oil prices rise. and there's a humanitarian catastrophe in iraq.  ''that's not a very happy scenario,'' mr. biddle acknowledged. ''but it beats the heck out of nuclear war in the mideast.''  the world  