attorney general in north carolina agrees to take duke case   north carolina's attorney general said saturday that his office would immediately assume control of the duke lacrosse sexual assault case referred to him on friday by the durham county district attorney.  ''i wish i could tell you that this case would be resolved quickly,'' the attorney general, roy a. cooper, said at a news conference here on saturday afternoon. ''since we have not been involved in the investigation or the prosecution of these cases, all of the information will be new to our office. any case with such serious criminal charges requires a careful and deliberate review.''  the district attorney, michael b. nifong, had asked mr. cooper to take over the prosecution, citing the conflict of interest he faced from having to respond to an ethics complaint from the north carolina bar association. mr. nifong was ''very disappointed'' at giving up the case, his lawyer, david b. freedman, said saturday, but pleased with mr. cooper's assignment of two veteran prosecutors.  defense lawyers and families of the defendants welcomed the news that the case would be in the hands of the attorney general's office.  ''we are taking a completely new, fresh look at this case, so anything could happen,'' mr. cooper said. ''we are looking at all the facts. whatever charges, if any, are appropriate, they will be pursued.''  mr. cooper said his office would obtain the case files next week and then meet with defense lawyers and reinterview witnesses, including the accuser. he said he did not know if a pretrial hearing scheduled for feb. 5 would have to be postponed.  mr. cooper, 49, a democrat, is a former legislator who wrote a crime victim's bill of rights. he is serving his second term and has announced plans to run for re-election in 2008.  he assigned james j. coman, head of the attorney general's law enforcement and prosecutions division, and mary d. winstead of the special prosecutions division, to the case. but mr. cooper said he would make the final decisions in the case.  ''we accept the case with our eyes wide open to the evidence, but with blinders on for all other distractions,'' mr. cooper said.  from the start, the duke case has been politically charged by race and class. a black woman hired to strip at a duke lacrosse team party last march 13 accused three white students of gang rape. protests erupted, and mr. nifong expressed with a certainty that a crime had occurred.  but in the last 10 months, his case floundered as defense lawyers offered time-stamped photographs challenging the stripper's account, prosecution reports highlighting the lack of dna evidence and inconsistencies in the woman's story. defense lawyers have insisted that the woman, 28, is a false accuser and have painted mr. nifong, 55, as a renegade with political motives.  sexual offense and kidnapping charges are pending against collin finnerty, 20, of garden city, n.y.; reade w. seligmann, of essex fells, n.j.; and david f. evans, 23, of annapolis, md. the three were initially charged with rape, but mr. nifong dismissed that charge after the accuser told an investigator she could not be sure what had penetrated her.  