tv dramas rip the cover off magazines   krishtine de leon, one of six interns picked to star in an mtv reality series set at rolling stone, expected an office out of ''almost famous,'' the 2000 movie about the early-1970s heyday of the rock music magazine. ''the type of place where people were doing copious amounts of drugs to get their stories in on time, hobnobbing with lots of celebrities, no real rules,'' she said.  instead, she found a workplace that was less like woodstock and more like wachovia bank. ''it was like any other freaking office with cubicles,'' ms. de leon, 24, said. ''very typical.''  it's no surprise that ms. de leon expected more flash and glamour, given the proliferation of pop-culture depictions of the magazine industry as a frothy, celebrity-packed playground. interest in the world of glossy publications and their semi-renowned editors has reached an apogee. there are television shows like ''dirt,'' the soapy fx networks drama set at a celebrity tabloid; ''ugly betty,'' about an unattractive fashion magazine assistant; and now the rolling stone reality show, ''i'm from rolling stone.''  at the same time, chick-lit books with magazine-editor heroines continue to line bookstore shelves: ''little pink slips,'' the sally koslow roman à clef about her life as editor in chief of mccall's is due in april; and ''black will shoot,'' a novel by jesse washington, a former blaze editor, about the world of hip-hop magazines, is scheduled for summer. a documentary about the making of the gargantuan vogue september issue is also in the works.  why is pop culture fixated on the magazine world? some of this is the copycat effect: both the book and film adaptation of ''the devil wears prada'' were runaway hits, so programming executives and book publishers are eager to repeat those successes.  and why do executives think viewers and readers will care about a backstage peek into magazineland? the notion seems almost quaint, given how the internet has displaced magazines and books in the affections of many young people, pointed out robert thompson, a professor of television and popular culture at syracuse university.  competition from the internet, in fact, is one reason magazines have offered up their offices to reality television productions. two previous shows, ''miss seventeen,'' set at seventeen, and ''the hills,'' whose main character worked at teen vogue, were essentially long commercials for those magazines.  jann wenner, the founder and editor of rolling stone, described reality television as ''a very good marketing idea.''  the shows and books all focus on a narrow niche of publishing. ''all of these shows take place at magazines that deal with fashion and celebrity,'' professor thompson said. ''they're not set at time or the new yorker. the intellectual magazines are struggling. the big fashion magazines and celebrity magazines still have a very prominent place in american culture, because the culture is obsessed, absolutely ravenous, about all things celebrity right now.''  editors of the glossies, who once toiled in relative obscurity, have become more visible in recent years, offering relationship advice and beauty tips on morning talk shows. many are demicelebrities themselves.  and glossy magazines do lend themselves easily to narrative. ''you've got divalike people in positions of power,'' said andrew essex, the former editor in chief of absolute, a magazine for the rarefied users of black american express cards. ''you have hierarchal positions that inevitably produce conflict. you've got overeducated and underpaid people who are completely self-aggrandizing, and these people are in the storytelling business, so they know how to form themselves into characters.''  much of the magazinecentric entertainment has been created by current and former magazine employees, who are following that old adage ''write what you know.''  tim brooks, an author of ''the complete directory to primetime television,'' believes the glossy editorial world is enjoying a higher profile because ''one of the imperatives of most networks is to appeal to younger women, and these places provide a setting that touches on issues that speak to this target demographic.''  thus far it appears that audiences don't care about the magazine industry quite so much as television executives, book publishers and filmmakers want them to. ''i'm from rolling stone,'' which made its debut last sunday, drew a mere 369,000 viewers. the audience for ''dirt'' fell from 3.7 million the first week to 2.4 million the second, according to nielsen media research.  books haven't fared much better. memoirs by linda wells, the editor in chief of the beauty magazine allure, and jean godfrey-june, the beauty editor at lucky, weren't big sellers. no one even remembers the names of most of the me-too chick-lit novels starring divalike magazine editors.  ''to expect any of these books to do as well as 'devil wears prada' is to court disaster,'' said sara nelson, the editor of publishers weekly.  and yet, from ''funny face'' to ''how to lose a guy in 10 days,'' pop culture's interest in the world of glossy magazines endures, often coming around cyclically like platform shoes. an earlier moment, in the '90s, offered the sit-coms ''anything but love,'' ''suddenly susan'' and ''central park west.'' only ''just shoot me,'' a comedy starring david spade about life at blush magazine, was a hit.  when it comes to television, mr. brooks thinks that the shows that do best feel accessible to the average american. ''the downside of being in a magazine setting is that it is a world that ordinary viewers can't relate to,'' he said. ''there is a certain amount of wanting to aspire upward, but in general you're divorcing yourself from the ''friends,'' ''roseanne'' world that's totally familiar to most people.''  matthew carnahan, the executive producer and creator of ''dirt,'' said he was attracted to the magazine business as a subject because it opens a window into a world where the potential for interesting and original stories is abundant. ''as viewers we've been beaten to death with the legal, medical and cop franchises,'' he said. ''this world offers a new narrative menu.''  ultimately, the success of these shows and books will depend less on their invocations of goody bags and fashion front rows than on character development, mr. brooks said. ''do you like or care about these characters, that's what matters,'' he said. ''you have to want to invite them into your home.''  correction:  january 21, 2007, sunday  because of an editing error, an article last sunday about depictions of celebrity magazines in television series and novels referred incorrectly to absolute magazine, whose former editor in chief, andrew essex, discussed the portrayals. it is not exclusively for holders of american express black cards, known formally as the centurion card; absolute is aimed at affluent readers in general. (centurion, the magazine, is published exclusively for customers with black cards.)  