what distractions? kidd leads way for the nets   jason kidd, 33, had played nearly 43 minutes against the chicago bulls and still was relentlessly pursuing kirk hinrich, a point guard who is seven years younger.  on the final play of thursday night's game at the united center, with the nets holding a 3-point lead, kidd disrupted hinrich's dribble, forcing him to attempt an off-balance 3-pointer that was blocked by nets forward bostjan nachbar. time expired, and the nets beat the bulls, 86-83.  it was the second consecutive victory for the nets (16-19), and it blemished chicago's 13-0 home record against eastern conference opponents.  kidd (23 points, 14 rebounds, 11 assists) recorded his 82nd triple-double. if he was distracted by his split from his wife, joumana, which became public this week, he certainly did not show it. kidd's performance was so dazzling that his coach, lawrence frank, nearly credited him alone for the victory.  ''it's a team victory,'' frank said, ''but to make the understatement of the short year, without him, we don't have a chance in this game.''  kidd's stellar play began early in the second half after the bulls outscored the nets, 6-2, in just over a minute and a half to extend their halftime lead to 18 points. frank called a timeout, and kidd apparently found a cape on the bench. he quickly made a pair of shots to spark a 22-6 run that drew the nets to within 2 points.  his energy sparked the nets' defense, which at one point held the bulls scoreless for nearly five minutes on 0-for-7 shooting from the field.  kidd and the nets made their decisive statement midway through the fourth quarter when they showed the resolve of an elite team, using a 14-0 spurt to take control of the game.  the nets prevented the bulls from scoring on eight consecutive possessions, and chicago shot 0 for 9 from the field. when kidd hit a 3-pointer from the corner with 5 minutes 41 seconds to play, the nets went ahead, 75-74, their first lead since they went ahead by 2-0 a minute into the game.  kidd's teammates did not hear him say a word during their game-changing runs. but his play spoke volumes.  ''he's a special guy,'' eddie house said. ''he's not really into the talking too much. he leads by example.''  kidd was also reserved as he spoke about his performance after the game.  ''my job was just to try to inject some energy,'' he said. ''hopefully, i did that.''  the nets finally seem to be finding the swagger of a year ago, when they used winning streaks of 10 and 14 games to cruise to the atlantic division title. and with their runs in the third and fourth quarters, they are showing they know how to shift gears when it counts.  ''that's the nets that i'm used to seeing,'' power forward cliff robinson said. ''being able to clamp down and get stops when they're needed.''  the nets held the bulls' sixth man, ben gordon, to just 3 points in the second half after he scored 20 in the first. frank gave kidd much of the credit, saying he prevented gordon from even touching the ball on many possessions.  the nets are also showing determination.  on one possession the, nets got offensive rebounds after 3-point misses by kidd and nachbar. center mikki moore finally ended the sequence by throwing down a dunk and a scream.  rod thorn, the nets' president, now has reason to believe his team can contend in the eastern conference. ''right now, you can't say that anyone's dominant in the eastern conference,'' he said thursday.  even before the game, thorn said he felt his team was starting to prove it could compete consistently.  ''sometime during the season, if you're a quality team, you get into a rhythm, a groove, and you play well,'' thorn said. ''i see a lot of good signs. our spirit seems to be good; confidence level's up. hopefully, we can continue to play well.''  rebounds  the nets rookie point guard marcus williams did not make the trip to chicago because of strep throat.  power forward chris webber, who agreed to a buyout with the philadelphia 76ers, did not mention the nets as one of the teams he is interested in, which led rod thorn to say, ''i don't think we're on his radar.''  pro basketball  