fraud cases are rising, f.b.i. says   mortgage fraud has continued its climb over the last year, according to new statistics from the federal bureau of investigation, despite increased attention from the financial industry and law enforcement agencies.  ''we recognize it's a growing problem, so we've redoubled our efforts to work with the industry and other law enforcement agencies to address it,'' said william stern, the f.b.i.'s mortgage fraud coordinator. ''we're seeing it spill over to things like organized crime and gangs, which concerns us, too.''  mr. stern said that as of early january, the bureau had 938 pending mortgage-fraud investigations, compared with 818 at the end of september and 721 in september 2005. the f.b.i. estimated that the actual number of cases was closer to 36,000 for the year ended sept. 30, compared with 22,000 the previous year.  the bureau's cases typically involve so-called ''fraud for profit,'' which happens when criminals seek to make off with the funds from a loan. criminals will buy a house, often using a stolen identity, from a legitimate seller, then immediately put the house up for sale. others in the crime ring will then pose as buyers and work with a corrupt appraiser to assign an inflated value to the house. after finding a mortgage at the inflated value, the buyers split the proceeds from the fraudulent mortgage with the sellers.  the other major category of mortgage fraud involves ''fraud for property.'' in these cases, borrowers typically inflate their incomes on mortgage applications so that they can qualify for loans that would otherwise be outside their reach. although borrowers can be held legally liable for misstatements, that rarely happens since the authorities say it is much more important for them to pursue ''fraud for profit'' cases.  mr. stern said lenders and other victims were losing bigger amounts to mortgage fraud rings. this year, the f.b.i. began closely tracking victims' losses and found that in 54 percent of the cases they lost more than $1 million. ''we've seen a steady rise in both the complexity of the cases and the loss amounts,'' he said.  borrowers not directly involved with mortgage fraud might not notice the effects of such crimes, since lending institutions can absorb the financial damage or compensate for the losses in subtle ways. but people who live in areas where mortgage fraud is a problem can be hit hard, said ann fulmer, the vice president for industry relations at interthinx, a mortgage-fraud consultancy in agoura hills, calif.  before she entered the field, ms. fulmer helped uncover a mortgage-fraud ring in stone mountain, ga., an atlanta suburb, in 1996. the criminals bought 21 of the 2,200 houses in her subdivision -- in fact, some who lived only three doors away had also committed violent crimes, she said.  aside from safety concerns, ms. fulmer said, neighborhoods victimized by fraud suffer tax consequences. assessors, she said, often do not recognize illegitimate transactions and assess neighborhoods at valuations similar to the inflated ones paid in the fraud schemes.  jay h. meadows, the chief executive of rapid reporting, a fort worth company that helps lenders identify potentially fraudulent mortgage applications, said lenders were now putting considerably more effort into preventing fraud than five years ago. but at the same time, mr. meadows said, lenders have more aggressively marketed products like stated-income loans that are more open to abuse.  with such mortgages, self-employed applicants and others who do not receive w-2 income statements can choose to estimate their annual income for lenders, who have limited means -- or, critics say, willingness -- to verify the estimates.  mr. meadows said criminals used such mortgages to qualify for loans they had no intention of repaying. ''it's like putting $200 on your windshield,'' he said of lenders who fail to verify applicants' incomes. ''i'd hardly call that theft. i'd call that charity.''  mortgages  