executive who stirred up volkswagen will step down   wolfgang bernhard, the hard-charging executive who pared costs at volkswagen but ruffled the feathers of its labor unions and chairman, will leave the company as part of a broad shake-up of its managing board, the company announced thursday.  volkswagen said that mr. bernhard would leave his position as chairman of the volkswagen brand group -- the cluster of vehicle makers that includes skoda, bentley and bugatti as well as the company's passenger car business -- ''by mutual agreement'' by jan. 31.  at the same time, volkswagen, which is europe's largest carmaker, said it would dissolve the volkswagen group and the audi group, which includes audi, seat and lamborghini. instead, a series of executive positions will carry responsibilities across all of volkswagen for such functions as sales and marketing, production and research and development.  ''with this step, the supervisory board is creating the conditions for greater synergies within the company,'' the board said.  volkswagen shares rose 0.3 percent to close at 82.84 euros, or $106.77, on the deutsche börse thursday.  martin winterkorn, who moved up from being head of audi to chief executive of volkswagen on jan. 1, will take personal charge of research and development for all of volkswagen. jochem heizmann, until now head of production for audi only, will assume that role for the entire company.  mr. winterkorn will also assume direct responsibility for the volkswagen brand, not the now-defunct grouping of brands, which has been the company's primary headache as it has tried to cut costs.  he will be assisted by ulrich hackenberg, formerly audi's head of development, as the top executive for development at the volkswagen brand.  volkswagen will later appoint a single person to handle distribution and marketing, the company said.  in the main, analysts have welcomed the changes at volkswagen, though they have cautioned that the effects are unlikely to be felt until the company begins developing its models for the next decade.  ''this change is not going to mean an absolute financial improvement by x percent,'' said horst schneider, an automotive analyst with westlb. ''we can't say that all. but it offers the opportunities for some synergies.''  the departure of mr. bernhard has been widely anticipated since mr. winterkorn's promotion was announced in november.  the former chief executive, bernd pischetsrieder, brought mr. bernhard, a former executive at daimlerchrysler, into volkswagen in october 2004 as part of his plan to cut costs at the automaker.  mr. bernhard pushed through plans to cut 20,000 jobs and extend the workweek during the course of 2006.  but in the process, he alienated the powerful volkswagen union, ig metall, which is also closely allied with volkswagen's chairman, ferdinand piëch. when mr. piëch, together with porsche, a major volkswagen shareholder, pushed out mr. pischetsrieder in favor of mr. winterkorn in november, mr. bernhard was left vulnerable to the same fate.  also on thursday, prosecutors dropped charges against peter hartz, the former head of personnel at volkswagen, over allegations of company payments to prostitutes.  the fall of mr. hartz, the chief architect of labor policy changes pushed through by the former german chancellor, gerhard schröder, created a sensation in germany when he resigned from volkswagen in july 2005. german tabloids were soon filed with lurid tales of sex tours and prostitutes.  though they have dropped these charges, the prosecutors in braunschweig, a town near volkswagen's headquarters, wolfsburg, in northern germany, will still pursue 44 charges of breach of trust, including accusations of payments to klaus volkert, the former head of the volkswagen works council, and his lover.  volkswagen's supervisory board rejected the hostile takeover bid of the german truckmaker man for a swedish rival, scania, on thursday, a move that scania said meant the german approach was doomed in its current form, reuters reported from frankfurt.  