american soccer takes a bold gamble on a boldface name   it was the night of aug. 12 that dave checketts was enlightened to the magnetic appeal of posh spice's significant other. david beckham entered a game in salt lake city for real madrid and, as checketts recalled, ''thousands of flashbulbs went off.''  before he became the principal owner of major league soccer's real salt lake -- real madrid's american partner in player development and its opponent in the aforementioned summer friendly -- checketts governed the knicks during the bullish 1990s. he recognized the michael jordan treatment when he saw it.  all the more impressive, checketts thought, it occurred seven time zones from beckham's mother england, far away from anyplace where soccer reigns.  ''he's a huge celebrity,'' checketts said yesterday in a telephone interview. ''i don't know if it's because he married a spice girl or he was the captain of england or he hangs out with tom cruise.''  check off all of the above, and don't forget beckham's legendary ability to bend a few balls into the back of the net.  does that make him, at 31, on the career downside, worth more than $250 million over five years, the mind-bending sum attached to the deal beckham has agreed to with the los angeles galaxy?  in a conference call yesterday, tim leiweke, president and chief executive of the anschutz entertainment group, which operates the galaxy, admitted that the figure was not being driven by conventional salary considerations. it factored in every last dollar of anticipated ancillary income, and maybe a couple of lucky scratch lottery tickets, too.  leiweke and his boss, philip anschutz, along with commissioner don garber, were no doubt hoping the masses would ignore the fine print, be very impressed by so-called industry sources calling this deal the richest in the history of global sports. not since the late 1970s, since pelé roamed giants stadium like tiki barber, has american soccer made such a big, sexy score.  whatever beckham's actual salary, it will no doubt be exponentially more than anyone else's, at least until the next big-name import. to that end, garber promised that his league, in allowing teams one contract unregulated by its salary cap, would not follow the inflated payroll strategy that doomed the north american soccer league.  checketts, who pushed hard against some internal dissent for what immediately became known as the beckham rule, said, ''if we do this responsibly, it'll be a huge benefit in this country for the sport.''  or, quite conceivably, it could mean more financial pain, if not ruin, for m.l.s., a boon only for paparazzi.  for now, this is a story about the blessed union of american soccer and international spice, about the bet that transcendent star power can catapult pro soccer across a spring-to-fall season that belongs to baseball, a game hard-wired for more than a century into the american sports psyche.  on the always-in-season subject of our national pastime, we should know now that baseball can withstand the most unseemly scandals, the shaming of its beckhams on charges of cheating. two days after mark mcgwire was humbled in the hall of fame voting like a fringe-party candidate, barry bonds, old reliable, was back in the news yesterday, reported by the daily news to have failed a test for amphetamines last season.  meanwhile, baseball attendance continues to soar. huge sums have been spent on free agents this off-season. where's the steroid fallout? does anyone care? i think they do, but maybe the toll can be measured only in those shrinking national ratings for all-star games and the world series, when fans are asked to root beyond their provincial passion.  giving up the home team, the daily fix, is too much to ask. here, baseball thrives on the men-at-work ethos that soccer has all over the world.  beckham weighed in by satellite yesterday, saying he is coming here ''to make a difference with the kids.'' we have more than enough of them playing, so that's not the problem. but will the young ones watch him, and those from abroad destined to follow? can beckham help create a fan base of those who will live and die with their team, week after week, year after year?  the best guess i heard yesterday came from ashley hammond, an englishman who directs numerous soccer programs in my town, montclair, n.j.  ''if his feet don't speak, no one will listen,'' hammond said.  if he can't be jordanesque in m.l.s., or even scottie pippen, the curious and the star struck will lose interest and so, in all likelihood, will tom cruise.  yes, cruise was at rice-eccles stadium that night last summer, with his scientology girl, katie holmes, and more than 45,000 somewhat less beautiful people for real madrid's 2-0 victory over real salt lake, two nights after 70,000 showed up for another friendly in seattle.  before the salt lake game, beckham picked up a shovel and assisted checketts in breaking ground for a soccer stadium. checketts then watched beckham practice with real madrid in front of several thousand fans and sign autographs long after his teammates had gone.  it sure looked like the groundbreaking for an american invasion, for what could be an illuminating experience for beckham and his sport. then again, the salt lake stadium he dug for remains politically entangled, on hold, a symbolic reminder that in this country, the resistance to soccer as a spectator sport doesn't bend as easily as beckham's most glorious goals.  sports of the times e-mail: hjaraton@nytimes.com  