house of the setting sun   jimi hendrix turns eighty  by tim sandlin.  308 pp. riverhead books. $24.95.  it's bad form, probably, to wish ill of the aged, but golly it would be gratifying to load all of the geezers in tim sandlin's new comic novel onto a spaceship and blast them into orbit around some other planet.  this may not be the effect sandlin was going for in ''jimi hendrix turns eighty,'' which is about woodstock-generation types in an assisted-living center. he was almost certainly hoping to create an endearingly irascible and eccentric bunch of rebels, the kind of people walter matthau and george burns and martha raye would play in the film version if they were still alive. instead he inspires a single, admittedly harsh thought: anyone still listening to procol harum in 2022, when this novel is set, is no longer welcome here.  sandlin puts his oldsters in a west coast establishment called mission pescadero, a place run by an unpleasant woman named alexandra who doesn't exactly empathize with her charges or employees. ''i don't know which is worse,'' she says while giving a new arrival a tour, ''old men who pee themselves and sit in it for hours or mexicans who can't clean it up.''  the newcomer is guy fontaine, who, like most of the residents, has been dumped into mission pescadero against his will (in his case, by a daughter, after an episode that involved driving a golf cart down a freeway). the notion of involuntary confinement is pivotal to sandlin's story, but it is one of several central tenets that are never quite credible. would these old folks, most of them veterans of the great authority-defying struggles of yore and (as later emerges) still perfectly comfortable with e-mail and cellphones and media manipulation have allowed themselves to be maneuvered out of their money and rights by venal offspring? nah; they would have figured out never to trust anyone under 40 way back in the year, well, 2007.  guy is from oklahoma, but practically everyone else in the center is from one of the sacred '60s spots; in an amusing bit, sandlin makes the dining room cliques geographic. (''the table with the fellow who calls everyone mate is haight ashbury before the summer of love,'' a fellow resident explains to guy. ''next to them are the haight newcomers, which means summer of love or after.'') though guy doesn't have the radical credentials of the others, he's the one who starts the inevitable rebellion, standing up for a fellow resident who has been found to be harboring an illegal cat.  the uprising is moderately enjoyable as the inmates seize the asylum and deliver payback to the evil alexandra and the doctor who has been overmedicating them all into complacency. but sandlin's incessant name-dropping -- song titles, lyrics, rock groups from back in the day -- quickly grows irritating; it's a first cousin of madison avenue's crass use of classic john lennon and ray davies to sell product. (also, if you're going to do ''hey, boomers, here's a book full of names from when you were young and relevant,'' at least get the trivia right. the donovan song was ''i love my shirt,'' not ''i love my jeans,'' and grace slick, in a song that more or less defined the era, sang, ''one pill makes you larger'' -- not ''bigger'' -- ''and one pill makes you small.''  and then there's the sex. a preposterous amount of it goes on at mission pescadero, more than in your average college dormitory. maybe sandlin, whose previous novels include ''skipped parts'' (which was heavy on teenage sex), has done some research on this and octogenarians really are going at it day and night. seems unlikely, though. and in any case, ick.  but what really doesn't ring true here is the way these codgers are stuck in the '60s only when sandlin needs them to be. one of many cases in point involves a mission resident named winston who is filming the uprising. ''up on the ladder, winston is thinking about selling his footage to an independent documentary filmmaker,'' sandlin writes. ''he plans to hold out for creative control of the sound track. he could lay on some who. or animals.'' if dear ol' winston is savvy enough to know the value of his video and be thinking in terms of creative control, he is also savvy enough to know that who songs lost their rebel credentials when they started turning up in television commercials and ''csi.''  but maybe that's overanalyzing the old folks in this lightweight work. maybe there really are people who have done nothing but debate whether it's ''keep on trucking'' or ''keep on truckin' '' since the first nixon administration. if so, we need to find them and either shut them up or ship them up, to neptune or thereabouts.  neil genzlinger is a staff editor at the times.  