new york's kindest   when cesar rodriguez's stepdaughter missed several weeks of first grade in the spring of 2005, he convinced an investigator from the city administration for children's services that his wife, pregnant with her sixth child, was simply overwhelmed. after he agreed to get the older children to school on time, the investigator arranged to buy the family a crib, a stroller and a high chair. and then she closed the case.  months later, when the girl came to school with stitches and a black eye, mr. rodriguez told a doctor and children's services investigators that the injury was the result of an accident. then he kept his family out of sight for a month. no one unlocked the door to his brooklyn apartment when children's services came to call.  on the morning of jan. 11, 2006, an investigator visited mr. rodriguez's building once again, and this time she had no trouble getting inside. an ambulance crew was there with the badly damaged body of 7-year-old nixzmary brown. and now mr. rodriguez and the girl's mother, nixzaliz santiago, are nearing trials on murder charges.  there had been reasons to suspect violence and deception in the nixzmary brown case, but investigators had not followed up on them. city officials have acknowledged breaches of protocol on the part of child protection workers and others who had seen evidence of the child's abuse, and they have since made valuable reforms in caseworker oversight.  nonetheless, in trying to prevent the same kind of failures from happening again, it is important to look beyond this case to a larger problem with the laws that guide child protection. some of the rules that caseworkers must follow do not accurately reflect the day-to-day reality of their work, and may even divert their attention from serious trouble.  last year i spent several weeks with skilled child-protection workers looking into reports of abuse and neglect in east harlem. the best of these professionals are trained skeptics with instinctive compassion. they spend their days and evenings in the toughest neighborhoods, in the homes of the poorest new yorkers, trying to make sure children are safe. most are women in their 20s who have bachelor's degrees and earn modest salaries. (starting pay is $38,000.)  situations involving brutal assaults are very rare. most cases stem from pressures linked to poverty -- including overcrowded housing, domestic violence, mental health problems and substance abuse.  i've watched investigators help single mothers organize child care, buy furniture or seek orders of protection against abusive men. i saw one worker in east harlem embrace a sobbing mother of two, as the woman contemplated the near impossibility of coming up with the rent after her violent lover moved out. later that evening, the worker cajoled a 16-year-old to obey her probation rules, stay out of detention and help her grandmother keep her family together.  from january through may of last year, after nixzmary brown's death, a torrent of nearly 1,600 new cases of suspected abuse and neglect were reported each week to the administration for children's services -- 48 percent more than usual. to this day, new names are added to case lists faster than old cases can be resolved.  about one-third of such reports turn out to raise valid concerns. many turn out to be frivolous complaints made by former lovers, unhappy neighbors or meddlesome in-laws. other reports -- far too many, city officials say privately -- come from school officials who don't first reach out to families to find out why a child is missing school, hungry or poorly clothed.  a central purpose of child protection services is to ensure that no child is killed or endangered by vicious, soulless or oblivious adults. state laws aim to accomplish this by requiring caseworkers to meet strict investigative protocols. these include interviews with everyone in the household within 48 hours, as well as others involved with the family -- but also stiff deadlines and multiple record checks with clinics and schools, and paperwork that includes dozens of pages of notes that must be filed in two separate data systems.  these rules make sense in cases like nixzmary brown's, in which there is reason to suspect harsh abuse. but in the great majority of cases, violence or extreme neglect is not the issue. and the rules impose a staggering burden of work that can distract investigators from more important tasks.  new york city needs to consider a two-tiered approach to child-protection services, similar to the ones that have been tried with some success in states like minnesota. in all cases, investigators should be required to follow the most basic procedures. they should see all the children in the household, and interview the adults. in instances where there is reason to suspect serious problems, teams of skillful, highly experienced investigators should dig deeper.  but most cases should be quickly passed on to workers who have the time to give families the support, resources and counseling they need.  op-ed contributor andrew white is the director of the new school's center for new york city affairs and editor of child welfare watch.  