the neediest cases; the physical pain of spinal disease eclipses poverty's mental anguish   the dozen or so old cookie jars, all that remain of a collection, glisten on the living room shelves, each alive in its bright details: the fiery red of lucille ball's hair, howdy doody's ruddy cheeks.  for lorraine kipper, 59, the cookie jars, some dating as far back as the 1930s, represent hundreds of road trips with her husband and their shared hunt, over 20 years, for the most coveted pieces. by 1990, more than 400 cookie jars lined the walls of their apartment in howard beach, queens.  now, though, only about a dozen remain.  suffering from depression and unable to work after her husband left her in 1991, ms. kipper sold the collection, except for a few of her most cherished jars, through an ohio auction house.  but a few years later, her depression was eclipsed by physical pain, she said, and her medical bills quickly depleted the money she had raised from the sale.  ms. kipper's legs and arms grew numb in 1995, she explained, and she soon could barely walk because of the pain in her back and legs. a string of doctors agreed she was suffering from lyme disease and prescribed antibiotics, but that did nothing to alleviate her pain.  a year passed before she finally saw a neurologist, who told her the problem was not lyme disease. her spine, he explained, was literally disintegrating.  between the discs of her spine, the cartilage is dissolving into powder, damaging her nerves and spinal cord, she said in an interview at her home. and despite two operations, her pain has continued. ''it's sharp, it's dull, it's there, constantly there,'' she said. ''i can't stand for too long, i can't sit for too long.''  during her first operation, doctors moved pieces of bone from her hip to her neck to separate the discs in her spine that had dissolved. for two months she remained in a body cast that stretched from her chin to her hips.  then the doctors implanted a titanium bar in her neck in another attempt to strengthen her spine. for three months as she healed she wore a metal brace in the shape of a halo, screwed into the front and the back of her head to hold her neck erect.  she depends on an aide who cares for her on weekdays, as well as a kitchen cabinet full of medicines.  ''i survive on vicodin,'' she said, pulling 20 pill bottles from the cabinet, naming the condition each is to treat. ''depression, bipolar, to help me not get an ulcer, high blood pressure, cholesterol, i'm diabetic,'' she said, falling silent at the sight of all the medicine. ''look how sick i am.''  ms. kipper cannot sit at her kitchen table without rising every few minutes to relieve the pressure building in her lower back. she does not cook, she said, because she cannot stand in front of her stove for long. once the busy manager of a supermarket-size liquor store, she longs to feel useful.  ''you don't feel like you're worth anything anymore because you can't work,'' she said. ''you can't do anything, really.''  her monthly checks, $710 from supplemental security income and social security disability, coupled with $139 in food stamps, barely cover her expenses, which include electricity, telephone and the co-payments her prescriptions and doctor visits require, she said.  she lives in the same apartment where she raised her children, the second story of a house that one of her daughters now owns. she pays $350 a month in rent, though the apartment is worth at least $1,800 monthly, she said.  the daughter, her husband and their three children live on the first floor of the house, ms. kipper said, and they cannot afford to let her use the space without some payment.  in february, she fell behind in her rent and turned to catholic charities of brooklyn and queens, one of the seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund. with $300 from the fund, a caseworker helped ms. kipper cover one month's rent, relieving her, at least for the moment, of the anxiety caused by the financial strain.  ''it's horrible,'' she said. ''you just feel like nobody cares, nobody cares that you don't have money to buy a coat or shoes. i don't have money for anything. catholic charities was the only one that helped.''  as her pain worsens, there is little that seems to relieve ms. kipper for long. even the few antiques that remain in her possession, including the cookie jars, seem only to remind her of the pieces she has lost.  her spine is in such poor condition, she said, that her doctor told her another operation was probably impossible. she has little faith, she added, that it would do much good. ''nothing's going to help,'' she said. ''it's not going to take the pain away.''  previously recorded: $6,363,802.08  recorded wednesday: 120,277.00  total: $6,484,079.08  last year to date: $6,152,702.38  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  