workers' pay: an issue for the rich   to the editor:  re ''working harder for the man,'' by bob herbert (column, jan. 8):  the poor and the middle class are being hurt now, though they don't seem to realize it. ironically, the short-range thinking of the wealthiest will eventually hurt the wealthy also. they forget that their wealth depends on corporate profits, and the profits will turn to losses if there are not enough customers to buy the products.  if they take too large a slice of the pie, the squeezed middle and lower classes will have less and less money to spend.  a company's performance is partly due to the chief executive's decisions, but also to hard-working employees, loyal customers and a considerable amount of pure luck. if the rich try to have it all, they may end up with very little, and they will suffer for their greed along with the rest of us.  bruce rollier  lakewood, n.j., jan. 8, 2007  to the editor:  bob herbert painted the ''pervasive unfairness'' by which most workers in the united states are compensated with a broad brush.  gains in productivity in domestic production have not turned into either higher pay or profits; they have been competed away by foreign rivals using cheaper labor, government support and technology acquired from western companies.  often, the rivals are themselves western companies that have moved overseas to enjoy foreign mercantilist policies and partnerships.  the large bonuses mr. herbert mentions are in the financial sector, which has profited by helping facilitate these international transfers of productive capacity.  goldman sachs, which tops mr. herbert's list, has been heavily involved in aiding chinese industry and the government itself.  united states trade policy can change this, but won't -- not when the former chief executive of goldman sachs, henry m. paulson jr., is appointed treasury secretary without dissent from the leaders of either political party.  william r. hawkins  senior fellow, u.s. business and industry council  washington, jan. 8, 2007  