life goes on. and then, once again, it doesn't.   it's the saddest story of the suburbs, and it goes on and on and on.  so samantha shenker drove friday afternoon to the makeshift memorial on kozloski road -- footballs and roses, candles and rosary beads, pictures of happy high school kids from freehold borough high school. she knelt and prayed for several minutes, crossed herself and began to walk to her car.  she had come to pray for her friend, michael dragonetti, dead at 17, after his 2006 cadillac cts collided with a dodge caravan minivan on wednesday afternoon. his pals and schoolmates james warnock, 17, and andrew lundy, 16, were also killed, as was ruth a. macarthur, 68, the driver of the caravan.  but ms. shenker, who graduated last year from nearby freehold township high school, was also thinking about louis fonseca, another friend who died at 18 after a single-vehicle crash in late december. that happened while the school he graduated from last spring, colts neck high, was mourning the death of mark t. zarantonello, who died in a car crash at the age of 17 in october.  ''it keeps happening,'' she said. ''it feels like it happens every day.''  at brewster high in putnam county, n.y., last week, they were mourning christopher c. caiazzo, 16, who died in a car wreck near the high school on tuesday, and over in elmsford, n.y., the wake was for ricardo dacosta, who died tuesday night when his car ran off route 9a and into a tree. he was 25, not a teenager, but way too young to die. he had made it through the killing fields of iraq, but not through the highways of westchester county.  sometimes people try in a concerted way to see what can be done. last month, 800 people went to monticello high school in the catskills for a forum on teenage driving that was billed as ''not one more.'' in the previous 11 years, 128 people, 85 of them teenagers, died in crashes involving teenage drivers in orange, ulster and sullivan counties in new york.  but mostly there are the intense spasms of grief, then those crosses and memorials on the side of the road, as commonplace as white castles. and then life goes on.  there is, of course, a limit to what anyone can do or what anyone can predict. so rich intile, a parent who through local sports knew and admired all three of the boys from freehold, found it hard to find much of a lesson other than the horror of it all. ''one second, one second in life and everything changes,'' he said.  michael dragonetti, the driver, was a responsible kid, a top student and athlete, mr. intile said. michael had a provisional license that allowed him to have only one other passenger who was not a relative, not the two schoolmates in his car. the cause of the accident has not been determined.  ''this was a wonderful, wonderful person,'' mr. intile said. ''you couldn't ask for a better kid. it makes you appreciate your children that much more because when god calls, when your time is here, your time is here.''  still, in at least two ways, the issue is more than the luck of the divine draw.  the first is about teaching. driver's education programs have been scaled back since the 1970s and increasingly are no longer part of the high school curriculum, at a time motor vehicle crashes remain the leading cause of death for people from 15 to 20. whether through school courses or extracurricular education, we have to be able to do better.  the second involves a kind of teaching, too. once, years ago, i watched from a motel room as teenagers way down the beach surfed with giddy abandon during a lightning storm on the atlantic, the light sparking and crackling over their heads until they came to the shore, juiced, jacked, alive.  being 17 is believing you can surf lightning, drive fast, walk through fire. usually, you can, but usually isn't good enough. ''when you're a teenager, there's an ambience of immortality,'' the freehold principal, linda jewell, said on friday, between talks with mourning families.  it's in their genes, but maybe it's in the culture, too. outside the high school on friday, the school signboard on one side read, ''mike james andrew. always in our hearts.'' the other side read: ''it is not the length of life, but the depth of life.''  really? what parent wouldn't give everything he had for another day with his teenage kid? who would pick 17 years of life, however rich, over the opportunity to see your kid grow up?  kids crash for many reasons: inexperience, inattentiveness, recklessness, speed, bad luck. but you mix the bulletproof instincts of youth with a commercial culture of extreme anything, where no message is cooler than live hard, die young (even if the second part is meant as pose), and you have something lethal. maybe one way to slow the carnage is to get much better at reminding our kids and ourselves that, no matter how deep your life, one bolt of lightning can end it, and that anyone who thinks length of life isn't important needs to interview the grieving parents of freehold.  our towns e-mail: peappl@nytimes.com  