sensitivity and a surprise for 'la traviata' at the met   what might have been just a routine revival of franco zeffirelli's extravagant 1998 production of verdi's ''traviata'' turned out to be an affecting performance thanks to the inspired work of two south korean-born artists and a stalwart american baritone who saved the day.  the soprano hei-kyung hong gave a beautifully sung and deeply felt portrayal of violetta, verdi's consumptive parisian courtesan. the tenor wookyung kim made his house debut as alfredo, violetta's impulsive young lover. as a verdi tenor mr. kim is still a little green, but he has a robust voice and lots of promise. the american baritone charles taylor was scheduled to sing giorgio germont, alfredo's patriarchal father, who persuades violetta to give up his son for the sake of his family's name. but mr. taylor was ill and was replaced by dwayne croft, an experienced germont, who was in very good voice.  ms. hong, a valued artist at the met since her 1984 debut, has a loyal following. though she may lack some charisma and vocal glamour, she is a vibrant and sensitive singer. like many sopranos who take on this touchstone role with its wide-ranging vocal challenges, ms. hong was not entirely at ease dispatching the brilliant coloratura runs and roulades in act i.  if her work in this scene was a little cautious, it was still a pleasure to hear the music sung with such accuracy, good taste and penetrating tone. a lovely woman, she embodied the captivating violetta, who tries mightily to deny for a while that she is fatally ill. from the beginning of act ii through the final death scene, ms. hong sang with increasing confidence and emotional intensity. her poignant phrasing in violetta's aching aria ''addio del passato'' was especially moving.  mr. kim's first official appearance with the met came last summer, when he sang alfredo opposite ms. hong's violetta with the met in the parks concerts. a house debut is a career milestone, and mr. kim seemed a little nervous during act i. but he has an attractive and healthy voice, evenly produced, and at his best he sang with energy and flair.  his one misstep came at the end of alfredo's vehement aria ''o mio rimorso!'' in act ii. to prepare himself for a final high c (which is not written in the score but typically interpolated), mr. kim skipped the climactic vocal phrase that leads to the final note. for all this, he still wobbled on that unnecessary top note. better to have sung the music as written. he is someone to watch. carlo rizzi was the able conductor.  there are additional performances of ''la traviata'' tomorrow evening, jan. 23 and 27, feb. 1, 12, 16 and 22 and in march at the metropolitan opera house, (212) 362-6000.  music review  