antiques   the south rises in the northeast  one of the draws at this year's winter antiques show when it opens next friday at the seventh regiment armory in manhattan will be a loan exhibition of southern antiques that have never been seen outside of their home museum in north carolina. the 40 objects come from the museum of early southern decorative arts in winston-salem.  this unusual museum, founded in 1965, has a comprehensive collection of art and antiques made in the south from 1660 to 1860, with a selection shown in its 24 period rooms and seven galleries. it also has a research center with an electronic database of 75,000 southern artisans who worked in 126 different trades before 1820.  so what makes an antique southern? sumpter priddy iii of alexandria, va., the only dealer specializing in the field at the winter antiques show, said he could ''identify a piece as southern from 20 feet away.''  how?  ''i can recognize the hand of the artisan,'' he replied, ''and see subtle differences in the forms, materials and proportions. there are many souths, and each south differs markedly from the others, geographically and historically. the characteristics of the furniture change from period to period, region to region and culture to culture.''  it may be harder for many of us. some of the southern antiques in the exhibition look english, like the ornate rococo silver coffeepot made in charleston, s.c., or the magnificent pie-crust mahogany tea table from virginia.  others are tougher to identify. one tall walnut desk and bookcase from 1801 combines baroque, rococo and classical elements with stylistic idiosyncrasies. its fully pierced pediment resembles the strings on a harp or the ribs of a whale. the drawer pulls are mounted vertically instead of horizontally. you yearn to learn more about its peculiar cabinetmaker, john shearer of martinsburg, va., who penciled 20 secret inscriptions along with his name and date on the piece.  there has been a lot of new research on southern antiques recently, some sponsored by the museum of early southern decorative arts and some by the chipstone foundation in milwaukee. all the essays in the chipstone journal's current issue, edited by luke beckerdite, are about southern decorative arts. they include one by the museum's curator, robert a. leath, about robert and william walker, two exceptional virginia cabinetmakers. for purposes of study, the south is divided into three colonial regions: the chesapeake, encompassing maryland, eastern virginia and northeastern north carolina, which grew very rich from tobacco before the american revolution; the low country, which includes the coastal areas of southeastern north carolina, south carolina and georgia, which prospered from trade in rice, indigo and cotton; and the rural back country, including parts of virginia, the piedmont of north carolina, south carolina, georgia, tennessee and kentucky -- but not mississippi and alabama.  the back country produced some of the most original work, perhaps because of its potpourri of cultures, including scots-irish, german, english quaker and swiss.  winston-salem, for example, was settled in 1753, when a group of german-speaking moravians leased about 100,000 acres to build a self-sustaining community. they were part of a group that had left what is now the czech republic to seek religious freedom in the american colonies. the settlers who landed in north carolina included european-trained surgeons, weavers, millers, potters, tinsmiths, shoemakers, carpenters and master masons.  when you see a cupboard with designs carefully painted blue, red and white, or a cheerful, slip-decorated earthenware lion (like the one at this show, made for a niece by an accomplished virginia potter named solomon bell), you know you are not in the north anymore.  geese to fly at christie's  dr. alvin e. friedman-kien, a professor of dermatology and microbiology at the new york university medical center, has been collecting contemporary art, photography and antique decoys for decades.  he is selling his collection of decoys, along with some weathervanes and trade signs, at christie's next friday. the presale viewing begins tomorrow.  dr. friedman-kien bought almost all his decoys from adele earnest, co-owner of the stony point folk art gallery in upstate new york and one of the founders of the american folk art museum.  he met mrs. earnest in 1959 at a folk art show at the willard gallery in manhattan, where he often bought work by morris graves and mark tobey. the decoys in that show gave him ''a mystical, almost sensual feeling,'' he recalled, so he visited mrs. earnest's gallery, in a barn on an estate with many outbuildings.  ''i rented one of these houses over several summers as a weekend retreat,'' dr. friedman-kien said. ''so did jasper johns, merce cunningham and john cage. we met at the swimming pool.'' he became close friends with mrs. earnest and, in time, a good customer.  ''i was doing academic research and didn't have time to get involved in the folk art world,'' he said. ''but the decoys gave me so much pleasure. the people who made them had a compulsion to make beautiful things.''  dr. friedman-kien, who was among the first to identify the link between kaposi's sarcoma, a rare form of cancer, and gay men with h.i.v., said the sale's proceeds would go to his foundation, which supports medical research, environmental causes and the arts.  his most prized decoy is a late-19th-century 30-inch canada goose found in pennsylvania. once exhibited at the american folk art museum, it is estimated to sell for $300,000 to $500,000.  ''this was adele's favorite decoy,'' he said. ''it stood at the foot of a daybed by the fireplace. adele gave me a different goose, a flying goose, for my 50th birthday, and i was able to trade it for the canada goose just before her son sold her collection at guyette and schmidt in 1994.''  another important decoy is a rare great gray heron made by the massachusetts carver elmer crowell in the 1890s. but many in the sale are not so rare and carry estimates in the $10,000 range.  asked if he had ever used his decoys, dr. friedman-kien said: ''no, i have an aversion to hunting birds. what i like is the excitement of finding things. as a child, i wanted to be an archaeologist.''  antiques  