in venezuela, a forest of islands   the wooden canoe, a curiara in the language of my pemón indian guides, winds through the rapids of the carrao river in southeast venezuela. a drizzle lets up as the sun rises, revealing the misty escarpments of auyan-tepui. then, abruptly, the tepui -- a pemón word for the majestic sandstone mountains in this wide swath of jungle and savanna -- comes into magnificent relief. it is easily one of the most impressive sights i've ever encountered.  but the best part is yet to come: angel falls, the world's tallest waterfall at 3,212 feet (almost 20 times the height of niagara falls), named in honor of jimmie angel, the missouri-born bush pilot who crash-landed his turboprop nearby in an ill-fated search for gold in the 1930's. though the pemón indians were surely among the first to contemplate the waterfall, the name angel falls stuck after word of the arduous 11-day trek of angel's traveling party reached the outside world. by 1949, the american photojournalist ruth robertson had measured angel falls for an expedition described in national geographic, cementing the mystique of venezuela's tepui country.  venezuela has done little to develop this corner of bolívar state, and the flight from puerto ordaz, over thick jungle and sinewy rivers, to canaima, an asphalt strip and collection of thatched huts that passes for an airport, attests to the region's remoteness.  ''i might have one of the most rewarding jobs in the world,'' said laszlo miszlai, 36, the venezuelan pilot of the cessna grand caravan that swooped in for a dramatic view of angel falls before we landed. ''i not only get to fly over the falls almost every day, but i get to see the awed expressions of our passengers.''  beyond the polarizing political theater that defines venezuela these days are places of intense beauty, from deserted caribbean beaches to snow-capped peaks. angel falls, in the heart of canaima national park, a protected reserve about the size of belgium, may top them all.  geography unique to venezuela made the surreal setting around angel falls possible. there are dozens of tepuis (pronounced tey-poo-ees) in this region, remnants of what geologists believe were the mountains of the ancient supercontinent known as gondwana. some of these isolated mesas are two billion years old, preserving an array of unique plant and animal life that rivals that of places like the galápagos.  ''think of each of these mountains like an island surrounded by forest,'' said charles brewer-carías, a caracas-based naturalist and explorer who is an eminent expert on auyan-tepui and the country's other mesas.  ''some birds cannot fly from one tepui to another because of the distances involved,'' added mr. brewer-carías, who described a family of flowering plants found near angel falls that is related to plants in madagascar, another long-isolated portion of gondwana, which once included africa, antarctica, south america, australia and the indian subcontinent, among other land masses.  ''each tepui has characteristics that give us a window into what the world was like more than a billion years ago,'' said mr. brewer-carías.  when i arrived in canaima in early october near the end of the rainy season, i found myself contemplating a more recent time -- the year 1956. that was when rudolf truffino van der lugt, a dutch adventurer and hotelier, arrived in canaima to scout out locations for a lodge after working for a spell at the hotel tamanaco in caracas.  he called his establishment -- a series of thatched-roof buildings and a bamboo bar -- campamento ucaima and became known as jungle rudy, the go-to guy for anyone planning an expedition to angel falls. in the '50s, ''almost nothing was known about the area,'' the dutch writer jan brokken wrote in his 2004 biography, ''jungle rudy.'' numerous lodges cater to travelers who come to canaima for a glimpse of angel falls, but campamento ucaima has the grandest and most eccentric past. it still feels like an isolated outpost when the fog rolls in off auyan-tepui. though accessible only by canoe from canaima, ucaima has its small luxuries, among them a drink made with venezuela's delicious santa teresa rum and papaya juice, which was handed to me as soon as i arrived.  i gazed around at the spartan world rudy truffino had created: hammocks slung on the porches of bungalows; canoes docked in a small river port; a staff chatting in a patois of pemón and spanish. some leather-bound notebooks contained decades-old clippings of truffino's mosquito coast-esque trajectory into this jungle after leaving post-war europe.  truffino died in 1994, and his lodge is now run by his daughters, who appear as children in a black-and-white photo in ucaima's bar with their austrian mother and their father, who is petting a capybara, a large rodent. a guide named yosmary lópez proudly told me that the lodge had been host to prince charles, neil armstrong and the german filmmaker werner herzog.  i gulped down the welcome cocktail and ms. lópez shepherded me and a few other arrivals into a canoe for an excursion to salto sapo, or frog falls. the 20-minute ride upriver and the one-and-a-half-hour hike through thick rain forest and lighter savanna vegetation was a warm-up for the following day when we would ascend to the foot of angel falls.  near salto sapo, ms. lópez, who was taking a sojourn from her university studies in western venezuela, plucked a yellow flower from the ground that was a little larger than a pinhead. ''it's the smallest orchid in the world,'' she said. i had no way of confirming this information, but i marveled at the intricacy of the tiny orchid and the geologic isolation that had made its evolution possible.  we were drenched as we navigated a narrow rock pathway under salto sapo's curtain of water, holding on to a withering length of rope; when we emerged on the other side of the waterfall we could see a group of pemónes playing soccer on a sandy spot.  by the time we hiked down to the impromptu soccer field they were gone, so we jumped into the water for a swim. rain started falling and i was surprised by the orange, tannin-tinted color of the river water. in the distance, two other mesas, kurún-tepui and kusari-tepui, soared above the savanna and jungle.  the remoteness of this region has kept it relatively pristine; it is still impossible to travel by car through most of canaima national park because there are almost no roads. airstrips built by capuchin missionaries allow limited travel in small planes. canoeing or hiking are the most common ways of getting around.  i got a taste of both methods the next morning with leomar jaramillo, a pemón guide who grew up in the village of santa marta near angel falls. with auyan-tepui still sheathed in darkness, we set out in a motorized curiara for the four-hour trip to the base of the waterfall.  mr. jaramillo, 22, maneuvered the canoe upriver against the rapids with amazing deftness before arriving at a camping site and lookout point where we could view angel falls in the distance. i had never been a huge fan of waterfalls before, but even from this distance, the falls, which shoot water over the top of auyan-tepui in a ''v'' formation, were breathtaking.  we had a brief breakfast of arepas, the white corn cakes that are a staple throughout venezuela, then set out on a smooth sandy path that led into thick jungle. early on, we came upon a small coral snake, at which mr. jaramillo shrugged and said was deadly. then we proceeded up the tepui, stopping occasionally to peek at the falls through the trees or gulp down some water.  the path in some stretches was completely overgrown with trees, reminding me how oppressively dark the jungle can be, and i wondered what it was like for jimmie angel when he descended auyan-tepui without any way of reaching the outside world  slowly, i ascended the tepui, grasping parts of tree trunks and branches to gain balance on the slippery mud and stones. ahead, mr. jaramillo blissfully jogged up the path as if he were strolling on the savanna. little by little, the thick trees above us began letting in more sunlight, raising the temperature to greenhouse levels. we glimpsed auyan-tepui's stone escarpment and, finally, the water falling more than 3,000 feet from the top of the soaring mesa.  but we still had about an hour to go before we arrived at angel falls. when we finally got there, the pool of cool water at the base of the falls was a welcome sight. i dove in, doing a backstroke as i gazed up at a cascade of water that doesn't so much crash as separate into smaller falls and showers of mist as it descends in seemingly slow-motion. there were no souvenir stands or snack bars here, just a few boulders to sit on. all around us was dense green jungle, accentuating the isolation and benign neglect that has thus far prevented this place from turning into an easily accessible tourist destination.  a retired oil executive who made the trek to the base of angel falls with his wife and his teenage daughter were the only other americans i encountered. a sprinkling of other nationalities was there, some italians, spaniards and a serb. some venezuelans were there, too, lugging a bottle of scotch whiskey and a bucket of ice.  eventually, we hiked down the tepui back to the lookout point, where our guides prepared a lunch of chicken roasted on a spit over an open fire, accompanied by casabe, a hard bread made from manioc.  later, in the canoe back to ucaima, i stole a last glance at angel falls. i had gotten a taste of venezuela's legendary lost world and now i wanted more.  visiting a prehistoric world  getting there  venezuelan airlines fly round-trip from caracas to puerto ordaz daily, with the one-hour flight costing about $170 (prices for flights, lodging and other services below are in united states dollars). charter companies and servicios aéreos mineros, or serami, a small private carrier, make the one-hour trip from puerto ordaz to canaima each day for about $240 round trip, according to akanan tours, a caracas-based company that arranges flights, lodging and hiking excursions in canaima national park (58-212-264-2769, www.akanan.com). the trip on serami's propeller plane includes a fly-over of angel falls close enough to remind you of jimmie angel's bravado in landing his flamingo airplane atop auyan-tepui in 1937.  the rainy season, from may to december, offers some of the better conditions for canoe trips with guides who take travelers by river relatively close to the foot of angel falls. hotels and airlines commonly quote their prices in united states dollars to foreign visitors.  where to stay  most of the lodges and small hotels known as ''camps'' offer packages that include all meals and lodging. alcoholic drinks are often charged separately.  the most intriguing place to stay around angel falls is campamento ucaima, founded by the dutch hotelier and adventurer rudy truffino in the 1950s. also known as jungle rudy's, its 14 rooms and thatched-hut bar feel like a placid outpost of civilization along the carrao river. meals are served in an open-air dining room where visitors can gaze at the sun rising above the thick jungle. rates are about $220 per person for a spartan room with a shower, bed and a hammock on the porch. (58-286-962-2359; www.junglerudy.com).  campamento canaima is a modern hotel near the edge of a lagoon with the luxury of a strip of white sand beach. with 109 rooms largely in the form of yellow bungalows, canaima has a multilingual staff and rates of about $187 a night (58-212-976-0530).  explorer | angel falls  correction:  january 28, 2007, sunday  the explorer column on jan. 14 about angel falls in venezuela, misidentified the type of airplane flown by jimmie angel, who survived a crash landing there in the 1930s. it was a radial-engine monoplane -- not a turboprop, which was not developed until the 1940s.  