rustic streams hiding complicated traditions   roy harris: symphonies nos. 3 and 4  colorado symphony orchestra and chorus, conducted by marin alsop. naxos 8.559227; cd.  roy harris's third and fourth symphonies represent the hopes and wishes of american composers in the 1930s, eager to find their own versions of the european tradition. newly nourished, old-country weltschmerz would take on a wholesome color and be cleansed by america's wide-open spaces. the style survives in aaron copland's music by virtue of copland's superior talent, while composers like mr. harris and his compatriot howard hanson have ceded their stature to diverse energies like elliott carter, steve reich and an immensely powerful popular culture.  marin alsop and the colorado symphony orchestra and chorus remind us of an older musical america in a naxos cd of those two harris symphonies. harris called the fourth his ''folk song symphony,'' though it is more accurately a five-part choral piece, with cowboys, marching bands and the civil war all providing fodder.  the single-movement third was taken up by serge koussevitzky's boston symphony in 1939, and it made mr. harris's reputation. dark strings in unison at the start move slowly in wide skips and gather other instruments. chirping winds, uneven meters and overlapping rhythms increase momentum and give way at the end to ominous timpani-driven chords.  in the fourth symphony mr. harris dresses up old favorite songs, dances and marches with his own little complications. i especially like ''bury me not on the lone prairie'' moving between major and minor modes. the treatments are good-natured and not without interest although sometimes modest to a fault. on its own, music cannot describe a physical space -- oklahoma's broad, flat terrain, for example -- but knowing that mr. harris came from there makes the association of place with sound inescapable.  ms. alsop's chorus is fine, and the colorado players do well enough to make us grateful that recordings like this are around.  bernard holland  classical recordings  