modernist no more: home by famous architect is razed   a modernist house designed by the renowned architect paul rudolph and at the center of a highly public dispute over its demolition was being torn down saturday, despite a last-minute effort by the state attorney general to save it.  crews arrived at the property on minute man hill road just after 8 a.m. when they began demolishing the house, the police ordered members of the news media out of the immediate area.  as the morning wore on, trash-hauling trucks carried away the remnants of the 4,200-square-foot home designed in 1972 by mr. rudolph, the chairman of yale's school of architecture in the early 1960s. the house was an elongated series of interconnecting cubes, with the eastern end hovering over the ground. by the afternoon, little of it remained.  mr. rudolph studied under walter gropius at harvard. later, he became famous for residences like the world-renowned bass house in fort worth, tex., and commercial buildings like the burroughs wellcome headquarters in north carolina.  according to westportnow.com, david waldman and his wife, yvette, who is buying the property, were on hand for the demolition. an attempt by connecticut's attorney general, richard blumenthal, to get a restraining order preventing the demolition failed on friday.  he said that the judge, taggart d. adams of state superior court in stamford, rejected the request because the house was not yet listed on the national register of historic places. the judge had given the parties in an earlier suit, the connecticut trust for historic preservation and mr. waldman, a westport developer, until 5 p.m. friday to reach a deal.  ''i was unable to get them to come to an agreement,'' mr. blumenthal said.  negotiations failed even though the trust had found a potential buyer: steven campus, the owner of a penthouse on beekman place in manhattan that mr. rudolph designed for himself. mr. campus confirmed saturday that he had made an offer.  nepal asatthawasi of the paul rudolph foundation, who said she was ordered away from the site, called the demolition ''a great loss.''  she said in a statement on friday night that ''as more and more architecturally significant modern homes reach critical points of neglect and eventual demolition, the consequences of devaluing the artifacts of our recent history will be felt by future generations.''  morley boyd, the chairman of the westport historic district commission, said, ''an irreplaceable piece of our town, indeed our state's, architectural heritage has been consigned to a landfill. it's hard to fathom.''  neighbors who walked by in the morning rain were curious. ''that house was on the market for months and no one bought it,'' said one who declined to be identified. ''where was the paul rudolph foundation then?''  