a history lesson that sprays scorn liberally   over the last few years, george w. bush has probably been the most frequently portrayed character in new york theater -- unless donald h. rumsfeld has edged him out. an entire genre of bush-bashing shows has even emerged, defined by broad parody, cutting one-liners and a disdain for the notion of fair and balanced. these shows, easily spotted by punchy, willfully unsubtle titles like ''bush is bad'' and ''bush wars,'' serve a psychological purpose as much as an artistic one. the world has gone mad, they imply, so come and vent with us.  ''get your war on,'' a sardonic history lesson featuring old-fashioned projectors and microphones, is a slightly different animal, as much in the vein of the slacker comedies of mike judge as the satire of jon stewart. a slick production, presented by the rude mechanicals company based in austin, tex., it sprays scorn liberally (in both senses) and provides quick-fire ridicule of the most egregious and silly highlights (remember the promise to go to mars?) of the past six years, leavened by an occasional cameo by a man in a north korean map costume.  based on the absurdist comic strip of the same title by david rees, the play, with kirk lynn credited as the chief writer, features five young, devilishly deadpan actors, dressed as white-collar employees, lounging around reading us weekly and eating doughnuts, in between making acid one-liners that hit more often than they miss. some of the characters, who are as one-dimensional as those in the strip, get excited about mr. bush: ''this war on terror is gonna rule!'' says ron (ron berry).  others try to work through their political stances. ''would you suicide-bomb yourself if osama bin laden was standing next to you?'' asks lana (lana lesley). ''what if it also meant that the henderson account got totally straightened out?''  these people eventually come around to a certain shock (though not awe) at what their country is doing, even if they still talk about it as if it's another part of the entertainment landscape. ''couldn't they have hung him with more panache?'' asks ron about saddam hussein. ''that was the dingiest state execution i've ever seen. the thing looked like it took place in the cbgb's bathroom.''  eventually, what separates this show from most bush-bashing satires is a subtext about our own powerlessness. the critics onstage -- and those laughing in the seats -- seem content to poke fun without ever asking that old, essential question: what is to be done?  ''get your war on'' continues through jan. 28 at 59e59 theaters, 59 east 59th street, manhattan, (212) 279-4200.  theater review  