threat and harassment for new jersey town's first black mayor   like a lot of mayors in small towns throughout new jersey, charles t. tyson took office here on new year's day with grand ambitions and little fanfare. but unlike most of them, mr. tyson started his term by trying to figure out who was threatening to kill him.  mr. tyson, 64, is the first black mayor of south harrison, a farming town in gloucester county about 25 miles south of philadelphia, and even before he was sworn in he was greeted with the kind of reception that was not uncommon for prominent african-americans before the civil rights revolution.  the tires on his car were slashed. anonymous callers phoned his home and business, sometimes twice a day, to spit racial epithets and then hang up. and then, shortly after he was sworn in on jan. 1, he received a death threat.  ''i've been living in this town for 64 years and this raises its ugly head right now,'' mr. tyson, a lanky grandfather of three who favors cowboy boots and blue jeans, said in an interview in his office here on wednesday afternoon. ''i couldn't believe it.''  residents were quick to defend the tolerance of the tiny township.  ''that isn't the kind of town this is,'' said john t. coleman, a local businessman and a republican candidate who made an unsuccessful run for the township committee in the last campaign. ''it just feels like there are some people in town, a small percentage of them, who are upset about the outcome of the election. they focus on charlie because he's known best. but they don't reflect the rest of the town.''  mr. coleman noted that mr. tyson, who runs a local landscaping business with his wife, received the highest vote totals of any candidate in the 2005 committee elections. ''the town knows charlie and they have a lot of respect for him,'' mr. coleman said.  even mayor tyson said he could not recall any other racial problems in south harrison, where about 95 percent of the residents in the roughly 15-square-mile township are white.  south harrison is a town with no stoplights, no main street, no restaurants or any major businesses to speak of. a view from the parking lot of the municipal building on harrisonville road presents the township as a mostly flat expanse of tomato orchards, grain silos, pine trees and low-slung ranch homes.  since the first episode on dec. 13, officers from the south harrison police department have asked county prosecutors and the bias crimes division of the new jersey attorney general's office to join the investigation.  ''we've been notified,'' said david wald, a spokesman for attorney general stuart j. rabner. ''but the county officials are the lead investigators.''  the authorities said they had interviewed someone mr. tyson called ''a person of interest,'' but there have been no arrests.  mr. tyson said that since officials began spreading word about the threats by sending letters to nearly all of the township's approximately 2,700 residents, the calls all but stopped. but he is still troubled by the thought that he has been threatened by a neighbor in a town where he has lived since its school was in one room above the firehouse.  ''i'm concerned but i'm watchful,'' mr. tyson said, sitting in an office that he is still decorating for his yearlong term in office. it is sparsely adorned with little more than a gavel and photographs of a favorite vacation spot in the virgin islands.  mayor tyson said that the first episode occurred when he was leaving a restaurant in nearby swedesboro. ''somebody said, 'oh, your jeep is sitting there a little crooked,' '' mr. tyson recalled. ''it didn't look like i had a flat. then i said, 'oh, the tires are slashed.' and things took off from there.''  the next day, mr. tyson said, he received the first menacing telephone call; he said the person used a racial epithet and told him, ''we're watching you.''  ''it escalated from that point on,'' mayor tyson said.  mr. tyson, a democratic committeeman for five years, was appointed mayor by his four committee colleagues. he said that he received his first death threat the day after he took the oath of office.  ''that's when it got really vicious,'' he said. ''he said: 'you'll never be the mayor. you're not going to be the mayor of this town.' ''  residents wondered on wednesday if politics played a role in the calls, since mr. tyson has an ambitious agenda for development in south harrison.  ''i just can't believe that someone from this little town would make threats like that,'' said laurie morris, who helps run the four seasons garden market. ''i'm very shocked that someone would make a death threat against him.''  mr. tyson has also not discounted politics as the motive. but regardless of the motive or the mystery behind the calls, he said that his next move was clear.  ''i'm just going to keep on doing the business of the town,'' he said.  