house, by a wide margin, backs minimum-wage rise   the house overwhelmingly approved a $2.10-an-hour increase in the federal minimum wage on wednesday, in a vote that democrats hailed as overdue and a symbol of new leadership on capitol hill.  the democrats, who campaigned against republicans last year for repeatedly allowing congressional pay raises when they were in the majority and yet refusing for almost a decade to raise the wage floor from $5.15, said the new, three-step increase for hard-pressed employees would be in sharp contrast to republican tax cuts approved for the affluent.  ''this is the day for the people who empty the bedpans, change the bed linens, sweep the floors and do the hardest work of america,'' representative robert e. andrews, democrat of new jersey, said before the 315-to-116 vote.  several republicans spoke against the legislation, a centerpiece of the house democrats' 100-hour domestic legislative agenda, on the ground that it would reduce the number of available jobs and so deny opportunities to those trying to enter the work force. but 82 republicans joined all 233 democrats in supporting the bill, unwilling to cast a vote that could have made them appear unsympathetic to americans trying to get by on a minimum wage that has not been raised since september 1997.  ''let's not trample on the market, but recognize that nine years is long enough,'' said representative zach wamp, republican of tennessee.  the measure would increase the minimum wage to $5.85 an hour 60 days after being signed into law, to $6.55 one year after that, and to $7.25 after an additional year. for a minimum-wage employee working full time, $7.25 would mean about $4,000 a year more than the current floor.  but the house vote is far from the final word. the legislation now goes to the senate, where members of both parties have indicated that they intend to tie it to tax breaks for small businesses, to help offset any new costs arising from the wage increase. linking the two is seen by many as a prerequisite to rounding up the 60 votes needed to overcome any filibuster and open the door to negotiations between the house and the senate over a final bill. president bush has indicated that he would sign a bill providing for a wage increase with related tax breaks.  ''the 110th congress is going to do the right thing and finally deliver a minimum-wage increase,'' the chairman of the senate finance committee, max baucus, democrat of montana, said wednesday. ''and at the same time, we should help keep jobs available to america's workers by helping small businesses absorb this wage hike.''  in recent years, republicans repeatedly rebuffed democratic proposals to raise the minimum, arguing that it could slow the economy. under pressure from republicans in swing districts, the leadership last year did allow a vote on an increase, but tied it to a repeal of the estate tax. democrats, backed by organized labor and other interests, blocked that proposal in the senate.  during the fall campaign, democrats made inaction on the minimum wage a mainstay of their arguments against republican control. breaking an informal agreement with republicans not to trade partisan charges over congressional pay, they contrasted the stalled minimum-wage rate and lawmakers' regular cost-of-living increases. trying to insulate themselves, the republicans agreed late last year that congress would get no more pay raises until a minimum-wage increase was approved.  on wednesday, republicans criticized democrats for blocking any efforts to change the house measure by including small-business tax breaks.  ''it is troubling that this bill gives no thought to softening the impact on our engines of new job growth,'' said representative wally herger, republican of california.  but democrats were determined to raise the wage floor with no strings attached.  ''can't you just give these workers an increase and be done with it?'' representative george miller, democrat of california and the new chairman of the education and labor committee, asked his colleagues.  despite their longstanding opposition, two mainstays of the washington business lobby -- the united states chamber of commerce and the national federation of independent business -- made only a perfunctory effort to influence the house vote, sending members letters of opposition but otherwise conceding the issue.  ''it was a foregone conclusion,'' said michael j. donohue, a spokesman for the federation, which represents small businesses. ''our lobbyists assessed that this wasn't the best way to spend their energy.''  the vote was celebrated by organized labor, which is seeing its influence in congress enhanced with the return of a democratic majority. but john j. sweeney, president of the a.f.l.-c.i.o., joined with senator edward m. kennedy, democrat of massachusetts and a longtime advocate of the wage increase, in urging the senate to pass the measure without offsetting benefits for businesses.  ''business has enjoyed hundreds of billions of dollars in tax cuts since bush took office,'' mr. sweeney said in a statement, ''while health care, secure retirements and the minimum wage have all been on government's back burner.''  on the house floor, meanwhile, speaker nancy pelosi beamed after the final vote as she brought down her gavel and democrats cheered the lopsided margin.  the 110th congress  