democrats plan to fight expansion of troops   the new democratic leaders of congress on wednesday accused president bush of ignoring strong american sentiment against the war in iraq and said they would build a bipartisan campaign against his proposed military expansion.  democrats continued to debate how assertively to confront mr. bush over his plan. house democrats said that they would seek to attach conditions to the spending request mr. bush will send to congress soon and that those conditions, if not met, could lead congress to limit or halt money for wider military operations.  ''we are going to fund the troops that are there,'' said brendan daly, an aide to representative nancy pelosi of california, the house speaker. ''any escalation of troops we will subject to scrutiny. we will have hearings, and we will set benchmarks that the president must meet to obtain this money.''  any challenge to mr. bush over paying for the additional troops is probably months away. house democrats said their first step would be to vote on a nonbinding resolution opposing mr. bush's plan. the senate is planning to vote on a similar resolution as soon as next week.  ''the president's response to the challenge of iraq is to send more american soldiers into the crossfire of a civil war,'' said senator richard j. durbin of illinois, the no. 2 democrat in the senate, responding for his party immediately after mr. bush spoke. ''the escalation of this war is not the change the american people called for in the last election.''  the criticism from democrats resounded in near unison on wednesday evening, a rare moment for a party that for more than four years has struggled to present a unified policy on iraq.  of more immediate concern to the administration was the bleak assessment from some republicans.  senator norm coleman, republican of minnesota, delivered a strong rebuke to the plan in a speech on the senate floor only hours before the presidential address. a recent trip to iraq, mr. coleman said, confirmed his fears that baghdad was besieged by irreparable sectarian violence.  ''i refuse to put more american lives on the line in baghdad without being assured that the iraqis themselves are willing to do what they need to do to end the violence of iraqi against iraqi,'' said mr. coleman, who is up for re-election in 2008.  senator john mccain, republican of arizona, one of the administration's staunchest allies on iraq, disagreed. public opinion was not entirely against the war, mr. mccain said, adding, ''americans want to be told how we can prevail in iraq and how we can get out.''  even though mr. bush proposed a bipartisan congressional working group on iraq, he set the stage for a major confrontation with democrats, who won the majority last fall after the lingering war soured the climate for republicans. the clash begins thursday as democrats open a series of hearings to scrutinize the president's approach on iraq.  ''in the coming days and weeks, we should undertake respectful debate and deliberation over this new plan,'' said senator joseph i. lieberman of connecticut, a democrat turned independent singled out by mr. bush for recommending a new bipartisan group focusing on the war on terror. ''excessive partisan division and rancor at home only weakens our will to prevail in this war.''  senator hillary rodham clinton, democrat of new york, whose potential presidential ambitions are complicated by her previous support for the war, rejected the proposal to send more american troops to iraq. mrs. clinton said more pressure should be placed on the iraqi government to begin solving its own crisis.  ''the president simply has not gotten the message sent loudly and clearly by the american people, that we desperately need a new course,'' she said. ''the president has not offered a new direction, instead he will continue to take us down the wrong road, only faster.''  the white house had asked republicans to reserve judgment on the iraq strategy -- or to at least stay silent -- but several republicans distanced themselves from the president wednesday. secretary of state condoleezza rice and stephen j. hadley, the national security adviser, made calls and held meetings in an effort to stem political damage.  ''this is a dangerously wrongheaded strategy that will drive america deeper into an unwinnable swamp at a great cost,'' said senator chuck hagel, republican of nebraska. ''it is wrong to place american troops in the middle of iraq's civil war.''  senator gordon h. smith of oregon, who was among the first republicans to drop his support of the administration's iraq policy, said he was opposed to a troop increase. ''this is the president's hail mary pass,'' mr. smith said. ''now it is up to the iraqi army to catch the ball.''  senator john w. warner, republican of virginia, said he had reservations about increasing troops, but declined to condemn the president's plan until congress had had the opportunity to study it.  ''blow the whistle, time out, until congress has done its homework and its analysis,'' mr. warner said. ''but each day that goes by, all of us are pained by the casualties. we cannot dither about.''  six hours before the president delivered his address, congressional leaders from both parties were called to the white house for a briefing. democrats dismissed the meeting as a last-minute procedural briefing, saying the president had failed to consult with them, as he promised to only a week ago.  the struggle for iraq  