law banning sugary foods in schools passes   sodas, candy and other foods defined as having minimum nutritional value will soon disappear from school cafeterias and vending machines in the state. the assembly passed a bill last monday that prohibits public schools and private schools that participate in government-sponsored child-nutrition programs from serving sugar-laden foods that do not comply with state guidelines.  among the rules is a directive to reduce serving foods that contain trans fats and a ban on selling any product in which sugar is the primary ingredient.  many of the policies were already a practice of the state department of agriculture, which has responsibility for school nutrition, and this bill codifies them into law, said assemblywoman linda stender, a deputy speaker who was a sponsor of the bill. ''the prevalence of childhood obesity has more than doubled in the last 20 years, and now we've got kids who are entering adulthood with already serious health risks of diabetes and high blood pressure,'' said ms. stender, a democrat from scotch plains.  sixteen million children nationwide are obese and the numbers are rising at an epidemic rate, according to the centers for disease control and prevention in atlanta. new jersey joins several other states that have recently adopted more stringent policies governing food and beverages served or sold in schools.  dr. margo wootan, the director of nutrition policy at the center for science in the public interest, a consumer advocacy group in washington, said the new jersey policy is one of the better ones.  ''one weakness of the state's policy is that it allows some low-nutrition beverages that are nutritionally equivalent to soda, like sports drinks and fruit drinks that are basically sugar water,'' she said.  some educators worried that banning the sale of candy and sodas would harm sports and after-school programs that rely on revenues from school vending machines.  an identical bill previously passed the senate. gov. jon s. corzine is expected to sign the bill, which would take effect in september.  the week  