what's on tonight   10 p.m. (hbo) louis c. k.: shameless -- with a season of ''lucky louie,'' his adult sitcom, behind him, louis c. k. (right)  takes the stage at the henry fonda theater in los angeles for an evening of stand-up, in which, as his people put it, he'll cover ''everyday subjects near and dear to his heart, tackling issues that others have been too ashamed to address.'' now what could that mean?  6:30 p.m. (fox) ebert and roeper -- richard roeper and the evening's guest critic, the filmmaker kevin smith, reveal their picks for the worst movies of 2006.  8 p.m. (food network) emeril live -- move over, pepperoni. in ''plenty of pizza,'' mr. lagasse mixes up his favorite crusts and  toppings, including green peas and potatoes.  8 p.m. (speed) two roads to baja -- two teams -- the repeat champion rod millen and his factory-backed support system, and kevin necessary and his band of misfits -- prepare to drive toyota fj cruisers in the baja 1000, an off-road race on mexico's baja california peninsula considered perhaps the world's most demanding and dangerous motorsports event. the real hazard: sabotaging and booby-traps set up by spectators.  8 p.m. (abc) the terminal -- (2004). our travel delays are never this interesting: tom hanks (left) stars in this irresistibly  optimistic story from steven spielberg about an eastern european traveler who is forced to camp out in a new york airport for months after a political coup back home invalidates his passport. catherine zeta-jones is the beautiful flight attendant who  captures his heart as she passes through.  9 p.m. (hallmark) mystery woman: in the shadows -- polonium 210, anyone? samantha (kellie martin) and philby  (clarence williams iii) attend an espionage writers convention where they meet a former k.g.b. agent-turned-novelist, alexsandr tseitsev. but when tseitsev winds up murdered that night, and samatha is seriously injured trying to catch the culprit, philpy is drawn into a dangerous game of cat-and-mouse.  9 p.m. (logo) southern comfort -- robert eads, a transgender man, is dying of ovarian cancer. this documentary follows  his struggle with the disease while examining the quality of medical attention transgender people receive.  9 p.m. (sci fi) grendel -- this is one way to learn the classics. chris bruno, ben cross and marina sirtis star in this adventure drama, based on the epic poem, about king hrothgar, who recruits the warrior beowulf (mr. bruno, above) to fight the monster grendel and set his kingdom free.  11:30 p.m. (nbc) saturday night live -- jake gyllenhaal is host; the shins perform.  kathryn shattuck  