a high-wire act shows up, with feet on the ground   one of the main reasons that the conductor kurt masur, a teutonic taskmaster, was brought to the new york philharmonic in 1991 was to instill much-needed discipline after zubin mehta's erratic 13-year tenure as music director. mr. mehta, a dynamo on the podium, was capable of brilliance. but too often, his performances back then were all flash and no substance. the consensus was that the playing of the philharmonic had grown careless and coarse during the mehta era.  yet you do not attain the international prominence of a zubin mehta without having formidable gifts. perhaps at 70, he has developed calm authority and greater depth. perhaps he just had a good night. whatever the reason, the new york philharmonic's concert on thursday at avery fisher hall was a rewarding surprise, especially mr. mehta's distinguished account of bruckner's magisterial symphony no. 7 in e.  the program began with edward elgar's cello concerto, with the exciting 24-year-old american cellist alisa weilerstein as soloist. the demoralized elgar, then in his early 60s, felt like a relic of the victorian age when he composed this work in 1918-19. the modernist advances of stravinsky and schoenberg made elgar's fastidious tonal compositions seem irrelevant. and he was devastated by the brutality of world war i.  but in time this concerto was embraced as a deeply personal and subtly original masterpiece. its richly chromatic harmonic language may be bound to late-romantic models. still, the way elgar somehow combines ruminative lyricism with striking economy of expression is very distinctive.  from the opening statement, a quasirecitative for solo cello that leads subtly into the poignant theme of the first movement, ms. weilerstein played with rich sound, lyrical freedom and technical command. during the scherzo movement, which is like an étude for repeated notes on the cello, she nimbly dispatched the challenges while conveying the wistfulness of this music.  she was just as compelling in the anguished slow movement and the deceptively jaunty finale. mr. mehta proved a discerning and respectful collaborator, drawing elegant playing from the orchestra.  any thought that mr. mehta was bent on proving his profundity by weighing in on bruckner's monumental 70-minute symphony quickly faded when he began the performance, conducting from memory with unfailing attentiveness and stamina. in fact, what i most admired was that mr. mehta seemed not out to prove anything. there was no interpretive agenda. no novel approach for the sake of novelty.  the elemental first movement, the mournful adagio, the weighty scherzo and the elusive finale all emerged as parts of an overall architectonic conception of the work. climaxes were never forced; brassy outbursts were radiant, not blaring; the chorales that run through this score had bachian nobility; the wagnerian evocations were vibrant yet tasteful.  no doubt mr. mehta's task was made easier by the hard work his two successors have done in bringing the philharmonic to its present top-notch technical state. mr. mehta was free to concentrate on music-making. that he did on this surprising night.  this program will be repeated tonight at avery fisher hall, lincoln center, (212) 721-6500.  music review  