truth be told   gov. arnold schwarzenegger's luncheon after his swearing-in last week was a giddy affair. california-theme songs were playing and california celebrities were present.  even though his leg was broken, the governor seemed to be in an effusive mood.  he thanked his mother-in-law, eunice kennedy shriver, and went on to announce that she was 86. then, according to the san francisco chronicle's web site, he said, ''she's screaming, 'don't give away my age,' '' adding, ''so you look 90 -- who cares?''  the audience groaned audibly. ''i meant 60,'' he said. ''i meant 60!''  honest as the world has become, and even at a time when everyone, including kids, are so concerned with either being authentic or amusing that they're constantly insulting us and each other, there are some things that you still can't say, true or not.  saying anything about a woman's age is one of them.  so is calling someone fat. that's why when someone asks you ''does this dress makes me look fat?'' you have to say no, even when it does. had donald trump known that calling a woman fat is never allowed (even one who fully admits that she is), he might have saved himself from prolonging his ongoing feud with rosie o'donnell.  ''the f word in our house is fat,'' ms. o'donnell said on ''the view'' last week.  it seemed to be a curse in nan kempner's house too. the late famously thin socialite once caused a public furor when she quipped that she ''loathed fat people.''  imagine how she would feel right now, when extra-skinny models are under attack by the fashion industry, as are certain actresses who are being called anorexic by the press. but forgive me. speaking truthfully of dead socialites isn't really allowed either, is it? o.k., so helen mirren, who would later play a british royal, got away with saying about the public response to princess diana's death, ''i didn't see it as grief,'' but as ''addicts having their drug taken away.''  but when the australian author and commentator germaine greer astutely suggested that steve irwin, the much mourned crocodile hunter of australia, was responsible for his own death because he got too close to wild animals, she suffered a severe lambasting.  one australian politician was so outraged he labeled her stupid.  john kerry got similar treatment last fall when his ''botched'' joke suggested that hard-working students don't end up in iraq, even though many people do see the military as a last resort for people whose options don't always include a college education.  and gwyneth paltrow had a lot of backpedaling to do last month after being quoted in england saying that the british are more intelligent and civilized than americans. she also said that instead of talking about work and money, the english converse about interesting things at dinner parties, and that london is not as hectic as new york or as vapid as los angeles. hard to disagree.  but that doesn't mean that she's allowed to talk like that.  she should have taken a cue from queen elizabeth (played by ms. mirren) in ''the queen,'' who simply says, ''i prefer to keep my feelings to myself.''  of course some people think that there's a call for brutal honesty in these brutal times. it may even be that simon cowell's honesty on ''american idol'' satisfies the craving we all have to tell friends or family that they have no talent, their bleached teeth are too white, their fiancé is a bore, their wedding inconvenient, their children unruly and their new mcmansion ridiculous.  certainly comedians and writers need to be savage when commenting on society. and being tough on friends can sometimes solidify friendships. but try too much honesty on students these days and you risk a lawsuit.  ''teachers are under a tremendous amount of scrutiny,'' one new york city teacher told me. ''you can't say anything to a student that could be construed as a personal attack.'' i guess that's part of the reason students can get away with so much right now. last week, for instance, a group of wild cheerleaders from a texas high school calling themselves the ''fab five'' made national news for finally getting punished after years of rude behavior.  their teachers never felt they could be honest about how bad they were.  ''kids will be kids,'' said a lawyer put on the case by the school district. ''but adults have to be adults.'' in other words, sometimes even when the truth hurts, it has to be told.  god save the cheerleaders. god save the queen. not to mention the rest of us.  the age of dissonance  