bonds is one problem baseball can't escape   barry, barry, barry. there you go again. this time it isn't flaxseed oil but amphetamines. you can't get yourself suspended for using flaxseed oil; you can get people laughing at you for saying that's what you thought you used, but suspended, no. greenies, however, will get you suspended if you test positive a second time.  bonds is so popular in baseball that many were rooting yesterday for him to test positive a second time. a second positive test would result in his identification and a 25-game suspension. a first positive test prompts neither penalty nor identification.  that was why baseball officials were not commenting yesterday on the report in the daily news that bonds tested positive for amphetamines.  bonds virtually acknowledged having tested positive by not denying it in a statement he issued yesterday saying that a teammate, mark sweeney, had nothing to do with the matter.  commissioner bud selig declined to comment on the bonds matter. think what you want about the commissioner; you wouldn't want to be in his position.  short of a legal development or an injury that would remove bonds from the field, he will hit 22 home runs this season and break hank aaron's career record.  aaron and selig have long been close friends, but selig could more easily accept bonds breaking the career home run record if he were not entangled in a grand jury investigation into possible charges of perjury, tax evasion, money laundering and violation of banking rules.  because bonds has been implicated in these and other matters, including steroid use, selig and major league baseball are in a no-win situation. if selig opts not to be present for a record-breaking home run by bonds, some will accuse him of shunning bonds because he is african-american, even though he would be breaking a record held by an african-american player. if selig were on hand for no. 756, he would dignify and endorse the record in a way he really would rather not.  the best solution from baseball's viewpoint would be for bonds to incur an injury that would keep him from breaking aaron's record.  selig receives mail from fans urging him to suspend bonds now, but selig has no reason to take disciplinary action. he can't suspend bonds for boorish behavior.  a positive test for amphetamines would say a lot about bonds. it would demonstrate an arrogance that was matched only by pete rose and his betting on baseball. rose defied baseball's rule against betting on baseball because he was pete rose and he was above such restrictions.  bonds has always acted as if he is better than other players, and not in the sense of what he does on the field. the giants, for whom he has played for 14 years, have enabled him in his attitude. bonds has always felt that he could do things in the clubhouse that other players wouldn't think of doing, and the giants never said no.  barry wants a living-room-type lounge chair at his locker? why not? barry wants his personal trainer in the clubhouse? sure. barry wants other members of his entourage in the clubhouse? that's all right.  the giants were afraid to say no. bonds was too big a bird to have his feathers ruffled. the giants needed him to produce, and couldn't afford to alienate him. paying him $18 million a year wasn't enough. the perks of arrogance had to be tolerated.  when bonds became a free agent in november, the giants were not certain they wanted to sign him for a 15th season. they weighed the positives and the negatives and still weren't sure. then, even though they knew there was at least the possibility he could be indicted by opening day, they caved in to their crass desires.  they needed bonds, free of knee and elbow ailments, to help them compete for the national league west title, and they wanted him to break the home run record wearing a giants uniform, maybe even at their park with a shot into mccovey cove. so they bid against themselves, raised their offer and gave bonds $16 million for next season.  the contract hasn't been signed, as several giants contracts with free agents haven't been signed because of differences in contract and guarantee language; bonds's entourage is an issue, for example. so it's possible that if the giants have second thoughts, they could get out of the deal.  larry baer, the team's chief operating officer, did not return a call seeking comment. the giants issued a statement saying they opposed the use of performance-enhancing substances and said they would have no further comment. that presumably would include no comment on possible second thoughts.  jeff borris, bonds's agent, did not return a call and did not issue a statement.  as awkward as bonds has become for baseball, his positive test would attest to the legitimacy of baseball's testing program. not that baseball would advertise that bonds tested positive for amphetamine use -- first-time positives are supposed to be confidential -- but what better endorsement for the testing program could there be than if it caught the game's no. 1 player?  besides the random tests included in the agreement, a player who tests positive for amphetamines will be tested an additional six times in the 12 months after the positive test. if he tests positive a second time, he will be suspended for 25 games without pay.  but demonstrating the efficacy of the testing program wouldn't ease the awkwardness that would accompany bonds's breaking aaron's record.  baseball would rather see him take his amphetamines and go quietly into the sunset.  on baseball  