tunisia says suspects in gun battle had blueprints of embassies   more than two dozen islamic extremists involved in a deadly gun battle with the tunisian police earlier this month had blueprints of foreign embassies and documents identifying foreign envoys as targets, the tunisian interior minister said friday.  it was the first official explanation of the firefight since tap, the state news agency, reported that the police had engaged ''dangerous criminals'' in a rare shootout south of the capital on jan. 3, the second violent incident in three weeks.  ''investigations have allowed us to seize quantities of homemade explosives, plans of certain foreign embassies, as well as documents containing the names of certain foreign diplomats resident in tunisia,'' said the interior minister, rafik haj kacem, according to the news agency. he did not disclose the countries or people who apparently had been targets.  islamic extremism has been growing across north africa, the far edge of a fundamentalist religious trend that is polarizing societies between rich and poor.  while the upper and middle classes in all of these countries are largely modernist, secular and western-oriented, a religious resurgence among the lower classes -- heavily influenced by the fundamentalist salafi school of islam practiced in saudi arabia -- has fueled the rise of islamic parties from the islamic brotherhood in egypt to the justice and development party in morocco.  the extremism has produced terrorist threats, and resulted in terrorist attacks, in every country along the southern mediterranean coast and most european countries across the sea. a bomb in tunisia's main tourist center on the island of djerba killed 21 people in april 2002.  since then, there has been no open threat in the tightly controlled country. but islamic terrorist activity has long threatened to bleed into tunisia from neighboring algeria, where the small but violent salafist group for preaching and combat, or g.s.p.c. as it is known by its french acronym, is fighting for an islamic theocracy in north africa.  those fears were bolstered friday when the interior ministry announced that six members of the group -- five tunisians and a mauritanian -- had crossed into the country from algeria.  two tunisian newspapers close to the government have reported that the group had ties to the g.s.p.c., according to agence france-presse.  in december, the interior ministry reported that two people had been killed and two arrested in a shootout with the police in hammam lif, a suburb of tunis, the capital.  then, on jan. 3, the ministry reported that the police had been engaged in another shootout with the group in soliman, 25 miles south of the capital, tunis, killing 12 people and arresting 15. two security force members were also killed.  it was not until friday that the government confirmed widespread speculation that the people involved had been islamic extremists.  ''the intelligence services know these people, their names and their salafist terrorist tendencies,'' mr. kacem said, according to the tap news agency.  he said the group was attacked in december with the help of the army and that those who escaped were eventually caught in the daylong shootout on jan. 3.  security in the country was tightened after the two episodes, with diplomats reporting an increase in roadblocks, particularly in the capital's diplomatic quarters.  correction:  january 17, 2007, wednesday  an article on sunday about a gun battle on jan. 3 between the police and islamic extremists in tunisia misstated the name of a militant islamic political party that has risen in popularity as part of a religious resurgence across north africa. the party, based in egypt, is the muslim brotherhood, not islamic brotherhood.  