victory for ortmeyer and the rangers   if jed ortmeyer needed any reminder of how far he has come this season, he received it yesterday the instant he slid a penalty shot past boston goalie tim thomas and sealed a 3-1 victory over the bruins.  in his moment of triumph, he turned to see his rangers teammates jumping in celebration on the bench while the appreciation of the madison square garden crowd rang in his ears.  ''it was a thrill,'' said ortmeyer, who began the season believing that a pulmonary embolism, diagnosed in august, would end his career. ''it was such a great feeling to see everyone so excited.''  the goal came with 2 minutes 47 seconds remaining, when ortmeyer was trying to score on a short-handed breakaway but was pulled down from behind by patrice bergeron.  for the 28-year-old ortmeyer to score at all -- much less on a penalty shot -- only five months after doctors told him they doubted he would play again seemed unlikely.  ortmeyer, a lunchpail forward who usually counts success in hits and blocked shots, was heading into his third season with the rangers and was floored by the news. when a later checkup found a new blood clot, ortmeyer's hopes sank further. but after conferring with some specialists, he began working out again and his outlook slowly improved.  he returned to the rangers' lineup jan. 2, working his way back into the forward rotation. against ottawa on thursday, he had two assists, and much of his old energy was back. yesterday afternoon, in only his sixth game of the season, he gave his team the kind of lift it could not have expected.  ''when he came back to the bench, i said, 'good things happen to good people,' '' rangers coach tom renney said. ''he is certainly all of that.''  his break came with the rangers trying to kill a penalty and holding a 2-1 lead over a gritty boston team. ortmeyer fought for the puck in the neutral zone, poked the puck free and skated in for a scoring chance before bergeron tripped him.  in the few seconds it took for the penalty shot signal to come, renney found himself cringing. ortmeyer is not a scorer. to that point, he had only seven goals in 141 n.h.l. games.  ''on the bench we said, 'can we decline?' '' renney said, laughing. ''but i don't want him to know that.''  ortmeyer said he was so nervous as he skated in on thomas that he could barely feel his stick. first, he head-faked, but thomas did not flinch. then he made a real fake to his backhand and slid the puck between thomas's left skate and the post.  ''i should learn some moves from him,'' rangers forward jaromir jagr said. ''that was great. to score on a penalty shot, that's huge. a lot of pressure, too. good for him.''  the rangers were in a position for ortmeyer's triumph by playing an excellent second period, when they rediscovered the energy of their four-goal comeback against ottawa on thursday. they outshot the bruins by 22-6 in the period, although they scored only once; martin straka broke a 1-1 tie 5:52 into the period on a rebound shot.  after that, the rangers played with a resilience they have lacked in a frustrating, up-and-down season. but they have also been without ortmeyer for much of it, and his resilience is perhaps only now rubbing off.  he sat at his locker long after his teammates had filed out. he was happy, he said, just to be back.  ''something like this,'' ortmeyer said, ''is just a bonus.''  slap shots  forward brendan shanahan was the only ranger chosen to the all-star game. jaromir jagr, who was conspicuous by his absence, said that he thought general manager glen sather let the league know that jagr wanted to use the all-star game break to rest and rehabilitate his surgically repaired shoulder. ''i think i can really work the shoulder to get it back where i want it,'' jagr said.  hockey  