bristol finds alliances, and perhaps a suitor   the drug maker bristol-myers squibb brings to mind that vacant colonial for sale down the street. in real estate parlance, both are expensive and might seem to need too much tender loving care.  the company's leaders all but announced it was for sale last september. four months later, though, no potential suitor has emerged -- at least not publicly.  instead, bristol-myers has entered several comparatively small deals, including one yesterday in which it announced a partnership with the british company astrazeneca to develop two diabetes compounds.  one industry executive said recently that every large pharmaceutical company had looked at bristol-myers as a potential acquisition. but there are major deterrents to a quick sale: its price; two pending justice department investigations; and a looming patent trial involving the company's blockbuster drug plavix. that trial is set to begin jan. 22 in manhattan federal court.  ''c.e.o.'s rarely buy big companies with big patent issues,'' said dr. gbola amusa, european pharmaceutical analyst for sanford c. bernstein & company. ''the easiest way to lose your job as a c.e.o. is to buy a drug that isn't there once you pay for it.''  bristol-myers declined to comment yesterday on speculation involving the company's possible takeover. a bernstein analysis last fall discussed why other pharmaceutical companies were not rushing to buy bristol-myers, despite a research and development pipeline that is viewed as one of the most attractive in the industry.  cost is a reason. the analysis by bernstein in october estimated the intrinsic value of bristol-myers at $21.50 a share. but the company's shares closed up 34 cents yesterday, at $26.54. judging by similar takeover deals in the past, shareholders would want a 20 to 30 percent premium -- or about $30 a share -- before they would be happy with a takeover.  and many companies that might be interested in bristol have lower price-earnings multiples. acquiring bristol-myers would be bucking the norm in which high multiple companies usually acquire lower multiple companies.  investors also shy away from uncertainties like the big patent case. in that dispute the canadian company apotex is challenging the validity of the bristol-myers patent on the anticoagulant plavix, a drug with an estimated united states market of nearly $4 billion.  sales of plavix took a big hit last year after efforts to settle the patent case broke down. apotex briefly flooded the market with its cheaper generic version of the drug, before a judge ordered a halt.  that debacle led to the ouster of bristol's chief executive, peter r. dolan last september. since then, the company has been run by an interim chief, the former guidant chairman james m. cornelius.  the company's moves in trying to settle the plavix litigation are also the subject of an investigation by the justice department, which wants to know whether bristol entered an anticompetitive agreement and hid it from the federal trade commission.  while the impact of that investigation might not be as big as a loss of plavix, the uncertainty of a justice department inquiry diminishes bristol's appeal as a takeover candidate.  ''i don't think anybody would put a multibillion-dollar potential liability there,'' said richard t. evans, an industry consultant. ''it's more of a qualitative issue. do you really want to be in the cross-hairs of the justice department?''  mr. evans also said it was not clear whether the product development partnerships bristol-myers had recently entered were conducive to a sale of the company.  in the announcement yesterday, the company said it had reached an agreement with astrazeneca to develop and commercialize two experimental diabetes drugs that were discovered by bristol-myers. the agreement was valued at as much as $1.35 billion for bristol-myers, with $100 million in upfront payments, and as much as $1.25 billion in milestone payments as the products are brought to market.  the deal, the largest of three alliances the company has announced recently, appeared to be a favorable one for bristol-myers, according to dr. amusa, particularly since both products face uncertainties. astrazeneca rose 83 cents, to $55.08.  andrew bonfield, chief financial officer for bristol-myers, said in a telephone conference yesterday that the company, which does not have a large sales force for primary-care doctors, hopes to take advantage of astrazeneca's sales staff if the products come to market. bristol-myers also wants to reduce its financial risk in developing the products, mr. bonfield said.  one big individual shareholder in bristol-myers, dundas i. flaherty of los angeles, had an optimistic take on yesterday's deal. he saw it as a possible sign that astrazeneca might wind up being the suitor bristol has been waiting for -- even though astrazeneca's chief executive several months ago said the company had little interest in mergers or acquisitions.  ''if cornelius is testing the water on deals,'' mr. flaherty said, ''this is one way to get to know each other before we consummate something.''  market place  