stem cell bill sails through the house, but a veto is probable   the house voted overwhelmingly on thursday to broaden federal support for embryonic stem cell research, stepping up a confrontation with president bush over a thorny scientific and ethical issue that democrats hope to capitalize on in the next election.  the vote, 253 to 174, was not enough to overturn a likely presidential veto of the measure, which would authorize federal support for research using stem cells derived from excess embryos that fertility clinics would otherwise discard.  the white house said thursday that the president would veto the bill, just as he did last year. ''the bill would compel all american taxpayers to pay for research that relies on the intentional destruction of human embryos,'' the white house statement said.  it would take 290 house votes to override a veto.  but the vote fulfilled a democratic promise from the november elections, when about a dozen winning house candidates and at least two winning senate candidates campaigned heavily on the issue. and with 37 republicans joining 216 democrats to support the measure, democrats said the vote also ensured that the issue would remain alive for the 2008 election. the measure's passage in the senate is almost certain.  ''we can do this the easy way or the hard way,'' said representative diana degette, a colorado democrat who was a sponsor of the bill.  ''by january 2009, we will have a president who favors embryonic stem cell research,'' ms. degette added, noting that at the moment the leading presidential candidates in both parties support it.  of the three most emotional social issues of the day -- abortion rights, same-sex marriage and embryonic stem cell research -- the last is the only one on which the public, by a growing majority, clearly favors the liberal position, said michael dimock, a pollster at the pew forum on people and the press.  proponents say research on embryonic stem cells could lead to treatments for cancer, heart disease, diabetes, alzheimer's disease, parkinson's disease and other illnesses.  in the weeks before the nov. 7 election, the actor michael j. fox campaigned for several democrats on the issue. mr. fox has parkinson's disease and presented himself as living evidence of the need to support stem cell research.  after the vote on thursday, representative debbie wasserman schultz, democrat of florida, said, ''this is a matter of life and death.''  social conservatives argue that destroying any human embryo means taking a life. some compare the bill's stipulations about using leftover embryos to financing deadly research experiments on death row inmates.  supporting research in leftover embryos ''will create a market for creating and cloning more human embryos for the express purpose of killing them,'' said tony perkins, president of the family research council, a group of conservative christians.  echoing arguments by the white house, house republicans opposed to the measure noted that some studies suggested that stem cells taken either from adults or from amniotic fluid might provide alternatives to using those from human embryos.  ''i support ethical stem cell research that does not spend public dollars to fund studies that many americans find morally reprehensible,'' said representative jeb hensarling of texas, recently named head of the house conservatives' republican study committee.  but the distinction between embryonic and other stem cells has not sunk in with the public, mr. dimock of the pew forum said, adding, ''we don't find much of a difference in the responses if you add or subtract the word 'embryonic.' ''  he said that in polls posing a choice between saving an embryo and pursuing the potential treatments from stem cell research, 56 percent of respondents favored research and 32 percent favored the protection of embryos.  in 2001, mr. bush issued an order prohibiting the use of federal money for research on any new stem cells derived from embryos. his order limited federal financing to the handful of lines of embryonic stem cells then in existence. but researchers have complained that most of those cells were damaged or inadequate.  the white house said that under the guidelines the government had spent $130 million on embryonic stem cell research using existing lines. including other sources of financing, researchers had spent a total of $3 billion on stem cell research of all kinds, the white house said.  