my big debut   i think i may have accidentally ended up in a pornographic film. it all began when i took a trip to los angeles. i suppose you could have guessed that. the story of one's adult-film debut rarely begins, ''so i went to an amish village in pennsylvania. . . . ''  now, i must confess to having a pretty naïve view of the world. whenever i go to l.a., i sort of expect to end up in a movie. i mean, that seemed to be what happened whenever laverne and shirley or the ''happy days'' gang went to l.a., and both of those programs were nothing if not realistic. i still believe that the streets of l.a. are packed with celebrities. when i pick up my rental car, i expect that nicole richie will run into me, or that mel gibson will accuse me of being jewish.  in reality, here is the type of show-business encounter i've had in l.a.: i once met john tesh's assistant in a bar.  i also once held a party in an l.a. hotel room that was attended by jerry maren, one of the munchkins from ''the wizard of oz.'' i'll never forget that cute little munchkin waddling up to me and barking, ''vodka and sprite.'' when i told him we only had 7-up, he clenched his jaw as if i'd just crossed a lollipop guild picket line. he gave me the skunk eye for the rest of the night.  but let's get back to the night of my film debut. my friends and i were at dinner when one of them got a call on his cell. there was a party. a crazy party. a party way too hip for us, but there was a guy who could get us in.  obviously, i said yes. i'm always looking for things that are too good for me. when choosing a college, i wanted a ''reach'' school. as for women, i'm not looking for a soul mate -- i want a woman who's way out of my league. a woman who'll be making the mistake of her life going out with me. at my wedding, i want to overhear people pointing to the bride and whispering, ''she could do so much better.''  somehow, i don't think that'll be a problem.  the party was way up in the hollywood hills. one of the things that stand out about the evening is the long, arduous climb up the hills, which in retrospect is a little strange -- you don't normally think of ascending to hell.  we arrived at the house to find a long line of people waiting outside a gate. my friend called his contact, who sent word to the security guard to let us in. as we passed through the gate, i noticed the security guard was making the other people sign a waiver as they entered.  a waiver?  inside, i found a crowd of people, yet no one had a drink. the women all looked as if they could've been in a mötley crüe video . . . 15 years ago. make that a hard 15 years ago. as for the guys, i saw a man dressed like an oil sheik handing out business cards claiming he was bob guccione. so on the list of things i wasn't expecting to see when i woke up this morning, there was that.  to make things even more surreal, a film crew was walking around taking shots of the partygoers. like most people, when confronted with a situation that makes me uncomfortable, i like to drink heavily. seeing as how this was a party, that shouldn't have been a problem. but hard as i looked, i couldn't find a drop of booze.  i walked out onto the balcony, searching for a keg. instead, i found an l.a.p.d. helicopter hovering above me. almost immediately, i was bathed in its ominous searchlight. oh, boy.  when i walked back inside, one of my friends excitedly told me the news. we were smack dab in the middle of an adult-film shoot! it turns out a film company had rented the house, and they had shot the good stuff during the week. they then opened the house up on the weekend to get stock party footage to put in between the sex scenes.  now do i look familiar? that's right, many of you men reading this have probably fast-forwarded past me. and in case there was any doubt that i'm a loser, consider the fact i somehow managed to end up in a sex film without actually getting to, you know, have sex. my wife-to-be can do so much better.  sadly, i don't know the name of the film they were shooting, so i've never seen it. yet somewhere out there exists an adult film with me in it. i may never find it, but it ain't gonna be for a lack of looking.  the funny pages: ii: true-life tales tom ruprecht is a writer for ''the late show with david letterman'' and the author of ''george w. bush: an unauthorized oral history,'' which will be published in april. his last true-life tale was about ordering a salad in a deli.  