the week ahead: jan. 14 - 20   theater  jason zinoman  yasmina reza's new work, "a spanish play," sounds perfectly suited to her strengths: conceptual playfulness, a highly developed sense of irony and a gift for the theatrical. it is a pirandello-like backstage drama about the rehearsal of a play that blurs the lines between fiction and reality. ms. reza, the only modern french playwright regularly produced in new york, has already written the audience hits "art" and "life x 3," which were both blessed with starry casts. but they do not compare with what the director john turturro, who was also in "life x 3" with helen hunt, has to work with here.  scene-stealers like denis o'hare ("take me out"), larry pine ("stuff happens"), linda emond ("homebody/kabul") and katherine borowitz ("illuminata") will appear, but the real story is the return of the magnificent four-time tony winner zoe caldwell, that force of nature whose regal voice has helped animate memorable characters like jean brodie and lillian hellman. the last time she starred in a new show was as maria callas in "master class," which opened more than a decade ago. in previews now; through march 4,classic stage company, 136 east 13th street, east village, (212) 352-3101, classicstage.org; $75.  in another return to the stage, the writer alan ball, who has proved himself quite skillful at uncovering the dark secrets of normal-seeming suburbia on screens small (as creator of "six feet under") and large (as screenwriter of "american beauty"), tackles the subjects of imperialism and american-arab relationships in "all that i will ever be," set mostly in west hollywood. jo bonney directs. begins previews wednesday, new york theater workshop, 79 east fourth street, east village, (212) 239-6200, telecharge.com; $60.  among the few happy things that you can count on in life is that the director richard foreman will open a show downtown in january. "wake up mr. sleepy! your unconscious mind is dead!," the new work from this godfather of experimental theater, continues his exploration of the use of film onstage and touches on disparate topics like the birth of the airplane and the death of the unconscious mind. opens thursday at 8 p.m., ontological theater at st. mark's church, 131 east 10th street, (212) 352-3101, ontological.com; $23 ($28 on saturdays), $17 for students.  film  sharon waxman  count this as retro noir week, as we do our best to ignore the golden globes. movie lovers have a rare opportunity to see "il mafioso," a little-known italian movie that created a sensation when it was shown at the new york film festival last year. released in 1962, well before mario puzo and francis ford coppola put their stamp on the genre, the film stars alberto sordi (known from fellini films and many other movies) as a sicilian named antonio who has made good in milan. he goes home to sicily for a family reunion but finds that the old neighborhood is still mired in the culture of the mob, and that the "capo di capi" who made his legitimate life in a milan fiat plant possible has a favor to ask. and you know what kind of favor that will be. (it involves a gun.) the film is dark and funny and well worth the trip. it had only a limited release in the united states in the 1960s. opens friday, angelika film center, mercer and houston streets, greenwich village, (212) 995-2000; and lincoln plaza cinemas, 1886 broadway, between 62nd and 63rd streets, (212) 757-2280.  and the two boots pioneer theater is, for a week beginning jan. 24, showing another rarely seen gem, the 1949 thriller "shockproof," directed by douglas sirk. a co-writer was the inimitable samuel fuller. in the film a probation officer played by cornel wilde takes into his charge a paroled she-killer played by mr. wilde's real wife, patricia knight. to keep her from a gangster boyfriend, he hides her at his blind mother's home; they end up on the run from the law, with the moralistic wilde character finding himself on the wrong side of right. the film is not available on dvd. (remember when they used to say, "only in theaters"? it is.) 155 east third street, at avenue a, east village, (212) 591-0434.  television  ginia bellafante  the twin californian obsessions of property and personal maintenance receive renewed anthropological attention in the second season of "the real housewives of orange county," which begins tuesday at 10 p.m. on bravo. truer to documentary style than reality-tv form, the show continues to follow the lives of the same group of women it began examining last year: working mothers and their stay-at-home counterparts, carousing and laboring to self-actualize in one of the fabled gated communities of suburban southern california. this season we get to see jo, the only unmarried woman in the group, back together with her boyfriend, a status that does not seem to impede her from going to a party at the playboy mansion. husbands receive increased attention this season, as do the children, layabout teenagers and 20-somethings who seem to confirm the assumption that extreme privilege robs young souls.  no relationship is what it seems in the movies that make up bbc america's "crimes of passion" series, part of its excellent mystery monday package. "soundproof," which will be broadcast on monday at 9 p.m., is the third installment of the "crimes of passion" films. a young deaf man is thought to have killed his roommate, and the sign-language expert helping investigators on the case falls for him. do the complications mount from there? yes, they do.  dance  roslyn sulcas  over the last nine years the annual japanese contemporary dance showcase has attracted a faithful following for its often weird and wonderful offerings. for its 10th anniversary the showcase has moved from the japan society to a more mainstream site, the joyce theater, with which it is presenting four companies. the names alone bode well: noism 07, pappa tarahumara, kim itoh and the glorious future, and leni-basso. tuesday through jan. 21, 175 eighth avenue at 19th street, chelsea, (212) 242-0800 or joyce.org; $30, $23 for joyce members.  not too far from the joyce is the residence of the cedar lake ballet company, a worthy small-scale addition to the city's dance scene, since it specializes in new ballets, often by choreographers who are fairly well known in europe but little seen in the united states. jacopo godani, who danced with william forsythe's frankfurt ballet for many years before establishing a successful choreographic career, falls into this category; it should be worth making the trip to the company's modern theater in the deepest reaches of chelsea to see his "symptoms of development," created last year for the nederlands dans theater and reworked for the cedar lake dancers. also on the program are new works by edgar zendejas, the mexican-born associate choreographer of les ballets jazz de montreal, and benoit-swan pouffer, cedar lake's artistic director. thursday through jan. 22, 547 west 26th street, (212) 868-4444 or cedarlakedance.com; $30, $20 for students and 65+.  classical music  allan kozinn  alarm will sound, a supremely inventive new-music ensemble led by alan pierson, is joining forces with musicians from the manhattan school of music for an expansive exploration of edgard varèse's music at the miller theater. varèse stood apart from the early-20th-century battles over tonality. like schoenberg and his followers he abandoned tonality as the cornerstone of musical structure; but unlike his serialist contemporaries, he did not propose a new dogma to replace the old one. instead he painted his works in what he called "organized sound" and created a catalog rich in both abstract works, in which timbre and rhythm are central, and soundscapes that evoke the modern urban world. at miller, alarm and company offer a program that ranges from the early "grand sommeil noir" (1906) through an orchestrated version of the "poème Électronique" (1957-58). saturday at 8 p.m., broadway at 116th street, morningside heights, (212) 854-7799, millertheater.com; $25, $15 for students.  yo-yo ma's silk road ensemble has for the last several years explored ancient and new music from countries along the old trade route that connected asia and europe. now, in a spinoff from that project, members of the ensemble are continuing their explorations on their own. siamak jahangiri, who plays the ney (a middle eastern flute), and the string quartet brooklyn rider offer a program that includes bartok's quartet no. 2, a selection of armenian folk songs and "ney-nava" by the iranian composer hossein alizadeh. tuesday at 7 p.m., makor, 35 west 67th street, manhattan, (212) 601-1000, 92y.org; $15.  if you're looking for something more conventional, the violinist vadim repin joins forces with the new york philharmonic for the tchaikovsky violin concerto. and you get something a bit off the beaten path: riccardo muti fills out the program with scriabin's rich-hued symphony no. 3, "the divine poem." thursday at 7:30 p.m., friday at 2 p.m. and saturday at 8 p.m., avery fisher hall, lincoln center, (212) 721-6500, nyphil.org; $24 to $96.  and daniel barenboim, in town a few weeks ago to conduct his west-eastern divan orchestra, is back to offer his idiosyncratic but compelling reading of bach's "well-tempered clavier," book 1. saturday at 8 p.m., carnegie hall, (212) 247-7800, carnegiehall.org; $34 to $108.  pop  kelefa sanneh  in 2006 the las vegas band panic! at the disco emerged as a million-selling juggernaut (no mean feat in this slow market), and my chemical romance, from new jersey, released a glorious epic, "the black parade" (although that album has yet to reach one million in american sales, according to nielsen soundscan). both bands emerged from the country's still-fertile emo scene, though none of their members seem eager to be associated with it. (would you be?) and their success is proof that the emo era isn't over yet.  so here comes fall out boy, the illinois group that is arguably the country's most popular emo act -- or at any rate was, way back in 2005. that was the year fall out boy released "from under the cork tree" (island), which sold more than 2.5 million copies in the united states and helped prove that self-aware pop-punk songs with long titles (one was called "a little less sixteen candles, a little more 'touch me' ") could become rock radio staples.  the new fall out boy album, "infinity on high" (island), is due in shops on feb. 6, and the first single, "this ain't a scene, it's an arms race," can already be heard, and seen, on mtv (and of course youtube). it begins with a snippet of "dance, dance," from the last album, and then follows the band members into what looks like a hip-hop studio: the room is full of skeptical african-americans, and the song starts with an electronic beat. by video's end, everything is back to normal: the fizzy punk chorus has arrived, and the guys are piling into the sort of beat-up tour van they outgrew years ago. see them in their element on tuesday at the hammerstein ballroom. also on the bill: new found glory, lifetime and permanent me. 6:15 p.m., 311 west 34th street, manhattan, (212) 307-7171; $35.  art  robin pogrebin  it wasn't until the hungarian photographer martin munkacsi (1896-1963) turned his lens on fashion models that he made his fortune. but he established his reputation with reportage, much of it published in german photo weeklies. now the international center of photography is mounting an exhibition of his work. the show, "martin munkacsi: think while you shoot!," organized by f. c. gundlach at the haus der photographie in hamburg, includes more than 125 vintage photographs, along with magazines and page layouts. mr. munkacsi's images of models running on the beach revolutionized fashion photography by being natural rather than posed. friday through april 29, 1133 avenue of the americas, at 43rd street, icp.org.  it was the photographer henri cartier-bresson who arguably put mr. munkacsi on the map, so taken was he with mr. munkacsi's photo "three boys at lake tanganyika," taken in 1929 or 1930. cartier-bresson said of the picture, "i suddenly understood that photography can fix eternity in a moment." it seems appropriate, then, that the international center of photography is simultaneously featuring an exhibition of cartier-bresson's work, which also starts friday. called "henri cartier-bresson's scrapbook: photographs, 1932-46," the show includes 251 prints personally selected and printed by the photographer. the show was originally assembled by the museum of modern art as a memorial when cartier-bresson was presumed dead after having been held in german prisoner-of-war camps during world war ii. (he actually escaped the camps and died in 2004 at 95.)  the winter antiques show returns to the seventh regiment armory on friday with a core of 28 specialists in american antiques and art, including shaker, folk art, american indian, colonial, federal, arts and crafts, and aesthetic movement pieces. the show also features exhibitors showing british, european and asian antiques, from old master paintings to chinese export porcelain. through jan. 28, noon to 8 p.m. (to 6 p.m. on jan 21, 25 and 28; to 6:30 p.m. on jan. 20), park avenue at 67th street, winterantiquesshow.com; $20.  