from grain elevator to dream house   as jill baumler stood in the ''head house'' at the very top of her grain elevator, with a large herd of bison visible through the window behind her, she pointed out the metal contraption that used to gravity-feed grain to the warren of rooms in the building below. ''they could turn the spout and pour the grain into one of 13 holes,'' she said, ''and it would fill up one of the 13 bins.''  now, after more than seven years of do-it-yourself renovation, the 13 storage bins, which once held up to 28,000 bushels of grain, have been transformed into a towering six-story antique-filled home that ms. baumler; her husband, bob mannisto; and their four dogs plan to move into this month.  ''it's been a huge learning experience,'' said ms. baumler, whose husband did much of the rough carpentry while she did the finish work. ''when i am done, my hammer is being hung up, never to be taken down.''  buildings like theirs were often the tallest structures on the featureless plains of the west and midwest, and were once a sign of prosperity, a symbol of abundance being brought in from the fields.  but now they are outmoded and many have been abandoned or torn down. an estimated 27,000 of these structures dotted the farm states in the 1930s, though fewer than half remain today, according to bruce selyem, the president and founder of the country grain elevator historical society.  at least a few of the remaining elevators -- along with grain bins and silos -- have been turned into homes or offices or adapted for other uses. one elevator, in stillwater, minn., was turned into a climbing gym. some much larger grain elevators have been turned into hotels.  yet some of the most striking conversions are residential. in minneapolis, for example, a large terminal elevator with 12 silos is being adapted into a 20-story, 229-unit mixed-income housing project called van cleve court apartments east. mr. selyem said he was aware of perhaps a dozen instances in which the buildings at the base of a smaller elevator had been remodeled, but only a few in which the elevators themselves had been adapted. ''it's a huge project, and you can't do it cheaply,'' he said.  the 70-foot-tall grain elevator owned by ms. baumler and mr. mannisto was built in 1914 by charles anceney sr., a rancher who saw promise in the soil of the camp creek hills of southwestern montana. he also envisioned a town called anceney, if the northern pacific railway could be lured to build a spur to his property. it could not, so he built the line himself.  though a town never materialized, the grain elevator continued to operate until the 1980s. ms. baumler bought it in 1993 for $10,000. the area, 14 miles west of fast-growing bozeman, is rural, and will stay that way. the media tycoon ted turner bought charles anceney's old flying d ranch for his bison herd, and it surrounds the elevator on three sides.  ms. baumler acknowledges that when she began retrofitting her elevator, she was somewhat naïve about how long it might take. ''i thought it would take two or three years,'' she said. ''it has taken more than seven.'' the couple say they have not tallied all their costs, in hours or dollars.  one of the bins has been set aside for an elevator, ms. baumler said, while all the plumbing and other infrastructure have their own dedicated bins.  the first and second floors have not been remodeled yet. the biggest floor, on the bottom, where trucks used to dump grain, will be turned into a victorian game room. the third floor, where renovations are completed, has a roomy kitchen and dining room.  the next floor up is the master bedroom, dark green with an antique white pressed-tin ceiling and a window overlooking the camp creek hills. a smaller bedroom is on the same floor.  the fifth floor is a library, filled with leather chairs and walls of books. and the room above that, the old head house, is a small reading room with picture windows on both sides.  ''the other day, the top of the hill was black with bison,'' ms. baumler said. ''and i thought, there's so many i can't even count them all.''  ms. baumler, an antiques dealer, has furnished the elevator with a lifetime's worth of collected artifacts, including period lighting fixtures from a drugstore. her pantry is covered with glass-paned doors from an old indoor swimming arena in helena that was destroyed in an earthquake.  where possible, the stacked lumber walls were sanded, varnished and preserved. in some cases, the grain bouncing off the walls created a beautiful eroded effect, as when a sandstone wall is carved into unusual swirled shapes by wind and water.  as she stood in the head house, ms. baumler looked out at the bison scene from montana's past. is she ever tempted to drive one through the fence onto her property? ''no, i'm a vegetarian,'' she said.  just over an hour from bozeman, in alder, ray smail operates a business, cgb housing, that converts grain bins into homes. cgb has created seven grain bin houses, and he lives in a 2,400-square-foot four-story home made from two stacked bins, near another turner-owned ranch.  mr. smail, who is 26, sprayed the inside of the 24-foot diameter bins with an insulation, then covered it with wallboard. every four feet, there is a 10-degree corner. a stairway winds up the knotty-pine wall inside.  the first floor, below ground, is a recreation room that includes a pool table and large-screen tv. the next floor up is the entryway, with a laundry room and bathroom.  the third floor has a kitchen with oak countertops, and a wraparound deck with built-in barbecue. the railing next to the stairs is made from peeled lodgepole pine.  the fourth floor features two bedrooms and looks out on a hot tub covered with a gazebo made from a grain bin roof.  mr. smail said the cost of one of the seven grain-bin homes that cgb has converted, which average 800 square feet, is around $110,000. the 24-foot bins alone cost around $15,000.  in the bozeman area, ranches have been bought up by outsiders who have no use for the storage bins, so they sometimes give them away. ''some of the ranches are fishing lodges instead of ranches,'' mr. smail said, ''and people are turning them into small homes. one i built is for a chef at the lodge; another is for a fishing guide.''  working with the bins can be a challenge, he said. when mr. smail cut holes in the steel for windows in his home, he said, the structure lost its tension. ''it's like jell-o, so you have to build metal window frames and weld them in to get the strength back,'' he said. the lack of 90-degree corners and flat walls also adds to the work. most of the steps in his four-story home, for example, are different sizes.  and the constant climbing from one floor to the next? ''you get used to it,'' he said. ''it's like an exercise machine.''  national perspectives  