shiite radicalism could fuel wider violence, official warns   the nation's top intelligence official said thursday that the spiraling violence in iraq, along with iran's ascendancy in the middle east, had led to a rebirth of shiite islamic radicalism that could fuel sectarian violence and destabilize nations across the region.  in his annual presentation on the global threats facing the united states, the departing director of national intelligence, john d. negroponte, spoke of the ''shadow'' that iran was casting across the middle east and warned members of congress that iran could be emboldened to dispatch hezbollah operatives to attack american targets.  intelligence officials have long assumed that iran's primary goal in iraq was establishing a weak, but viable, state dominated by shiites. but mr. negroponte suggested thursday that iran's steady arms shipments into iraq, which american military officials say they have documented, and the political manipulation of iraqi shiite politicians could signal that iran is trying to worsen the sectarian war and anarchy there, rather than seeking relative stability.  in a senate intelligence committee hearing, mr. negroponte also testified that al qaeda's ''resilient'' senior leadership continues to play a central planning role from remote hideouts in pakistan. this conclusion about al qaeda reflects a shift in thinking among intelligence officials, who as recently as last summer had assessed that terrorist leaders like osama bin laden and ayman al-zawahri had become largely isolated from their network of supporters, reducing their role to being more inspirational than operational.  as have previous years' assessments, mr. negroponte said al qaeda remained the organization most capable of carrying out another devastating attack on american soil. but thursday's testimony from mr. negroponte and other top intelligence officials showed a mounting concern about the threat of militant shiite groups.  mr. negroponte cited iran's burgeoning nuclear weapons program, its flood of oil revenue and hezbollah's perceived victories against the israeli army last summer as signs that both iran and its client terrorist organization could be interested in moving more aggressively around the globe.  ''as a result of last summer's hostilities, hezbollah's self-confidence and hostility toward the united states as a supporter of israel could cause the group to increase its contingency planning against united states' interests,'' mr. negroponte said.  he offered no evidence to lawmakers that hezbollah was planning any attacks.  but committee democrats, along with some of the republican minority, chose to spend most of their time with the intelligence officials asking pointed questions about the new strategy for iraq laid out by president bush on wednesday night.  echoing their colleagues at other hearings throughout the day, the lawmakers expressed deep skepticism that increasing the american troop presence in iraq could halt the steadily escalating violence there.  ''i don't get the feasibility, i don't get the achievability, i don't get the sustainability,'' said senator barbara a. mikulski, democrat of maryland.  the intelligence officials defended the new iraq strategy, and mr. negroponte said it had a good chance of succeeding despite iraq's ''precarious'' state.  the central intelligence agency director, gen. michael v. hayden, said that so far the iraqi government had fallen short in its efforts to halt sectarian violence. ''the track record of this government isn't one that would give you great confidence,'' general hayden said.  the other intelligence officials who testified at the hearing were lt. gen. michael d. maples of the defense intelligence agency, robert s. mueller iii of the federal bureau of investigation and randall m. fort, who leads the bureau of intelligence and research at the state department.  the officials agreed that the iraq war had helped fuel islamic radicalism around the globe and had most likely bolstered the recruiting efforts of al qaeda.  the takeover of the american embassy in tehran in 1979 and the bombing of the marine barracks in beirut in 1983 made shiite radicalism a primary concern of american officials during the 1980s and much of the 1990s. it was not until the rise of osama bin laden's al qaeda network in the mid-1990s that parallel concerns about sunni extremism grew among intelligence officials and terrorism experts.  but intelligence officials point to last february's bombing of the golden mosque in samarra, a sacred shiite shrine, as a watershed moment that stoked shiite anger throughout the middle east and set off a wave of reprisals against sunnis inside iraq.  mr. negroponte said thursday that governments across the region were concerned that the violence in iraq could spill across the country's borders and embolden ethnic minorities to carry out attacks against majority sects.  he also warned of the successes that a resurgent taliban is having in afghanistan in its attempts to destabilize the government of president hamid karzai.  the intelligence chief said the taliban ''probably'' does not directly threaten the viability of mr. karzai's government. at the same time, he said the taliban is achieving more limited goals of impeding economic development in southern and eastern afghanistan and undermining popular support for the government in kabul.  the reach of war  