bruno son emerges as key link in father's circle of connections   pond view way, a dirt road in this town of 2,125 residents, was completed late last year, but it is so new, and in such a remote location -- eight miles west of the vermont-massachusetts border -- that much of it does not appear on local maps.  living in a large but secluded house on pond view way is kenneth r. bruno, a lawyer and real estate broker. he was the district attorney for rensselaer county from 1997 until 2003, when he resigned to become a lobbyist, with clients like madison square garden. he is also the younger son of joseph l. bruno, the leader of the republican majority in the state senate.  as part of their investigation into the business dealings of senator bruno, federal authorities are examining a series of land deals involving kenneth bruno, who has emerged as a nexus between his father and a wealthy businessman, jared e. abbruzzese, whose financial ties to senator bruno are under scrutiny.  the younger mr. bruno was instrumental in persuading the wife of mr. abbruzzese to pay $90,000 for almost 12 acres on pond view way from a partnership involving senator bruno, according to an owner of the partnership. weeks before that november 2004 deal was completed, a canadian racetrack owner that had hired kenneth bruno as a lobbyist formed an advocacy group with mr. abbruzzese that would urge an overhaul of the state's horse racing industry, an issue in which senator bruno has been playing a major role.  kenneth bruno's involvement in recruiting buyers for the partnership's land, including mr. abbruzzese's wife, was critical to reviving a moribund project in which senator bruno had a 25 percent stake, according to james d. featherstonhaugh, a lawyer and lobbyist who also owned 25 percent of the partnership, the first grafton corporation.  the project had been hampered by disputes over the building of roads and the effect on wetlands. in an interview, mr. featherstonhaugh said of kenneth bruno, ''he was the most active person in selling the lots, and he was directly involved in selling them.''  mr. featherstonhaugh said that records about kenneth bruno's involvement in the land deals were among reams of documents that the partnership turned over to the authorities under a grand jury subpoena for information about senator bruno's involvement in first grafton, which was dissolved in may 2005.  kenneth bruno, who turned 44 last week, did not respond to several messages requesting comment, and he hung up when reached on his cellphone.  a spokesman for senator bruno, who is 77, said the senator placed his stake in first grafton in a blind trust in 1992. ''he has had no interest or involvement in any of its activities from that time until the time it was dissolved,'' said the spokesman, john e. mcardle.  first grafton was incorporated in 1987. its goal was to build 55 homes on 625 acres to the north and east of two bodies of water, south long and dyken ponds, which join to form a t-shaped lake.  mr. featherstonhaugh, like senator bruno, owned a 25 percent stake, as did douglas p. rutnik, a lawyer and lobbyist. peter j. bruno, a brother of the senator, owned a 12.5 percent stake.  for years the project floundered -- a history chronicled in the times union of albany, the record of troy and other local newspapers.  in 1991, the partnership enraged some town residents when it cut a 1.7-mile access road through environmentally sensitive woods and wetlands without seeking approval from the grafton town planning board or state environmental officials. in 2000, the army corps of engineers halted work on the project when the partnership began work to extend the road, but the stop-work order was lifted in 2001 after the partnership submitted a plan addressing the corps' concerns.  the same year, kenneth bruno and his wife at the time, mary e. bruno, bought a 10-acre lot near the access road for $44,000. he obtained a construction permit in august 2001 and a certificate of occupancy in march 2002.  the completion of kenneth bruno's house, the first to go up on the first grafton land, appears to have been a catalyst to drive the long-dormant development forward, according to land records. from 2002 to 2004, five more lots were sold, from $71,000 to $90,000 apiece.  in november 2004, dove interests, a company controlled by mr. abbruzzese's wife, sherrie g. abbruzzese, bought two parcels totaling 11.4 acres for $90,000. wayne r. barr jr., a longtime business associate of mr. abbruzzese's, represented the couple. (mr. barr, a friend of the senator's, has received a subpoena in the investigation into senator bruno.)  in an interview, mr. featherstonhaugh said that kenneth bruno actively recruited the abbruzzeses, among others, to buy the lots. ''we wanted to sell, and they wanted to buy -- i thought that was a good thing,'' mr. featherstonhaugh said.  he said he believed that kenneth bruno was paid commissions on at least three of the sales, but said he could not be certain because the partnership's records had been turned over to the federal bureau of investigation.  kenneth bruno's involvement with the abbruzzeses represents an important link between mr. abbruzzese and senator bruno, in part because the son was lobbying for a company allied with mr. abbruzzese at the time.  kenneth bruno resigned as district attorney to join the law firm wilson elser moskowitz edelman & dicker as a lobbyist in june 2003. among the clients he brought to the firm was the magna entertainment corporation, a racetrack owner based in aurora, ontario, according to a firm spokesman.  in october 2004, magna and mr. abbruzzese were among the 10 founders of friends of new york racing, which later called for awarding the state's horse racing franchise to a private business. when mr. bruno left the law firm in march 2005, he took magna with him as a client of his new lobbying firm, albany strategies. he ceased lobbying in january 2006 to focus on his law practice.  magna and mr. abbruzzese later joined in forming the empire racing associates, a consortium of gambling and racing interests that is bidding to get the franchise.  regarding the land deal, e. stewart jones jr., a lawyer for mrs. abbruzzese and dove interests, said she had bought the land ''because it was perceived to be a very good investment,'' but he declined to discuss the role of kenneth bruno.  ''there's no question that the bruno family and abbruzzese family were friendly, close, but other than that, i'm not going to comment on the interactions between the two families,'' mr. jones said. stephen r. coffey, a lawyer for mr. abbruzzese, did not respond to requests for comment.  having sold seven lakefront parcels, first grafton sold its remaining property to a development company for $800,000 in february 2005. the partnership, after 18 years of existence, was dissolved three months later.  mr. featherstonhaugh estimated that he and his partners lost at least $100,000 on their investment. ''i wound up with the majority of the aggravation and at the end of the day, we never made any money,'' he said.  kenneth bruno also seems to have had a mixed experience with his investment.  in september, he sued the town of grafton and the school district in nearby berlin, arguing that assessment increases had caused taxes on his property to rise to about $15,000 a year from $8,000 -- an increase he called exorbitant and ''totally unfair'' in a letter to town assessors.  ''i have had absolutely no work done on the property, applied for no building permits,'' he wrote. ''the house is the same as it has been since 2001!''  but last month, christian f. hummel, an acting justice in state supreme court in rensselaer county, threw out the complaint, finding that mr. bruno had ''failed to support his conclusions with any evidence.''  