children's quality of life is on the rise, report finds   compared with a decade ago, america's children appear to be marginally better off, according to a census bureau analysis. more are performing at grade level in school, more are taking lessons after class and on weekends and more parents -- especially in black households -- are imposing limits on television viewing.  and, by a small margin, more children under 6 are eating breakfast with at least one parent.  on the other hand, better educated and wealthier parents were generally less likely than other parents to have dinner with their children, once the children turn 6.  the census bureau report, titled ''a child's day,'' surveyed parents to analyze benchmarks of well-being for 73 million children from a 2003 review of income and participation in various government assistance programs. it compared some of the findings with results from similar surveys in 1994 and 2000.  ''we hadn't noted anything where children were doing worse,'' said tallese johnson, an author of the report.  many of the results were left to half-empty, half-full ambiguities, and some seemed, perhaps, sugar-coated. for example, 47 percent of parents said they never felt angry with their children. only 5 percent said their children often behaved in ways that bothered them a lot.  about 7 in 10 children under 6 were praised by a parent three or more times a day, but that declined to half of children 6 to 11 and a little more than 1 in 3 among 12- to 17-year-olds.  parents of 7 in 10 children under 6, about half of 6- to 11-year-olds and about 4 in 10 children 12 to 17 said they played with or talked to their children just for fun for at least five minutes several times a day.  non-hispanic white parents were more likely to spend that kind of time, except when it came to teenagers. and generally, teenagers were praised less often than younger children, regardless of their parents' race, ethnicity, educational attainment or occupation.  ms. johnson and her co-author, jane lawler dye, found a few improvements in child well-being compared with a decade earlier. the number of children considered ''on track'' academically increased to 75 percent, from 69 percent in 1994.  also, the number of parents imposing rules for television viewing increased. rules making certain programs off-limits and regulating viewing time by time of day and total hours were imposed on 54 percent of 3- to 5-year-olds in 1994, compared with 67 percent in 2003. comparable numbers among 6- to 11-year-olds increased to 68 percent from 60 percent, and to 44 percent from 40 percent among 12- to 17-year-olds.  ''it's good news that more parents are restricting tv viewing because we know that children who watch a lot of tv are more likely to be obese,'' said andrew j. cherlin, a sociology professor at johns hopkins university. ''we know that black children spend more hours watching television than other children. parents who live in dangerous neighborhoods seem to use television viewing as a way to keep their children safe at home.''  parents who imposed no viewing rules were also least likely to have read to their young children (although there appeared to be no correlation between television rules and grade-level performance).  most children have dinner each night with at least one parent, but not breakfast. fifty-seven percent of children under age 6 have breakfast every day with at least one parent (up from 51 percent in 1998), but that drops to fewer than one-third among 6- to 11-year-olds and fewer than one-fourth among children 12 to 17.  nearly 4 in 10 children (and more than half of black children) have been in regular child care, a situation that is more common when parents, regardless of race, are better educated and wealthier.  but racial and ethnic disparities persist, according to the report.  children in wealthier households were about twice as likely to be enrolled in school programs for gifted students than those living in poverty.  ''it does underscore the pervasiveness of disadvantage of certain groups in every-day life,'' said william o'hare, a senior fellow with the kids count project at the annie e. casey foundation.  hispanic children were least likely to have been read to by their parents. more than 1 in 5, hispanic children ages 1 to 2 were not regularly read to. but hispanic children liked school most often, while non-hispanic whites were most likely to never have liked school. nearly 1 in 5 black 12- to 17-year-olds had repeated a grade, and almost the same proportion had been expelled or suspended from school at some point, compared with about 1 in 10 among all children.  but children of wealthier parents were more likely than most other children to have repeated a grade and just as likely to have been suspended.  all parents said they wanted or expected their children to attend college, and they all set higher goals for their children's schooling after college than they expected the children to meet.  hispanic children under 18 in central cities were most likely to be kept home as much as possible because their neighborhoods were perceived as dangerous; the same was true for more than 1 in 3 black children and 1 in 4 non-hispanic whites.  those disparities extend to the suburbs, where 33 percent of hispanic children, 25 percent of blacks and 15 percent of whites are generally kept at home. in rural areas, 34 percent of black children were most likely to be kept home as much as possible.  