what's on   8 p.m. (fox) 24 -- set the clock: it's 6 a.m. on day 6 in this two-night, four-hour season premiere,taking place 20 months after the season 5 finale, in which a pummeled jack bauer (kiefer sutherland, right) was captured by chinese agents. tonight, a series of terrorist attacks leads president wayne palmer (d. b. woodside), the brother of the late president david palmer; their sister, angela (regina king), an advocacy lawyer; and the president's advisers karen hayes (jayne atkinson) and thomas lennox (peter macnicol), into an unfathomable day. part 2 will be shown tomorrow night at 8.  8 p.m. (13, 49) the best of nature: 25 years -- ''the urban elephant.'' ''cloud: wild stallion of the rockies.'' ''the triumph of life.'' ''kingdom of the ice bear.'' ''deep jungle.'' cuddle up with these and other ''nature'' favorites in this 90-minute compilation of memorable highlights from the series's first 25 years.  9 p.m. (nbc) the apprentice: los angeles -- project apprentice: the candidates design swimsuits for a beach fashion show. but just how skimpy should a man's suit be? carey sherrel, a contestant, asks the question -- and then answers it by modeling his own itsy-bitsy, er, trunks. in keeping with the dwindling-clothes theme, the winning team gets to sample the playboy lifestyle with hugh hefner.  9 p.m. (hbo) rome -- atia (polly walker), that conniver, discovers she'll need more than cunning and charisma to survive the treacherous twists of this new season, which finds her dealing with the death of caesar and the rise of his chosen heir -- her son, octavian, whom she now hates. mark antony (james purefoy, above, with ms. walker) isn't having an easy time of it either and decides to skip town with atia and her family in tow. but octavian won't hear of it.  9 p.m. (travel) living with the kombai tribe -- mark anstice and olly steeds, who call themselves extreme travelers, head in this new reality series to the rainforests of west papua, new guinea, to live with the kombai tribe, which was discovered only 25 years ago, and whose way of life has changed little since the stone age.  10 p.m. (nbc) crossing jordan -- subtitle this one ''the fugitive.'' jordan, still on the run in this season premiere, tries to figure out what really happened the night her former beau was killed.  10 p.m. (hbo) extras -- simply irresistible? not orlando bloom. or at least not as far as maggie jacobs (ashley jensen) is concerned in this season premiere of the comedy series starring ricky gervais as a 40-something actor who gave up his day job to be in pictures. apparently mr. bloom (above left, with ms. jensen and mr. gervais) can't quite understand the lack of attraction.  kathryn shattuck  