today's matchups   indianapolis (13-4)  at baltimore (13-3)  4:30 p.m., channel 2  this is the colts' first playoff game in baltimore since the franchise abandoned the city 23 years ago.  peyton manning can counter the ravens' heralded defense by passing quickly from short drops or handing off to the rookie joseph addai. ''we never feel we can go anyplace and not move the ball,'' colts coach tony dungy said.  but the ravens' offense has come a long way since brian billick fired jim fassel as offensive coordinator and took over himself. steve mcnair looks like the mcnair of old.  the colts have lost four straight games on the road, where manning is 1-4 in playoff games. the ravens have won four games in a row and 9 of their past 10.  reporter's pick: ravens  philadelphia (11-6)  at new orleans (10-6)  8 p.m., channel 5  the eagles have the playoff experience and momentum. most of the saints have never been to the playoffs, but they have game-breakers on offense, a smart new coach in sean payton and a feel-good story.  the eagles have won six in a row with jeff garcia at quarterback, and brian westbrook, with his elusive running, is no longer a hidden treasure. the offense must carry the saints, and the weapons are there in quarterback drew brees, reggie bush, deuce mcallister and receivers joe horn and marques colston.  the eagles must contend without lito sheppard, the pro bowl cornerback who has a dislocated elbow. that makes the saints' offense even more dangerous.  reporter's pick: saints  seattle (10-7)  at chicago (13-3)  1 p.m., channel 5  both teams have problems at quarterback. when the bears overwhelmed the seahawks three months ago, they sacked matt hasselbeck five times and had two interceptions. hasselbeck has 10 interceptions in his past 7 games.  shaun alexander's running has carried the load for the seahawks, but as he said, ''our offense has some things to do.'' so does the injury-riddled defense, but it may get unintended help from rex grossman, who had a passer rating of 0 in the bears' season finale.  the bears have been able to afford his bad days because they run well and their defense is good. but that defense is showing signs of weakness, yielding 300 or more yards in each of the past six games.  reporter's pick: bears  new england (13-4)  at san diego (14-2)  4:30 p.m., channel 2  this could be the best game of the playoffs. the chargers have been the league's strongest team and have the best record. the patriots have won three super bowl titles in the past five years.  the patriots have won seven of their past eight games and are 7-1 on the road. they will need a big game from quarterback tom brady to counter chargers running back ladainian tomlinson, who led the league with 1,815 rushing yards and an n.f.l.-record 31 touchdowns.  ''we're usually looking at the back of his jersey,'' patriots coach bill belichick said. ''he's killed a lot of people besides us, and he's killed us.''  the chargers have won 10 in a row and are playing at home, where they are 8-0.  reporter's pick: chargers  pro football  