snug and warm on restaurant row   emme of capri, on stamford's restaurant row (summer street), is so small you may pass it so quickly you'll have to backtrack.  small doesn't mean insignificant, however. the mustard walls, with wood wainscoting and paintings of italy, create the effect of an intimate cafe, warm and snug. the good-size menu features a number of interesting southern italian choices, both for starters and entrees, and several intriguing desserts, a bit unusual for an italian restaurant.  the crusty bread served with a pungent extra virgin olive oil was a good sign of pleasant dishes ahead.  i especially liked the italian crepes as a starter. stuffed with shiitake mushrooms, shrimp and artichoke hearts, they came in a gently seasoned brandy cream sauce with shallots. the portion was sensibly sized, so it didn't kill my appetite for an entree.  other good choices were calamari all' agro, squid sauced in a piquant citrus sauce, and calamari and zucchini, the calamari crisply fried and mixed with fresh sliced zucchini. funghi trifolati was also a winning selection -- three different mushrooms (shiitake, porcini and portobello) sautéed in white truffle oil.  if you favor salad as a starter, there are seven to choose from. i was partial to the mista (fresh baby greens in olive oil and balsamic vinegar), both simple and zesty. also appealing was the contadina -- crispy romaine lettuce with shaved parmigiano and crumbled gorgonzola cheese in a sharp balsamic glaze.  each menu comes with a printed attachment of the evening specials (a patron-friendly improvement on the verbal recitation at so many other places). one of my guests ordered cernia alla griglia -- fresh red grouper grilled, then sprinkled with extra virgin olive oil and lemon and served on a mound of broccoli rabe.  my own fish selection was less felicitous: salmone alla griglia. the waiter neglected to ask how i wanted the salmon prepared, and i forgot to specify lightly under-grilled. the end result was a filet tortuously overcooked. but the accompaniments were tasty: thin slices of zucchini sautéed with garlic bits and well-roasted potato chunks.  two pasta dishes were better entree selections. orecchiette alla pugliese consisted of tender pasta tossed with broccoli rabe and crumbles of sweet sausage; the bitter broccoli rabe was nicely balanced by the sausage. farfalle ortolano was a textural contrast of bow-tie pasta with sun-dried tomatoes, mushrooms, spinach and shrimp, a pleasing combination of flavors. another worthy dish was scaloppine caprese -- lightly breaded, thin veal scallops topped with melted mozzarella, tomato slices, prosciutto and tomatoes.  desserts are often an afterthought at italian restaurants, but emme surprised me with its options. both the chocolate hazelnut cake (a rum-soaked sponge cake with hazelnut ganache) and lava di cioccolato (rich chocolate cake with soft interior served warm) were delicious. more predictable were the peach sorbet (served in a real frozen peach) and tartuffo al cioccolato (a chocolate covered ice cream ball).  there is a $20.99 lunch special, which includes salad, panini or pasta, and coffee or soda. another good midday option is one of six panini on grilled rustic italian bread. hearty and excellent are the marucella (grilled eggplant, zucchini and asparagus in extra virgin olive oil), carosone (grilled chicken with fresh mozzarella and roasted red peppers in a picante balsamic glaze) and annarè (prosciutto di parma, shaved parmigiano, tomatoes and arugula in a balsamic glaze).  emme of capri may be small, but it can pack a memorable punch.  emme of capri  227 summer street  stamford  (203) 353-0626  good  the space cozy storefront with two large windows facing the street; tables seat a mere 32. wheelchair access possible.  the crowd mostly couples and foursomes for dinner; business singles, doubles and quartets at lunch. small staff handles the tables professionally.  the bar selections are limited to beer and wine, with wines $28 to $250 by the bottle, $8 to $9 by the glass. the wine list is concise, mostly italian, with some interesting choices.  the bill lunch entrees $10 to $18; dinner entrees $17 to $23. most credit cards accepted.what we like italian crepes, calamari all'agro, calamari and zucchini, funghi trifolati, mista, caesar and contadina salads, orecchiette alla pugliese, scaloppine caprese, farfalle ortolano, grilled red grouper, hazelnut cake, tartuffo, lava di cioccolato.  if you go lunch: monday to friday, noon to 2:30 p.m. dinner: monday to thursday, 5 to 10 p.m.; friday and saturday, 5 to 11 p.m.; sunday, 4 to 9 p.m. reservations recommended. parking on the street or in one of several lots on summer street.  reviewed jan. 14, 2007  dining/stamford  