after adjustment, the ravens' offense makes up ground   it was the price to be paid last season for leaving the house.  '''yo, dog, what's up with the offense, you stink,''' the fans would say when they recognized fullback ovie mughelli. ''i felt like i was in high school,'' mughelli said this week.  the 2000 ravens won a super bowl with a ferocious defense, a field-goal kicker and not much else. there was something almost endearing about their ineptness on offense, and when they went five games -- the entire month of that october -- without scoring an offensive touchdown, it elicited murmurs of awe more than the gnashing of teeth.  but the ravens' offense of recent years, including the one that began this season, was an easy target. the contrast with their dominating defense was so stark that the ravens' locker room became a stew of frustration and resentment.  when an early surge of touchdowns this fall, attributed largely to the presence of new quarterback steve mcnair, was followed by a slump, the frustration bubbled again. the team lost two games in a row. coach brian billick saw the season, and perhaps his job, slipping away. so, during the mid-october bye week, with a winning record still in hand, billick fired jim fassel, his offensive coordinator and close friend, and took over the play-calling himself.  ''how many years ago was that?'' billick joked this week as his team prepared to play the indianapolis colts in an american football conference second-round divisional playoff game saturday in baltimore.  from almost that moment, the ravens' offense has been transformed. it has become both efficient and explosive, ranking 10th in the n.f.l. in yards a game (averaging 344.2) since billick took over the play-calling. if the ravens still do not put up the pinball numbers of the colts, their improvement has been stark nevertheless. the offense, which was ranked 28th over all in the league when fassel was fired, now ranks 17th over all.  ''it's a tremendous difference,'' receiver mark clayton said.  most telling, the team that seemed to rely almost exclusively on kicker matt stover for scoring was ninth in the n.f.l. in points scored over the final 10 weeks of the season, averaging 24.3 a game. that was an average of 6 points more than the ravens were scoring when fassel was calling the plays.  they scored with long, clock-chewing drives and quick-strike pass plays. the defense allowed a league-low 201 points. but the 353 points scored put the ravens into a tie for 12th in the league.  billick deflects talk about his role in changing the offense. he doesn't want to diminish fassel's contributions, so he says he is merely tailoring the offense to mcnair. as the quarterback and his teammates have grown more comfortable with each other, billick said, he has been able to expand the play-calling.  but players said billick has demanded that they know what every other offensive player on the field is doing, so they can better respond to changes at the line of scrimmage. that gives the offense more options when players have to adjust on the fly, they said.  whatever the reason, billick has managed a delicate balancing act. running back jamal lewis, who complained about the play-calling early this season, is getting more carries, but billick is also spreading the ball around among other players. the reliable tight end todd heap may still be the preferred target of mcnair's play-action passes, but in the ravens' 13-3 loss to the broncos in week 5, four players carried the ball and six caught passes. in the season finale, a 19-7 victory against the bills, five players rushed and eight caught passes.  it may seem like a small variance, but its impact is obvious. and the success has brought billick a measure of redemption, and perhaps job security.  ''when you're a coordinator, it becomes self-centered because you're wanting to make a name for yourself,'' billick said. ''since i've got what i want and i'm where i want to be, it's liberating to not carry that around with you. i'm not auditioning for anybody, i'm not trying to impress anybody.''  mughelli may be the poster child for the switch. mughelli, a fourth-year player from wake forest, caught three passes last season. in the first six games of this season, he had no receptions and no rushes. in the final 10 games, mughelli caught 21 passes and rushed 12 times. he knew things had changed when he caught a pass from mcnair against the titans, broke two tackles and scored his first career touchdown.  ''i wasn't really involved in the offense last year,'' mughelli said. ''this year, i'm rushing, catching and being able to open up other wide receivers. guys actually cover me this year.  ''you can't say the ravens are predictable anymore,'' he added. ''now, we have so many weapons, defenses don't know where we're going to.''  and it's safe to leave the house again.  ''i used to hate going out,'' tight end daniel wilcox said, adding: ''now it's, 'hey, how do you like playing with steve? you like that guy?'  ''yeah,'' he said, ''i love that guy.''  pro football  