mets and schoeneweis near multiyear deal   the mets were busy on two pitching fronts yesterday, welcoming an enthusiastic pedro martínez to the team's minicamp to check on his rehabilitation from shoulder surgery while closing in on a multiyear contract with scott schoeneweis, a versatile left-handed reliever.  the mets and schoeneweis's agent, scott boras, ''were 99 percent done'' on a three-year, $10.7 million deal, said a major league baseball official with direct knowledge of the deal. the official spoke on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak publicly about a contract that has not been completed.  schoeneweis, 33, pitched for the toronto blue jays and the cincinnati reds last season and was 4-2 with four saves and a 4.88 earned run average in 71 appearances. over the last two seasons, he has held left-handers to a .209 average with a home run in 201 at-bats. but schoeneweis has the ability to be more than just a left-handed specialist. as recently as the 2004 season, he started 19 games for the chicago white sox.  his addition to the pitching staff will give manager willie randolph a deeper bullpen and more flexibility, since schoeneweis can be a middle-inning reliever, a setup man, an emergency closer and perhaps even a long reliever, a role that was effectively filled last season by darren oliver, who has moved to the los angeles angels.  for the moment, the mets are overflowing with left-handed relievers. they have schoeneweis, closer billy wagner and the middle reliever pedro feliciano, who pitched capably for the team last season. they also have dave williams, who started five games for the mets last season but could end up in the bullpen in 2007.  from the right side, the mets' bullpen also has plenty of candidates. aaron heilman remains a key setup man although he clearly wants to be a starter. duaner sánchez is rehabbing after a midseason taxicab accident left him with a separated shoulder. guillermo mota should rejoin the mets after sitting out the first 50 games of the season because of a steroids suspension. the hard-throwing ambiorix burgos, who was acquired from kansas city during the off-season, will fight for a significant spot in the bullpen, too.  the abundance of relievers fits a pattern established by general manager omar minaya, who had a strong bullpen last season that propped up a modest starting rotation all the way to game 7 of the national league championship series. minaya clearly wants another strong group of relievers in 2007, particularly when the starting pitching staff remains a question mark.  as the mets players came into the locker room from the practice fields after the first day of workouts, martínez, a 35-year-old right-hander who no longer throws as hard as he did when he was one of the best pitchers in baseball with the boston red sox, spoke to reporters about his rotator cuff surgery and his status for next season.  wearing jeans, a bright-green polo shirt and a diamond necklace, martínez said that he would begin throwing in march and that he could return sooner than his originally projected date of july or august.  ''i am going to do this one time and i am going to do it well,'' he said. ''i am not going to get excited and put myself in a difficult situation, though. i was told what to do and i am going to follow it religiously. i am not going to disobey my doctor.  ''right now everything is going perfectly,'' added martínez, who has two years remaining on his contract. ''i am working hard. it is a long period of time working, but it is paying off.  ''they told me, if everything went right, my velocity would pick up. hopefully, it will be the truth. if not, i am going to use my head and continue to do what i do.''  but no matter how long it takes martínez to return, minaya plans to have a big bullpen to back him up when he does.  inside pitch  omar minaya said wednesday that the mets had no interest in signing the free-agent outfielder bernie williams, who has played his entire 16-year career with the yankees.  baseball  