arts, briefly   is there an actor in the house?  todd weeks, near right, who plays hugh voysey in the atlantic theater company's production of ''the voysey inheritance,'' left the show for a few days this week after his father died suddenly on monday. there were no understudies; either performances would have to be canceled or someone familiar with the play would have to jump into the role. someone like neil pepe, far right, the artistic director of the company. ''it was terrifying, but i had a great time,'' said mr. pepe, who hasn't acted much lately but performed on wednesday night in costume and in british accent (though, it should be said, while holding a script). mr. weeks will return on tuesday to the play, which, incidentally, is extending its run through march 25. mr. pepe, who will continue in the role until mr. weeks returns, is something of an alfred hitchcock of the company, as he also appeared as a guitarist for a couple of performances of ''spring awakening'' last summer.  steve wynn sues lloyd's over elbowed picasso  steve wynn, the casino magnate who accidentally poked a hole in a picasso with his elbow last year, yesterday filed a lawsuit against lloyd's of london contending that it failed to act properly on his demands to pay $54 million in lost value for the 1932 painting, ''le rêve'' (''the dream''), right, the associated press reported. filed in the united states district court in manhattan, the suit seeks to force lloyd's to expedite his claims for reimbursement and restoration costs by providing him with an appraisal report or initial damages assessment. representatives for mr. wynn, who paid $48.4 million for the painting in 1997, told lloyd's in november that it was worth $139 million the day before he damaged it and that it was believed to be worth no more than $85 million afterward. there was no immediate response to a message seeking a response from a lloyd's spokesman.  muslim sitcom is a hit in canada  ''little mosque on the prairie'' has turned out to be a big hit. created and written by zarqa nawaz, the cbc satirical sitcom about a muslim family among rustics in western canada drew two million viewers in its debut on tuesday night, the toronto star reported, citing nielsen overnight figures. the newspaper described the show's reviews as ''lukewarm at best.''  a tv drama takes place in buckingham palace  as if britain's royal family didn't already provide enough fodder for readers of gossip columns and celebrity magazines, here comes a new television drama set in buckingham palace, the bbc reported. the show, ''the palace,'' described as britain's answer to ''the west wing,'' will be made for broadcast by itv next year in eight hourlong installments.  carnegie and city center approve partnership  the boards of carnegie hall and city center have approved details of a partnership that will begin next year and draw upon the musical strength of carnegie hall and the dance, drama and musical theater performances of city center, the associated press reported. details of their programming for the 2008-9 season will not be announced until next january. each institution will retain its own board and governing structure, but joint fund-raising may occur, and a new partnership board will be formed to oversee their collaborations.  gary glitter may get an early release  gary glitter may get a lunar new year present: freedom. glitter, 62, the british glam rocker whose real name is paul francis gadd, was convicted in march of ''obscene acts'' with two girls, ages 10 and 11, and is serving a three-year prison sentence in vietnam. but tran huu thong, the director of the thu duc detention center, where glitter is being held, said he is on a list of inmates under consideration for early release. as part of its lunar new year celebration next month, vietnam traditionally reduces the terms of inmates with good prison records. under law prisoners can be nominated for early release if they behave well and fellow inmates recommend it. mr. thong said nearly everyone in jail voted for early release for glitter.  festivals choose juries  stephen frears, the director of ''the queen,'' was named yesterday to head the jury at the 60th cannes film festival, to be held from may 16 to 27, reuters reported.  paul schrader, the director of ''american gigolo'' and screenwriter whose credits include ''taxi driver'' and ''raging bull,'' will be the chairman of the 57th berlin film festival jury, agence france-presse reported. willem dafoe, a star of ''platoon, will be among the members of the panel. the event, which will run from feb. 8 to 18, will open with ''la vie en rose,'' a biography of edith piaf directed by olivier dahan and starring marion cotillard as the beloved french singer.  meryl streep as mamma  meryl streep will take on the role of a mother with a rebel streak when she stars in the film version of the international hit musical ''mamma mia!,'' reuters reported. the film will be the first musical for ms. streep, who has, nevertheless, sung in the movies ''a prairie home companion,'' ''postcards from the edge'' and ''death becomes her.'' the story of ''mamma mia!'' features 22 abba songs and revolves around a bride-to-be and her once-rebellious single mother, who reared her on a greek island without disclosing the identity of her child's father. the young woman locates three possibilities and invites them to the wedding.  'housewives' house is more than home  if the home of the ''desperate housewives'' star marcia cross (bree van de kamp) resembles the set of a television show for a while, that's because it will be one. ms. cross, 44, who is expecting twins, has been placed on bed rest, making it necessary for the hit abc show to take over the downstairs portion of the home in los angeles at the end of the week to film the last two episodes she was planning to appear on this season, reuters reported.  correction:  january 16, 2007, tuesday  a report in the ''arts, briefly'' column on friday about the decision by the boards of carnegie hall and city center to form a partnership for performances referred incorrectly to the plan. each institution will maintain its own board; a partnership board will not be formed.  