house bans smoking, and few complain   democrats banned smoking inside the house on wednesday. then they quickly congratulated themselves, squeezing as much symbolism out of the moment as they could.  ''the days of smoke-filled rooms in the united states capitol are over,'' the house speaker, nancy pelosi, declared.  whether democrats are any less inclined to make backroom deals than republicans, the new majority will be remembered for bringing the rules of the house into line with those in the rest of the district of columbia, numerous states and corporations, several european countries and all major airlines.  and it did so with surprisingly little outcry from the smoking crowd. ''i'm o.k. with it,'' representative mike simpson, republican of idaho, said as he headed out onto an adjoining balcony for a cigarette between votes.  he did, however, glance nostalgically toward the spot where a large ashtray once stood.  ''that was the circle,'' mr. simpson said, referring to the spot where he and other republicans once gathered around representative john a. boehner of ohio, the minority leader and a noted chain smoker. ''that was where the decisions on the future of the country were made.''  it was also where some of the more geriatric members of the house -- including at least one who used an oxygen tank and rode a motorized cart during the last session -- came and went during votes. representative henry a. waxman, democrat of california democrat and a longtime advocate of the ban, said he had received numerous complaints from members about the second-hand smoke, which wafted onto the house floor and into halls.  ''why should people have to quit their jobs to protect their health?'' mr. waxman asked, beaming as he talked about the ban. ''it was long overdue. it took nancy pelosi to put this in place.''  lawmakers can still smoke in their individual offices, but they can no longer light up in the ornate hallway outside the house chamber known as the speaker's lobby, the spot where lawmakers often gather to talk with each other and with journalists. most other areas of the capitol, including the public areas outside the senate, had already banned smoking.  now, mr. waxman was asked, could he eliminate the phrase ''smoke-filled room''?  ''i don't have the power to do that,'' he replied. ''i only have the power to investigate clichés.''  on a day when iraq and the minimum wage dominated the news in congress, few smokers were clamoring to discuss the change. mr. boehner -- who has been spotted cradling a lit cigarette inside his palm when he darted from the speaker's lobby to the house floor for votes -- dismissed a question about the ban, saying it was fine. representative barney frank, the massachusetts democrat who often puffed on a cigar in the lounge, refused to comment on it (his aides recommended calling back with a more serious question).  one lawmaker who was spotted heading out to the balcony for a cigarette -- and who did not want his name used because he was ''not known to be'' a smoker -- said he was glad to obey the new rules. and then he pointed at a reporter and said, ''it's a lot healthier for you.''  