online giving increases   more and more people are donating online to the new york times neediest cases campaign. as of dec. 31, 2006, with more than a month left in the campaign, the number of online donors, 2,240, had already exceeded last season's total. data comes from nycharities.org , which processes the online donations. sixty-seven percent of online donors are new yorkers, while the remaining 33 percent represent 36 states. they have many reasons for giving, but they are all moved to do so. some of their letters are below.  an obligation to give  ''i am just about to go to bed in my warm apartment overlooking the river here in exeter, new hampshire. my sister has just left, after we made and shared a delicious moroccan meal. my dog is toasty on her suede bed; she had frozen yogurt for ''dessert'' tonight. i consider my life and again i am struck by the serendipity of being so remarkably fortunate. blessed, really. why am i donating? because i believe it is my responsibility to give something back, to help others and to work towards raising the bar for all people, not just the fortunate. if i can help someone this holiday season -- with a meal or a new winter coat or a rent payment -- then i have taken one small step in the right direction.''  amy selwyn, exeter, n.h.  a family tradition  ''ira seidman and ben zweig , sixth-grade students at the school at columbia university, sold homemade hot chocolate and cookies on the corner of 110th street and broadway to raise this $200.00 to donate to the new york times neediest cases fund. they met up with alot of neighborhood and school people, had fun, and hope this money will help make life a little better for some fellow new yorkers.''  daniel seidman, new york  ''giving to the ny neediest fund has been a family tradition since i was a little girl. i hope that this small gift can help some little girl somewhere and give her some hope and a way to reach her dreams.''  susan bodiker, d.c.  ''i have donated to the ny times neediest cases every year since i was a small child. this has not been the best year for me financially, but it has been a year of great personal growth and happiness. i hope that this gift, and the new year ahead of us, may bring comfort and joy to families trying to get back on their feet.''  robin d. beckhard, new york  ''i give every year in memory of my mother, faye steiner, who had the proverbial heart of gold, and always gave to those who needed help.''  barbara steiner, brooklyn  self-reflection  ''i decided to give because it is the christian thing to do.. i also decided to donate because if i am given more, it is my responsibility to give back to those who are less fortunate than myself. i know what it is like to not have money for groceries and be afraid of having your lights turned off. i make this in memory of my grandmothers, claudia, who made pennies into dimes to keep my mom and uncle out of foster care; and eula; who made pennies into nickels to keep my father and his three siblings out of the hands of the division of youth and family services, in new jersey.''  nicole webb, somerset, n.j.  ''having been there years ago, i know what a few dollars can mean.''  anne ilaria, gilbert ariz.  ''last year one of your neediest cases was a widowed woman struggling with ms. that describes me -- except that my three children and i are lucky enough not to be financially strained. i think of her often, and hope my gift will ease her life and those of the many amazing families and children you profile.''  kathryn henkens, menlo park, calif.  ''my wife and i have a three month old baby (our first) and, having realized how much work it is, we are constantly amazed at the stories of single mothers, barely scraping by, who manage to raise their children in the most difficult of circumstances. while previously such stories touched us, now they bring us nearly to tears, as we have a better understanding of the difficulties of raising a child. making this donation is the least we could do to help these mothers.''  russell singer, d.c.  moved by a voice in the paper  ''dear peggy,  it seems that you have an abundance of love in your family. i cross my fingers that you will find a good job such that there will be money too. here is my contribution for the rough patch until you find that job.  with admiration for your strength, ''  sophie bade state college, pa.  ms. bade was responding to an article by kari haskell about peggy lopez that was published dec. 17 in the new york times.  ''reading about the individuals who have benefited from the fund gives me the feeling that i understand the connection between a donation and the recipient in a very tangible way. the decision to make donations at this time of year was already made; the decision to donate to the neediest cases fund was influenced by understanding how this money is distributed.''  laurie goldberg, westport, conn.  giving to celebrate the holidays  ''last christmas, while sitting amid the carnage of dirty plates and wrapping paper, my father felt gluttonous, spoiled, selfish. our lifestyle felt damnably selfish. so, he declared that next christmas he would rather we gave money to the times neediest cases in his name than give him a gift. and i am.''  james bishop, colorado springs, colo.  ''in honor of my two children, i would like to donate a chanukah gift to support the neediest.''  stuart ain, hewlett, new york  ''this is a season to buy less, love more. no better way to impress upon my daughters the importance of giving back -- not just during the holidays, but always. this donation is a gift to them.''  ann magnin, norwalk, conn.  giving in gratitude  ''the charity workers are angels, in my book, and donating money is easy in comparison to the work they do. i am grateful for all i have and for my wonderful family and friends, and i would like to do something for those who are not as fortunate.''  lorraine j. meyer-peyton , fort rucker ala.  contribution was made by doug and lore peyton.  ''every day we wake up and think about how lucky we are to have our health, 2 wonderful sons, good paying jobs and a nice home. i cannot imagine having the strength to survive what these families have survived. they have real courage.  judith feldman, brooklyn  ''new york has been good to my family and me, we want to share that goodness with the people of new york.''  edward hoare, centerport, new york  ''i have been very lucky in that i have never wanted for food or shelter. i know how easy it would be, however, for that to change and how fragile that luck is.''  nancy lipin, brooklyn  ''i am donating in thankfulness for the wonderful year that 2006 was in my life. i wanted to wish all those in need and despair, a prayer of hope and prosperity and health for the years to come; may their circumstance and luck change for the better in 2007.''  rose marie bressan, new york  