german leader's status grows as voice of europe   when angela merkel was sworn in 14 months ago as germany's chancellor, the first woman to hold the post, she seemed less a phenomenon than a fluke -- squeaking into office amid predictions that her government would be hobbled by internal problems and might soon collapse.  now, with britain and france in political flux and with mrs. merkel having forged a surprisingly warm relationship with president bush, the 52-year-old chancellor has emerged as the leading political actor in europe -- not to mention the go-to person in europe for washington.  it is no accident that when secretary of state condoleezza rice wraps up a tour of the middle east next week, her first stop will be berlin, where she will brief mrs. merkel on efforts to revive the peace efforts in that region.  on a visit to washington last week, mrs. merkel won a pledge from mr. bush to focus more on the so-called quartet -- the united states, the european union, russia and the united nations -- to promote peace talks between israel and the palestinians.  ''this enables the european union, as a whole, to take on responsibility, and we want to take on responsibility for the middle east process,'' mrs. merkel said in an interview here thursday.  mrs. merkel's foray into the middle east is one of several high-visibility initiatives by the chancellor as she assumes the rotating presidencies of the european union and the group of 8 industrial nations.  at the top of her agenda, analysts here say, is reinvigorating the atlantic alliance. her first foreign trip after assuming the dual presidencies was to the white house, where she proposed creating a trans-atlantic economic zone and pressed mr. bush on climate-change policies.  ''i consider it my job to express to america what's in the interest of europe,'' mrs. merkel said. ''and for me, the trans-atlantic partnership, in general, is in the european interest. europeans know that we cannot accomplish things without america,'' she continued, ''and on the other side, america must also know that europe is needed in many areas.''  mrs. merkel is getting a respectful hearing in washington in part because she is the only leader of a big-three european nation likely to be around at the end of this year. tony blair of britain and jacques chirac of france are in the waning months of their lengthy tenures.  ''she's the big player in europe right now,'' said kurt volker, the bush administration's principal deputy assistant secretary of state for european and eurasian affairs.  the bush administration, mr. volker said, views mrs. merkel as the ''anchor point'' for its dealings with the european union on a host of issues, from constraining iran's nuclear ambitions to responding to russia's recent showdown with belarus over natural gas shipments.  after the rupture between the united states and much of europe over the iraq war, the bush administration is also clearly relieved to find a german leader with whom it can have a civil relationship. mrs. merkel's predecessor, gerhard schröder, a strong opponent of the war, and mr. bush had little to say to each other after it began.  mr. bush, who has met with mrs. merkel six times, regularly refers to her upbringing in the former east germany, which they both affirm has given her a particular appreciation of freedom.  to some extent, analysts say, mrs. merkel's strength is a corollary of mr. bush's weakness. there is a precedent for a german leader to act boldly during a time of trouble in the united states.  ''thirty-five years ago, willy brandt reacted to watergate and vietnam by taking the initiative with his ostpolitik,'' said john c. kornblum, a former american ambassador to germany. ''thirty-five years later, merkel is doing the same thing with her own form of westpolitik.''  mr. volker, however, cautioned against concluding that mrs. merkel's rising influence would iron out all the differences between the united states and europe. ''we have to be careful not to think this is a magic bullet,'' he said. ''there are limits to what anybody can do.''  indeed, mrs. merkel's boldest trans-atlantic initiative -- for an economic zone comprising europe and the united states -- has aroused little excitement in washington, where the bush administration is focused on salvaging the current doha round of the global trade negotiations.  mrs. merkel is also unlikely to change the stance of germany or france on the iraq war. she declined to comment on mr. bush's plan to commit more than 20,000 additional american troops to iraq. ''next time,'' she said with a smile, switching momentarily from german to english.  in general, mrs. merkel deflected questions about her enhanced status. even the site of the meeting with a small group of correspondents -- a cramped conference room down the hall from her cavernous office facing the domed reichstag building -- seemed calculated to avoid pretense.  but she left no doubt she would push her ideas aggressively. her trans-atlantic economic proposal, which aims to harmonize american and european business regulations, is a case in point. ''in a world with rising economies like china, like india, like latin america, we face completely different competition,'' she said. ''that suggests bundling our power, not falling back on protectionism, but bundling our power.''  mrs. merkel expressed confidence that the united states had become more open-minded about policies to confront climate change, an issue she has put high on the group of 8 agenda. mr. bush, in remarks after meeting mrs. merkel, said it was time to move beyond ''old, stale debates of the past.''  mrs. merkel said: ''i see a greater readiness than in previous years to confront climate and climate change. and i see good possibilities for cooperation in the area of energy efficiency,'' as well as in biofuels.  american officials said they admired mrs. merkel's stern warning to russia concerning its recent standoff with belarus over natural gas shipments. mrs. merkel has taken a more neutral line toward russia than did mr. schröder, who took pride in his friendship with president vladimir v. putin.  asked if she seconded mr. schröder's assessment of mr. putin as a flawless democrat, she said: ''i have not yet said that, and would also not say it now. i use the phrase strategic partnership with russia.''  with germany growing at its fastest clip in six years, mrs. merkel's government looks secure. the question, analysts here say, is whether she will have staying power on the global stage. mrs. merkel professes not to be worried. ''fear,'' she said, ''is not a good political adviser.''  