school official steps down after inquiry   a top new york city schools superintendent abruptly retired after investigators' found that he had had an affair with a subordinate, city education officials said yesterday.  on friday, the city's education department announced the retirement of the superintendent, reyes irizarry, 56, who oversaw more than 100 schools and more than 100,000 students in region 4, covering western queens and bushwick, brooklyn.  schools chancellor joel i. klein was quoted in a press release praising mr. irizarry's successor, charles a. amundsen, but there was no mention of the allegations about mr. irizarry, who had worked in the school system for 33 years.  the chancellor's office declined yesterday to comment on mr. irizarry. ''friday's press release was about charles amundsen's new position and our confidence in charles,'' said melody meyer, a department spokeswoman.  the results of an inquiry into mr. irizarry's relationship with his subordinate were sent to mr. klein on friday by the special commissioner of investigation for the new york city schools, a division of the city's department of investigation.  the special commissioner substantiated a romantic relationship between mr. irizarry and eva chejfetz, the director of intervention services in region 4, according to two department officials who spoke on condition they not be named because the report was not yet public. the findings were reported yesterday in the new york post.  ms. chejfetz was a tenured teacher before her 2005 promotion, approved by mr. irizarry, to the regional job, the officials said.  mr. irizarry, who is married, did not return a phone call to his home. an e-mail message to ms. chejfetz and a phone call yesterday to her home were not returned.  mr. irizarry was one of 10 veteran city educators to be elevated to the position of regional superintendent in 2003 when mayor michael r. bloomberg and chancellor klein reorganized the city's 32 school districts into 10 regions.  early in mr. bloomberg's first term, mr. irizarry, who previously had been the superintendent for brooklyn and staten island high schools, often joined the mayor and the chancellor at many of their biggest education announcements.  officials at education department headquarters regarded mr. irizarry as a dedicated and effective administrator.  two years ago, however, he was the subject of a letter of censure by the city teachers' union, over complaints by educators that they were being micromanaged. the dispute also led the union to stage a demonstration outside his offices, attended by more than 400 teachers.  