the fruits of fiscal responsibility   fiscal discipline seems a quaint idea when money is pouring into the city treasury like beer at a super bowl party. but the independent budget office knew what it was doing when it warned that lawmakers eager to spend the city's budget surplus could be looking at tax increases and spending cuts down the road unless they show restraint.  fighting the urge to spend will be a real and pivotal test for the city's elected officials. this is a moment when new york needs to hold itself up as a model of fiscal prudence. and if it does, it can argue that it is worthy of being given more responsibility over its own financial house, something that would have been unthinkable just a few years ago.  the extra $700 million this year, on top of a $3.5 billion surplus last year, should put the city on good financial footing until 2009. after that, though, no one should assume that the real-estate boom and the wall street bulls will continue to buoy the economy. mr. bloomberg has rightly ended the myopia of budgets past, extending forward planning to four years, controlling spending where he could and lobbying the state where he could not.  even so, there could still be red ink ahead. and should any city lawmaker be so dazzled by present-day surpluses as to overlook that danger, there are plenty of independent analysts with long memories ready to sound the alarm. the budget office has served this function for 10 years, analyzing budgets and spending on everything from housing to sports stadiums, and raising questions that officials would rather duck. and then there is the financial control board, which came into being three decades ago, when the city verged on bankruptcy.  the board mostly serves as a monitor now, no longer an overlord, and the word ''emergency'' was removed from its title, but it continues to do good work. because of inept tinkering in albany with the board's mandate, it could go out of business. but the mayor supports it and it deserves to survive.  mr. bloomberg and christine quinn, the speaker of the city council, should seize the opportunity to trumpet the city's fiscal soundness and use it to win more freedom from albany. it's ridiculous that city hall should have to ask state legislators' permission on almost anything of consequence -- on most matters involving taxation, for instance, and even for the right to investigate medicaid fraud.  if the city shows self control, it should be rewarded with more control.  the city  