conquer and convert   inÉs of my soul  by isabel allende.  translated by margaret sayers peden.  illustrated. 321 pp.  harpercollins publishers. $25.95.  a work of historical fiction couldn't ask for better bones than the adventures of a real-life conquistadora. the heroine of isabel allende's latest book, a 16th-century spanish woman who sailed to peru and trekked south with the expedition that claimed vast lands for charles v, faces the same perils as the soldiers around her -- along with a few extras, like unwanted sexual advances.  not that inés suárez rejects them all: pedro de valdivia, the leader of the expedition, is her lover and partner in the founding of santiago de la nueva extremadura, the first spanish stronghold in chile. this conquistador, whose wife initially remained in spain, regularly seeks his lover's counsel. ''i did not have enough hours to do everything,'' inés, the ultimate multitasker, complains: ''taking care of my house and the colony, looking after the sick, the plantings and the animal pens, along with my reading lessons.''  in margaret sayers peden's translation of ''inés of my soul,'' allende's reach is broad, scooping up politics, history, romance and the supernatural. ''this novel is a work of intuition, but any similarity to events and persons relating to the conquest of chile is not coincidental,'' she writes in an author's note. this is a neat twist on a familiar phrase, but it hints at a problem. too often allende's book reads as if she is assembling a plot around places, dates and historical figures. slow to start, the narrative acquires an events-driven tunnel vision that can get in the way of character development.  at a time when the strong arm of the spanish inquisition reached clear to the southern tip of the new world, valdivia's mission was to find riches in chile while conquering and converting the indigenous population. in allende's rendering, inés has a sensitive view of the local people: ''they are my enemies,'' she notes of the mapuche indians, ''but i admire them because i know that if i were in their place, i would die fighting for my land, as they are doing.''  despite this, inés is a crucial actor in the brutality of the spanish conquest, at one point decapitating prisoners and throwing their heads outside the walls of the fledgling colony. not terribly conflicted by the part she must play, she seems beyond reproach, as effective and inscrutable in battle as she is as a gobernadora. as if that weren't enough, she has two almost impossibly valuable attributes: she's been born with the gift of dousing, which means she can find water anywhere, and she never becomes pregnant.  allende uses the backdrop of constant violence to weigh in on the politics of domination and intimidation. is it just a coincidence that the date given for the biggest, bloodiest battle in santiago is sept. 11? or that, on the very same day in 1973, salvador allende (the author's uncle, then the president of chile) was assassinated and his government overthrown in a military coup? ''i fear that these pages already contain more cruelty than a christian soul can tolerate,'' inés notes. ''in the new world, no one has scruples when the moment calls for violence. but what am i saying? violence ... exists everywhere, and has throughout the ages. nothing changes; we humans repeat the same sins over and over, eternally.''  what stays with the reader, after the treks and battles and politics fade, aren't allende's political musings or even her characters. instead it's her vivid descriptions of daily life in 16th-century south america: the meager soups that starving settlers season with mice, lizards, crickets and worms; the marriage rituals of the mapuche, in which a man ''steals the girl he desires''; an attack in which the right hands and noses of mapuche prisoners are removed with hatchets and knives. in ''inés of my soul,'' allende succeeds in resurrecting a woman from history and endowing her with the gravitas of a hero. but as a work of fiction, her portrait of inés is hit-and-miss.  maggie galehouse is a reporter for the houston chronicle.  