like them or loathe them, hedge funds aren't going away   sometimes it feels as if there is a red state-blue state divide when it comes to hedge funds.  some people believe that if permitted to remain free from the shackles of dangerous government oversight, hedge funds can help solve problems from underfunded pensions to inept corporate management. this group tends to include hedge fund employees and hedge fund investors.  others believe that hedge funds are sinister forces that capitalize on superior information -- possibly obtained illegally -- and are hell-bent on pillaging the financial system to corner the market on luxury cars and palatial real estate. this group includes much of the news media and the connecticut attorney general.  yet hedge funds are neither saviors nor satan.  there are more than 9,000 funds that vary greatly in the kinds of investments they make, returns they seek and strategies they employ. one of the few things they have in common -- other than gigantic paychecks when their returns are good -- is that the funds have become a more accepted fixture in the financial landscape.  a number of recent studies show that hedge fund investors are satisfied with the performance of their investments, even if that performance appears on paper to be less than stellar. widespread demand for risk-adjusted returns of 8 to 10 percent ensures that the money spigot will stay turned on. (risk adjusted means that the portfolio is hedged. if the market slumps, the fund's returns should not.)  for example, the top performers of the 2007 commonfund benchmarks study of educational endowments, a survey of college, university and other educational endowments and foundations in the united states, were almost 50 percent invested in ''alternatives'' -- hedge funds, private equity, real estate, distressed debt, energy and natural resources and venture capital.  hedge funds constituted the largest portion -- 44 to 70 percent -- of the alternatives category. average returns for the foundations and endowments that responded to the survey were 10.6 percent, while the leaders posted returns of more than 16.8 percent.  the top 10 percent of performers among the endowments allocated 49 percent of their money to alternatives, compared with 11 percent for fixed income, 18 percent for domestic equity and 21 percent for international equity. the top quartile of performers also show a heavy weighting to alternatives: 46 percent, compared with 11 percent for fixed income, 20 percent for international equity and 21 percent for domestic equity.  even though hedge funds represented the bulk of investment dollars, their returns were lackluster. in 2006, the standard & poor's 500-stock index had a total return, when dividends were reinvested, of 15.8 percent. overall returns for alternatives averaged 14.6 percent. energy and natural resources produced a stunning return of 40 percent; distressed debt, 26 percent; and private equity, 19 percent. hedge funds turned out only 10.6 percent. but investors did not seem to be bothered.  ''it was nice to see hedge funds were doing what they are supposed to do,'' said john s. griswold jr. executive director of the commonfund institute, a research organization dedicated to educating the nonprofit community about investing. ''they should lag a rapidly rising stock market,'' he explained, ''because hedging has a cost.''  the money continues to flow into hedge funds. hedge fund research, a chicago-based research firm, estimates that $110 billion flowed into new funds through november. a study released by deutsche bank yesterday surveyed investors who represent $900 billion of the total $1.4 trillion in the industry and predicted that $110 billion will flow into the sector in 2007.  ''i don't think demand will slow down anytime soon unless we see a lot of disasters,'' mr. griswold said. ''there's a bit of a herd mentality here. if you are not in hedge funds, people look funny at you, like, 'why aren't you?' ''  heavy investments in alternatives and hedge funds in particular have paid off for endowments. more than 79 percent of the growth in endowments with assets of $500 million to $1 billion resulted from investment returns (as opposed to gifts, for example). institutions with more than $1 billion derived more than 75 percent of their returns from their investments, according to the commonfund survey.  a separate study conducted by casey, quirk & associates last fall also showed satisfied customers. about 72 percent of respondents said that hedge fund returns came within 1 percentage point of their target. a surprising 25 percent of investors said they did better than expected: 19 percent exceeded their target by 1 to 5 percentage point. only 3 percent said their investment underperformed.  there are other reasons to expect robust growth. pension funds are wading in, raising their investments in alternatives in general and hedge funds in particular. the casey, quirk study estimated that institutions globally will add $1 trillion in money by 2010, compared with $360 billion today.  the growing role of institutions has tempered expectations about returns: 80 percent of those surveyed by casey, quick said they expected returns below 10 percent, with the bulk anticipating 8 to 9 percent. only 20 percent expected more than 10 percent.  megabucks compensation, meanwhile, still draws talent to hedge funds.  ''hedge funds are here to stay because of the compensation,'' mr. griswold said. ''this is where the best and brightest managers are gravitating to.''  the unforgiving nature of the industry means that those who do not perform will be booted out. according to hedge fund research, since the beginning of 2005 almost 1,300 hedge funds have closed. during that time, more than 3,000 have been started.  there will be more amaranth advisors (which was based in greenwich, conn.) -- funds that blow up because of bad and greedy bets. there will be frauds and there may be a market meltdown.  but alternative investing -- in private companies, with hedge fund managers who more aggressively try to time the markets, and in forests and wineries, is thriving.  street scene: insider  