from start to finish, bush is a blur in helping to alter game   the party that had been building all season for the saints reached a peak at the start of the playoff game saturday against the eagles. two plays and 19 seconds later, it came to a hushed halt.  running back reggie bush, whose no. 25 jersey adorned thousands of fans in the superdome, lay on the turf. he had been leveled by eagles cornerback sheldon brown after dropping a swing pass, and the tackle lifted bush in the air. it was a wonder that his cleats were still attached to his feet. the energy of the stadium instantly appeared to whoosh out the doors, like the air from a balloon whose knot had come undone.  fans rebuilt the energy through a ''reg-gie, reg-gie'' chant. and bush, the cherub-faced rookie with the loose-hinged hips, popped up.  ''that's probably the hardest i've been hit before,'' said bush, who had the wind knocked out of him. ''they can knock me down 100 times, i'm going to get back up 101 times.''  all season, bush led the team in highlights and goose bumps, among other, more measurable, statistics. and the possibility that he would miss all but two plays of the national football conference divisional playoff game? fans probably could not have imagined a bigger blow.  and they never pictured bush dropping the ball near the end of the game, a fumble charged to quarterback drew brees that nearly derailed what became the saints' 27-24 victory.  with 3 minutes 18 seconds left and the saints holding a 3-point lead, milking the clock and looking for the clinching points, everything that bush had meant to the saints slipped through his fingers on a pitch from brees.  bush and brees were rescued by a defensive stand. and when the eagles punted with less that two minutes left, it was bush securing the ball with a fair catch as two eagles charged into his peripheral vision.  but a part of bush's effectiveness is as a decoy. he diverts attention from deuce mcallister, the team's leading rusher, who quietly ran for 1,057 yards during the season and scored two third-quarter touchdowns against the eagles -- one on a bullish 5-yard run, the other on a slippery 11-yard screen.  mcallister provided the steady hand to the chaos that swirls around bush. he ran for 143 yards, none more important than the 14 he gained on the three plays after bush's fair catch, sealing the victory.  when the saints march, it is mcallister providing the rhythm and bush the percussion. it is obvious by the routine chants of the fans -- the cool ''doooce'' for mcallister, the thumping ''reg-gie'' for bush.  bush, the second choice over all in last april's n.f.l. draft, a 21-year-old connected by time and ability to the promising future of a long-sorry franchise, has become its symbol of a new era. he plays as if lifted and brought to life from a video game. even the plays that lose yards -- and there are many -- are exciting.  the beauty of bush is the unexpected. every play seems like a chance to alter the script, bush improvising his way around the field.  on second-and-goal from philadelphia's 4-yard line in the second quarter, bush took a handoff, took a couple steps and smacked into the back of saints left tackle jammal brown. like a pinball, he bounced to the right, then outran his pursuers to the corner of the end zone for a touchdown.  he ran to a life-size poster of himself that hangs on the wall behind the end zone, below the first row of seats, and started boxing with his likeness. the most exciting player on the team, and maybe the league, is a perfect poster boy for the new-look saints.  the touchdown capped a drive that encapsulated the give and take of bush. earlier, he took a pitch to the right on a second-down play and was corralled for a 6-yard loss. on the next play, needing 11 yards, he caught a screen pass and scampered 14.  on the next second-down play, bush lost 2 yards. but on third-and-7, he ran behind the left guard for the needed 7.  ''i find myself being alert to block on a lot of his runs,'' brees said, ''because the chances of him cutting back or bouncing around or retracing everything are pretty good.''  bush, who had more yards receiving (742) than rushing (565) during the regular season, had 12 carries for 52 yards and 3 catches for 22 more on saturday.  as usual, bush also led the team in stand-up moments. fans stood each time he went back to receive a punt, each time he took a handoff and appeared to have a sliver of room. when he fumbled at the end of a 10-yard gain in the third quarter, and his teammate terrance copper recovered the ball 6 yards later -- a unique way to convert a second-and-15 -- they cheered again.  but they did not cheer when the fourth-quarter pitch from brees slid through bush's fingers, hit the artificial turf and ended up in the hands of eagles defensive end darren howard.  ''from my vantage point, it looked like reggie had his eyes downfield on the guy he was to have to make miss,'' brees said.  it simply added drama to a game that could barely stand any more.  pro football  