notes for a soul mate   ah, the sweet sound of personal regrets, of squandered talents, of if onlys, of what might have beens. it is a siren song to which no one is immune, a fantasy ballet in which you are always prima, in which your dying swan always draws unprecedented applause.  this act, of course, is accompanied by the violin, that nobly wrenching instrument whose magical way of eliciting sadness has no peer in the orchestra pit. why else would it be almost comically identified with self-pity?  so, as if written into broadway union contracts -- listen, pal, no sad songs without the violin, you got me? -- you can hear it cry, on cue, in ''another winter in a summer town,'' the heartbreaking climatic number from ''grey gardens,'' as the 50-ish little edie beale mourns a rosy future that never came to be.  but one woman's locked cage is another's open door. christine ebersole, who found a star-making role in little edie, has had a thrill of vindication after being told, after two decades of steady work in hollywood, that she was too old to find a breakout role in film or television. she won her first tony award in 2001 (for ''42nd street'') and now, at 53, is a contender for a second with ''grey gardens.''  like many, ms. ebersole can relate to the violin as a megaphone of woe. ''it's melancholy,'' she said. ''there's something about the way it can resonate in the deepest recesses of your soul.'' but she regards her own violin, which her parents gave her when she was 10 (when it was clear the music lessons were paying off), as something more like a diving board.  ''it was really my ally,'' she said. ''it became an intimate relationship.'' the two of them were very happy there in the orchestra until one day, at a high school performance of ''finian's rainbow,'' she looked up at the stage.  ''i realized i wanted to be up there,'' she said. ''i got so caught up that i missed my cues and played when i shouldn't have.''  but the violin, a stradivarius copy made by scherl & roth in the 1950s, had taught her well. like a set of training wheels, the violin -- famously the instrument closest to the human voice in timbre, range and seamless fluidity -- had given her an unconscious education in voice.  ''it made you realize that you really have to create the notes,'' she said. ''you couldn't just put your finger on them. you have to find the place where the note becomes right.''  today ms. ebersole can muster a serviceable performance on the violin, although, as she pointed out, ''it's more tragicomic when i play it.'' even so, when she plays a few bars of ''another winter,'' its poignant wail can still send a chill, even with a rusty edge.  her daughter, maemae, 10, has started to play the instrument, prompting ms. ebersole to muse about getting back to it. ''so far it's a pipe dream,'' she said.  but unlike little edie, ms. ebersole does not have a pipe dream problem and, like any star, is more than content to let the violin live on in a supporting role. being more interested in the present and future than her past, she directs her energies at building up ''grey gardens,'' not watching it molder. after all, she is not just its star. she is one of its producers.  possessed  