doodles à la carte   it is a cool, cloudy day in late fall as sam gross and gahan wilson, both in their 70s and regular contributors of cartoons to the new yorker, stroll side by side up seventh avenue. after a quick tuesday morning meeting with bob mankoff, the magazine's cartoon editor, they and a handful of other new yorker cartoonists have set out for lunch; more men than women, most in their 70s, each week they are a slightly different bunch.  mr. gross and mr. wilson lead the way through the crowded nub of broadway to pergola des artistes, a little restaurant on west 46th street that has, for the past five years or so, been the favored destination.  mr. gross, wearing a green baseball cap, swaggering like a schoolboy out to pick a fight, carries a portfolio case by his side. his are the magazine's precocious cats and dogs, their human counterparts outmatched and comparatively unrefined. he has wanted to be a cartoonist since he was a kid.  next to him, mr. wilson walks with an easy stride, tall and black-clad, with fine white hair. his work, fancifully absurdist, morphs the bodies of monsters with those of men. if any adult still takes a pre-emptive peek under the bed or in a darkened closet before falling sleep, it is his creations they will find.  several paces back, sidney harris and john kane push north between knots of tourists.  mr. harris, an artist with a statistician's memory and a child's sense of wonder, was cast by an uncanny penchant for details in the role of science cartoonist. he smiles hesitantly, speaks with a careful brooklyn accent, plays with his knife and fork at the table.  mr. kane, who came to the field from advertising, somewhat later than the rest, has taken to cartooning with the superstitious compulsion of a man who plays the slots. he wields a compass and, outfitted in a light hat and a vest packed with pockets, seems as capable of sustaining himself in the woods as on the web.  others on their way to pergola des artistes this lunchtime are bud handelsman, jack ziegler, mort gerberg (who often stops by a little later, well dressed, as someone with much to do) -- men who know well the world of cartooning in new york, as they have, from the front line, defined it. often there are a couple of youngsters, too, men and women in their late 30s and 40s: glen le lievre, carolita johnson, felipe galindo. there is also the occasional new yorker neophyte, one of those who have recently sold their very first cartoons to the magazine: evan forsch, martha gradisher, me.  i walk with martha gradisher, a cartoonist, illustrator, art director and ''kitchen sink,'' as she puts it, for 30 years. another fresh addition, she sold her first drawing to the new yorker last march, after a year and a half of faxing submissions to the magazine.  a house red is uncorked  pergola des artistes, a homey french restaurant whose brick facade is painted swiss army red, nestles beneath a massive parking sign and the back of the imperial theater like a squat little appendix. its entrance, just east of eighth avenue, boasts of the restaurant's ''43rd anniversary celebration'' and ''year long lobster special.''  its walls are pink and white, textured plaster hung with the dated trappings of an old-timey french resort: copper pots, the stuffed head of a goat, murals representing provinces, coat of arms for each. at first glance, it seems an unlikely locus for such a celebrated bunch.  the maître d', jean-christian ponsolle, known as chris, addresses each person by name. his mother, marie-rose, longtime matriarch at pergola, speaks french to the regulars, leaning in to rest a hand on their shoulders and ask that they enjoy their meal. she often wanders about times square wearing a sequin-studded cap and large turquoise earrings, handing out promotional cards to tourists and passers-by.  when mr. ponsolle sees the cartoonists arrive, he immediately has two or three tables pushed together along the right-hand wall. as bags and coats and portfolios are stowed, a house red is delivered all around.  the conversation opens up like the fan of a peacock. whatever starts it, gag or gripe, it tumbles like a pebble from a lofty mountaintop into a landslide of wit.  to the left, how to capture a spit-take: ''how many little droplets do you draw?'' ms. gradisher asks. to the right, how to draw a sneeze.  a waiter delivers a small dish of oil for the bread and places it in front of mr. ziegler. ''oh?'' says mr. harris, with the interrogative upturn of a brooklynite. ''you got the soup?''  the leather fish  there is a farcical ambiguity among the cartoonists as to the pronunciation of the name of the place. some tuesdays, it is pur-guh-la, other tuesdays pur-goh-la, which adds variety, at least, since the setting is the same nearly every week.  on the occasions the group has dined elsewhere, food is judged with caution. on an errant lunch many months ago, away from the faithful default, mr. wilson ordered a piece of fish, which he said arrived on his plate tough as boot leather. he took it up speculatively between thumb and forefinger, turned it over and, eyebrows raised, peered at the other side. ''i could fix a hole in my wallet with this,'' he announced. to prove the fish's hardiness, he slapped it against the edge of the table a few times, then passed it on to his neighbor to inspect.  tuesday's midday feeding is still a comparatively novel invention, perhaps no more than 15 years old, a vestige of the days when cartoonists in this media capital literally took to the streets to sell their work, running into each other on their respective circuits.  from the 1940s to the early to middle '80s -- before submissions could be faxed in, before kinko's made copies for a dime and before the magazine market began to dry up -- new york city's cartoonists set out about town each week, on foot, to markets like collier's, true, cavalier, the saturday evening post, national lampoon and playboy, many now long defunct. wednesday in new york was the designated day when the editors saw their work.  ''we used to spend the whole day going from magazine to magazine,'' mr. gross says. at the time of the wednesday walk, the new yorker had a second day, tuesday, as the day to see its regulars. ''tuesdays they had the elite people come,'' mr. gross said. ''and wednesdays they had the unwashed people come. i came on wednesdays.'' (now, tuesday is the only day when the new yorker sees its cartoonists.)  the cartoonists walked a route that lay, for the most part, in the blocks between 42nd and 59th streets. ''a whole day,'' mr. harris says, ''starting at the one that paid most.'' it took tenacity to make art that might not sell, with rejection permitted no greater weight than a testing elbow to the ribs. if a door was locked when you knocked on it, there was a good chance someone had left a window ajar in the back. the dearth of magazines buying cartoons makes current competition even tougher, and those editing more selective.  at the meeting the cartoonists had just left on this cool fall day, the new yorker's mr. mankoff saw them one on one, with hundreds of cartoons reviewed. the cartoonists waited together, chatting, standing about or seated in a tiny lounge.  the first to arrive is the first to be seen. if mr. mankoff decides to hold a cartoon, he adds it to the pile on his desk. the rest are handed back -- no luck, although a recent book of cartoons spurned by the new yorker, called ''the rejection collection'' (simon spotlight entertainment, $22.95), suggests that lucklessness might also sell.  ''you gotta be a street rat,'' mr. gross says of the job of selling cartoons. ''i'm a street rat. i told marisa acocella that once, and she kept her demure outside. but then----'' he paused and smiled. ''she grew a tail.''  the menu and 'moon river'  the cartoonists' lunch has never been a particularly organized event. ''we just wandered until we got tired and hungry,'' mr. harris says. ''and then we stopped.''  the routine, held together by a few staple gentlemen, furnishes therapy for a week's worth of work, a chance to get good counsel, and a platform for show and tell. recently released collections make their way from hand to hand, their artists discussed and measured; sketchbooks are flipped through; rejected drawings laid upon the pyre for mass commiseration; ideas held up and shot down, all in good faith, for a laugh.  lunch is limited by little more than location, its chatter predictably capricious, as a distinctive array of cameos pass through each week like members of a traveling circus.  recently, paul peter porges made an appearance. mr. porges, a viennese cartoonist who as a young man left europe after world war ii, tucked his napkin directly into his collar and, in an accented baritone above the din of chatter, sang the contents of the menu to the tune of ''moon river.''  another week, carolita johnson, an uncommonly lovely-looking cartoonist-slash-model, with dark bangs, large eyes and, if needed, a disarmingly diffident pout, explained the intricacies of her studies in paris: predoctoral work in historical anthropology, a thesis on the images of rape in political discourse.  she listed for us the contents of her purse: an ''idea book,'' an assortment of pens, the current issue of the new yorker, a pair of silicone breasts. ''they're called cutlets,'' she said. ''they're for when i'm fitting.'' the table grew curiously attentive, and she removed one from her bag and passed it around.  there is more wise to the wise guy than one might imagine, and just as much wisdom behind the pen as wit: mr. gerberg plays the piano beautifully; mr. gross knows opera, can talk mozart as if he knew the guy; mr. harris could navigate the morgan library in the dark. nor are they frozen in the past: mr. kane has just as many pictures up on flickr.com as any self-respecting high school kid.  ''there are more galaxies out there than there are grains of sand on a beach,'' mr. harris tells us one afternoon. ''can you imagine?'' he pauses a beat, then adds: ''you can't. because our brains are too small to grasp this yet.''  on the protective paper atop the restaurant's linen tablecloth -- another excellent detail suited to this particular gathering -- we draw what the edge of the universe might look like. ''and what's around it?'' asks mr. le lievre, a dark-haired melbourne import. ''now here's what i imagine.''  he takes up his pen and sketches what lies beyond the galaxies. twin lines contract off into the distance; grass sprouts raggedly on one side. ''it's surrounded by a white picket fence,'' mr. le lievre says. ''and there's a gate in it.'' he draws that next. ''and it annoys the hell out of everybody.''  peering at the drawing upside down from across the table, mr. gross says: ''and on the other side, there's a gated community. it's like florida.''  mr. harris declares, ''there was no space before the big bang.'' he pauses to intimate that we should consider the statement, which we do.  then someone asks the obvious question: but how do you draw that?  and the magic is in the digression -- the conversation both resolute and ridiculous, a sustained note of humor, choruslike: when one man is off, another is on. tuesday's lunch is a performance as much as a meal.  what caused the explosion? says mr. harris: oily rags. says mr. gross: a paint can full of oily rags! and then, mr. handelsman asks perfectly, from the end of the table: ''how do we know it was a big bang, anyway? what did they have to compare it to?''  mr. harris moves bread crumbs about the tablecloth into a design. ''maybe it was a little bang?'' he says with a shrug. ''if it was the first, how do we know?''  someone makes an off-color remark, everyone laughs, and the riffing picks up again, tumbling from the celestial into the obscene.  ms. gradisher, her cheeks pink, begins to laugh. ''you gotta stop this!'' she says to the guys.  ''no,'' says mr. gross, both hands upon the table. ''as a cartoonist, you go to the end, for god's sake! no matter what!''  no topic is exempt: technology's ebb and flow; the price google put up for youtube; the weimar exhibition at the met.  a waiter puts a plate down on the table. ''don't touch it,'' he warns. ''it's hot.'' invariably, everyone nearby touches the plate.  there is a bond among those who do the same work, no matter their age, race or gender. no matter, in fact, if they are living or dead. personal narratives sweep back on decades (''were you here when saxon was here?'' someone will ask), a thrill for a youngster, over a glass and a half of wine, to feel so connected, as a. j. liebling once felt with boxers, by artists who knew artists who knew artists. it is as if james thurber might show up to lunch one day with his crayon.  mr. gross works the check. a onetime accountant, he collects the tab in a pile in front of him as if he were presiding over a poker game. ''who had the fish?'' he shouts. ''it's more!'' everybody throws down a 20. few have any change.  ''i have a $15 bill,'' mr. le lievre offers, rooting through his wallet. ''it's got a picture of walter mondale on it.''  