art of the deal   the girl with the gallery  edith gregor halpert and the  making of the modern art market.  by lindsay pollock.  illustrated. 483 pp.  publicaffairs. $30.  de kooning once grudgingly praised the art dealer leo castelli by declaring, ''that son of a bitch, you could give him two beer cans and he could sell them.'' sure enough, after the impish jasper johns responded to this taunt by making a pair of ballantine ale empties, castelli sold the 1960 work to the collectors robert and ethel scull. this classic of pop art is now in a german museum.  art dealers prefer the term ''gallerists'' these days, a euphemism meant to put some distance between themselves and dealers in cars and junk. the profession can certainly be an honorable one, serving to link artists and the public. just don't be fooled by the intimidating air of their white-walled emporiums. art dealers are essentially shopkeepers in the business of selling you something you don't need.  the chief virtue of ''the girl with the gallery,'' lindsay pollock's biography of edith gregor halpert, is that the author, a journalist, has not unduly glamorized halpert or her livelihood. this largely unheralded figure from the midcentury new york art scene, with an impressive roster of artists that included arthur dove, stuart davis, yasuo kuniyoshi, charles sheeler and jacob lawrence, is presented here as a superior saleswoman who had to fight for everything she earned.  there was almost no market for american art, abstract or realist, when halpert opened our gallery (soon renamed the downtown gallery) in greenwich village in 1926. she spent her adult life tirelessly promoting her artists to a clientele not easily persuaded to appreciate -- or pay decent money for -- contemporary work by non-europeans. from records halpert left to the archives of american art at the smithsonian, pollock has traced gallery sales to influential collectors, notably abby aldrich rockefeller, and followed the trail of money and donations into museums. many biographies of art dealers fail to mention crucial facts of their economic lives -- for example, how much was needed to pay the rent. this book has the goods, offering a refreshingly candid view of the mundane realities and strategies behind the art business at a time when new york was becoming the world's art capital.  halpert had plenty of moxie. a russian-jewish émigré who started her career in a department store selling fur coats and persian rugs to upper-crust new yorkers, she married the artist samuel halpert and readily adapted to his bohemian milieu. before they divorced in 1930, the ''little girl from odessa,'' as she called herself, used her connections to entice artists with an offer to take only a 33 percent commission rather than the usual 50 percent. culling the phone directory, she sent fliers to the best addresses in the village, alerting residents to the new gallery. it became a welcome refuge for struggling artists -- halpert lived alone in an apartment above -- during the depression and world war ii.  if only pollock were as skilled at recapturing the electricity of these years as she has been scrupulous in notating halpert's financial transactions, this biography would be an absorbing read. as it is, the focus is largely on the dealer's relationships with her clients. interesting as these could be -- henry ford's son, edsel, was another buyer -- one searches in vain for pungent anecdotes revealing what the dealer thought of her artists, or they of her. five pages about halpert's affair with sheeler in 1934-35 tantalize: ''edith didn't have time for sheeler's infatuation. her favorite companion was adam ... a small brown dachshund, who remained defiantly un-house-trained.'' but halpert was in many respects all business.  many of halpert's artists have for years been excised from histories of the period because curators and critics, led by alfred barr and clement greenberg, denigrated the figurative and socially oriented work she favored. ben shahn's 1947 retrospective at the museum of modern art, for instance, was trashed by greenberg as ''not important.'' but pollock makes little of this decisive factor in halpert's present obscurity. nor are the ardent voices that supported (or denounced) abstraction and political art in the 1910s, '20s and '30s heard in these pages. i'm not sure how one writes about 20th-century art in new york without once mentioning picasso. but pollock has done it.  the best chapter recounts halpert's mad attempts in the early '50s to coax a show from georgia o'keeffe, who had moved to new mexico to paint and remove herself from the bother of a career. being an art dealer often requires as much bargaining with artists as with collectors, and pollock recreates in painful detail the wooing of the reclusive diva, who makes one demand after another, each of which halpert agrees to only to be double-crossed in the end. it is a relief when she finally explodes at o'keeffe: ''i am not accustomed ... to being treated as an underling, being scolded and railed at. frankly, i do not like it.'' the artist was unfazed: ''i hope you recovered from your grouch,'' she wrote back with blithe unconcern.  pollock, who draws heavily on an 800-page oral history halpert completed five years before her death in 1970, is perhaps too enamored of her subject's plucky spirit. but halpert was indeed a remarkable figure. historians of the american folk art market, created in part by her salesmanship, will find plenty of details to chew on. the rest of us can wonder about the book that another year or two of work might have produced.  richard b. woodward writes frequently about the arts for the new york times and the wall street journal.  