4 schools added to list as failing under u.s. law   twenty three schools in westchester failed to meet requirements outlined by the federal no child left behind law, including four schools that were newly identified as in need of improvement, the state education department announced last week.  they are ossining high school, greenburgh eleven high school in dobbs ferry, sleepy hollow middle school in tarrytown and school 23 in yonkers.  schools are designated in need of improvement when students do not show enough progress on statewide tests in english and mathematics. for the first time this year, schools were judged on the scores of students in the third, fifth, sixth and seventh grades, in addition to fourth, eighth and 11th graders. not only must schools show improvement over all, but they must also meet achievement targets for component groups, like racial categories and special education.  under the federal no child left behind act, schools that receive federal money must replace administrators or close schools if they do not improve after several years. roosevelt high school and emerson middle school in yonkers have already reorganized, and two other yonkers middle schools, commerce and museum, are planning to do so this year.  ''we made the decision to redesign roosevelt so it became two schools, with designated administrative staff for each,'' said jerilynne fierstein, spokeswoman for the district. ''the idea is to personalize the instruction and stay more focused on the curriculum.''  the state also removed three schools from the list because of improvements in scores, including two high schools in yonkers, lincoln and gorton, that reversed several consecutive years of failure. ''we are thrilled,'' ms. fierstein said. ''it was quite an accomplishment for the staffs of those schools.''  schools that do not receive federal money are not subject to no child left behind sanctions, but are required to meet state demands for improvement if their students do not meet targets. twelve of the 23 failing schools are on that list, which is referred to as ''schools requiring academic progress.''  the week  