lesson for corzine: tax relief is not simple   in a speech that acknowledged the many complex moving parts of new jersey's quest to lower property taxes, gov. jon s. corzine seemed to extend an olive branch to the legislature in his state of the state message. he praised legislators for what they had done so far on the issue and signaled his own willingness to compromise.  it was a marked change from his inaugural speech nearly a year ago, in which doom and gloom about the state's fiscal woes and high property taxes dominated.  at that time mr. corzine, newly elected, appeared to be speaking past the democratic majority in the legislature and directly to taxpayers in the hope that they would pressure lawmakers to make the tough changes on property taxes that have been talked about for more than two decades.  but now, after several deadlines have been missed for completing relief measures -- like a cap on annual property tax increases and the sale of state assets to raise cash -- the governor has been sobered.  he has come, mr. corzine said, to see some of the difficulties in establishing a tax credit program for 95 percent of the state's property owners and chastened by his own delays; he had a change of heart on how to accomplish state pension reforms that he has said are essential to easing the tax burden on property owners.  ''every issue in this debate is substantively complex and politically risky,'' mr. corzine acknowledged in his 45-minute address to the assembly and the senate on tuesday. ''but the road we have traveled is much farther than the stretch we have left. if it were ever appropriate to use the phrase 'the perfect should not be the enemy of the good,' it is in this debate.''  democrats, the democratic governor's putative partners in the drive to lower property taxes, welcomed the tone. the assembly majority leader, bonnie watson coleman, said she was pleased that mr. corzine had taken note of the legislature's work on various parts of the plan, undertaken through a number of study commissions. she said she sensed that he had accepted, as lawmakers had, that this ''has to be done right, not fast.''  for their part, republican lawmakers continued to snipe at the plan. they charged that it was not sustainable; lacked any serious attack on costly and corruption-plagued practices, like ''pay to play,'' at the state and local government levels; and failed to recognize the need for substantial cuts in state spending to ease property taxes. assemblyman bill baroni, a mercer county republican, said the democrats were still talking about ''an infusion of money into a system that is broken.''  democrats, who control the pace and much of the substance of legislation, optimistically predicted that they will have completed negotiations with mr. corzine's administration and worked out bills to address property taxes by the time of the governor's budget message at the end of february.  but in a year when all 120 seats in the legislature are up for grabs, a lot could still happen.  on politics  