winter? what winter?   the final new hope & ivyland railroad steam locomotive of the day had just lurched out of new hope, pa., station last sunday afternoon, leaving ed hoy hunched at his desk in the ticket office to crunch the numbers from an unusually warm and profitable weekend.  new hope, a village of antique shops, art galleries and restaurants perched on the delaware river, is a good place to saunter any time, and tourists often wind up at the railroad station for a pleasure ride through woodsy bucks county.  business is strong when the weather turns warm, and the temperature chugged past 70 degrees last saturday. the four trains leaving the depot saturday carried 297 passengers, mr. hoy said, more than twice as many as a typical saturday in january. ''we had the windows open on the train,'' he said. ''it was almost like a spring day.''  it has been a winter of slush and discontent for skiers in much of the northeast. but the balmy weather has been a startling gift for people who like to hike the adirondacks or wander the vineyards of long island's north fork or golf in shorts and short sleeves. and, hey, was that the first robin of january?  as ski areas struggled to keep trails open and pond hockey melted into nostalgic memory, people in the region last weekend cruised in their convertibles (tops down, of course) and went to the beach.  some meteorologists blame the current mild streak on a weak el niño system in the pacific, though global warming is the more topical (and popular) whipping boy. after taking a midweek tumble, temperatures in new york and a lot of the northeast are expected to rise again into the 50s this weekend, though showers are predicted to accompany the winter swelter.  but out on long island last weekend, people were more worried about the pour than a downpour (or, even, snow flurries).  rich pisacano, who owns roanoke vineyards in riverhead, n.y., said the winery did twice as much business last weekend as it usually does in january. many visitors ambled in after lingering on the beach, he said, tracking sand in after them.  others parked farther away so they could stroll around the vineyard. roanoke was open till 9 p.m. saturday, and visitors stayed, sipping wine and chatting. ''it seemed like everybody had a dog with them,'' mr. pisacano said, laughing.  jim waters, who owns waters crest winery in cutchogue on the north fork of long island, said the number of visitors to his winery last month was up 30 percent from the year before. and steve bate, executive director of the long island wine council, said he was thrilled that the council did not include a cross-country ski race among its winter activities.  given recent weather, though, the wine council might consider adding a winter golf tournament.  the number of rounds played in november and december at the state-run golf courses open on long island jumped to 38,096 from 25,851 a year ago, said wendy gibson, a spokeswoman for the new york state office of parks, recreation and historic preservation.  at bethpage state park on long island, 500 golfers made reservations to play on new year's day, ms. gibson said, up from the 50 to 100 golfers who made reservations the year before.  last saturday, bethpage's parking lot was packed and the golf-cart barn empty, said kevin mccann, an assistant superintendent for the state parks office who supervises golf operations at bethpage. three courses were open, and some golfers wore short-sleeve shirts, a few wore shorts and most wore grins.  there were 681 rounds played last saturday, contrasted with 130 the same saturday last year. more important, the greens (which, at this time of year, are more often snow-blanketed ''whites'') and fairways were in good shape. ''golfers were challenged as if it were the summer,'' he said.  golfers aren't the only athletes basking in the solstice glow. metrosoccer ny has tripled the number of its adult teams, to 48 from 16, in its city-based winter warriors league, said ian walker, the association's president, who attributed most of the growth to the mild weather.  some of the league's 500 participants have joked to mr. walker that they want short-sleeve t-shirts instead of the winter long sleeves. he understands why. ''i put my thermals on the other night,'' he said, ''and didn't really need them.''  in the same way that warm weather awakens drowsy winter flies, the unseasonable temperatures are nudging people out the door and away from winter torpor.  the theodore roosevelt nature center at jones beach state park on long island received 300 visitors last weekend, which is a record, its administrators say. ''instead of accommodating them with cross-country skiing, we're accommodating them with golf, walking, hiking, those type of activities,'' said carol ash, the acting commissioner of the state's parks department. ''folks were just so stunned by the weather they wanted to get out to bring the warm air into their systems.''  occupancy at the two lodges in upstate new york run by the adirondack mountain club has stayed the same, said neil woodworth, the club's executive director. instead of cross-country skiing or snowshoeing, though, visitors are hiking.  ''people are still getting outdoors,'' mr. woodworth said in a telephone interview from his office in albany, ''they're just not doing the things outdoors they normally have been doing.''  retailers who sell cold-weather gear like skis and snowmobiles still hope for a cold snap and some semblance of winter. rich donaldson, a spokesman for l. l. bean, the maine outfitter, confirmed that sales of winter sporting goods are lagging. ''but the sales of items related to boating and cycling have actually ticked up at a time you'd expect it to do otherwise,'' he said.  the number of visitors to the appalachian trail conservancy headquarters in harpers ferry, w.va., rose 20 percent last month over a year ago, said martin a. bartels, the conservancy's director of marketing.  he added that these visitors even looked different: ''people were coming in dressed to hike,'' he said, ''rather that coming in to prepare for march, when they usually start to take their hikes.''  the weather has forced many members of the new england inns and resorts association to offer specials that do not have a so-called snow component.  for example, if skiing conditions are poor, guests at the wildflower inn in lyndonville, vt., can exchange their free lift tickets to burke mountain ski resort for dinner at the inn's restaurant. the eagle mountain house, in jackson, n.h., has a bonfire each night -- wine and marshmallows included.  ''people are getting very creative at their properties,'' said beth steucek, the inn association's executive vice president.  the association has also started a twice-a-month e-mail newsletter that details last-minute deals and discounts. because of the lack of snow in new england, association members are offering substantial discounts.  not that anyone was too concerned about the woes of faraway new england resorts in new hope last weekend. the town's tight sidewalks were packed, and the new hope visitors center had 300 customers saturday, about double the normal amount, said stephanie nagy, who works there. on sunday, the parking spaces across main street from the havana restaurant were lined with dozens of motorcycles, their chrome shining in the bright sun.  but having summer in winter might eventually cause a few problems. mr. woodworth, of the adirondack mountain club, said it had been easier, in one way, to negotiate some of the peaks, because some trails are not clogged with as much snow. but other trails have been coated with slab ice caused by melting snowfrom higher elevations, creating treacherous conditions. and deer ticks could proliferate this spring because of the warm weather.  so, there could be issues to grapple with later. but people are not sweating those details right now, though some are indeed sweating. and when people are warm, their thoughts turn to ice cream. there was a bump in business at gerenser's exotic ice cream -- moose tracks, anyone? -- in new hope. but only about half the 60 flavors usually available in summer were for sale.  but matt allison, the store's manager, was forthright about the ice-cream shortfall. ''we weren't really expecting the weather,'' he said.  