advisers quit carter center to protest mideast book   fourteen of the city's business and civic leaders resigned from the carter center's advisory board on thursday to protest former president jimmy carter's recent criticisms of israel and american jewish political power.  their joint letter of resignation denounced mr. carter's best-selling book, ''palestine: peace not apartheid,'' for its criticisms of israel's treatment of palestinians. the letter also took issue with comments mr. carter has made suggesting that israel's supporters in the united states are using their power to stifle debate on the issue.  ''it seems you have turned to a world of advocacy, even malicious advocacy,'' the letter said. ''we can no longer endorse your strident and uncompromising position. this is not the carter center or the jimmy carter we came to respect and support.''  the 14 who resigned were members of the center's board of councilors, a group of more than 200 local leaders who act as ambassadors and fund-raisers for the center but do not determine its policy or direct its operations.  among the letter signers were michael coles, the chief executive of the caribou coffee company; william b. schwartz jr., the ambassador to the bahamas during mr. carter's presidency; liane levetan, a former chief executive of dekalb county, ga.; and s. stephen selig iii, who served as national finance chairman for the carter-mondale presidential committee.  ''i felt very passionate about this,'' ms. levetan said. ''you can't, when something is not correct, sit back. you have to stand up for what you believe.''  several members said they had admired mr. carter for years and found it difficult to resign, but could not remain associated with his recent statements.  ''i was very offended with the views that he espoused in that book,'' said jonathan golden, a board member for 10 years and chairman of the arnall golden gregory law firm in atlanta.  in an e-mailed statement responding to the resignations, john hardman, executive director of the carter center, thanked the resigning members for their ''years of service and support,'' but also played down the significance of their departure. mr. hardman pointed out that those who resigned were just a fraction of the overall board and were not ''engaged in implementing the work of the center.''  the resignations are the latest in a recent string of public defections from mr. carter and the ideas he espouses in his book, which has been on the new york times best-seller list for the last five weeks.  in december, kenneth w. stein, a professor at emory university who was the first executive director at the carter center, resigned his most recent position as a fellow there. days later, dennis ross, a former envoy to the middle east who is now a news analyst, accused mr. carter of using maps that mr. ross created without his permission, and mislabeling them in the book.  the anti-defamation league of b'nai b'rith recently placed advertisements criticizing mr. carter in several major newspapers, and the central conference of american rabbis, representing reform judaism, announced that its members would not visit the carter center, as planned, during a coming conference in atlanta.  mr. carter has defended his views, along with his use of the word ''apartheid'' in the book's title, saying he intended the book to spark discussion.  the letter from resigning board members accuses mr. carter of having abandoned his role as a peace broker in the middle east, and said his statements had proven useful to white supremacists and other anti-semites.  ''in its work in conflict resolution, the carter center has always played the useful and constructive role of honest broker and mediator between warring parties,'' the letter says. ''in your book, which portrays the conflict between israel and her neighbors as a purely one-sided affair with israel holding all of the responsibility for resolving the conflict, you have clearly abandoned your historic role of broker in favor of becoming an advocate for one side.''  