mr. spitzer's task on court reform   revamping a sprawling state court system beset by chronic organizational and patronage problems, and badly in need of structural reform, is one of the most urgent tasks facing new york's new governor, eliot spitzer.  the urgency of this task is attributable in no small measure to indifference by mr. spitzer's predecessor, george pataki. although he periodically gave lip service to making improvements in the courts, occasionally following through, mr. pataki generally shied from expending the necessary energy or political capital to persuade the state legislature to go along. to the extent mr. pataki led in this sphere, it was mostly by bad example. his misuse of the governor's judicial appointment power to play politics -- even to the extent of packing manhattan's appellate court with upstate republicans -- has left a legacy of mediocrity and cronyism.  mr. spitzer has already announced his support for two fundamental reforms: a major court restructuring to simplify the state's wacky organizational chart of nine separate trial courts, and a switch from clubhouse-dominated elections for the state supreme court, the state's highest trial court, to a new system of merit appointments. here is a brief look at these and two other court reform matters needing priority attention:  court restructuring. mr. spitzer has embraced chief judge judith kaye's sensible proposal to merge the court system's archaic maze of trial courts into a modern, two-tiered system that permits efficient deployment of resources and personnel. its enactment will require a sustained effort. as in the past, attempts may be made to preserve patronage by exempting surrogate's court from the reorganization. moreover, the overhaul will require amending the state constitution, meaning approval must be given by two separate legislatures -- the present one and the one to be chosen in november 2008 -- before the measure goes to voters.  merit selection. the system of sham elections that allowed party leaders to award state supreme court seats to their handpicked favorites at tightly controlled nominating conventions was declared unconstitutional last year. unless the legislature devises a new system, the discredited conventions will be replaced by primaries that could open judicial campaigns and decision-making to special interest contributions without breaking the courthouse-clubhouse link at the heart of recent judicial scandals.  a special commission appointed by judge kaye suggested tweaking the convention system in ways that would make it feasible for political outsiders to compete at the conventions and gain a berth on the ballot, mandate review of candidates' credentials by independent screening panels, and forbid sitting judges from hearing cases involving people who donated above a certain amount to their campaigns. but the wise, permanent fix is the one mr. spitzer advocates: amending the state constitution to provide a new merit selection system.  judicial pay. the last time new york's judges got a salary increase was eight years ago. as a matter of fairness, and to avoid harming the recruitment and retention of quality judges, mr. spitzer needs to press the legislature to approve catch-up raises. he should also get behind judge kaye's proposal for changing the manner of setting judicial compensation. the present system holds judicial salaries hostage to the legislators' own pay raises.  town and village courts. responding to press accounts of abusive practices by ''justice courts'' doing business in rural areas around the state, albany and judge kaye have been exploring remedies. any new package should mandate more training for these justices, require that all be lawyers, and enhance indigent defense services. mr. spitzer's persuasive powers will be greatly needed here, since these changes will affect upstate communities represented by republican members of the senate.  the city | long island | westchester  