lawyer gave information to kerkorian   when kirk kerkorian's longtime lawyer was indicted on wiretapping and conspiracy charges last february in the federal investigation of the hollywood private detective anthony pellicano, the billionaire investor was mentioned almost as an afterthought.  there were no accusations that mr. kerkorian knew or approved of any wiretapping, and no indications that he had even been interviewed by the f.b.i. about mr. pellicano's work on his behalf.  but in recordings that mr. pellicano secretly made of his own telephone conversations, mr. kerkorian's lawyer, terry n. christensen, repeatedly said he told the billionaire -- then 84, and locked in a legal dispute with his ex-wife, lisa bonder kerkorian -- what the private detective was learning from what prosecutors say were his wiretaps.  mr. christensen stops short of saying he has told mr. kerkorian that mr. pellicano was using wiretaps, but says he is providing mr. kerkorian with details of ms. kerkorian's private conversations.  mr. kerkorian has not been accused of any wrongdoing, and it is unlikely that someone could be held criminally liable for the actions of an investigator hired by his lawyer without showing that the client knew of the investigator's illegal acts.  yet the recordings show how mr. pellicano's information could affect a high-stakes lawsuit, and make clear that mr. kerkorian, according to mr. christensen's assurances, was grateful for intimate information that helped his case.  ''tell me that the old man has a smile on his face,'' mr. pellicano said on may 14, 2002.  ''he does, o.k.? he's happy,'' mr. christensen said. ''our jaw is still hanging down.''  mr. kerkorian was then embroiled with his ex-wife in a nasty child-support and paternity battle. mr. pellicano heard ms. kerkorian talking to her lawyers, relatives and friends even as she and mr. kerkorian were wrangling over her demand for a $270,000 increase in monthly child-support payments. ms. kerkorian's effort ultimately failed; a judge increased the payments by just $316.  the secret recordings also show how mr. kerkorian and his lawyer pushed the private detective to investigate another multimillionaire, the movie producer stephen l. bing, whom mr. kerkorian suspected of being the biological father of his ex-wife's daughter.  a spokesman for mr. kerkorian, dick sobelle, declined to answer questions for this article. ''we're not at liberty to comment on any of this,'' he said. federal prosecutors declined to comment, as did mr. pellicano, who is in jail awaiting trial.  mr. christensen's lawyer, terree a. bowers, declined to answer questions, but when told the thrust of this article, called it ''irresponsible, unwarranted and a pack of lies.'' he added: ''in fact, there are absolutely no tapes or reliable evidence of any wiretaps involving the kerkorian-bonder litigation. the charges are and remain totally unfounded.''  the recordings are among hundreds that prosecutors have turned over to defense lawyers, along with tens of thousands of documents. that evidence was subject to a court protective order, and prosecutors are investigating the new york times's access to some of it.  mr. christensen and mr. pellicano, both of whom have pleaded not guilty to felony wiretapping and conspiracy charges, were among seven people indicted last february as part of an f.b.i. inquiry. two have pleaded guilty, and the trial of the other five, after several delays, is set for august.  mr. kerkorian, through his holding company, the tracinda corporation, controls mgm mirage, with its extensive hotel and casino properties. he bought and sold the metro-goldwyn-mayer movie studio three times from 1969 to 2004. last year, he bought 9.9 percent of general motors, trying to pressure it into a deal with nissan and renault, then retreated, selling his shares for a profit of $100 million. forbes put his net worth at $8.7 billion last year.  mr. kerkorian will turn 90 in june. the recordings in which he is discussed by his lawyer and the private detective suggest he could be called to testify at their trial about what he knew and when.  the wiretapping on mr. kerkorian's behalf began after his ex-wife sued to increase his child-support payments from $50,000 to $320,000 a month. mr. kerkorian had learned much earlier that her daughter, who was born before he married ms. kerkorian, was not his biological child. but now mr. kerkorian pressed his lawyer to find out who the father was.  on march 18, 2002, mr. christensen told mr. pellicano that ''proof of exactly how she got pregnant'' would be worth $100,000 to mr. kerkorian.  over the next two months, mr. pellicano recorded at least 33 more conversations with mr. christensen. while they did not use the word ''wiretap,'' they freely talked about what mr. pellicano heard while monitoring ms. kerkorian's phones.  on april 27, 2002, mr. pellicano reported hearing her discuss trying to leverage mr. kerkorian's desire to spend time with her daughter into a bigger settlement. ''this is her exact words, by the way,'' he said. '' 'how much money is he willing to pay me to get that?' that's her exact words.''  he also said ms. kerkorian had confided in her father about her case. ''there's no way except with my unique techniques that you would know this,'' he said.  a few excerpts show the kinds of information mr. kerkorian's side gained from learning of ms. kerkorian's telephone conversations:  on april 22, 2002, mr. pellicano reported to mr. christensen that ms. kerkorian was furious at her lawyers and ready to fire one of them, stephen kolodny, but mr. kolodny talked her out of it. ''i'll tell you something, if we continue to get this kind of information with their strategy, we'll really kill 'em,'' he said.  mr. kolodny said he had no recollection of ms. kerkorian threatening to fire him in this time period.  on saturday, april 27, two days before a settlement conference, mr. pellicano told mr. christensen he had picked up ''massive detail'' about ms. kerkorian's settlement demands.  ''she wants all her legal fees paid. you understand?'' mr. pellicano said. ''she wants retroactive support back to august of last year. she wants $125,000 a month. she wants a joint press statement saying that neither one of them was at fault, and they just both made mistakes.''  repeatedly, mr. christensen said he intended to, or already had, told mr. kerkorian what mr. pellicano had learned from ms. kerkorian's phone calls:  on april 27, mr. pellicano said mr. christensen might want to warn mr. kerkorian about something.  ''she talks about killing him,'' mr. pellicano said. ''she says, 'you know, i gotta kill him.' she says those things. now, whether she really means it or not, probably not. but does she say it? absolutely.''  two days later, mr. christensen returned to the subject. ''those comments and that discussion was pretty disgusting, and i'm thinking that i should probably, you know, give kirk a heads-up,'' he said.  mr. christensen's lawyers later claimed that mr. pellicano's information about such statements by ms. kerkorian was what led mr. christensen to become involved with the private detective in the first place.  steve sitkoff, a lawyer for ms. kerkorian, scoffed at the notion that she was ever a threat to anyone. ''it's ludicrous to think that she would ever mean any harm to kirk or anyone else,'' he said.  on may 10, mr. pellicano argued for telling mr. kerkorian not to trust the mediator in the case, deborah simon. after mr. kerkorian had left ms. simon a lengthy message, ms. simon told ms. kerkorian all about it, mr. pellicano said, and ms. kerkorian was thrilled.  ''the elation was overwhelming,'' mr. pellicano said.  ''well, i will let kirk know the emotional high that lisa got out of deborah's call,'' mr. christensen said. ms. simon did not respond to messages at her home and office.  on may 14, mr. pellicano asked if mr. kerkorian had been briefed about another exchange he had overheard. ''did you tell him about that?'' he said.  ''yeah, oh sure,'' mr. christensen said. ''he just couldn't believe it.''  ms. kerkorian, who had a long relationship with the billionaire, married and quickly divorced him when her baby was a year old, and the two agreed at the time that the child was his.  by the time mr. pellicano was hired, the investor already had been told by his ex-wife's friends that she had had an affair with mr. bing, the film producer, around the time when her daughter was conceived. so, after mr. pellicano tried to but could not confirm that ms. kerkorian had been artificially inseminated, mr. christensen pressed him to focus on mr. bing -- who was already embroiled in a contentious and public paternity fight with the actress elizabeth hurley.  at one point, on april 28, 2002, mr. christensen told mr. pellicano that he took no pleasure in pursuing mr. bing. ''but kirk is going through this, and he's been [expletive] defrauded, o.k.? and i am not resting until this is put to bed, and it's not going to be put to bed until we find out who the father is.''  ultimately, mr. bing, who declined to comment, was identified as the father of ms. kerkorian's child, with the help of a dna sample lifted from his trash.  as word broke of that finding, on may 15, 2002, mr. christensen told mr. pellicano to shut down the wiretap of ms. kerkorian after one final night of listening. the private eye said he hoped to work for mr. kerkorian again.  ''maybe the old man will give me something in the future,'' he said.  ''well, that you can count on,'' mr. christensen said.  