tonight's tv listings: what's on thursday night   10 p.m. (usa) nashville star jewel and cowboy trent are hosts of the fifth season of this competition series in which the grand prize is a recording contract with warner music group. among the 10 contestants, chosen from 20,000 aspiring country musicians, are angela and zac hacker, sibling competitors.  8 p.m. (nbc) my name is earl whodunit? everyone has a theory when earl learns that some stolen treasure is no longer where he buried it.  8 p.m. (abc) ugly betty just as danny musters the strength to pop the question to sofia, betty discovers evidence that casts doubt on her intentions. meanwhile, a kinder, gentler wilhelmina emerges at the hands of her texas beau. did we mention he's rich?  8 p.m. (11) smallville tit for tat: tori spelling plays a gossip columnist who spills the beans when lana confesses to chloe that she has reservations about marrying lex. lois suspects that oliver is the green arrow.  9 p.m. (ifc) in the bedroom (2001). no parent can be sure of what they would do. in todd field's wrenching drama sissy spacek and tom wilkinson play a small-town new england couple who deal with the murder of their college-age son in an unexpected way.  9 p.m. (abc) grey's anatomy george's father has surgery for his cancer, meredith's father arrives to see his new granddaughter. and why can't derek sleep?  9 p.m. (discovery health) the dan ho show what if you're 60 and single for the first time in, say, 35 years? mr. ho offers up stress-free tips for dating in middle age, from what to wear to where to meet people. helpful hint no. 1: embrace your inner style. at 9:30, in an episode intended for a slightly younger generation, mr. ho discusses making a good first impression on your date's parents.  9 p.m. (g4) g4 presents ces 2007 attention, wireheads: g4 looks at the latest products from the consumer electronics show.  9:30 p.m. (nbc) 30 rock what kind of title is that? jenna anxiously awaits the release of her independent film ''the rural juror.'' meanwhile, tracy creates his own celebrity product to endorse and dig his way out of debt.  10 p.m. (abc) men in trees when jack admits he is falling in love with marin (anne heche), she can't wait for his ex-girlfriend (justine bateman) to get out of town.  11:35 p.m. (cbs) late show with david letterman it doesn't get much better than this: mr. letterman talks with julianne moore.  11:35 (nbc) the tonight show with jay leno or this: mr. leno talks with helen mirren. kathryn shattuck  tonight's tv listings  