new u.n. chief steps gingerly into the city   nobody mentioned parking tickets.  get a bunch of new yorkers together with the city's no. 1 diplomat, and you figure that someone is bound to grouse that foreign consulates respect traffic laws about as much as donald trump and rosie o'donnell reflect quiet dignity. the diplomats-gone-wild parking complaint is a new york favorite.  but the subject never arose the other morning when ban ki-moon, the brand-new secretary general of the united nations, broke bread with some prominent businesspeople and public figures. it's just as well. diplomats and parking violations are truly old hat as a conversation piece.  since a 2002 change in the rules, the number of summonses issued to foreign consulates and missions has shrunk by more than 90 percent. and when new tickets are handed out, very few go unpaid (although some diplo-deadbeats still refuse to settle their pre-2002 parking debt, put by the city's finance department at $18 million).  even if summonses are no longer a pressing topic, mr. ban had transportation on his mind during a breakfast with business leaders at the grand hyatt hotel.  he said he would encourage diplomats to follow the lead of mayor michael r. bloomberg and take the subway -- never mind that he himself was driven to the grand hyatt. he also understood that some in new york ''have felt frustrations caused by some traffic jams or some behaviors by diplomats,'' he said in slightly imperfect english.  all the same, he said, people ''should feel proud to have the united nations headquarters in new york.'' its presence here, he said, is a reason that the city can pound its chest as the self-proclaimed ''capital of the world.''  the breakfast was something of a new york coming-out for mr. ban, 62, a south korean career government official who replaced kofi annan on jan. 1.  this venture beyond the confines of his headquarters building was not exactly a visit to the neighborhood. he had a friendly -- not to mention cosseted -- audience, gathered by the association for a better new york and the business council for the united nations. the once-independent council has been absorbed into the united nations association of the usa, a support group for the world organization.  ''the united nations and business need each other,'' mr. ban said. some might say the same holds true for the united nations and new york. a 2004 study by the city's economic development corporation calculated that the organization generates 18,000 jobs and gives the local economy a $2.5 billion jolt.  through much of his talk, mr. ban tried a light touch. his jokes were hardly of the rolling-on-the-floor variety. but he showed flashes of being more than a staid career diplomat, and has some people wondering if the new secretary general intends to be more secretary than general.  take his family name. it is ban, he said, not moon, as some seem to think. and it is pronounced ''bahn,'' not ban, as in prohibition -- even if ''there are so many things to ban,'' he said, like weapons proliferation and disease.  a question from william h. luers, president of the united nations association, led mr. ban to acknowledge the obvious: that his organization is far from universally beloved in this city. that is true for reasons going well beyond parking tickets and traffic jams, from united nations policies on israel and darfur to the oil-for-food scandal under mr. annan.  mayors periodically try scoring political points by thumping the united nations, even urging it to get out of town. mr. bloomberg, however, is not in that camp. neither is former mayor david n. dinkins, who said at the breakfast that he spoke up for the united nations when some said its headquarters ''should be leveled and made a parking lot.''  mr. dinkins got a laugh of his own with a nod to local political realities. ''i'll be for you or against you, whichever will help,'' he told mr. ban.  for his part, the secretary general noted that he was ''not a stranger to new york.'' he was in the city for a while in 1975, representing the south korean government, and happened to be back on sept. 11, 2001, for united nations-related work. so he was here at the depth of new york's worst fiscal crisis and at the bloodiest moment in its history.  ''i have seen the city in its most challenging times,'' he said.  that he has. new yorkers can only hope this is nothing more than a coincidence, not a sign that the seemingly unassuming mr. ban is something of a jonah.  nyc e-mail:haberman@nytimes.com  