where courtly manners and vital energy meet   belgium is better known for contemporary dance -- anne teresa de keersmaeker, wim vandekeybus and jan fabre are among its international exports -- than for ballet, and it is probably better known for beer than for any kind of dance. but the country does possess a first-rate classical company, the royal ballet of flanders, based in antwerp, the flemish-speaking home of diamonds and fashion design.  since 2005 this 49-member company has been directed by kathryn bennetts, a long-time ballet mistress for william forsythe at the frankfurt ballet. ms. bennetts appears to have infused the dancers and repertory with new life, and her connection to mr. forsythe has allowed her to acquire works not seen elsewhere: most recently, ''new sleep,'' which he originally choreographed for the san francisco ballet in 1987.  on wednesday night it was performed for the first time since 1992 by the flanders company, alongside a premiere from a japanese choreographer, toru shimazaki, and balanchine's celebrated ''divertimento no. 15.''  the evening, at the small theater 't eilandje in the company headquarters, began with ''divertimento,'' scrupulously staged by victoria simon. the ballet is about not only the courtly manners but also the vital energy exemplified by mozart's music, and the flanders dancers showed both beautifully schooled placement and an understanding of balanchine's broadening of the academic ballet vocabulary in the endlessly unspooling dance.  altea nuñez, aki saito and wim vanlessen were particularly notable for the lovely expansiveness and precision of their dancing, heightened by the silky, legato performance of a seven-member chamber orchestra from the former beethoven academy, conducted by koen kessels.  the radical extensions of classical ballet technique that mr. forsythe effected during the period he made ''new sleep'' are already 20 years old, and they have influenced an entire generation of choreographers. but this piece, with its darkly gothic humor and brilliantly theatrical lighting, is still a superb example of the way he can make ballet feel like part of the contemporary world.  ''new sleep'' is centered on an eccentric group of three -- two men and a woman -- who stalk about armed with a striped measuring stick, an aggressively green potted plant and black-and-white bowling balls, while 12 dancers in shiny black pick their way around a stage illuminated by changing diamonds of light.  the group of three might be a team of strange scientists, and the dancers the molecular components of their experiments, but no interpretation is really necessary in this alternately brooding and explosive piece that suggests a dance experiment about time and space.  set to ticking, wailing electronic music by mr. forsythe's regular collaborator thom willems, the movement offers an extreme articulation of the back and upper body paired with unbounded use of the hips and torso, and risky, off-balance partnering. it needs rigor, precision and clear intent to look right, and it's a testament to the staging of andrea tallis, alan barnes and douglas becker that it did.  mr. shimazaki, who has mostly worked in japan, does not appear to be one of that younger generation influenced by mr. forsythe. his ''eyes in the sky,'' set to a minimalist score by the french composer rené aubry, offered five sections of sweeping movement of wheeling high legs, crumpled lifts and odd, staggering walks, mostly performed in unison and evoking the forced intimacy of crowded societies.  dressed in full-legged blue pants and black tops by yasuko tomonaga, ms. saito and mr. vanlessen again stood out for their passionate performance as the central couple in the midst of the crowd.  ''eyes in the sky'' is unevenly paced, and the exhilarating effect of its propulsive movement wanes a little by the end. but ms. bennetts was right to take the chance of showing yet another facet of her dancers' considerable talents.  dance review  