u.s. official sees opening for revival of trade talks   the united states trade representative, susan c. schwab, said friday that she was optimistic the collapsed doha trade negotiations could be restarted, but added that there were still obstacles to a revival of the talks.  ''i am more optimistic than i have been in many months that we are on a path that could help reach a successful conclusion of the doha round,'' ms. schwab said after a three-hour meeting with the head of the world trade organization, pascal lamy.  but she added that ''ultimately it will be substance that dictates when there's a breakthrough.''  the next few weeks are considered critical to whether the new political impetus could be maintained.  mr. lamy, who will meet with prime minister tony blair of britain in london on tuesday as part of his step-by-step diplomacy, is also expected to visit india. in the next few weeks, he is scheduled to visit a group of african countries and make stops in brussels and washington. the meetings of about 25 trade ministers in late january during the world economic forum meeting in davos, switzerland, are also considered crucial.  ms. schwab distanced herself on friday from the upbeat assessment of peter mandelson, the european trade commissioner, who said the talks were approaching ''the endgame.'' she reiterated that an agreement on important issues, like agricultural market access, would dictate whether a deal could be hammered out.  in recent weeks, diplomatic activity and support for a deal at high levels in capitals around the world have lifted hopes that the talks could be revived. the talks, which were started in doha, qatar, in november 2001, collapsed in late july because of major differences over agricultural subsidies and tariffs primarily among countries like the united states, the european union, japan, india, australia and brazil.  president bush and josé manuel barroso, president of the european commission, meeting monday in washington, instructed their negotiators to push ahead with the talks.  many developing countries are apprehensive, about the latest push by the united states and europe.  correction:  january 18, 2007, thursday  because of an editing error, an article in business day on saturday about a meeting between the united states trade representative, susan c. schwab, and the head of the world trade organization, pascal lamy, misstated the date of mr. lamy's discussion with prime minister tony blair of britain about the restart of global trade negotiations. it had already been held, on jan. 9; it was not scheduled for tuesday.  