stonehenge-by-the-sea? no, just simple homage   the evidence lay throughout the yard of a modest home on burns road. a jumble of driftwood in the corner of the pebbled driveway. a rock wall built without mortar. and, most tellingly, a stout cylindrical cairn, reminiscent of the mysterious one that appeared on a nearby beach around christmas.  shelter island is a small community, especially in winter, when the swell of tourists and seasonal residents recedes. those who remain know one another by name. yet a sophisticated cairn was erected, almost six feet high, on the north side of the causeway that leads to ram island, and no one knew the builder's identity.  on jan. 4, the local newspaper, the shelter island reporter, featured a picture of the cairn, which is made of concentric layers of well-balanced stones that taper to a point at the top. four driftwood posts run through it, creating a spiral pattern around the shaft, and the interior is filled with rocks. if you lean on the cairn, it does not budge.  ''there's so many possibilities,'' karen boltax said in her boltax gallery last sunday afternoon. ''there's a lot of artists here.''  she did not realize then that she knew the builder and would be a key in unraveling the mystery.  a piece of driftwood propped against a tuft of golden grass a few feet from the cairn provided the first substantial clue: ''maya emma'' was scrawled in charcoal.  ''i have a friend named maya,'' said lena cordts, 11, who had gone to the beach that sunny sunday with friends and their parents, sarah sherwood and chris mulligan of shelter island. ''she has a sister emma, too,'' lena told a reporter who had also stopped by.  lena said maya and emma lived near st. mary's episcopal church. a trip there found a house with driftwood, stones and a cairn on the property. its residents were not home, but that was where ms. boltax came in. she knew the house, she said: gary buckner, a social studies teacher at mattituck high school, his wife, valerie marvin, and two daughters, maya and emma, live there.  ''val and gary are very hip people,'' ms. boltax said. ''it wouldn't surprise me if they did the sculpture.''  it turns out that mr. buckner built it, and he feels uncomfortable calling it a sculpture.  ''i don't think of myself as an artist,'' he said on monday. ''i call it a cairn.''  he built the cairn from materials he found on the beach and worked on it each weekend in december, saying he put in a few meditative hours just after sunrise and sometimes at ''the setting of the day.'' he showed the structure only to family and friends visiting from brooklyn on christmas. he had hoped to remain anonymous to the rest of the island and said he did not realize his daughters had left their names behind.  although several admirers likened the cairn to work by the environmental sculptor andy goldsworthy, mr. buckner said he did not intend to create a piece of art. it was homage, he said, to its location, a peaceful ribbon of shore where the water slides smoothly inland and cedar trees thrive in the sandy soil.  ''i thought it was appropriate to leave an offering to a place where we all go,'' he said. ''we go when we're angry and confused. we go for peace, for an answer, for understanding. we go there and then we leave, and that's it. i wanted to leave something somewhat permanent.''  acknowledging that the cairn may one day be destroyed by nature or human hand, mr. buckner said: ''i wanted it to be an observer of time and change. even in its destruction, that's time itself.''  already, the cairn has changed. visitors have stuck pieces of curled seashell and a long brown feather between the outer stones.  ''i'm totally drawn,'' ms. sherwood said as she gazed at the cairn. ''it's a strangely primitive emotional thing.''  she said she and her family had built cairns in their travels around the world. ''but i think the level of our sophistication will now increase,'' she said.  indeed, 50 yards down the beach, her husband and children were busy piling rocks.  mystery  