treating youngsters and easing parents' minds   at recess, dozens of children tumble into the nurse's office, jackets askew, some with tear-streaked cheeks, fresh from falls and scrapes on the playground at the thomas a. edison school.  ''jason threw me a rock on my head,'' michael loja, a 5-year-old kindergartner, said as he sat holding an icepack to his forehead. ''it hurt and it bled.''  on a nearby examining table, stephanie gonzalez, an 8-year-old third grader, waited nervously for her flu shot. ''it didn't hurt and i got stickers,'' she said afterward, all smiles, on her way back to class.  the scene in this sunny suite in the basement of edison, an elementary school, is being replayed daily as one of the newest full-service school health clinics in westchester county treats not only hundreds of children when they are sick or injured, but also provides checkups, immunizations, obesity counseling and dental care.  in the past two years, school-based health care in the county has grown in popularity at schools the state considers to be in need. while the first elementary school health clinics in westchester opened 17 years ago in four schools in yonkers, three more have been added in mount vernon and port chester since 2005, with another, at port chester high school, scheduled to open in april. mount vernon and port chester are considering opening even more clinics.  ''if we had enough resources and time, i'd like to see school-based health services in every school,'' said dr. joshua lipsman, the county health commissioner. ''it would help keep kids in school, help them learn and help prevent emergency-room visits, drug use and teen pregnancy.''  the clinics provide a safety net for thousands of children in westchester who otherwise would not have regular health care. in each case, a local health care provider has sponsored the clinics -- writing the grants to pay for them and providing the expertise to license and operate them. st. joseph's medical center in yonkers, the mount vernon neighborhood health center and the ossining open door medical center's outpost in port chester all compete for the limited funds available from the same federal and state sources. the care is free, but parents must sign up their children.  at edison, the school nurse and the pediatric nurse practitioner provided by open door work side by side. behind a screen in the large anteroom is a dentist's chair and equipment where the dentist, dr. raha iraj, works one day a week.  madelin cruz, another 5-year-old kindergartner, happily clambered up and down from the examining chair after her checkup, clutching a plastic goodie bag with a toothbrush and pamphlets. two weeks earlier, she had had a dental emergency, an infected tooth that required antibiotics.  ''i liked the dentist,'' madelin said. ''she told me she would only tickle my teeth, not take them out. and she did just tickle them.''  edison's principal, eileen santiago, said that 70 percent of her students had never seen a dentist before the clinic opened. ''children were coming to school with anbesol in their lunchboxes for toothaches because their teeth hadn't been taken care of in so long,'' dr. santiago said.  lorraine tiezzi, a specialist in school-based primary care at the mailman school of public health at columbia university, said that when parents get to know their school-based clinic, they have peace of mind that their child is being cared for, which helps them to be productive at work.  an edison kindergartner, sherley alonzo, 5, kneeled by the front of the nurse's office, coloring while waiting to go home because she had conjunctivitis. when her father, edwin alonzo, 31, came to get her, she buried her face in the leg of his dusty work pants.  ''i think it's wonderful to have a clinic inside here,'' mr. alonzo, a mason, said in spanish. ''if it were just a school nurse calling me, i would be scared, but now i know they are able to take care of problems here, so i know sherley's o.k. also i don't have to make separate trips to the doctor and drugstore when i get my child.''  health  