does abe foxman have an anti-anti-semite problem?   in certain precincts of the jewish community, a person who insists that the sky is falling, despite ample evidence to the contrary, is said to gevaltize -- a neologism derived from the famous yiddish cry of shock or alarm. the word is sometimes applied to the american israel public affairs committee, known as aipac, the hard-line and notoriously successful pro-israel lobby. but in the world of jewish leaders, one man stands alone in the annals of gevalthood -- abraham foxman, director of the anti-defamation league and scourge of anti-semites of high estate and low, in hollywood and tehran, on campus and in the tabloids.  in a conversation last month over lunch, as foxman's bodyguard kept a weather eye open from across the room, i asked the a.d.l. leader about his ever-renewed fount of outrage. ''i haven't done gevalt for 30 years,'' foxman said, though some might argue otherwise. ''but never before has there been such a threat to israel and to the jewish people from a geopolitical conglomerate -- the arab world, with iran, with hamas, with hezbollah, with its position that it will not recognize israel. the vise is closing.''  the united states, foxman added, is ''the only -- the only -- country in the world that is consistently willing to stand up to hypocrisy, to double standards, to triple standards, which always has the guts to say no.'' and now he sees this great bulwark crumbling. former president jimmy carter accuses israel in his most recent book of practicing a policy of ''apartheid'' in the occupied territories. former secretary of state colin powell, according to karen deyoung, a washington post associate editor, in her recent biography, ''soldier: the life of colin powell,'' links president bush's middle east policy more to jewish-neoconservative influence than to principle. judith regan, the celebrity editor, was reported as saying -- she denies it -- that the jews were behind her recent downfall. (some of foxman's examples are more weight-bearing than others.)  but what really makes abe foxman shray (cry) gevalt is the claim that an ''israel lobby'' or a ''jewish lobby'' -- aipac and the a.d.l. and a few others -- has effectively gained control over u.s. policy toward the middle east and suppressed voices calling for alternative policies. foxman himself became entangled in this debate in october, when he was accused of intimidating the polish consul general in new york into canceling a talk to be given by tony judt, a highly regarded professor of european history at new york university and a supporter of the ''israel lobby'' view -- which seemed to confirm judt's thesis.  foxman says he is innocent of the charge, and his sense of outraged virtue makes him all the more incandescent. abe foxman isn't doing the stifling -- he's the one being muzzled with the charge of stifling. but the stifling won't work: foxman says he will not be intimidated; people all across the islamic world already believe every kind of pernicious fantasy about the jews and about israel. and now here come credentialed american -- even jewish! -- scholars saying, as he put it, ''the jews control the media, control the government, control congress.'' the jewish people, foxman said gravely, ''have paid a very, very significant price for that canard.'' and yes, he's willing to shray gevalt until he's blue in the face.  so what's the problem, the thing abe foxman is fighting or foxman himself?  the anti-defamation league, which has an annual budget of more than $50 million, offers ''anti-bias education and diversity training'' through its world of difference institute; plays a major advocacy role in keeping church and state separate; monitors a vast array of extremist activity; publishes curricula on the holocaust and on tolerance; and so on. but the league is, in the end, mostly abe. foxman is a domineering character who over the years, according to critics, has driven out potential rivals and successors. when i asked him whom else in the organization i should talk to, he couldn't think of anyone, not even kenneth jacobson, the a.d.l.'s deputy national director and, others had told me, foxman's alter-ego. the a.d.l., for all its myriad activities, is a one-man sanhedrin doling out opprobrium or absolution for those who speak ill of israel or the jews.  foxman was born in poland in 1940 as his parents fled before the nazi advance. the following year, when the nazis reached lithuania, foxman was placed with his polish catholic nanny, who pretended to be his mother and raised him -- as a catholic and, foxman has written, as a jew-hater. both his parents, miraculously, survived the war and then reclaimed him, though not without a bitter fight. foxman escaped the worst of the holocaust, but it has deeply shaped his sense of the world and is presumably responsible for his feeling that nothing short of supreme and unflinching vigilance will ward off the next cataclysm. perhaps his childhood also accounts for his air of brazen self-assertion. ''then he had to hide his identity,'' as jonathan jacoby, the founder of the israel policy forum, a liberal advocacy group, told me. ''now he's the most out jew in the world.''  foxman grew up in brooklyn and went to work at the a.d.l. immediately upon graduating from new york university law school in 1965. an incisive and impassioned figure, he rose through the ranks to become associate director, and in 1987, when nathan perlmutter, the organization's director, died, foxman was the consensus choice to succeed him. these were heady times for the a.d.l. though founded in 1913 to combat the mistreatment of jews, the a.d.l. rapidly became one of the nation's leading civil rights organizations and a cornerstone of the black-jewish alliance. the rise of the black-power movement largely put an end to that sort of coalition, and in the 1970s and '80s the a.d.l. turned its attention to extremism. the organization infiltrated its own volunteers into the john birch society, neo-nazi groups and the like at a time when law enforcement paid them little heed. the a.d.l. was a major force behind the passage of hate-crime laws at the state and federal levels.  with anti-semitism apparently waning, the a.d.l. might well have moved away from its original identity in favor of either promoting tolerance and diversity or leading the nonsectarian fight against extremism. but for foxman, fighting anti-semitism was always the core of the mission. the a.d.l.'s world became increasingly binary -- ''good for the jews,'' ''bad for the jews.'' this change had the effect of moving the organization, as it had other mainstream jewish bodies, to the right. foxman upset many of his colleagues by extending a welcome to christian conservatives, whose leaders tended to be strongly pro-israel even as they spoke in disturbing terms of america's ''christian'' identity. foxman was willing to cut them some slack on issues of social justice, and even of church-state relations, in the name of solidarity toward israel. at the same time, as black-jewish tensions increasingly surfaced, the a.d.l.'s old allies became some of its chief targets. foxman skirmished for years with jesse jackson until the early 1990s. when khalid abdul muhammad, an aide to louis farrakhan, delivered a venomously anti-semitic speech late in 1993, foxman demonstrated that he knew how to hold a punch as well as throw one. in the midst of an urgent meeting called to formulate a response, foxman declared: ''you know what we're going to do? we're going to take out a full-page ad in the times and just reprint the speech.'' excerpts of the text ran under the headline ''minister louis farrakhan and the nation of islam claim they are moving toward moderation and increased tolerance. you decide.'' peter wilner, then an associate director of the a.d.l., recalls, ''you never felt prouder working for the organization.''  it's tempting to compare abe foxman with al sharpton, another portly, bellicose, melodramatizing defender of ethnic ramparts. but you never feel that foxman is admiring his own performance, as you do with sharpton. foxman's spleen, in all its infinite variety, is the real deal. ''more than anything else,'' says j. j. goldberg, the editor of the forward, a leading american jewish weekly, and a frequent foil of foxman's, ''i think his gut is where jewish emotions are. he opens his mouth and out comes the jew on the street. he's not complicated.'' over the years, goldberg has attacked foxman for offering his kosher seal of approval to such as silvio berlusconi, the christianity-promoting, right-wing former prime minister of italy, and more recently to john bolton, the united nations-hating former ambassador to the u.n. goldberg says he thinks that foxman is often wrong -- but never cynical.  i first went to see foxman a few days after the midterm congressional elections. the flat-screen tv mounted on a wall to one side of his desk was tuned to cnn. newspapers were stacked up at the entrance to his office -- the times, the jewish week, the forward, the tabloids. foxman is 66, and his dark hair has thinned and his pale face has grown broad and fleshy. these days he wears his wedding ring on his pinky. he has the look of a kingpin -- a cadillac-driving ward-heeler out of saul bellow. he had just returned from a whirlwind trip to europe conducted more or less at the level of foreign minister. jacques chirac, the president of france, pinned on him the rosette of the legion of honor, but he is too proud of who he is and where he came from to wear it in his lapel.  i found that i could twist foxman's dial of outrage without even trying. he said, apropos of the dispute over tony judt, that while he would never try to prevent speech, he did believe that it was wrong to give really evil figures, like mahmoud ahmadinejad, the president of iran and at present the world's most famously anti-semitic head of state, the legitimacy of a meeting, as u.n. secretary general kofi annan and the council on foreign relations recently had. i asked if annan also shouldn't have met with saddam hussein. ''there is a difference between ahmadinejad and even a saddam hussein,'' foxman rejoined. ''here is a man who says time and again, 'i will wipe this nation' '' -- israel -- '' 'off the face of the earth,' and says afterward that the holocaust never happened. this is not 'israel as victim'; this is the destruction of jewish identity.''  foxman made a beseeching gesture, his fingertips cupped before his mouth. ''plus, it has happened before,'' he went on. ''it's not an abstraction. by a man, by a government, who aids, abets, fuels suicide bombers, makes them martyrs, celebrates them, who asks for volunteers from his country, and i don't know what they have, 40,000 now, who have volunteered in future to go kill jews!'' foxman was now shouting at me across the table. ''and you arm yourself to take out as many jews as possible!'' foxman's hands were wheeling in circles before him; this possible holocaust, so remote to many of us, seemed to rise up before him with a terrible clarity. ''oh, my god!'' he cried, as if reeling in horror before the vision he had himself conjured.  foxman really does dwell imaginatively in the holocaust. he spends a month or so each winter in palm beach, moving in the company of elderly folk, many of them holocaust survivors, who revere him. he seems to understand the survivor mentality far better than he does the lighthearted and lightheaded culture of disposable, custom-made ethnic identity. all that, so far as foxman is concerned, is a pleasing delusion, like the soigné berlin of 1925. in his most recent book -- ''never again?'' -- he makes the stupefyingly counterintuitive claim that high rates of jewish assimilation are a reaction to discriminatory treatment, rather than a proof of the opposite. ''one out of three people in these united states believes that the jews are more loyal to israel than to the u.s.,'' he growled. ''that's a classic anti-semitic canard.'' and yet a pew global attitudes poll in 2004 found that anti-semitism had declined in much of the west and was lowest in the united states. a pew poll last year found american support for israel as strong now as at any time in the last 13 years.  foxman's genius lies not so much in the realm of oratory as in the realm of dramaturgy; he stages public rituals of accusation and often of reconciliation and redemption. in mid-november he held an event, a cross between a news conference and a roof-raising abolitionist meeting, to honor ruth halimi, a parisian jew whose son, ilan, had been kidnapped, tortured and murdered by a gang in february. he had invited prominent members of the french jewish community, a.d.l. lay leaders, prospective donors and the press. foxman spoke first, and he addressed halimi, a small, modest woman, with great gentleness and compassion. within minutes, though, foxman had begun to advance up his scale of spleen. he was shouting about auschwitz and six million and then ticking off the litany of jews who had been killed in recent years only because they were jews: congregants in buenos aires, the journalist daniel pearl, a volunteer at a jewish charity in seattle -- ''and now ilan,'' whose kidnappers assumed that all jews are rich. ''i still hear the good people'' -- foxman uses the word good in this context to mean ''saps'' -- ''coming to us in the a.d.l., saying: 'what are you worried about stereotypes? they're words! big deal.' we sat with the minister of education in spain not long ago, and she said to us, 'when we say jews are rich, when we say jews are successful, it's a compliment.' '' foxman was now full-out screaming. ''and i looked at her and i said: 'your excellency, no thanks. those are words that helped pave the way to auschwitz.' ''  foxman was followed by ruth halimi, and she in turn by françois delattre, the french consul general. delattre was a man of very different temperament than his host, and he spoke quietly and feelingly of anti-semitism as ''an existential threat to all of us.'' of france, he said, ''the jewish tradition and culture is deeply part of our dna.'' at the same time, because of the collaboration of the wartime french government at vichy, ''we have forever a special responsibility in the fight against anti-semitism.'' at times, delattre had to struggle to compose himself. it was extraordinarily moving to hear such words, and see such depth of feeling, from a french-government official; perhaps it also proved that foxman's hectoring really has raised consciousness about anti-semitism in places where anti-jewish feeling represents a real threat. ''you have,'' one of foxman's aides said to me afterward, ''experienced an a.d.l. moment.''  the a.d.l. moment wasn't quite over. foxman called the press -- two reporters for jewish media outlets and me -- to a small conference room to meet halimi. she spoke of her disappointment and anger at the conduct of the french police. foxman, sitting next to her, fiddled with his coffee mug in increasing agitation. so many people in the neighborhood knew what was going on, he interjected. there should be an investigation, he said, but of course it would look bad if the a.d.l., in new york, called for it: ''we need the support of the community.'' he asked us to keep this part off the record. we filed out, but a moment later an aide came to fetch us back. foxman was still sitting at the conference table with halimi. ''there's a need for an investigation,'' he declared. a reporter asked when and where the announcement would be made. he didn't get it. ''i'm announcing it right now,'' foxman said.  one of the really remarkable features of post-9/11 political life was that in the first months and years after the attacks, scarcely anyone called for america to abandon israel, though it is hardly difficult to argue that our support for the jewish state has cost us dearly in the islamic world. (foxman himself insists that muslim anger at american support for israel has nothing to do with islamic terrorism.) rabble-rousers haven't gained any traction by scapegoating israel. nor have legislators of either the left or the right pushed for a substantial rethinking of our policy.  the publication last march (in the london review of books) of ''the israel lobby,'' an article written by the political scientists john mearsheimer and stephen walt, marked the end, or at least the beginning of the end, of the post-9/11 taboo. throwing aside all the circumlocutions with which the subject is usually addressed, as well as most of the ethical and historical premises, mearsheimer and walt insisted that israel had neither a strategic nor a moral claim on american sympathies. israel was not an asset but a ''liability'' in the war on terror; indeed, ''the u.s. has a terrorism problem in good part because it is so closely allied with israel.'' and while ''there is a strong moral case for supporting israel's existence,'' the country's ''past and present conduct'' brutal mistreatment of palestinians, refusing serious peace offers, even spying on the united states ''offers no moral basis for privileging it over the palestinians.''  how, then, to explain so one-sided a policy? ''the unmatched power,'' they argue, ''of the israel lobby.'' mearsheimer and walt, distinguished figures who teach at the university of chicago and at harvard, respectively, note that the israel lobby is not a cabal but simply a very effective pressure group whose goal is to influence legislators and ''to prevent critical comments from getting a fair hearing in the political arena.'' like any other lobby, this one (the authors are speaking specifically here of aipac) succeeds at the legislative level ''due to its ability to reward legislators and congressional candidates who support its agenda and to punish those who challenge it.'' the lobby dominates media and has established a ''commanding presence'' in policy institutes, thus ensuring that, with few exceptions -- mostly on campus -- only one side of the debate can be heard. and if all else fails, the two maintain, the lobby is always prepared to engage in intellectual blackmail: ''anyone who criticizes israel's actions or argues that pro-israel groups have significant influence over u.s. middle eastern policy ... stands a good chance of being labeled an anti-semite.'' that would be where abe foxman comes in.  at times, mearsheimer and walt come very close to describing the israel lobby as something like a fifth column. ''the bottom line,'' they write, ''is that aipac, a de facto agent for a foreign government, has a stranglehold on congress.'' and it has a stranglehold, as well, mearsheimer and walt argue, on the bush administration. ''pressure from israel and the lobby,'' they write, was ''critical'' in the decision to go to war in iraq. that pressure came not only from top officials of the israeli government and representatives of jewish groups but also from a subset of neoconservatives, most but not all of them jewish, both inside and outside the administration. more recently, they suggest, israel, the israel lobby and the neoconservatives have shaped the administration's belligerent policy toward syria and iran. the ultimate objective is to give israel ''a free hand with the palestinians,'' while the u.s. ''will do most of the fighting, dying, ... rebuilding and paying.''  ''the israel lobby'' slammed into the opinion-making world with a category 5 force. the article loosed a flood of fevered editorials, labored rebuttals and bare-knuckle debates. not only the a.d.l. and other watchdog groups, like the committee for accuracy in middle east reporting in america, but even academic colleagues of mearsheimer and walt pointed out serious errors in the historical portions of the essay. benny morris, a revisionist israeli historian whose work mearsheimer and walt have drawn on, described the article as ''a travesty of the history which i have studied and written on for the past two decades.'' the authors were also attacked for cherry-picking quotations. j. j. goldberg, the forward editor and a critic of israeli policy, wrote that by conflating moderate supporters of israel and genuine die-hards, the authors had managed ''to create the appearance of a vast, terrifying octopus.'' the most trenchant criticism was also the most simple: even if the authors didn't believe that israel has legitimate moral claims, the american people do, and it was this widespread support, more than any unholy machinations, that explained the continuing support of israel even in the face of the terrorist threat.  scholars and journalists familiar with the workings of the israel lobby came to mearsheimer and walt's defense, if somewhat warily, in the pages of the nation and the new york review of books. but support, or at least confirmation, also came from inside the world of jewish advocacy. according to m. j. rosenberg, the washington director for the israel policy forum and a veteran of capitol hill, ''the way it works is that most members of congress feel that saying things on the middle east that are not strictly the aipac line will get them in more trouble than it's worth.'' rosenberg notes that legislation on the middle east generally consists of symbolic statements, like the recent palestinian anti-terrorism act, which are ''written by aipac.'' no one, rosenberg says, ''advocates anti-israel policies,'' and even the modest american task force on palestine is ''closer to what the american jewish community supports'' -- a two-state solution, the rollback of settlements in the occupied territories -- ''than any of these right-wing jewish groups are.'' rosenberg describes the attitude of most legislators as a shortsighted ''path of least resistance,'' which, he says he fears, will do real harm to israel in the long run.  the storm over the israel lobby picked up new life in september, when mearsheimer and two supporters squared off against three former policy-makers and authors -- two from the clinton administration and one from israel -- in a debate at the cooper union in new york. one member of the mearsheimer tag team was tony judt, who stoutly defended the position that the israel lobby ''acts constantly and very effectively to silence criticism of its cause.'' the debate was raucous, and widely publicized, and succeeded in deepening, or at least confirming, the hostility surrounding the issue.  then came a new tempest, if in a much smaller teapot: the polish consulate affair. after judt's talk there was canceled at the last minute, he says he heard from the event's organizer that ''serial phone calls'' from abe foxman had frightened the consulate into canceling the event. here was the proof, in case more proof were needed, that the israel lobby was squelching debate -- precisely the point judt had planned to make. he now threw a match into new york's ever-combustible intellectual world by circulating an e-mail message detailing his victimization to a long list of pundits and scholars. a number of the recipients of judt's e-mail were less outraged by his treatment than by his views. nevertheless, the issue of the suppression of debate had now been joined, and more than 100 people signed an open letter, which appeared in the nov. 16 issue of the new york review of books, accusing foxman and the a.d.l. of fostering ''a climate of intimidation'' and lamenting that the organization had apparently lost sight of its hundred-year commitment to civil rights and public education.  the problem was that foxman had not made those serial phone calls. according to a story that he tells and others confirm, a subordinate had called on his behalf to see if the consulate was sponsoring the event. satisfied that it was not, the group dropped the issue. of course, even those calls might have prompted some rethinking by a diplomat from a country that has worked hard to restore its ties to israel. a separate call from david harris, the head of the american jewish committee -- who later explained that he had called as ''a friend of poland,'' because ''that evening was going to be entirely contrary to the entire spirit of polish foreign policy'' -- probably proved more influential. but when a consulate official telephoned the organizer, patricia huntington, to call off the event, she says he told her that the consul general couldn't come to the phone as he was speaking to foxman. this was what huntington later told judt.  here was one of those stories that seemed so self-evidently true that its falsity couldn't be accepted. abe foxman was, after all, the hanging judge of anti-semitism. isn't it just the kind of thing he would do? and the a.d.l. so neatly symbolized the divide between mainstream jewish groups and the intellectuals who had once been so closely associated with them. on this subject, tony judt went to town in a way that he may live to regret. in one widely circulated e-mail message, he described foxman and david harris as ''illiberal lying bigots -- fascists, as we used to say.'' he dismissed foxman himself with an almost leninist turn of phrase: ''pollution like him swirls around in the gutters of every democracy.'' apparently it's not only the hanging judge who suffers from a sense of grandiosity. judt now says, ''i don't feel in the least personally suppressed,'' but rather he worries about the effect of this attempt at suppression on other, less doughty souls.  that, abe foxman would say, is ''abject nonsense.'' the a.d.l., he says, doesn't operate that way; it seeks balance, not suppression. foxman told me that he believes he's challenging his adversaries to a debate, not shouting them down. but, i asked, isn't slinging the dread charge of anti-semitism at people like jimmy carter and tony judt and mearsheimer and walt really a way of choking off debate? no, it isn't, foxman said. this was at our lunch; foxman got so exercised that he began to choke on his gratin. i asked if it was really right to call carter, the president who negotiated the camp david accords, an anti-semite.  ''i didn't call him an anti-semite.''  ''but you said he was bigoted. isn't that the same thing?''  ''no. 'bigoted' is you have preconceived notions about things.''  the argument that the israel lobby constricted debate was itself bigoted, he said.  ''but several jewish officials i've talked to say just that.''  ''they're wrong.''  ''are they bigoted?''  foxman didn't want to go there. he said that he had never heard any serious person make that claim.  perhaps the question comes down to this: are we courting more danger by suppressing speech or by speech itself? several of the signatories of the open letter with whom i spoke cited john stuart mill's dictum that in a democratic society the free market of ideas ultimately sifts through falsehood to produce truth. abe foxman says this is naïve. the a.d.l. used to argue with norman lear, the producer of ''all in the family,'' that listeners weren't laughing at archie bunker but with him. foxman says the same thing now about borat. experience -- primal experience -- has taught him that the truth does not win on its own merits; the market for falsehood is just too powerful. ''where is it being debated?'' he asked. ''in the universities, on the airwaves. advanced by whom? harvard, the university of chicago. with pat buchanan, it wasn't legitimate. who cares about david duke? it is now a legitimate debate.'' and mahmoud ahmadinejad, and the murderers of danny pearl and ilan halimi, and millions of impressionable muslims are listening and taking notes. that's the audience that abe foxman worries about.  what is the difference between this claim and the accusation, a favorite of vice president dick cheney and former defense secretary donald rumsfeld, that critics of the war in iraq, or of the war on terror, or of homeland-security preparations, are emboldening the enemy? and isn't that claim, too, designed to suppress debate, or at the very least to make the critic think long and hard before opening his mouth? is that a price worth paying? put otherwise: should we make the existential choice to err on the side of fear, or of hope -- a prudent, watchful hope, that is?  foxman invited me to hear him speak in december at temple sholom in greenwich, conn. the temple has 700 members, mostly younger families, but the crowd at the event, and especially at the $250-a-person reception beforehand, was an abe foxman crowd -- older, richer, more conservative. foxman gamely grinned and hugged and mugged for the camera; the bodyguard straightened his collar. one by one, the congregants approached to consult him on matters jewish and middle eastern; foxman fielded the questions with due solemnity. a woman who introduced herself as the daughter of holocaust survivors said that jimmy carter was just as bad as ahmadinejad -- another israel-denier. foxman demurred on the comparison but said he planned to write to tim russert, the nbc interviewer, asking why he had treated carter with ''kid gloves.'' a short, bearded man who said that he was a member of aipac asked, ''what do you think of john bolton?'' the american ambassador to the united nations had just tendered his resignation. both agreed that it was a shame. the a.d.l. had taken out a full-page ad applauding bolton as a staunch defender of israel. more hugs, more pictures.  foxman is an anachronism. the demographic of which he is a member -- holocaust survivor -- is rapidly disappearing. younger people don't know quite what to make of him. in a recent column in the jewish journal, david a. lehrer, formerly the head of the a.d.l.'s los angeles office, observed that jews are now the most widely admired religious group in america, as well as the most successful, and lamented that jewish leaders -- foxman specifically -- continue to harp on jewish ''insecurity'' and the threat of anti-semitism. lehrer says that when he raised his view that the a.d.l. had to learn to speak to this new, confident but less affiliated generation of jews, foxman dismissed it out of hand. the generational question does not interest him. ''it's not my job to judge whether they should feel beleaguered or not,'' foxman snapped when i raised the subject. ''i do feel. and i've got news for you: every one of them, in their maturing process, will experience this.''  james traub, a contributing writer, is the author most recently of ''the best intentions: kofi annan and the u.n. in the era of american world power.''  