when classic chef meets barbecue pit   ''this is gourmet barbecue,'' the woman at the next table said as she relished the exceptionally moist homemade corn bread at bobbique in patchogue. she was right. this six-month-old spot features the soft, smoky meat of real pit barbecue in the hands of a classically trained chef, eric rifkin, who knows his way around the kitchen as well as the pit. his cooking skills are evident in the fantastic side dishes and luscious desserts.  mr. rifkin earned his culinary stripes at an american place, vong, the lobster club and city crab, all in manhattan. long islanders know him as the chef and co-owner of the crazy dog in westhampton beach and the restaurant of the same name in sayville (both now closed). he is owner as well as chef of bobbique, which he named for his 8-year-old daughter, bobbi.  mr. rifkin fell in love with memphis-style barbecue and honed his skills by working at top barbecue spots in that city. bobbique has a smoker that holds 700 pounds of meat; all the meat and seafood served here come out of it. even the hot links (kielbasa) started as fresh sausage and were smoked on the premises.  the restaurant is very casual, with patrons placing their orders at a counter and the food being delivered to their table. servers are laid back but very accommodating, checking frequently to see if diners need seconds on drinks or wish to order dessert.  the staff reflects the casual ambience of the restaurant. mr. rifkin was going for the industrial look in this large storefront, and he achieved it with corrugated metal roof decking (used as a decorative accent), hanging industrial lights over the bar, exposed pipes and old brick. four large black-and-white frank stewart photographs of barbecue pits and their owners are the only adornments on the walls.  diners sit at high tables covered in butcher paper or at low tables in front of a stage where blues bands perform on the weekend. rolls of paper towels, which are used as napkins, top each table.  bobbique has earned a following for its blues music, its congenial bar serving more than 70 varieties of beer and, most of all, its terrific food. don't miss the barbecued wings. they are big and juicy, with deep, smoky flavor. another opener that hit all the right notes was the basket of deep-fried pickle chips accompanied by a first-rate tartar sauce. crisp sweet potato fries with a honey-mayo dip were also an addictive starter.  there's a big chopped salad -- at $8.95, large enough for four -- that is enhanced by the honey-balsamic house dressing. we also liked the iceberg wedge, with its two thick slices of beefsteak tomato and three strips of bacon.  the tender ribs are the headliner here. they are not dripping with sauce, but have a crunchy glaze. the delicious pulled pork sandwich crowned with coleslaw on a soft bun shared top billing. the barbecued half chicken was running with juices and finger-licking good.  we liked the beef brisket, but it was not in the same league as the pork and the chicken. the brisket portion was also a tad skimpy. barbecued salmon with crispy skin made the grade, but fried shrimp was average. stick with the barbecue.  the sides receive as much attention from mr. rifkin as the meats. entrees come with a choice of two. the baked beans were liberally laced with bacon; the coleslaw was minced and creamy; the skins-on potato salad was brightened by onion, and the mac and cheese was soothing and tasty. that super corn bread accompanies every entree.  two of the desserts were noteworthy. the warm brownie soufflé (a k a fallen chocolate cake) is especially good with a scoop of creamy gelato-style ice cream, from a local company, fresco, in holbrook. the other exceptional dessert was the lincoln logs -- long strips of french toast that have been rolled in cinnamon sugar and drizzled with raspberry sauce. they reminded some diners of beignets, others of jelly doughnuts; either way, they melted in the mouth.  bobbique  70 west main street  patchogue  (631) 447-7744  www.bobbique.com  very good  the space -- large, casual storefront barbecue joint with industrial look. complete wheelchair access.  the crowd -- noisy, young and hip. blues music fridays and saturdays at 8:30 p.m. and on thursdays at 7:30 p.m. lots of families with children earlier in the evening.  the bar -- long and very lively. over 70 varieties of beer are served, including 12 brews on tap. (draft beer $5 to $6, bottles $4 to $10; large bottles, $13 to $16.) there is a small wine list of six bottles ($24 to $35) with the same number offered by the glass, $5 to $9. happy hour is 4 to 6 p.m. monday through friday.  the bill -- lunch and dinner entrees, $7.95 for a pulled pork sandwich to $23.95 for a combination plate of five meats. children's menu, $5.95. (american express not accepted.)  what we like -- barbecued chicken wings, fried pickle chips, corn bread, sweet potato fries, chopped salad, iceberg wedge, barbecued chicken, ribs, salmon, pulled pork sandwich, baked beans, coleslaw, potato salad, mac and cheese, warm brownie soufflé, lincoln logs.  if you go -- open 11:30 a.m. to 10 p.m. monday through thursday, to 11 p.m. friday, 3 to 11 p.m. saturday and 2 to 9 p.m. sunday. no reservations; go early to beat the crowds.  reviewed jan. 14, 2007  dining/patchogue  