she solves the crime but remains a mystery   find me  by carol o'connell  352 pages. g. p. putnam's sons. $24.95.  when it comes to the writing and reading of mystery series, certain rules of the road apply. each novel features a stellar main character, possibly with a cast of devoted sidekicks. these books are cranked out at regular intervals. they're also read in sequence by readers who are as compulsive as the authors, so that it is unthinkable to pick up a current title without wading through the earlier ones. unthinkable, that is, unless an established but not yet mainstream writer like carol o'connell blows this whole orderly process out of the water.  ''find me'' is the latest of ms. o'connell's mallory novels, the 9th of her 10 books (the exception is ''judas child'') to deal with the gorgeous, crazy, stone-cold new york city detective known strictly by her last name. (for the record, she's kathy mallory.) and a study of the other mallory books would fill in her strange and troubling case history from the days when she was desperate and alone. ''mallory's early life,'' says this book, of the time before she turned up abandoned in grand central terminal, ''was one long bad trick on a little kid.''  then this loner became the pride and joy of hefty lou markowitz, a venerable new york police detective. he became her foster father and taught her everything she now knows. he loved her, but how much did he change her? even markowitz was moved to check for his wallet whenever ''the kid,'' as she is now known in her 20s, gave him her killer smile.  markowitz is only a memory in these books, as is his wife, helen, who became mallory's foster mother. but he left mallory a legacy of uncanny police skills and at least one other protective father figure -- her partner, the affably rumpled detective sergeant riker -- who is endlessly fond of her antisocial quirks. riker subscribes to ''the theory that mallory was not simply in love with high technology, but actually required batteries in order to walk and talk.''  all this and much more background is woven into ''find me,'' to the point where the new book is entirely accessible and self-contained. read the others if you like, but start with this one. the author has pared and fine-tuned what was once a cumbersome style so that it is now as clean, lean and forceful as the series's heroine, whose spooky beauty and daunting manner make an indelible impression wherever she goes.  although mallory is ''no more than five feet ten,'' she has been known to give a tall man ''the unshakable feeling that he was looking up at her.'' and when an actual wolf wanders into this story, riker remarks: ''it's got weird eyes, huh? real cold. remind you of anybody we know?''  the wolf appears in ''find me'' during this novel's westward trek along route 66, the legendary road that is a virtual character in this story. (this book's abysmally dull cover art would have been hugely improved by some visual reference to its geography.) and the wolf is part of a crazy caravan, which is joined by mallory, riker and poor charles butler.  butler, also a fixture in earlier books, is a brilliant psychologist who has the bad luck to be smitten with mallory. her way of returning butler's affection has been to refrain from shooting him.  the caravan's focus is missing or murdered children, who have often figured in ms. o'connell's stories. their parents have banded together under the shady leadership of dr. paul magritte, who has recruited them via the internet. dr. magritte intends to use the journey as a way of garnering publicity in order to solve old crimes. at least that's what he says. but everything about this group is peculiar, including the presence of one scary little girl whose sister has vanished -- and who compulsively hums the opening notes of ''mack the knife'' whenever she is reminded of some past trauma.  all this makes for a complicated setup. there are a number of things going on in ''find me'': the search for a serial child-killer, the alarming sense that this killer is somehow attached to the caravan, turf wars among f.b.i., state and new york city police and mallory's own secret mission: to blast across the country in a stealth porsche (it looks like a volkswagen beetle) that is just like the car of peyton hale, the father she never knew.  one atypically soapy part of the book describes a romantic triangle linking characters named peyton, savannah and cassandra. (cassandra was mallory's biological mother, who died when her daughter was 6). fueled by anger over this treachery and guided by her father's purplish letters about the wonders of the mother road (as route 66 is known to its cultists), ''the little sociopath'' shows rare glimpses of her soggy side in the midst of crime-solving. that peyton has left instructions for listening to the eagles while driving is further cause for alarm.  but most of ''find me'' makes it a terrific find: a tightly wrapped, expert combination of suspense, mystery and show-stopping character. one starkly visual sequence manages to turn a highway rest area into the scene of a coolly terrifying duel of wits, one small part of the book's overarching cat-and-mouse game.  a word about ms. o'connell: she has made little impact for such a smart, skillful practitioner of the mystery-writing arts. she is not a familiar figure. she does not appear to be part of this genre's blurb brigade. instead she writes discreetly dazzling books that are centered on one incomparable, near-mythic character. but the new book's emphasis on mallory's stature may make ''find me,'' for all its finesse, as bothersome to the author's longtime admirers as it is entertaining to her new ones.  the reason: mallory aficionados already know much of what is reiterated here. they may wonder why this book's plot has such a broad span. and any reader, new or well versed, will be jolted by a finale that brings mallory to a major turning point -- and by last words that suggest that the series could be over.  let's hope not. for those who discover it at this breakthrough moment, mallory's story has just begun.  books of the times  