a night out with: michael musto; enough about you   confidential to everyone: michael musto plays the viola. he's good, too; he even made it into the all-city orchestra in high school. (''don't print that,'' mr. musto faux-hissed. ''it'll ruin me!'')  but there's more: he also does a mean diana ross, having once led a band called the must. the group did supremes covers exclusively; following in the footsteps of the original girl group, they changed the name to michael musto and the must.  but thankfully for catty people everywhere, he preferred being the city's most punny, raunchy and self-referential gossip columnist (it was his dream, girl).  now, between his weekly deadlines at the village voice and his appearances as an oversize talking head, well, everywhere, he's put together a book. called ''la dolce musto,'' like his voice column, it's a compilation of two decades worth of his favorite blind items, outings, hissy fits and scandals concerning everyone from madonna to anita ekberg. ''it was daunting,'' he said as he prepped for a party in his honor at room service, a club on 21st street. ''i had to read through 1,000 columns! but to be honest, i already had my favorites in folders.''  typical behavior from mr. musto, a work-a-party-holic who goes out seven nights a week. ''people always say, you should take two weeks off and go to the beach,'' he said. ''that would be hell to me, because i don't want to be alone with my thoughts.''  he paused, recalling years of therapy or maybe mind-numbing rehearsals. ''i may be running away from something -- duh! -- but at least i'm running toward something fabulous.''  on tuesday, he was: himself. ''tonight's about michael,'' said his friend mickey boardman, a columnist for paper magazine, as he doffed his coat to reveal not one but two sequined shirts. in this crowd, everyone blended in, even the burlesque star julie atlas muz, in a feathered headdress, glittery bra and thong panties. le tout downtown demimonde was there: murray hill and the cabaret singer bridget everett, who both performed; justin bond of kiki and herb; randy jones, the village people cowboy; amanda lepore; and ivana trump.  reporters were everywhere. ''this is my ideal room -- all press!'' mr. musto cried when he took the stage. not bad for a boy who still goes home to bensonhurst for the holidays.  ''he is the unadorned hedonist of gossip,'' joan rivers said as she watched mr. musto work the room in tuxedo pants worn high and a cream-colored blouse with a neck ruffle and foofy sleeves. ''also, tonight he looks like he's in 'pirates of the caribbean.' ''  ''it's comme de garbage,'' mr. musto shot back ( emphasis his). he carried his navy shoulder bag, ''my security blanket'' all night long, sipped diet coke, posed for photos and accepted plaudits. he planned to wind down later with ''the golden girls'' (he's a fan of dorothy); it's the only tv he watches, except for the shows he's on. ''i'm usually shy, but i come alive before a spotlight,'' mr. musto said. ''i feel the flamboyant me -- on stage or tv -- is the real me.''  in person, though, he slings the snark quietly and covers his mouth when he is listening or even talking, as if to say, ''this is our (dirty, filthy, italicized) little secret.''  the open bar ended and the media people left (shh!). the regular party began. the hosts, susanne bartsch, who wore a gold minidress, and kenny kenny, in a one-legged black body stocking, danced. mr. musto, unruined, watched from a couch.  ''this will definitely make for a really hot column,'' he said.  confidential to everyone: it already has.  a night out with  