second look at passing first   jared jordan was in the fourth grade when his parents moved from the suburbs of hartford into the city, to a neighborhood known as the west end. until that time, jordan's entire basketball repertory consisted of a long-range jump shot. then he began showing up at playgrounds where he was not only one of the smallest players on the court, but also one of the few white players.  it was there, jordan said, that he learned the subtleties of playing point guard and developed the ability to handle and pass the ball and to create on the run against bigger and more athletic defenders. it was there, too, where he neglected shooting, which is why he received division i scholarship offers from only canisius, hartford and marist.  he chose to come here, to marist, a 4,200-student college midway between albany and new york city. now, four years later, under the tutelage of a coach who has a reputation as a technician of the jump shot, jordan is still perfecting his mechanics while bolstering his reputation.  amid a recent minor slump, he made another adjustment, knowing that he had little margin for error on two fronts. the marist red foxes are favored to win the metro atlantic athletic conference and earn an n.c.a.a. tournament bid for the first time since 1986-87, when their center was rik smits, a future n.b.a. all-star. the 6-foot-2 jordan has also drawn the attention of n.b.a. scouts, who see in him what they once saw in another pass-first point guard from a little-known college.  ''everybody hopes to find the next steve nash, but there's not a lot of them,'' said matt brady, jordan's coach at marist, who worked with the pro guards jameer nelson and delonte west while an assistant at st. joseph's. ''but jared does some of the same things. i watched steve nash a lot in college, and jared is not dissimilar to how he was. who knows if jared's going to continue to improve, but as a college player, he's marvelous.''  one thing jordan is not reluctant to discuss is his admiration for nash, the two-time n.b.a. most valuable player for the phoenix suns. it is not just nash's game that jordan admires, he said. it is the way he carries himself, the way he emerged from santa clara university and slowly developed into an all-star.  ''the n.b.a. is more about potential, about guys who can jump and run,'' jordan said. ''but nash is the exact opposite. and i think they're growing more aware that there are other people who might be like that.''  despite concerns over jordan's athleticism, scouts are growing more captivated by his potential. after jordan's performance in late november at the nationally televised old spice classic in orlando, fla., a number of scouts projected him to be picked in the first half of the second round of the n.b.a. draft. marist defeated minnesota and western michigan and lost by 9 points to arkansas in the tournament.  ''a lot of people are emulating steve nash,'' said ryan blake, the n.c.a.a.'s assistant director for scouting. then he referred to jordan. ''but you don't know, that's the thing. he's really going to have to prove it when the time comes. he needs to prove he can do it against the elite players.''  jordan led division i in assists last season and could do so again this season. he is a regular reader of basketball blogs and web sites and keeps careful track of his assist numbers. he has even been known to send text messages to his coaches with scores of games. still, he said, this sudden burst of attention is a bit disconcerting.  even his longtime roommate and backcourt mate, will whittington, cannot get jordan to open up much about it.  ''he's really a modest kid,'' whittington said. ''but i don't see how jared couldn't excel in the n.b.a. i believe he can get his game to nash's level.''  brady took over at marist before jordan's sophomore season, in 2004, after the team's longtime coach, dave magarity, stepped down. jordan had bulked up to more than 200 pounds by lifting weights, and one of the first things brady told him was that he needed to drop 10 pounds. jordan returned the next season having lost 12. the next summer, brady said, he told jordan to lose 10 more pounds. he lost 14.  jordan, 22, said he had assumed he needed to gain strength to compete at the college level, but dropping the weight improved his quickness and range of motion. in the meantime, brady, who encourages his team to play up-tempo, began adjusting the shooting motion of nearly every player on his roster, including jordan.  ''with jared, i call it a shot without synchronization,'' brady said. ''it was a matter of getting the arm and the body movement synchronized.''  [jordan is shooting 34.6 percent from 3-point range this season amid the continued adjustments, but he is scoring more than ever before. marist is 12-4 over all and 4-1 in the maac. jordan leads the team in scoring at 18.1 points a game. through the games of jan. 9, he led division i with 8.6 assists a game.]  the impact of his play on marist's hopes of securing an n.c.a.a. bid is nearly immeasurable. just as the suns fall into disarray when nash is not on the floor, so do the red foxes without jordan. he sat out with an ankle injury against wright state on dec. 19, and marist played its worst game of the season, losing, 63-53.  ''he can see things no one else sees,'' whittington said. ''he's a throwback point guard. there are players in the n.b.a. right now who i couldn't say are better than him.''  college basketball  