in control on capitol hill   only a few weeks ago, representatives rosa l. delauro of connecticut and nita m. lowey of westchester were in the legislative equivalent of dead-end jobs: democrats in a chamber tightly controlled by republicans.  but with democrats now in power under the newly formed 110th congress, the two lawmakers are back as ''cardinals,'' in coveted top-tier positions on the house appropriations committee that give them a significant say over how billions of dollars in federal aid are spent.  the experience of these two congresswomen underscores how the november elections have boosted the fortunes of the heavily democratic congressional delegations from the new york metropolitan region -- a group made up of everything from urban liberals and suburban moderates to policy geeks and smooth political operators.  after having spent more than a decade in the political wilderness, with congress in the hands of conservative republicans mostly from other regions of the country, democrats from new york, new jersey and connecticut are eager to take control.  in large part, they will concentrate on shaping the national agenda on issues like health care, education, terrorism and the war in iraq. but members of the tristate delegation say that they will also be focused on parochial matters, most notably getting federal money for homeland security initiatives as well as for the region's aging highway and mass transportation systems.  in interviews, local, state and federal officials from the region provided a laundry list of need that is daunting by any standard, including:  as much as $7 billion to connect new york city and long island to the national rail freight system with the construction of a cross-harbor tunnel intended to reduce truck congestion on highways and roads.  $2 billion for a rail link connecting the world trade center site to the long island rail road and kennedy international airport; $500 million for a metro-north railroad link across the hudson river to connect stewart international airport in newburgh with the new york city area.  $6 billion for a new jersey transit train tunnel under the hudson river, which would include a loop south of secaucus junction and give riders on the bergen, main and pascack valley lines a direct ride into pennsylvania station without having to switch trains in secaucus or hoboken.  $700 million on top of billions of dollars already set aside for a project to link the long island rail road to grand central terminal via a tunnel along 63rd street in manhattan.  jeremy soffin of the regional plan association, however, sought to lower expectations. while area lawmakers are clearly well positioned to secure individual projects for their districts and states, he said, the test for them will be whether they can prod congress into making fundamental changes to federal policies in several areas that have often neglected the needs of older metropolitan regions like new york city.  ''we have to have realistic expectations about what a new congress will mean for our region,'' he said. ''we would expect more money coming our way in the form of pork in the short term. but there won't be a lasting impact unless there is a shift to prioritize federal investment in metropolitan regions.''  senator robert menendez, a democrat from new jersey, did not disagree with that contention and noted that the thin majorities the democrats possess, particularly in the senate, add to the challenge. but he said that the regional delegation could make progress through alliances with lawmakers from metropolitan regions from other parts of the country.  ''it will be more difficult but still possible,'' he said in a recent interview, referring to overall changes in federal policy. ''we now have people in positions to work with us and make it better. we won't get everything we want, but we can try to make it better.''  the jockeying for federal aid has already begun.  in december, for example, new york's newly elected governor, eliot spitzer, met with the state's congressional delegation. their discussion focused, in part, on increasing the federal government's contribution to the state's vast medicaid program, whose costs have helped contribute to soaring property taxes in counties around the state, particularly in the new york city suburbs.  then earlier this month, just after democrats officially took control of both chambers in congress, members of the delegation protested a plan by the department of homeland security to require new york city to share federal terror grants with northern new jersey. the department decided to treat new york city and northern new jersey -- including jersey city and newark -- as one region instead of treating them separately. but leading delegation members warned that they would move to block the plan if it turned out to be nothing more than a pretext to cut the region's security money.  senator charles e. schumer of new york said that if the agency ''gives out money based on a combined new york and new jersey area, it better be two full loaves, not half for each.''  with the 110th congress now in session, lawmakers from the region hold several important positions in both chambers, enhancing their ability to influence the flow of legislation on issues that affect all three states.  in the senate, for example, christopher j. dodd of connecticut, who formally announced last week that he is seeking the democratic nomination for president, is taking over the leadership of the senate banking committee. the panel has jurisdiction over billions of dollars in federal mass transit aid, and over laws that affect the scores of financial institutions that make up the region's economic backbone.  joseph i. lieberman, the other senator from connecticut, will be the only other senator from the region to hold a full-committee chairmanship -- on the government affairs and homeland security committee.  frank r. lautenberg, the senior senator from new jersey, holds positions on two committees that have significant say over the fate of local projects, the environment and public works committee and the appropriations committee.  politically, the tristate region has another powerful advantage in that chamber. all the senators from the region are part of the new democratic majority in the senate. (mr. lieberman ran as an independent, but is caucusing with the democrats and describes himself as an independent democrat.)  in mr. schumer's case, he has a direct line to the new majority leader, senator harry reid of nevada, as one of mr. reid's top political lieutenants in that chamber. (mr. reid recently appointed mr. schumer vice chairman of the democratic caucus, the no. 3 leadership position in the senate, as a reward for the election victories mr. schumer helped orchestrate as chairman of the senate democrats' campaign committee last fall.)  as for the junior senator from new york, hillary rodham clinton, a leading contender for her party's presidential nomination, she is in position to collect favors after having spent much of her time in the last election campaigning and raising money on behalf of her democratic colleagues in both chambers.  the region also has several powerful players in the house. the job of vice chairman of the democratic caucus, the fifth-most powerful position in that chamber, will go to john b. larson of east hartford, conn.  beyond that, several lawmakers from the region's house delegation will be leading crucially important panels. these lawmakers include louise m. slaughter, from western new york, who will be chairwoman of the rules committee, the panel that republican leaders employed to limit any floor debate and amendments affectingbills they favored; and charles b. rangel of harlem, who as chairman of the ways and means committee will shape tax policy and oversee some of the federal government's largest entitlement programs.  besides mrs. lowey and mrs. delauro, the region will have several other democrats on the house appropriations committee, including jose e. serrano of the bronx, who will also hold the rank of ''cardinal,'' as the heads of appropriations subcommittees are known on capitol hill. the other democrats on the appropriations committee are representatives maurice d. hinchey of the new york's hudson valley, steven r. rothman of hackensack, n.j., and steve israel of long island. the appropriations committee, among other things, receives thousands of individual spending requests annually from lawmakers seeking money for pet projects back home.  ''we have a great team in place on influential committees,'' mrs. lowey said, referring to the region's house delegation. ''we are in a position to deliver.''  even some of the regional delegation's newcomers are moving quickly to establish themselves as go-to guys and gals.  joseph courtney, who defeated a republican incumbent, rob simmons, in the second district in eastern connecticut, was recently given a seat on the armed services committee after lobbying hard for it. mr. courtney and his aides say that the seat will position him to steer military money and projects into the district, where the navy has a submarine base in groton and where the electric boat corporation, a navy contractor, builds submarines.  ''i'm ready to go to work,'' mr. courtney said last week, less than an hour after being sworn into office.  it is easy to see why new york, new jersey and connecticut have been routinely overlooked in the national political calculus. all three states have consistently (and solidly) voted democratic in the last four presidential elections, meaning republican leaders in washington have generally had little compelling political interest in catering to the region's needs.  beyond that, 29 of the region's 47 house members, or 62 percent, were democrats going into the midterm elections last year. and republicans from the region tend to be moderates whose positions on social issues like abortion rights and gun control put them at odds with conservative leaders of the national party.  (as it turns out, the midterm elections further solidified the region's standing as a democratic stronghold, with democrats defeating two republican incumbents in connecticut and two in new york. democrats also picked up one republican-held seat that became open in new york.)  while political analysts in both parties agree that the democratic ascendancy gives the region a stronger voice on the hill, the recent elections brought mixed news. for example, representative peter t. king, a republican from long island, is losing the chairmanship of the committee on homeland security, a position that he used to steer more money to new york city and other area localities considered at high risk of terrorist attack. the position will go to a democrat, bennie g. thompson of mississippi.  in an interview, mr. king said that he expected to work well with mr. thompson, though he noted that he believed he would do ''a better job'' for the new york region than his mississippi colleague.  ''i have to play the cards i've been dealt,'' he said. ''we're still in a pretty good spot because i am the top republican on the committee. which means that if democrats want to get anything done, they have to work with the administration. which means that democrats will have to work with me because i will be the administration's man on the committee. and if the administration wants to get anything done, it has to work with the democrats on the committee. and it will have to work through me to work with the democrats.  ''ultimately,'' he continued, ''i see myself as new york's man on the committee.''  politicians and other officials from new york, new jersey and connecticut agreed that a top priority of theirs was securing federal dollars for the reconstruction and maintenance of the region's network of highways, bridges and tunnels, and its subways and commuter railroads.  mr. schumer argues that the region's transportation system is nearing capacity during peak hours of travel and must be expanded to absorb the region's rapid growth. in the past, he said, transportation projects in the region had often been dealt with in isolation, resulting in today's individual systems. he suggested that the challenge for tristate lawmakers would be to work across traditional governmental boundaries, with an eye toward building a coherent system that ties the entire region together.  ''we are the largest metropolitan region in the country, and we are bedeviled by the fact that we have numerous jurisdictions -- state, county and town,'' mr. schumer said. ''we need to connect the region.''  