children's books   the adventures of marco polo  by russell freedman.  illustrated by bagram ibatoulline.  64 pp. arthur a. levine books/scholastic.  $17.99. (ages 9-12)  when russell freedman won the newbery medal for his photobiography of abraham lincoln in 1988, he rewarded himself with a trip to china. the many nonfiction books he has written since then are devoted primarily to american subjects, but freedman continues to be fascinated by asia. he wrote about confucius in 2002 and now, with the russian-born illustrator bagram ibatoulline, he has produced a splendid new book, ''the adventures of marco polo.''  there are really two subjects in this picture book. freedman vividly recounts some of the adventures marco polo claimed to have had between the time he left venice, about 1270, with his father and uncle, both merchants, and 1295, when he returned. and freedman presents the history of the book marco wrote that told the world about these travels. audaciously titled ''the description of the world,'' it ''opened the eyes of europeans to a civilization they had known almost nothing about,'' freedman writes. ''but many readers continued to regard the book as a fantastic collection of tall tales.''  marco polo always insisted that his stories were true (''i have only told the half of what i saw''), and they are, indeed, extraordinary. he was 6 when his father and uncle first set forth from venice, intending to find trade in russia. they returned nine years later -- having been delayed by wars and storms, and bringing stories of places no european had ever seen, including, most remarkably, the court of kublai khan in cathay (modern china). after two years at home, the brothers set off again, taking with them marco, ''an energetic youth of 17.''  in his book marco described an arduous journey -- a trek by camel caravan through persia, over the towering mountains of the hindu kush and across the vast desert of western china called the taklimakan. after three and a half years, the travelers reached kublai khan's summer capital, shangdu (xanadu), and marco saw for himself the famed ruler sitting atop a tall throne with a tame lion at his feet. kublai khan invited the travelers to the great capital city he was building called daidu (which would become beijing). while his father and uncle became wealthy trading with local merchants, marco was busy taking in all he saw: daidu's streets laid out like a chessboard, broad enough for nine horsemen to gallop abreast; the ''black stones that burn like logs,'' heating homes and water so efficiently that people could take hot baths every day (coal was unknown to him, and daily bathing an oddity); the efficient postal system; and, most amazing of all, the use of paper money instead of coins. having learned several languages, marco told the khan what he knew about everyday life in places as distant as tibet and burma (modern-day myanmar). he came to respect kublai khan's liberality in matters of religion, noting that ''if only all are faithful to the great khan and obey his laws, they may do whatever they please with their souls.''  marco polo's adventures were not over when, after an absence of 24 years, he returned to italy. war erupted between venice and genoa and, serving as captain of a venetian galley, marco was captured and thrown into prison. there he shared his cell with an author, rustichello of pisa, and ''the practiced writer of romances teamed up with the restless wanderer.'' the result was a book that was copied over and over again and translated into many languages. it became one of the world's most influential works, inspiring legions of travelers and explorers, including christopher columbus -- who, freedman tells us, ''used his well-thumbed latin translation as a guidebook, scribbling notes in the margins and underlining passages about gold, jewels and spices.''  but not everyone believed that marco had done all he said he had. some accused him of putting together his account based on stories he'd heard from other travelers; he was called ''the man of a million lies.'' in our own day, too, scholars have raised questions. if, as he claimed, marco polo spent 17 years at the court of kublai khan, why is he never mentioned in chinese documents? why does he seem to be unaware of china's great wall? freedman doesn't draw a definitive conclusion, but he notes that, despite various mysteries, most scholars today believe that marco polo's account of what he saw and did is ''essentially truthful.''  the magnificent illustrations by ibatoulline emphasize the widespread popularity of marco polo's book by drawing on various versions of it from medieval spain, england and germany. other images are inspired by period art from china and persia, and excellent maps show the travelers' routes to china and back again.  this is a thought-provoking book, one that will fascinate readers of all ages.  stephanie deutsch is a writer who lives in washington.  