giving up a republican future to work for a democrat   michael a. l. balboni, the man who might have been new york's next republican governor, or maybe republican attorney general, is instead the man who gave up his senate seat and any dibs on being a republican candidate for statewide office, to run the homeland security team for gov. eliot spitzer, a democrat he barely knows. they are strange bedfellows, but they both say the politics involved are nonpartisan.  it is, at least on the surface, a hazardous career maneuver by mr. balboni (his departure dropped his party's slim senate margin to 33 of 62 seats; a special election to replace him will be held next month). sort of like wearing a bright orange tie in midwinter -- decidedly not the g.o.p.-approved choice, but he's trying to pull it off. give him points for innovative decision-making.  mr. balboni, plucking a constellation of dog hairs from his dark suit as he opens the door of his sprawling colonial in east williston, on long island -- where every driveway has an s.u.v. and each yard is landscaped to the nines -- seems invigorated, not conflicted.  he has been chairman since 2003 of the state senate committee on veterans, homeland security and military affairs; a member of the senior advisory committee of the united states homeland security council; author of the state's chemical security standards statute (the first law of its kind); and a senior fellow of the homeland security policy institute at george washington university. he hasn't gained expertise on security matters or the nickname dr. doom by being a slacker.  an entire shelf of his home library, a chintz-free room he calls his domain, is devoted to terrorism: ''nuclear terrorism, bioterrorism, cyberterrorism, chemical terrorism, and profiles of suicide bombers,'' he recites. he has reread george orwell's ''1984'' and is immersed in ''the looming tower: al qaeda and the road to 9/11'' by lawrence wright, which he describes as a sort of ''radical road map to the next attack.'' so new york's new homeland security chief thinks another attack is in the cards? ''that's unfortunately what we all anticipate.'' hence the spitzer job offer.  ''it's been like drinking water from a fire hose,'' he says of his unanticipated segue from senate vet to spitzer official. ''to be given control of an issue i absolutely am fascinated by, scared by, and compelled by, it was almost too good to be true.'' mr. balboni's transformation into an antiterrorism/emergency-management expert was his way of coping with the aftermath of the sept. 11 terrorist attacks. ''this is the only job i wanted in government, and the only job i wish didn't exist,'' says this father of four.  his 13-year-old daughter, olivia, cried when she learned he had switched his identity from senator balboni, a nine-year senator who represented nassau county's seventh district after eight years in the state assembly, to just plain mike balboni, deputy secretary for public safety and security on the spitzer team.  but mr. balboni appears not to be in the throes of an identity crisis. asked his age, he replies, ''i'm 47, same age as the governor, except he's done a little better than i have. i wanted to run myself, so i pay a lot of attention to what makes a governor. he does have the whole package.''  incongruously, or maybe not, surfing is a passion for him second only to homeland security (he owns a robert august ''what i ride'' board, recently acquired a nine-footer called -- no lie -- ''the secret weapon,'' and has wiped out from montauk to costa rica to hawaii).  his father was a pediatric cardiologist, his mother was a nurse, and he traded pre-med for pre-law at adelphi before earning a law degree at st. john's. seated on a floral armchair in the sunroom, with one shedding couch potato pooch, fiona, in his lap and the other, zoe, commandeering his ottoman, mr. balboni explains his transition from up-and-coming candidate (he mulled a gubernatorial run in 2006 and was briefly a candidate for attorney general before bowing out in deference to jeanine f. pirro) to top-tier policy wonk for mr. spitzer. that his wife, stephanie, endorses it is a given in a household with a plaque that says, ''if at first you don't succeed, try doing it the way your wife told you.''  ''i'm still a republican,'' he says, ''even if my friends in kansas tell me i'd be known as a raving liberal democrat if i lived there. i've always thought of myself as an independent. i voted for the gay rights bill and the assault weapons ban and work force housing and got derided; they say i'm a rino.'' (republican in name only).  mr. spitzer has a different view. at a meeting of his cabinet this week, the governor offhandedly asked mr. balboni about his availability and was told by his new homeland security adviser that he was at his beck and call. ''see, it takes a republican to finally get it and understand what discipline in government is!'' mr. spitzer thundered. in jest, mr. balboni points out.  whatever he is, he knows this move hasn't endeared him to g.o.p. sticklers, but he doesn't seem to care. his final legislative session in albany ended up, he says, ''like groundhog day, with nothing getting done. the political pull has lessened for me. i'm not even sure i have higher-office ambitions anymore, which is probably a good thing, because i'd rate my chances of being a republican candidate in the future somewhere between zero and zero.'' which makes him grin.  public lives  