the neediest cases; student gets some help from a sympathetic mother   jill rappaport had just finished talking to her son, alex, who is a freshman at duke university, when she read an article about steguer wilson, a young man from the bronx adjusting to his first semester at hunter college.  the article told how mr. wilson, 18, had received help from the children's aid society, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund.  mr. wilson's story was like that of so many other college freshman. in the beginning of his first year, he was a little overwhelmed by homework, the scheduling of classes and the costs of course materials. mrs. rappaport, of westchester county, decided to help.  ''my son was going through the same things, but i couldn't imagine what it would be like for someone who does not have a supportive community and financial resources,'' she said last month before a board meeting of children's aid.  soon after she read the article on nov. 13, she wrote a note with a check for $5,000 to the society and specified that the money should help a student like mr. wilson, but preferably mr. wilson himself.  c. warren moses, the chief executive of the society, said, ''this is the kind of generosity that makes the difference in people's lives.''  he called mrs. rappaport and invited her to present the check in person to mr. wilson at the society's end-of-year board meeting.  ''all the stars were aligned,'' she said. during the board meeting on dec. 21, mrs. rappaport sat by mr. wilson, who was wearing a brown striped shirt and matching tie.  cathleen clements, the society's director of office of public policy and client advocacy, talked of the importance of the neediest cases and said that through it the society's staff had made a difference to nearly 4,600 families during the past nine years.  mrs. clements also said that money from neediest cases enables the society to help families so they can focus on building strong and healthy lives. when families do not have many resources, even ambitious people like mr. wilson can get discouraged.  ''they still need a boost up,'' mrs. clements said. ''what we can do with neediest money is to move them into a place so that they have access to another way of life.''  it was through the society's after-school programs at the dunlevy milbank community center that mr. wilson received support and encouragement.  he participated in capoeira, a brazilian martial art that incorporates dance, and other programs that helped him get an internship at nbc and the federal reserve bank.  ''steguer was one of those young people that took advantage of everything,'' said casper lassiter, assistant director of youth development and teen programs at the dunlevy milbank center. ''it takes a person who knows that they are a leader to step away from the crowd. he is an independent young man and definitely focused.''  at the meeting, mr. lassiter played a video about mr. wilson that was produced by the new york times for nytimes.com.  he then introduced mrs. rappaport, who presented the $5,000 check. as an added surprise, she gave mr. wilson an ipod from her son, who is 18, which he had filled with all his favorite songs.  ''my son hopes that you like some of his music, too,'' she said.  mr. wilson was overjoyed. ''i can't believe all this is happening to me,'' he said after the presentation. the money will be put in the bank for future college expenses, he said.  ''i am definitely going to save it,'' he said, ''because i am sure i will have to take out loans if i transfer to a different school'' based on what area of study he chooses.  as for the future, he hopes to make his parents proud, to be successful and to give back to the children's aid society.  ''it would be crazy not to,'' mr. wilson said. ''i will definitely give back to the children's aid society; i don't know how i couldn't. they have given me everything.''  previously recorded: $6,484,079  recorded thursday: 240,690  total: $6,724,769  last year to date: $6,285,241  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  