duke accuser contradicts herself and says 2, not 3, attacked her   in an interview last month with a district attorney's investigator, the woman who has accused three duke lacrosse players of sexual assault contradicted critical evidence and parts of her earlier accounts, dealing a new blow to a faltering case.  in her account, made public on thursday in a motion by defense lawyers, the woman said two players attacked her in the bathroom at a team party in march. she also gave a new version of the timing and revised some of the men's descriptions.  the lawyers' motion said the latest account, from an interview on dec. 21 with an investigator for district attorney michael b. nifong, raised further questions about the credibility of the central witness in the case.  ''the accuser's most recent recollection of events demonstrates clearly that she cannot accurately recall and describe her attackers and that any identification made by her is necessarily unreliable,'' the motion said.  mr. nifong is increasingly embattled. last month, he dropped rape charges against the men after the accuser said she was no longer certain of some details of the incident.  the state bar has filed an ethics complaint against mr. nifong for what it said were prejudicial public statements. the executive committee of the north carolina conference of district attorneys has called on him to drop out of the case. he has also been widely criticized for withholding exculpatory dna evidence.  in the interview, the woman, 28, a stripper and the mother of three children, said she was attacked after she and another woman had danced at the party. she said the assault occurred between 11:40 p.m. and midnight on march 13.  that contradicts time-stamped photographs of her dancing at the party after midnight, as well as a next-door neighbor's report of seeing the two women entering the house at midnight.  although the woman had told the authorities that all three men sexually assaulted her, she now said two had. the third, whom she identified as reade seligmann, was only present in the room, she said.  she also revised her statement at a photo lineup that another defendant, david evans, looked just like an attacker ''without the mustache.'' the statement was widely used to discount her identification because mr. evans has never had a mustache. the woman said in her new statement that she meant stubble or a 5 o'clock shadow.  the woman also said she could not be certain what had penetrated her. it was that statement of uncertainty that led mr. nifong to drop the rape charges on dec. 22, a day after the investigator, linwood e. wilson, interviewed her. the defendants, who have strenuously denied the charges, continue to face charges of sexual offense and kidnapping, carrying equally serious penalties.  the five-page typed interview was released in a motion adding arguments to suppress the woman's identifications of defendants. the motion is scheduled for a hearing on feb. 5 and could, if granted, end the case.  mr. nifong did not respond on thursday to requests for comment.  the interview is the first time anyone from the prosecutor's office talked with the woman about the case. she has made five comprehensive statements, interviews with a sexual assault nurse and detectives, recorded remarks at the photo lineup with the police, a statement in her handwriting and the interview with mr. wilson. each statement contradicts parts of the others.  in the newest statement, the woman said she arrived at the house about 11:10 p.m., joining the other stripper and dancing briefly before they stopped when a man threatened them with a broomstick. she said that the two women retreated to a car, received apologies from three men, were enticed back inside and separated and that she was sexually assaulted starting about 11:40 p.m.  defense lawyers have released time-stamped photos of the women dancing between midnight and 12:04 a.m. the prosecutor has questioned the stamps' authenticity.  the neighbor, jason bissey, gave the police a statement that he saw the accuser talking calmly with the second dancer in the yard outside the house shortly before midnight and then going inside, apparently for the first time. that version is consistent with the time-stamped photos.  ''i'm absolutely certain,'' mr. bissey said in a telephone interview thursday. ''i had looked at my cellphone, and i was sure they had gone into the house at 12. i had assumed that's when they first got there. but i can't say for sure that was the first time they showed up. it seemed to me that it was.''  the defense motion said the woman's cellphone records contradicted her version because she was speaking with someone at the time she now says the attack started. she was on the phone from 11:25 p.m. to 11:32 and 11:36 to 11:39.  the latest account leaves a gap of more than 50 minutes. the second dancer called 911 at 12:53 and reported that racial slurs had been shouted at them. she later told the police that she had made the call as they were driving from the party.  in previous statements, the accuser said three men calling themselves adam, matt and brett had held her in a bathroom, raped and assaulted her. she had given different versions about what each had done, but had said three people attacked her.  the statement on dec. 21 represented the first time that she said the same man, mr. evans, had used multiple names and that she did not remember any name being used for collin finnerty, the third defendant. defense lawyers wrote, ''in fact, nowhere was this said -- or even hinted at -- before dec. 21, 2006.''  the lawyers added, ''in short, by claiming that any one of the defendants could be any or all of her attackers, the accuser has now created the equivalent of a 'do over' in an attempt to try to make sense of her prior conflicting statements.''  based on the earlier timeline, mr. seligmann had a strong alibi. cellphone records, a time-stamped photo from an a.t.m. and a cabby's account showed that he was on the telephone or had left the party when the attack was said to have occurred.  the information on thursday raised new doubts about his role. on april 4, when the woman identified mr. seligmann in a photo lineup, she said, ''he was the one that was standing in front of me  um  that made me perform oral sex on him.''  in the new statement, she said mr. seligmann stood in front of her while someone else sexually assaulted her from behind, but she did not say he made her perform oral sex. instead, according to the statement, mr. seligmann stood there and refused to go back behind her ''because he was getting married.''  the report says, ''both finnerty and evans were trying to get seligmann to 'do it' but he kept saying no.''  irving joyner, a law professor monitoring the case for the n.a.a.c.p., said someone who acted in concert with others could be charged with sexual offense even without personally assaulting the victim.  the woman also said in the statement for the first time that the men had used a white towel to wipe her face, mr. evans's penis and the floor where she said she had spit. defense lawyers wrote that the new account of the white towel was an effort to explain why none of the defendants' dna was found on or in the woman.  