davidson finds his new voice in leading blues   half a season has passed, but for viewers of rangers games on the msg network, it's still strange not to hear john davidson's commentary. after 21 years of analyzing rangers games and games on other networks, davidson left in june to become the president of the st. louis blues.  ''when you broadcast a lot of games -- i did 153 last year -- you have to stay up with every team,'' davidson said, remarking on the contrasts between his old and new jobs in a telephone interview last week. ''in this world, now you're primarily focused on the blues' team.''  davidson was hired to turn around st. louis, which finished last season 30th among 30 teams. with 39 points this season, the blues are again near the bottom of the standings, but after a 6-5 victory yesterday over the los angeles kings, they had won 9 of their last 12 games.  ''the key is retaining your patience,'' he said from his office in st. louis. ''it takes time to redevelop your organization as a whole. we are getting there.''  davidson, whose goaltending career was spent with the blues and the rangers, spoke about the differences between fans.  ''st. louis is a different city than new york, quieter in some ways,'' he said. ''in new york, the fans show their emotions a little more. new york can be loud and abrasive, but it can also be tender.  ''st. louis is a city of manners. they're very supportive here, no matter how things go. i went to a cardinals game and they were losing to the marlins by a huge score, but no boos. it's a difference in culture.''  the toughest part about leaving, he said, was his relationship with rangers fans.  ''a lot of those people you'd see for 30 years,'' he said. ''our booth was out in the open, and you'd see kids grow up, become adults, then see their kids. it was fascinating.''  he added: ''every season they'd come back, say hello, and they'd talk about a parent or a grandparent passing away, kids getting married, new grandchildren. you'd see it all.  ''i've been lucky to be in two good worlds. the one in new york was great, and this one in st. louis is, too.''  champions of europe  hpk hameenlinna of finland and ak bars kazan of russia will play in the european champions cup final today in st. petersburg, russia. the tournament, staged by the international ice hockey federation, pits the champions of the six top leagues in europe against one another.  hpk hameenlinna, a tournament favorite, reached the final with a 7-0 victory thursday over mshk zilina of solvakia and a 3-2 defeat yesterday against sparta prague of the czech republic.  ak bars kazan, the other favorite, made it to the final by knocking off farjestads bk of sweden on thursday, 6-4, and hc lugano of switzerland yesterday, 3-0.  rené fasel, the federation president, was asked last week if he could envision a day when the n.h.l.'s regular-season or stanley cup champion might take part in a world club championship tournament.  ''that will happen, sooner or later,'' he wrote in an e-mail message. ''it will happen because this is the natural thing to happen, a best-on-best on a club level. we have discussed it for many years with the n.h.l.''  fasel added: ''any competition that makes sportive sense is in everybody's interest. the n.b.a. has understood this, and this is the reason why they target europe and asia very aggressively year after year. an i.i.h.f.-n.h.l. club tournament or series would be the optimal win-win situation for the n.h.l., for the i.i.h.f. and for the fans. besides the sports side of things, there is an enormous financial, marketing and p.r. potential in a competition like this.''  ice chips  n.h.l. central scouting announced last week that the top prospect among draft-eligible europeans is aleksei cherepanov, a right wing for avangard omsk who was named the best forward at the world junior championship this month. if he is picked first in the draft in june, he will become the third russian chosen no. 1, after ilya kovalchuk and alexander ovechkin. cherepanov, who turns 18 tomorrow, has 11 goals and 9 assists in 29 games with avangard. ... the top-rated north american is angelo esposito, a 17-year-old center with the quebec remparts of the quebec junior league. through friday, he had 19 goals and 42 assists in 40 games.  the write-in campaign to get the vancouver journeyman defenseman rory fitzpatrick into the all-star game fell just short. he finished third behind anaheim's scott niedermayer and detroit's nicklas lidstrom.  hockey: sunday shootout  