speaking of warming is it spring?   it was the inaugural meeting of the westchester global warming task force, and there was clearly no need to schedule a snow day. as the 34-member committee gathered to discuss climate change, the temperature kept creeping up. by afternoon, when the mercury registered 70, the record was set for the warmest january day in westchester since 1895, when records were first kept.  while the group -- made up of local government officials, educators, environmentalists and representatives from the business community -- set to work in a white plains conference room on jan. 6, other local residents hit the golf courses, biked around the kensico dam, picnicked and otherwise enjoyed the balmy weather. i had just returned from a vacation in the tropics and was bracing myself for winter's chill. instead, i pulled my shorts out of the suitcase and went hiking.  even if you are no fan of snow and ice, this elongated break from winter weather is giving most of us an uneasy feeling. you cannot quite enjoy it because you know something is up. no matter where you fall on the michael crichton-al gore scale (global warming is not real, versus batten down the hatches, we are in serious trouble), you cannot argue that this has been a normal winter so far.  the numbers do not lie. on wednesday, the hudson valley weather observers, a group that has recorded local temperatures every day for decades, held its bimonthly meeting to report its findings. not only was december nine degrees above normal on average, but there was no measurable snowfall and not one day that the temperature dipped into the single digits, said dr. jerome thaler, who has been monitoring temperatures in yorktown for more than 40 years.  scientists at nasa's goddard institute estimate that 2006 was the fifth-warmest year on earth since modern records have been kept. and those experts do not waffle as to the cause: a buildup of man-made carbon dioxide. so you might wonder why a small county like westchester thinks it can make a dent in the problem of rising temperatures across the globe. can a town supervisor in north castle (that is reese berman, the co-chairwoman of the task force) actually end up having an impact on whether polar bears in the arctic have enough ice to maintain their habitat?  well, this may be one of those times when the expression ''think globally, act locally'' actually does resonate. certainly the county's efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions cannot hurt. the task force, whose first meeting was organizational, plans to identify practical steps that can be taken on a local level to address the problem. one of its first efforts will be to update exactly how much greenhouse gas westchester has produced. in 1999, the county produced almost 12 million tons of carbon dioxide.  ''this is an enormous amount,'' county executive andrew spano said. ''while it is lower than estimates for some other new york counties in the same period, it is higher than the state average at the time of 11.8 tons. and even that state average is way too high.''  transportation accounted for about 51 percent of the 12 million tons, residential use was roughly 30 percent and the commercial sector about 19 percent.  the task force will set goals to reduce those emissions over the next decade and develop strategies on how to get there. they also plan on recommending a sustainable development program for westchester. this includes everything from ''green'' (environmentally friendly) construction, using alternative energy sources, converting to more energy-efficient uses, reducing waste and water consumption, recycling, focusing on transportation and fuel alternatives, and looking at land-use plans and legislation.  ''people need to take this seriously,'' mr. spano said. ''there are local governments across the whole country that are involved in this, because the federal government isn't showing any leadership.''  john hall, the newly elected congressman who represents the hudson valley, said that he and his colleagues were startled to see the cherry blossoms in bloom during their recent inauguration, and that global warming was the talk of the new freshman class. but even without direction from washington, if local governments switch to hybrid cars, and local businesses use less heating oil, and schools install energy-efficient light bulbs, and hundreds of other small steps are taken in thousands of municipalities, it would be a start.  of course, despite warming trends, the daytime temperature did dip into the 30's last week and we could still get snow this week. i think most of us are ready.  ''i took a walk last saturday and it felt like spring,'' ms. berman said. ''but it was an odd sort of day. people felt happy it was so warm and scared at the same time. it's not like you feel about spring after a long winter. that's joyous. this is a different feeling.''  