looking defenseless, knicks take step backward   the scoring gap between the charlotte bobcats and the knicks was considerable last night, as was the gap between the knicks' defensive effort and their attempted explanations for it.  the bobcats entered the game as the league's sixth-worst-scoring team, but they routed the knicks, 126-110. their shooting percentage (.593) far exceeded their season average (.429). derek anderson, playing for his seventh team in nine seasons, scored 29 points -- his highest output in three years. matt carroll, whose best days as a professional were spent with the roanoke dazzle, scored 23 points. between them, carroll and anderson had nine 3-pointers.  there was surely a defensive lapse or two in there somewhere, but after seeing their three-game winning streak end and the boos at madison square garden return, the knicks (16-22) were in no mood for self-analysis.  ''no,'' stephon marbury said when asked if there was a defensive answer to be found.  coach isiah thomas dismissed the letdown without uttering an ill word about his team.  ''i don't have any excuses other than they were hot,'' thomas said. ''they did everything right.''  the theme was generally consistent around the locker room after the knicks absorbed the first loss in their past six home games. charlotte (11-23) was the sort of team thomas has said the knicks should be expected to beat, which made the defeat that much worse and the explanations that much stranger.  ''i would be the first to say if the energy and the effort wasn't there, i'd say our guys didn't bring it tonight,'' thomas said. ''but i thought the other team was very effective in setting screens, getting their people open, and they knocked down shots.''  so, four hours after thomas gushed about the knicks' winning back the garden crowd -- ''i think the team and the fans have bonded in the building'' -- the boos returned, though with less volume and intensity than were heard in november.  eddy curry had 27 points against the bobcats, 13 of them in an ill-fated comeback charge in the fourth quarter. marbury had 28 points before fouling out in the final minute. most nights, their scoring would have been enough to deliver the victory.  instead, marbury and curry combined for the signature gaffe of the night -- a no-look pass from marbury that bounced off curry's head for a turnover and led to a basket by primoz brezec in the fourth quarter.  curry followed that play with two turnovers and a reverse layup attempt that sailed over the basket as the knicks' late comeback attempt sputtered.  ''we're a better team than what we showed tonight,'' curry said.  charlotte's emeka okafor effectively contained curry through three quarters, blocking two of his attempts and changing several others. okafor finished with a career-high 10 blocks, one short of the record for a knicks opponent. (cleveland's larry nance owns the record -- 11, on jan. 7, 1989.)  that was not as startling a statistic as anderson's point total, however. the injury-prone anderson has bounced from cleveland to los angeles, san antonio, portland, houston and miami in his career and rarely has nights like this anymore. he made 9 of 11 field-goal attempts, including 6 of 8 from behind the 3-point arc.  ''anytime you play against a team and a guy who normally doesn't do those kind of things comes in and scores big for them, it's going to be a tough night,'' curry said, before adding the stock company line: ''i don't think it had anything to do with how we were playing defense, because i thought we played pretty good defense all night. they made some tough shots.''  charlotte entered the game with the league's third-worst record, but was on its own hot streak. the bobcats had won three of their past five games, all against quality teams -- the los angeles lakers, indiana pacers and detroit pistons.  so it perhaps should not have been a surprise when they ran off a 26-7 run from the second to the third quarter, taking a lead they never relinquished.  carroll and anderson combined for four 3-pointers in the opening minutes of the third quarter, and charlotte took a 12-point lead. the knicks never got closer than 5 points in the fourth quarter.  ''it's not the end of the world,'' said channing frye, who had 12 points, but went scoreless in the second half. ''we're still one game out of first place.''  the knicks led by as many as 9 points in the first half and might have turned the game into an early rout had they not kept driving into okafor's path. he blocked eight shots in the half, getting curry, frye and marbury twice each. he closed the half by blocking a crawford runner.  rebounds  chris webber has not yet chosen a new home, which means the knicks are technically still in the race for his services. but other than acknowledging his interest and contact with webber's agent, isiah thomas would not shed any new light on the pursuit. ''i won't give a daily update of private conversations or anything that we have with players that are out there,'' thomas said. ''it's safe to say that we're one of many teams that are interested, and we'll see where it ends up.'' webber was waived thursday by the philadelphia 76ers and is weighing offers from a number of teams. he has stated a preference for signing with a championship contender, with the detroit pistons emerging as the early favorite.  pro basketball  