betting on facts   for most people gambling is an enjoyable -- if occasional -- experience. but for some, gambling leads to debilitating problems.  at its most serious, problem gambling has been recognized as a psychiatric disorder. yet very few comprehensive studies of the impacts of gambling (both positive and negative) have been carried out, probably because -- as the national gambling impact study commission pointed out in 1999 -- regulating gambling is viewed as a state issue and few states have the resources or political will to finance such studies.  i have spent more than 20 years studying gambling and, to my knowledge, connecticut is the only jurisdiction ever to mandate that impact studies of legal gambling be conducted every five years. starting in 1981, four impact studies -- including one in 1991 in which i was involved -- have been carried out in connecticut. however, each one was done so differently that it was impossible to draw any hard and fast conclusions about changes in the impact of legal gambling over time.  in 2001, in the face of budget constraints, the state reneged on its pledge to conduct these periodic surveys; no gambling impact study has been carried out in connecticut since 1996. this was a mistake, especially when the state's gambling industry has brought in more than $600 million annually to connecticut's general fund since 2002.  there is some good news. the state senate has recently set aside money to study the impact of gambling in connecticut. as officials prepare to carry out the study, here are some things they should keep in mind.  quantifying the effects of legal gambling is a complex task. an international review of gambling impact studies that my colleagues and i are doing for the british government has highlighted several important issues.  first, every jurisdiction is unique and any impact study must be designed to answer, as comprehensively as possible, the questions deemed most important by its policymakers and citizens. second, account must be taken of the socio-economic impacts of all of the different types of gambling available, rather than focusing narrowly on one or another form of gambling.  third, it is impossible to account fully for all of the social benefits or costs associated with gambling since some of the effects defy quantification and the negative impacts often take much longer to emerge than positive ones like revenue flowing into state coffers. fourth, while the relationship between gambling availability and the prevalence of problem gambling is poorly understood, research suggests that there is a substantial lag between the introduction of a new form of gambling and the emergence of new problem gamblers. this underscores the importance of conducting uniform studies on a regular basis.  what we have learned by looking at the few exemplary gambling impact studies conducted internationally is that the cost of a high-quality study far surpasses the $350,000 that connecticut is pledging to spend; that the best studies are awarded competitively and carried out by large, multidisciplinary teams from independent research organizations with close involvement of gambling researchers; and that consideration of a range of issues, including economics, crime, public health and culture and community impacts is necessary.  it is also important to pay particular attention to vulnerable groups. for instance, people who are socially and economically disadvantaged are often hurt the most by legal gambling. and most significant, any gambling impact study must be accompanied by recommendations for change that are put into action and assessed for their effectiveness in reducing the harm caused by gambling.  those of us concerned about the effects of gambling applaud the effort in connecticut to reclaim its early leadership role in studying the impacts of legal gambling. but to avoid repeating mistakes, senate leaders must ensure that sufficient resources are made available in connecticut and that the study is done to the highest standards, maintaining comparability with what was done previously in the state as well as with studies across the nation and around the world.  op-ed contributor rachel a. volberg is the president of an organization that studies the effects of gambling on communities.  