it's congress's turn on the war   to the editor:  re ''bush's plan for iraq runs into opposition in congress'' (front page, jan. 12):  you quote secretary of state condoleezza rice as saying, ''i think that we all know that the stakes in iraq are enormous and that the consequences of failure would also be enormous not just for america and for iraq, but for the entire region of the middle east and indeed for the world.''  if this is indeed the case, why did the administration rush to war virtually alone, ask for no shared sacrifice at home and make so many egregious mistakes along the way?  it's time to pull our troops out of this quagmire.  thomas knopp  vandalia, ohio, jan. 12, 2007  to the editor:  iraq must speak up. no matter how misguided the american war in iraq has been, and how sour americans have turned, there is hope that whatever we are doing is at least doing some good for iraq.  but we don't hear anyone exactly begging us to stay.  we see chaos. we are risking a lot and now again deciding whether to commit ourselves further.  iraqi leaders and common folk must state publicly what they want, and what they would like to see from us, whether it be withdrawal or engagement and, of course, how they will each work toward those goals themselves.  for starters, let's hear from you, mr. maliki. preferably at the united nations, tomorrow.  barbara rosenthal  new york, jan. 12, 2007  to the editor:  joseph r. biden jr., the chairman of the senate foreign relations committee, is right to challenge president bush's threat to expand the iraq war into iran.  under the constitution, congress has the sole authority to declare war, congress did authorize the president to take action in iraq through a war resolution, but never granted or even considered authorizing incursions into iran or even syria.  this type of escalation is certain to lead to a worldwide conflagration.  congress must stand firm against the president's unconstitutional subjugation of the nation's war powers.  michael boyajian  fishkill, n.y., jan. 12, 2007  to the editor:  a few questions for president bush:  what is to prevent insurgent groups from rapidly matching and overmatching your proposed ''surge'' with one of their own?  have any plans been made for countering such an insurgent surge, and if so, what are they?  if they do not involve sending still more american troops, what do they involve?  how many months would any united states counter-response take?  how could one occur rapidly enough to avert a final, bloody catastrophe in which american troops and innocent iraqis would be killed by the thousands?  edith notman  nelson, n.h., jan. 12, 2007  to the editor:  re ''in baghdad, bush policy is met with resentment'' (news article, jan. 12):  executive summary of president bush's speech to the nation on wednesday: we're going to do what iraq wants, whether the iraqis want it or not.  robert zager  stamford, conn., jan. 12, 2007  to the editor:  re ''in pennsylvania, president's plan draws mixed responses and hardens opinions'' (news article, jan. 12):  this view of the mood of a sample of our citizens is an important picture of the failed administration policy of the war in iraq, termed the war on terror to justify its existence.  when some of the hard-right groups, firmly supporting the war in the beginning, start to see the results of this invasion and decide that it is instead a serious mistake, there is hope for some change.  the administration, with some cleverness, has instituted a ''new approach'' to policy that is more likely seen as a policy to shift blame for this debacle, first to the iraqi government, and second to the democrats.  if the iraqi leaders fail to stem widespread violence, the administration can start the withdrawal of troops, saying lack of cooperation leaves no alternative.  similarly, it now seems that a popular theme is to accuse the democrats of having only criticism and no policy to stem the violence. more shifting of blame.  raymond a. coulombe  deland, fla., jan. 12, 2007  to the editor:  ''love among the ruins,'' by maureen dowd (column, jan. 10), lists the many metaphors that have been used recently ''to describe our deadly embrace of iraq.''  many are clever, some entertaining, but all distance us from the absolute horror of what is actually taking place there.  those interested in communicating the true story of iraq to americans who live comfortably and at a safe distance from the killing fields would do better to resist metaphoric thinking altogether.  rather, they should take on the more challenging task of accurately describing, for example, the death of a soldier blown up by a roadside bomb, or an iraqi mother holding the shattered remains of her child in her arms.  ronald rubin  topanga, calif., jan. 10, 2007  