the super bowl means super-size hotel rates   finding a moderately priced hotel room in miami during the winter is never easy, but securing one over super bowl weekend (feb. 2 to 5) is a totally different ballgame, regardless of availability.  this weekend, for instance, the rate for a double room at the miami airport holiday inn is $190. for the night before the super bowl , that room goes for $430. at the already pricey delano, a city view deluxe room that would have cost $775 for last night is more than twice that amount, $1,625, on feb. 4 (and it's booked solid). even the ultraexpensive setai is requiring guests to stay a minimum of seven nights during super bowl week, at $950 a night for a double room.  robert tuchman, president of tse sports & entertainment (www.tseworld.com), said his company was selling four-night super bowl packages with upper-level game tickets, but without air fare. for example, $5,850 a person gets a double room at the westin in fort lauderdale, while $7,350 a person puts you in a penthouse suite at the albion south beach.  (the actual ticket prices are $600 and $700. most tickets are technically available through the 30 national football league teams, but are essentially sold out. brokers charge far more for the tickets.)  ''when you couple the super bowl with a great location like miami, hotels can charge five times their normal price,'' mr. tuchman said, adding that last year's location, detroit (featuring the seattle seahawks and the pittsburgh steelers, above), was a bit of a bust. ''we only sent around 300 people,'' he said. ''this year, we already have a thousand.''  his packages include an autographed football, a celebrity golf tournament and a sunday morning chat with a former n.f.l. player or coach.  loyal n.f.l. team followers might prefer ''fan packages,'' starting this week, from sports traveler (www.sportstraveler.net), a chicago-based company. it is $6,300 to $7,500, including three or four nights accommodation, reserved game tickets and air fare from your championship team's city. a required deposit of $200 to $500 is refunded if your team doesn't make the big game. but, as mr. tuchman said, ''the super bowl has become such a spectacle, most people don't even come anymore just for the game.''  in transit  