living in/park slope, brooklyn; coveted, whether stone-clad or bare brick   for a time after mona thong and her husband, robert stamicar, moved to brooklyn from toronto in 2004, they lived on montgomery place in park slope, perhaps the most sought-after location in the neighborhood, if not all of brooklyn. the street is an immaculate ensemble of bay windows, elegantly angled rooftops, understated columns and brownstone facades, ending in a flourish at prospect park.  soon the couple, both in their 30s, had a baby girl, sophie, and they needed to find a house. the options on montgomery place and streets like it were out of their reach -- out of most people's, for that matter. after a year of considering options in places like nearby windsor terrace, which they saw as short of amenities, they were surprised to find an affordable brick house six blocks away on fourth street, right in park slope.  despite its somewhat beat-up interior, the house wasn't one of the neighborhood's ''handyman specials''; it was actually livable. at $1.225 million, it was also far less expensive than most intact single-family houses. and it happened to be within the district of the premier elementary school, public school 321. the family moved in just before new year's eve.  ''we're willing to put the work into it over time,'' said ms. thong, who works for a canadian bank in the financial district. ''it wasn't something that we had to gut right away.''  park slope, a busy neighborhood of 60,000 residents, has almost always demanded sacrifices of its brownstone-seekers, whether they come in years of repairs and renovations, or in the substantial outlays of cash now required to scoop up a restored limestone or brownstone. but the area is not just elegant town houses populated by young families; its thousands of co-op owners and renters give the lie to that stereotype -- as does its wide variety of restaurants, shops and parks.  these days it's also a construction zone, at least on its fringes. developers have worked quickly since 2003 zoning changes along fourth avenue, park slope's noisy, truck-filled western border with gowanus, to begin building condominium towers and a hotel there. comparisons to a new park avenue for brooklyn are being made, with occasional snickers, on local blogs. but building presses on, with sales soon to begin at the novo park slope, a wide 12-story condo building at fifth street. the construction is ''very quickly transforming fourth avenue from what was otherwise a forlorn, neglected thoroughfare into a place where people can live,'' said craig hammerman, district manager for community board six. ''whether or not the infrastructure is there to support it is now the newest challenge.''  what you'll find  one of the biggest neighborhoods in brooklyn, park slope stretches from the planned site of the atlantic yards project south to the vicinity of the sunken prospect expressway, with the green hills and stone walls of prospect park forming most of the area's eastern border. at last glance, a sparkling white christmas tree was still standing under the soldiers' and sailors' memorial arch, the park's grand classical gateway, around which a farmer's market forms most saturdays.  along prospect park west, a few majestic full-service apartment buildings, with their coveted co-ops, mix in with some of the most expensive houses in the neighborhood. on a stroll westward down the slope and away from the park, the rows upon rows of brownstone and romanesque revival homes gradually give way to buildings without quarried rock to cover their bricks. west of fifth avenue, this is the rule, not the exception, though houses are for the most part stately and well kept.  park slope has two main commercial drags, each distinct in character; their identities diverge further every year.  seventh avenue, the neighborhood's traditional main street, is said to be more family-oriented, with cheery cafes and baby clothing stores predominating. fifth avenue is home to the bulk of park slope's trendy restaurants and bars. the most recent local complaint about seventh avenue has concerned its ready adoption of chain stores like rite aid, radio shack and subway. still, for every cingular shop, there is an unusual boutique like bird, a women's clothing store.  parking remains a major problem; residents cite a main character in the 2005 film ''the squid and the whale'' who circles his slope block repeatedly looking for a spot (and the film was set in the 1980s).  what you'll pay  as in other areas of the city, park slope's real estate market has decelerated, though prices have not yet taken a turn downward.  ''we've seen a slowdown in the sense that instead of having 50 or 60 people at an open house with 10 offers on the first day, you might have 10 or 15 people and maybe no offers on the first day,'' said tim stanard, a broker for the corcoran group. ''i've still had things sell over the asking price, but i've also had things sit on the market for six or eight weeks.''  matthew miller, the owner and a broker of heights berkeley realty, says that although properties don't ever go unbought, some owners are asking too much, and expecting to receive 2005-style offers. ''if something is priced just right, it sells,'' he said. ''but the problem is that many people overprice their properties because they have read about all the run-up in prices over the last year.''  over all, the neighborhood offers a wide range of prices for a wide range of housing types, and though it is mostly upper middle class, park slope still caters to a healthy variety of budgets. charles ruoff, an agent at brown harris stevens, says he sells entry-level studio co-ops on occasion but has also recently handled purchases for investment bankers and partners at blue-chip law firms, who seem to snatch up meticulously preserved brownstones.  ''on the high end,'' he said, ''we don't have any sort of real supply of good properties, either town houses or large apartments.''  recently, at the absolute top of the market, according to mr. ruoff, his firm sold a house on montgomery place for $6 million, but most large town houses in perfect shape, if ever on the market, sell for just over $3 million. he cited a limestone town house on first street that just went into contract for $3.2 million.  in the co-op market, mr. stanard said, studios average around $250,000, with one-bedroom units at $450,000, two-bedrooms at $700,000 and three-bedrooms at about $1 million. in september, his firm sold a co-op one-bedroom in a brownstone building with a renovated kitchen and bathroom on president street for $545,000. and while units in the new condominium buildings along fourth avenue are not yet for sale, corcoran sold a three-bedroom, two-bathroom apartment in the ansonia court building on 12th street for $1.09 million in september.  property tax, according to mr. miller, is relatively down-to-earth. he cited a center slope town house, now on the market for over $3 million, that will be assessed about $6,000 a year.  rentals are robust, mr. miller added; renovated three-bedrooms can fetch over $4,000 a month, studios about $1,400. in between, rent levels depend on the upkeep of the building and proximity to transportation.  what to do  a small crisis was averted when the new owners of the pavilion cinema on prospect park west announced last summer that they would continue to show movies there; the same could not be said for the flatbush pavilion on the neighborhood's north end, which closed in 2004. still, there are the meadows, formal gardens, tennis courts, festivals and carousel in the park next door. restaurant hopping is also a favorite neighborhood sport.  the history  once farmland, then a revolutionary battleground, park slope (nee prospect hill) grew up as a neighborhood because of prospect park. its completion in 1867 spurred the development of a ''gold coast'' of bordering houses for magnates and moneymen. a housing boom decreased prices in the early 20th century, and soon after world war ii, park slope entered a decline, as did most of brooklyn. its revival occurred earlier than most, in the 1970s and 1980s.  the schools  park slope's public schools are known as some of the best in brooklyn, and recent test scores tend to bear out that perception. the jewel of the local selection -- the one parents occasionally base moving decisions upon -- is public school 321 on seventh avenue. on english language arts tests in 2004-05, 89.6 percent of fourth-graders met state and city standards, versus 60.9 percent citywide; 89.2 percent did so in math, versus 65.1 percent citywide.  students performed similarly well at middle school 51 on fifth avenue, where 79.6 percent of students met standards in math versus 40.8 percent citywide; 85.6 percent met standards in english, whereas 43.3 percent did so citywide.  high schools here are scarce. at one, the secondary school for law on seventh avenue, students averaged 397 on the sat verbal section, as opposed to 497 statewide, and 412 in math, versus 511 statewide.  the neighborhood also has two private schools: the berkeley carroll school, whose middle and upper schools are on lincoln place and whose lower school is on carroll street; and the lower school of poly prep on prospect park west.  the commute  public transportation is easiest from in the north slope, within easy walking distance of stations on the b, q, 2 and 3 subway lines. from there, the trip to midtown manhattan takes about a half-hour. closer to fourth avenue, there is access to the m and r trains, and in the center and south slope there are f stations at fourth avenue, seventh avenue and 15th street; the trip from these stations to midtown is listed by the transit authority as taking about a half-hour but has been observed to take longer.  what we like  despite some local griping about the scrum of strollers on the slope's streets, it is refreshing for many to live in a true family enclave that lacks the motorized and isolated atmosphere of a suburb.  going forward  residents wonder if the neighborhood's small grocery stores and markets will be enough for the new batch of residents set to arrive in fourth avenue condominiums; a new whole foods expected nearby won't open until 2008.  living in | park slope, brooklyn  