so you think a hold and a kick are a snap?   snap. hold. kick.  compared with all the other physical machinations that players must execute during the average football game, this three-step process seems downright remedial.  why do you think football movies never show the extra point after the heroic touchdown? on the nbc show ''friday night lights,'' has the dillon panthers' place-kicker been a major character, or even a minor one, or been shown in more than one token frame all season? exactly. for all we know, the panthers go for 2 after every score, have a kicking mule or both.  i can tell you from personal experience -- at the age of 40 i'm heading into my fourth season as a semipro kicker -- that the aforementioned three steps are not, in fact, easy. yet they form one of the most highly criticized and crucial moments in sports.  the average viewer has no conception of how the planets must align for even the shortest kick to split the uprights: the snap has to be fast, tight and accurate; the hold has to be fabergé-egg gentle, yet crisp, with perfect rotation, tilted just so, laces out.  all this before accounting for any wind, rain, mud, frogs, locusts or the opposing special-teamers rushing forward like pamplona bulls. so i feel for the guys who fail, because when one of those three links in the chain breaks, an entire season -- sometimes an entire career -- can unravel.  just ask tony romo. in the waning moments of the dallas-seattle playoff game jan. 6, in front of the world, on a potential winning field goal, romo was link no. 2, the holder. and he broke in the most humiliating fashion. good snap. clean catch. then  bobble. panic. scramble. tripped up short. game -- and season -- over. embarrassment. even tears. (tears. in football.)  before i started playing football, i would have cracked open another beer and mocked his keystone kop act. or made some ''he must still have styling mousse on his fingers'' joke. or cursed him, as you might have.  now? i'm fed up with the abuse and second-class relegation that kickers, snappers and holders experience. especially when you consider that we're held to a higher performance standard than other athletes. a quarterback completing 60 percent of his passes may end up in canton. a batter succeeding a paltry 3 of 10 times may wind up in cooperstown. a kicker converting 70 percent of his attempts? ends up working a drive-through.  i might have only recently become a special-teamer, but i felt an instant, sorrowful kinship with romo. i've never had to make a last-second kick in front of tens of millions of people. (more like tens.) i don't have a multimillion-dollar contract on the line; we semipros play for free.  still, football is football. i know what pressure is. i know the practice, the precision, the mind-numbing repetition that goes into every kick. which is why i cringed dec. 24 when the bengals' reliable long snapper, brad st. louis, misfired through mile-high flurries and wounded cincinnati's playoff hopes, and when romo played pigskin hot potato. because they committed the ultimate special-teams sin: they were noticed.  the second i joined the semipro boston panthers, my goal was to be anonymous, to blend in -- a tough thing when you're the only suburban white person on an all-black/latino inner-city team -- and never to be the goat. to do so, i had to:  1. make most of my field goals and, especially, all the extra points.  2. hit kickoffs into the end zone.  3. if ever forced to tackle someone, try not to look like a yorkshire terrier nipping at someone's cleats.  call romo and others like him a goat if you must. but he did throw for about 3,000 yards and 19 touchdowns in only 10 games. his refreshing mobility helped dallas finish second to the colts in third-down efficiency and he might have been the reason the cowboys even made the playoffs. he's a pro bowler.  still, like so many goats before him -- mike vanderjagt, scott norwood, trey junkin -- no matter how successful romo is from now on, he'll have trouble shedding the itchy, wet wool-smelling cloak of his blunder in seattle.  i hope he does. and i hope that when the next special-teams gaffe happens on your favorite team, you'll go easy on the guy(s).  after all, you need us -- warts, single-bar face masks and all. what's more, you, there on the couch, licking neon orange cheetos dust off your fingers and yelling at your tv -- you couldn't handle special-teams pressure. trust me, you'd curl up into the fetal position and weep. i know. i was one of you.  cheering section mark st. amant is the author of ''just kick it: tales of an underdog, over-age, out-of-place semi-pro football player.''; e-mail: cheers@nytimes.com  