when money's involved, the truth can take a beating   faced with a hostile takeover bid from us airways, the chief executive of delta air lines, gerald grinstein, has played the role of greta garbo, publicly insisting for the past two months that his company wanted to be alone. behind the scenes, however, his act has been much more mae west, as his company made come-hither phone calls to rival northwest airlines to discuss a possible deal.  mr. grinstein even two-timed delta's staff, who have been proudly sporting red campaign badges that read ''keep delta my delta!'' to rally support to remain independent. the chief of delta's pilots union, lee moak, told the associated press last month, ''there's no talks going on between delta and any other airline.'  mr. grinstein is just the latest executive who, faced with an unsolicited offer, seems to be speaking out of both sides of his mouth. too often, executives seeking to fend off unwanted takeovers make claims that end up looking foolish in hindsight. in their desperate attempt to ward off bidders, executives make every excuse in the book, but rarely say what they really mean: show me the money.  truth, it would seem, is the first casualty in a takeover battle.  meet the corporate pinocchios.  the chief executive of caremark rx, edwin m. crawford, may be next. last week he refused to even negotiate with express scripts, despite its offer being worth about 13 percent more than its current deal to be sold to cvs. mr. crawford called express scripts' bid a ''desperate attempt'' to break up his deal.  that's business speak for ''leave me alone unless you can pay me a lot more money.''  then his logic switch appeared to be turned off as well.  mr. crawford defended his position by asserting that a deal with express scripts ''faces significant, if not insurmountable, antitrust risks.''  it was a classic pinocchio moment. almost no antitrust lawyer worth his $700 an hour believes that an express scripts-caremark combination would be blocked by regulators. except, of course, caremark's lawyers at wachtell, lipton rosen & katz.  mr. crawford has now boxed himself in a classic stretch-the-truth corner. what will mr. crawford say if caremark shareholders vote down its deal with cvs and he is forced to do a deal with express scripts? will the ''antitrust risks'' have gone away? not likely.  if that happens, mr. crawford will be not the only chief executive who later had to eat his words.  when comcast made a hostile bid for at&t's cable unit, its chief executive, c. michael armstrong, hemmed and hawed, saying, ''we have no intention of selling our broadband business.'' of course, by now you know the ending. mr. armstrong very quickly turned around and put the unit up for sale. and he ended up on comcast's board (until he stepped down about a year and a half ago).  and certainly peoplesoft's former chief executive, craig a. conway, knows how bad it tastes to gorge on your own words.  when peoplesoft was under threat from a hostile takeover from oracle in 2003, he came out swinging. ''there is no way in god's good earth that i am going to let peoplesoft be sold to oracle,'' he said at the time.  then he tried to make excuses about why they shouldn't merge; they weren't much better than ''the dog ate my homework.''  he also played the antitrust card to the hilt, contending that no matter how much oracle was willing to pay, it ''doesn't change the fact that it wouldn't be approved by the justice department and european union.''  when a federal court struck down the justice department's case, mr. conway turned around and told his employees that ''antitrust concerns were never the centerpiece, only one of many issues'' that troubled him about a deal with oracle. mr. conway was himself later fired when it emerged that his fibbing had become a bit too much. in his desperation to win over analysts, he told them that all pending orders had been completed when, in fact, they hadn't.  in the end, peoplesoft sold out to oracle. of course, when that deal was announced, peoplesoft had no comment.  dealbook also has a newsletter and a web site, nytimes.com/dealbook, that is updated continuously when markets are open.  dealbook  correction:  january 24, 2007, wednesday  the dealbook column on jan.14 in sunday business, about what some chief executives say during takeover battles, referred incompletely to the position of delta air lines and its chief executive, gerald grinstein, on merger proposals. as the column noted, delta has rejected a takeover offer from us airways and says that it wants to come out of bankruptcy as an independent airline. yet it has also been privately talking with northwest airlines. while mr. grinstein had not publicly commented on reports of the talks with northwest until yesterday, he had indeed said that delta had a fiduciary duty to consider all alternatives, including mergers.  