attack on u.s. embassy revives greek fear of terrorism   the anti-americanism was of a different vintage but still deadly, etched into two somber plaques at the battened-down united states embassy here. starting in december 1975, five embassy employees -- four americans and one greek-american driver -- were killed here by november 17, the leftist greek terrorist group.  now, with a new attack on friday on the embassy -- using an unusually potent weapon, a rocket-propelled grenade -- greeks are grappling with deep uneasiness.  was this a one-time attack?  or was this just the first break in a new wave of leftist violence in greece, now given an updated cause -- and perhaps some conflicted sympathy among ordinary greeks -- amid worldwide anger against united states actions in iraq and its broader fight against terrorism?  ''the strike against the embassy was powerful, audacious, highly symbolic with an imported weapon,'' read an editorial in vima, a leading greek newspaper. ''unfortunately, terrorism is returning, ready to put its dark and damaging stamp on political developments.''  the stakes for greece are high. after several years of relative stability, any revival of violence here could erase the gains made after the successful dismantling of november 17 before the olympic games here in 2004. those gains are vital and real. greece's international image has improved, as have relations with the united states. tourism, the nation's largest money maker, is surging. the number of american tourists has doubled since 2005.  ''for the time being, we're calm,'' said yannis evangelou, president of the hellenic association of travel and tourist agencies. ''this was an isolated, one-off incident by a small group of people who obviously have a bone to pick with the u.s. and its policies.''  ''it doesn't reflect the views of the general public here,'' he added. moreover, he said, ''greece isn't the only country where violent forms of anti-american protests are taking place.''  no one was wounded in the attack on friday, but alarm has been widespread. the damaged united states embassy sits in one of the most heavily protected and patrolled sections of athens, home to other embassies and foreign officials as well.  the weapon, too, was not some crude homemade bomb, but a powerful antitank grenade that, experts say, was either bought on the illegal international arms market or from a foreign militant group that may have also trained greece's new generation of terrorists. it was a chinese design, the greek authorities said saturday, not russian as earlier identified.  ''this is our fear, that they are professionals,'' said christodoulos yiallourides, a professor of international relations at panteion university in athens. ''they are not a group of leftist young people. they are professionals, and they are following a strategy.''  but what they want is still a mystery. greek officials have not yet accepted the claim of responsibility for the friday attack by a marxist group, revolutionary struggle. the group released a proclamation of its aims in late 2005 -- a grab-bag of complaints against globalization, poverty, the european union and an american administration waging an unjust ''war without borders or territorial or national divisions'' against terrorist suspects.  ''we will achieve the eradication of these ills only with the overthrow of the existing system in its entirety,'' the proclamation read.  mary bossis, one of greece's foremost terrorism experts, said revolutionary struggle was worrisome because, unlike november 17, it did not seem to have a coherent political plan. moreover, she said, revolutionary struggle and other new leftist groups seem to have ties to crime, both petty and organized, as the use of the rocket-propelled grenade seemed to show.  ''it seems that these organizations are not really interested in what people think about them,'' she said. ''they are not overthrowing the government. they are just interested in violence.''  she and other experts said the signs of the resurgence of those gropus had been clear for years -- and, she and others charged, were not taken seriously enough by the greek government. since september 2003, revolutionary struggle has claimed responsibility for at least seven attacks, from bombings at a courthouse, bank and police station to an assassination attempt against the culture minister.  ''i expect more attacks,'' ms. bossis added.  the question now, analysts say, is how actively the government of prime minister kostas karamanlis works to prevent other attacks. some experts said an encouraging sign was the immediate appointment of stylianos syros, the former head of the greek antiterrorist squad credited with taking apart november 17, to lead the investigation.  the government, considered generally more friendly to washington than its socialist predecessors, also quickly made clear that it wanted to avoid any deterioration in relations with the american government.  condemnations sounded across the political spectrum, and a foreign ministry spokesman, george koumoutsakos, said he was convinced ''that neither greece's relations with the united states, nor the country's international image would be tarnished by friday's attack.''  that all political parties condemned the attack, he said, ''proved important and useful.''  there seems, too, no small measure of exhaustion with leftist political violence in greece, which still simmers long after similar groups in nations like italy and germany fizzled out.  it appears true despite much irritation with america, from old grievances from american support of the greek military dictatorship; to the feeling that united states has sided against greece on issues like turkey, macedonia and cyprus; to anger, widespread around europe, to american foreign policy since the 9/11 terrorism attacks.  ''we are against american policies but not against americans,'' said george krassias, 19, a pilot trainee, driving past the embassy, pocked with a hole from the grenade. ''this shouldn't have happened.''  