u.s. rebuke to myanmar is defeated by u.n. vetoes   china and russia vetoed an american-drafted resolution on friday calling for the military rulers of myanmar to release all political prisoners, cease attacks on ethnic minorities and speed a transition to democracy.  the vote was 9 to 3 with south africa joining china and russia in opposition, and three other countries, congo republic, indonesia and qatar, abstaining.  the security council's five permanent members -- britain, china, france, russia and the united states -- hold veto power over most resolutions.  china and russia argued that they shared concerns about conditions in myanmar but considered them internal matters that did not constitute threats to international peace and security, the category of crisis subject to security council action.  ''not a single one of the neighboring countries regards the situation in myanmar as a threat to them, and on the basis of that, there were no grounds for the security council to consider the matter,'' said vitaly i. churkin, russia's ambassador.  wang guangya, the chinese ambassador, said, ''of course there are problems in myanmar, but we believe that these problems do not constitute a threat to international peace and security.''  alejandro d. wolff, the acting american ambassador, said he was ''deeply disappointed'' at the outcome but noted even countries voting against the measure made clear in explanatory statements that they were not defending myanmar's government. ''this was a jurisdictional issue behind the split vote here,'' he said. ''there was no disagreement about the content and substance behind this resolution.''  mr. wolff was asked why the united states risked dividing the council and muddling its message to the repressive rulers of myanmar, formerly known as burma.  ''the only mixed message here is whether this issue deserved to be on the security council agenda,'' he said. ''there is no mixed message, no mixed signal at all, about how the international community, how this council feels about the situation in burma.''  the resolution mentioned by name the most prominent political prisoner, daw aung san suu kyi, the nobel peace prize-winning opposition leader, who is under house arrest.  it also accused myanmar's armed forces of attacking and raping civilians from the country's ethnic minorities and causing a refugee crisis in the region, enabling narcotics traffic and permitting international transmission of communicable diseases like h.i.v./aids and avian flu.  r. nicholas burns, the under secretary of state for political affairs, said he had no doubt that the abuses by myanmar posed a threat beyond its borders. ''when a million people flee the country because of the abusive practices of the government, that's a threat to international peace and security,'' he said in a telephone interview from washington.  ''when you have a political movement jailed,'' he said, ''led by a woman who is one of the greatest people in the world, that's a threat to international peace and security.''  he dismissed suggestions that the proper united nations forum for myanmar was the geneva-based human rights council, not the security council. ''we forced this onto the agenda for one reason,'' he said. ''the security council is the only place that can deal with human rights. the human rights council is a discredited institution. all it has done is to bash israel; it has ignored north korea, it has ignored sudan and it has ignored burma.''  after the vote, kyaw tint swe, myanmar's ambassador, thanked china and russia for blocking the move and said the charges against his country in the resolution were ''patently false.''  the double veto was the first multiple veto in the security council since 1989, when britain, france and the united states blocked a resolution on panama.  