habitats/west village; and diggity makes three   no one gets it right the first time. even the second apartment that a novice new yorker inhabits is often a mistake -- tiny, or stinky, or in a dull part of town. but after that, either you wise up and start to figure out what you need in order to feel at home in this city, or there's a good chance you never will, and the next place you live will be somewhere far away from here.  lauren daitch and julianne spehar, both 25, want to stay in new york city forever. ''i love having a roommate who is happy with the city and wants to make a life here,'' said ms. spehar, who is called jules. the two women had talked about living together long before ms. spehar found their current apartment listed online last summer.  ''i just fell in love with it,'' she said of the 1,100-square-foot two-bedroom duplex in a mews near the corner of hudson and leroy streets. she called ms. daitch, whom she had met through mutual friends two or so years earlier and asked her to come see it right away.  ''i always wanted to live in the village,'' said ms. daitch, who was equally smitten with the apartment, and agreed to submit an application with her friend. by september, their names were on the lease.  the rent, which is $3,800 a month, is a bit of a stretch for them. ''we cover it ourselves now,'' ms. spehar said, ''which is something we're pretty proud of. but my mom sometimes helps with the groceries.''  ms. daitch was already familiar with the satisfaction of financial independence. ''there was something very fulfilling about knowing that my parents had cut me off,'' she said, remembering when she first earned her share of the rent for a previous apartment. but in almost every other way, her real estate experiences had been disappointing.  ''i had been living on the upper east side in a fifth-floor walk-up with three other girls,'' she said. ''we had different ideas of living spaces and how to keep them clean. i had a single bed in a tiny room. and i kept about half my clothes in the hallway. i couldn't keep my stuff straight. so much of it got ruined.''  ''i felt like i'd put in my time,'' ms. daitch continued. ''so when this came along, i was ready.''  ms. spehar, meanwhile, had lived through an equally unsustainable situation.  after moving to the city to attend parsons school of design at age 19, she quickly found herself living with a rock-musician boyfriend -- and the rest of his band. and all their girlfriends.  ''we were all together in an apartment with one bathroom,'' she recalled. ''i used to go to the parsons bathroom to put on makeup in the morning. and i would go sit in washington square park when i had to make a phone call.''  on nights when homework assignments kept her up late, ''i'd lie on my stomach on the floor behind the couch, so the light from my computer wouldn't bother anyone.''  from the moment you walk into the women's current apartment, everything announces that they've put that chaos behind them. apart from a giant andy warhol-style poster in the living room, and photographs of bob dylan and john lennon over the dining table, the furnishings are resolutely homey. there's a big pine dining table, a massive antique chest of drawers and a comfy traditional sofa brightened with ethnic pillows.  if furnishings make a statement (as interior decorators say they do), then these announce that, at an age when earlier generations of women would have been feathering their nests, ms. daitch and ms. spehar long to feel grounded, too.  and why shouldn't they? being domestic and being single are no longer incompatible, especially in new york city. the difference is that whereas once a home would have been a base for a growing family, now it's the foundation on which to build a multifaceted, independent life.  the roommates even have a dog named diggity -- diggy for short -- a sociable cavapoo, which is a cross between a cavalier king charles spaniel and a poodle.  although the dog was acquired by ms. spehar, the two women share responsibility for him. ''jules and i are always texting during the day about the dog -- who fed him, who'll be home in time to walk him in the evening,'' ms. daitch said. ''we joke that diggy has two mommies.''  ms. spehar agreed: ''the dog creates a sense of family.''  and like typical new york parents, both of them work. ms. daitch's job as a publicity assistant at simon & schuster occupies her from 9 to 6. ''two or three nights a week, i go straight from my publishing job to a baby-sitting job. i go out with friends almost every other night.''  ms. spehar keeps later, and more solitary, hours. she often stays up far into the night, designing clothes at the worktable in her bedroom, drawing on the computer, or creating something by hand from her cabinet full of ribbons, wire, leather, beads and feathers.  ''i've always been really crafty,'' she said. ''i always wanted to be in fashion but didn't know where. i'm in no rush to design the next hot thing. i'd like to create something that's right, even if it's a much slower process. one thing that frustrates me about the fashion industry is that it's based on change, and sometimes that's forced too early.''  during the day, ms. spehar works at a west village clothing boutique called mick margo. ''i'm happy because this job is the first place where all my skills come into play,'' she said. ''i get to be creative, but i have a good business sense, too. and i'm a perfectionist.''  such self-knowledge may be the key to putting down the kinds of roots that will allow ms. spehar and ms. daitch to thrive in the city for years to come. ''twenty-five is an age when you're a little more sure of who you are,'' ms. spehar said. ''you've done some exploring around, and you know what you need. it was really important to me to have creative space, thinking space.''  finding the right roommate to share it with was equally important. ''lauren is such a considerate person,'' ms. spehar said. ''it's great to have a roommate and also a sense of independence. this is my first apartment that feels like home.''  habitats | west village  