voters who take chances on politicians may get a new way to test their luck   the next time a new jersey resident steps into a voting booth and hopes to pull the lever, think of a one-armed bandit.  under a bill introduced this week by two democratic legislators, everyone who votes in new jersey would be eligible to win more than $1 million in a lottery drawing after an election.  there could be other rewards as well, like even more money or something else valuable.  to make voting even more alluring, anyone who votes in both a primary and the general election would have two chances of winning. voters could conceivably get even more than two shots a year, depending on whether school board, municipal and fire district elections, which are often held on separate dates, would also count.  the goal, said assemblyman patrick j. diegnan jr. of middlesex county, one of the bill's sponsors, is to encourage more people to vote. turnout has been steadily declining in the state, as it has elsewhere, with a record-low 48.5 percent of registered voters actually voting in the 2005 race for governor between jon s. corzine and douglas r. forrester.  and though one of the possible sources for the plan, named the new jersey voter reward program, could be ''money appropriated to the fund,'' according to the bill, mr. diegnan emphasized in an interview that his idea would not cost the taxpayers anything, because it would be financed by unclaimed lottery prizes.  ''people say, 'oh gee, it's trivializing the voting,' '' mr. diegnan said. ''i say just the opposite. anything we can do to call attention and get people to vote, we should consider it. my purpose is really to bring some excitement to it.''  voters should not start counting their money just yet, however. arizona voters rejected a similar idea in november, and the odds in new jersey, where a popular vote presumably would not be needed, are uncertain.  both mr. corzine and senate president richard j. codey reacted coolly to the idea, and a spokesman for the assembly speaker, joseph j. roberts jr., said that he would not comment until he had talked to the sponsors.  the leaders of the state democratic and republican parties also seemed unimpressed by the plan.  but some republicans could not resist getting in a dig. a few suggested that the proposal was merely an election-year ploy designed to divert attention from the democrats' struggles to pass a property tax reform package. others suggested that the idea would benefit democratic candidates because, they maintained, more democrats than republicans play the lottery.  ''this is nothing new,'' mark p. campbell, a republican political consultant, said in jest. ''democrats have been paying people to vote for decades.''  