2 missing boys are found near st. louis   when the police entered an apartment near st. louis yesterday looking for a 13-year-old boy who had disappeared 60 miles away on monday, they found him and a bonus: another missouri teenager who had been missing for more than four years.  officers found william ownby, who vanished after stepping off a school bus in beaufort on monday afternoon, and shawn hornbeck, a 15-year-old who was last seen riding a bicycle near his home in richwoods in october 2002, inside the rental apartment, in kirkwood, mo.  sheriff gary toelke of franklin county told reporters that both boys appeared dazed but unharmed.  officers arrested michael devlin, 41, who lived in the apartment, and charged him with one count of first-degree kidnapping. mr. devlin was being held on $1 million bond.  robert parks, the prosecuting attorney of franklin county, told reporters that mr. devlin had confessed to the crime and added that more charges were likely to be filed in the case.  sheriff toelke said officers were questioning mr. devlin, who worked as a pizza-delivery dispatcher and on the overnight shift in a funeral home, to try to determine a motive behind the abductions. mr. devlin's name was not found in a check of the missouri highway patrol's registry of sex offenders. similarly, a search of missouri court records revealed no criminal history.  in beaufort, family and friends of william, a boy scout known as ben, had been conducting a full-scale search yesterday for the boy. he was last seen dashing home from the school bus on monday. a schoolmate told the authorities that he saw a dilapidated white pickup truck with a camper shell speeding away from the spot.  an intense hunt ensued in rural franklin county. members of the ownby family appeared on television to make tearful appeals for the boy's return. community members plastered fliers throughout the area and ventured out on foot, horseback and all-terrain vehicles looking for clues.  the break in the case came thursday evening when two kirkwood police officers, out to serve a warrant at the apartment complex where mr. devlin lived, spotted a white truck that matched the description, sheriff toelke said. the blocklong single-story complex is just off interstate 44 near a collection of industrial buildings.  the kirkwood police contacted the franklin county sheriff's department, located mr. devlin's address and returned the next day to find ben and, to their surprise, shawn hornbeck, in the apartment, he said.  sheriff toelke said that shawn identified himself to officers when they entered the home. he had disappeared on oct. 6, 2002, when he was 11. his parents had reported him missing after he rode to a friend's house on a lime-green mountain bike wearing a little league jersey but never arrived.  ben, who was wearing a red shirt and jeans yesterday, appeared somewhat dazed when he was reunited with his family around 5 p.m. at the sheriff's office, sheriff toelke said. he added that shawn's parents were coming to meet their son at the same location.  ''there are a lot of things we don't know right now,'' he said.  at imo's pizza in kirkwood, where mr. devlin worked, a manager declined to comment. at the bopp chapel, where he worked the overnight shift, susan waterman, a funeral director, declined to comment on the situation, saying the chapel would release a statement today.  