a.m.d., in price war with intel, warns of disappointing revenue   in the turf war that has come to characterize the computer chip market, advanced micro devices, appears to have stumbled in the fourth quarter.  a.m.d., the second-largest maker of the microprocessors, issued a warning late thursday that its fourth-quarter revenue would miss wall street's forecasts because of lower unit prices, signaling that the price war between a.m.d. and its main rival, intel, had taken its toll.  on friday, shares of a.m.d fell $1.92, to $18.26. shares of intel rose 21 cents, to $22.13.  a.m.d., based in sunnyvale, calif., said that it expected fourth-quarter revenue to increase about 3 percent, or about $1.37 billion, over the third quarter. fourth-quarter operating income, the company said, ''is expected to be positive but substantially lower than the third quarter.''  in october, analysts forecast a.m.d.'s fourth-quarter sales would be about $1.44 billion, excluding revenue gained from its $5.4 billion acquisition of ati. a.m.d. executives said at the time that they expected a ''seasonally strong'' fourth quarter, which included the holiday shopping season.  the chip maker said its fourth quarter gross margin and operating income were hurt by lower average selling prices, though unit sales rose over all.  a.m.d. plans to issue its fourth-quarter earnings report on jan. 23 after the close of regular trading.  in the last few years, a.m.d. has managed to gain market share, as the market leader, intel, has struggled to revamp its product line. the threat of competition led intel to lay off more than 10,000 employees and cut costs sharply last year.  yet in recent months intel has staged something of a comeback, and in october, the company's chief financial officer, andy d. bryant, told analysts that he thought intel had begun to win back market share.  after a.m.d.'s revised forecast, several wall street investment firms lowered their outlooks. bear stearns sharply cut its rating on the company, while citigroup downgraded a.m.d. to hold, from buy.  mark lipacis, an analyst with prudential, which also lowered its rating, wrote in a research note that he did not expect the price war to be resolved anytime soon. but, mr. lipacis said he believed that computer makers want a strong second supplier of chips and that he expected a.m.d. to continue to take unit share from intel this year.  ''a.m.d.'s share is near the highest levels that it has ever been at,'' mr. lipacis said, ''and it seems that the company has gained enough critical mass in the market to weather downturns better than it historically has.''  the weakness appears to be solidly in a.m.d.'s server business, analysts said, the part of the market where a.m.d. has gained the most share from intel.  an analyst at bear stearns, gurinder kalra, said he expected further pricing pressure as a.m.d. tries to prevent intel from ''clawing back'' share.  