for many, king's birthday is just another workday   in the 21 years since the rev. dr. martin luther king jr.'s birthday became a national holiday, the embrace it has received from employers has been less of a bear hug than a polite handshake followed gradually by an arm around the shoulders.  business leaders in new york city say most big companies will honor the king holiday on monday by making it a paid holiday for their workers. but some local transit agencies said there were still too many people commuting to work on dr. king's birthday for them to treat it like most other national holidays.  the long island rail road and new jersey transit will operate a regular weekday schedule of trains into and out of the city because a holiday schedule would be inadequate to meet demand, their representatives said. the long island rail road expects 40 percent of its usual weekday ridership on monday and new jersey transit is prepared for more than half. path trains and new york city buses and subways will also operate on regular schedules.  new jersey transit learned the hard way that acceptance of the holiday would take time. the railroad shifted to a holiday schedule in 1986, the first year of the holiday, but ''it did not go well,'' said dan stessel, a spokesman for the agency.  back then, most financial companies continued operating on the king holiday because the new york stock exchange was holding a full day of trading. the exchange did not begin closing on the holiday until 1998, under pressure from the rev. jesse l. jackson and his rainbow/push wall street project to offer more opportunities to minorities.  but even though dr. king's birthday is a day off for the federal government and almost all banks and all of wall street, most employers still treat it as a working day, according to the bureau of national affairs.  an annual survey by the bureau found that just 33 percent of employers nationwide intended to give all or most of their workers a paid holiday on monday, up from 31 percent last year. but more than a third of those employers were nonbusiness entities, such as government agencies and nonprofits, the majority of which said they would observe the holiday.  those numbers surprised kathryn s. wylde, the chief executive of the new york city partnership. ms wylde said on friday that she had spent much of the day trying to schedule a meeting for monday but everybody she contacted told her they would be taking the day off, even executives of small, private investment firms.  ''my sense is that, far more than in the past, it is a holiday,'' ms. wylde said. ''i really don't know of any of the major companies that are not closing.''  timing is one factor working against the holiday, which falls on the third monday of the year. this year it comes on the earliest possible date, jan. 15, and less than two weeks after the national day of mourning for gerald r. ford extended the new year's weekend to four days for many workers.  in the accounting business, this is no time to be resting. at the manhattan headquarters of pricewaterhousecoopers, dr. king's birthday is a ''floating holiday,'' one of several workers can choose to take off during the year. but dave nestor, a spokesman for the firm, said that most employees would be at their desks on monday and some celebratory events would take place in the building.  employees at skadden, arps, slate, meagher & flom, a large law firm, can choose two floating holidays from among several, including the king holiday, passover, good friday and columbus day. but at sidley austin, another big law firm in manhattan, employees are encouraged to observe the holiday, according to an executive at the firm.  the mixture of messages from employers has kept transit agencies guessing. a few years ago, new jersey transit tried again to adjust its schedule, shifting to an ''enhanced weekend schedule.'' that, too, proved to be insufficient to handle all the people who were still heading to work, mr. stessel said.  but metro-north railroad, which serves commuters in the northern suburbs, said a ''beefed-up saturday schedule'' has proved adequate for martin luther king's birthday. it said its ridership on the holiday last year was less than 30 percent of a normal weekday's load.  