it's all happening downstairs   what with the vast, labyrinthine subway system, building superintendents who live in basement apartments and businesses squeezed into microscopic spaces down narrow stairs, new yorkers may spend more time underground than anyone else in america, with the possible exception of fallout-shelter inspectors.  for much of the year, that can be a bad thing: spring is sidewalk-cafe time, summer is escape-to-the-beach time and fall is play-in-the-park time. winter, however, when our side of the planet shyly ducks away from the sun for much of the day, is the perfect time to go underground.  and though in recent years the city may have lost some of its reputation for underground activities of the figurative variety, there are still plenty of literal underground places to go.  since, generally speaking, basements are known for being dank and dark, a good place to start your new york weekend underground is on friday night in decibel, an east village sake bar and restaurant. the place is claustrophobic with a hint of fish in the air -- but in a good way. it attracts a partly young, partly asian crowd, some of whom can tell their junmai-type sake from their honjozo from their ginjo, and others who are willing to stare at a menu and pretend they can tell before picking at random.  for those who want to eat underground -- but hold the dank -- the dining concourse at grand central terminal may be the world's greatest food court. (which is kind of like being the world's biggest chihuahua.) it has all the variety of new york city restaurants and none of the fast-food chains, pervasive deep-fried smell and steam tables of gloop-covered chicken. instead, it's a local scene: slices from two boots pizza, cheesecake cupcakes from the little pie company and pulled pork from brother jimmy's bbq.  but you didn't come to new york just to eat. the arts thrive below the earth's surface here, too, beginning with the subway, by definition underground (except for the parts that are elevated, which are still called the subway, but let's not be picky). these days, art is pretty inescapable in the subway system; if you don't believe it, just check out the mta's arts for transit web site (www.mta.info/mta/aft). to give a few examples, get off the subway at bloomingdale's and you'll catch elizabeth murray's colorful glass mosaics called ''blooming''; in times square, you've got the pop art master roy lichtenstein; down at the main canal street stop there's bing lee's ceramic tiles; and a bronze wall relief by harry roseman is at wall street.  running second to the subway system for underground art? the dahesh museum of art, featuring european academic art of the 19th and 20th centuries, with a specialty in orientalism. the museum's cafe and gift shop may be aboveground, but it's down the stairs you go for the real thing.  subterranean night life and entertainment is as varied as you want it to be. even carnegie hall has an underground space, zankel hall, a 600-seat concert theater. for movies, where darkness is a significant asset, there's the lincoln plaza cinemas on the upper west side, one of the city's top spots for foreign films. for comedy, there's the comedy cellar in greenwich village. and for jazz, just try to find a place that's aboveground. the classic village vanguard isn't, nor is smalls, which closed in 2003 but has reopened. the bar next door is a more recent arrival to the ''it's down here!'' scene. more for dancing than hanging out is cafe wha?, where the house band plays classic rock and r&b down below.  for those who prefer their underground drinking without live music, there is no lack of spots. double happiness on mott street has a dungeon-like vibe (again, in a good way) with all kinds of hidden nooks and d.j.'s spinning eclectic low-key music that ranges from vintage soul to britpop. a step up on the glitz (but not altitude) scale takes you to pravda, a popular, once-massively-fashionable spot that features vaguely soviet-era décor and house-infused vodkas that range from peach to chili-and-horseradish.  and a double step up leads to the g spa & lounge in the basement of the gansevoort hotel. by day, the spa offers pricey facials, massages, pedicures and waxing, and by night similarly pricey drinks like mojitos for $15. not expensive enough? don't worry, they'll tack on an automatic 20 percent service charge.  for some, the one drawback to spending a weekend underground will be that you can't always get a reliable cellphone signal, which could make it difficult to meet up with people or give friends back home the play-by-play of how great life in underground new york can be. but that's o.k.: catch up with them on your drive out of town. the lincoln, holland and midtown tunnels don't have much to offer in the way of art, and it is illegal to drink while driving through them. but they do have dependable cellphone service.  below the sidewalks  decibel, 240 east ninth street between second and third avenues, (212) 979-2733.  dahesh museum of art, 580 madison avenue between 56th and 57th streets, (212) 759-0606; www.daheshmuseum.org.  zankel hall at carnegie hall, 881 seventh avenue at 57th street, (212) 903-9600; www.carnegiehall.org.  lincoln plaza cinemas, 1886 broadway between 62nd and 63rd streets, (212) 757-2280.  comedy cellar, 117 macdougal street, between west third street and minetta lane, (212) 254-3480; www.comedycellar.com.  village vanguard, 178 seventh avenue south near west 11th street, (212) 255-4037; www.villagevanguard.com.  smalls, 183 west 10th street near seventh avenue, (212) 675-7369; www.fatcatjazz.com.  bar next door, 129 macdougal street between west third and west fourth streets, (212) 529-5945; www.lalanternacaffe.com.  cafe wha?, 115 macdougal street between bleecker and west third streets, (212) 254-3706; www.cafewha.com.  double happiness, 173 mott street near broom street, (212) 941-1282.  pravda, 281 lafayette street between prince and houston streets, (212) 226-4944.  g spa at the hotel gansevoort, 18 ninth avenue at 13th street, (212) 206-6700; www.hotelgansevoot.com.  weekend in new york | underground  