team needs some players who are pillars   in the state of the giants address yesterday by the team's co-owners, john mara and jonathan tisch, mara mentioned how ''the players we have spoken to overwhelmingly'' supported retaining tom coughlin as coach. but the more serious issue is that none of those players resemble the locker-room pillars that made the giants an elite pro football team in two glorious eras.  when the giants were winning super bowls xxi and xxv, coach bill parcells could depend on harry carson and george martin and, later, on lawrence taylor and phil simms to solve any locker-room problems.  despite l. t.'s reputation for wild off hours, when a carousing teammate arrived at the giants' hotel only 15 minutes before curfew one night before a playoff game, l. t. chewed him out. that's a locker-room pillar.  when the giants won the 1956 n.f.l. title and evolved into eastern conference champions in five of six seasons from 1958 to 1963, the coaches, jim lee howell and allie sherman, relied on andy robustelli, frank gifford, charlie conerly and then y. a. tittle to police the locker room.for whatever changes coughlin makes in his coaching staff and whatever supposedly better players the yet-to-be-named new general manager acquires through free agency and the draft, coughlin needs two or three locker-room pillars whom he can trust and who trust him.  over coughlin's three seasons, tiki barber and michael strahan appeared to be the obvious pillars in the locker room, but sometimes that was a mirage.  for all his yards as the best running back in franchise history, barber griped after the 23-0 playoff loss to carolina a year ago about how the giants had been ''somewhat outcoached,'' an unnecessary public slap at coughlin. that's not a locker-room pillar.  midway through this season, barber complained that he felt insignificant after having rushed for 27 yards on only 10 carries against jacksonville, an unnecessary public slap at the play caller, john hufnagel. that's not a locker-room pillar.  for all his sacks as an all-pro pass rusher, strahan never seemed devoted to coughlin. at coughlin's first minicamp in 2004, strahan was the loudest objector to his strenuous schedule -- too strenuous, the players union decreed. but coming off a 4-12 season, that was no way for a supposed locker-room pillar to greet a new coach.  when the giants began tumbling into their 1-6 tailspin this season, strahan bullied an espn reporter -- hardly befitting a supposed locker-room pillar for a franchise that prides itself on dignity.  now with barber retiring, at least one of the supposed locker-room pillars won't even be around, and the 35-year-old strahan is a battered player. he missed six games and half of two more with a foot injury; in 2004, a torn chest muscle limited him to eight games. no matter how glorious his résumé, if another injury benches strahan, he's no longer even a possible pillar.  of the other current giants, the most likely candidates to emerge as locker-room pillars for coughlin are linebacker antonio pierce and center shaun o'hara.  more than one player has described pierce as ''the heart of the defense,'' and o'hara is a respected voice of reason. the day strahan blew up, that same espn reporter kept trying to get o'hara to comment on strahan's radio-show criticism of wide receiver plaxico burress. but o'hara wisely kept saying: ''i don't talk about other players. i don't talk about other players.''  then again, o'hara may be a pillar in another team's locker room. with the outgoing general manager, ernie accorsi, unable to sign him so far, o'hara may depart as a free agent.  any coach would like his quarterback to be a locker-room pillar, as simms was for parcells, and maybe eli manning will grow into that role. but at 26, in what will be his fourth season, he doesn't seem ready to be that assertive. simms wasn't ready in his early years, but he grew into it. if a receiver didn't run his pass pattern correctly or a lineman missed a block, simms was known to growl, ''do that again and i'll get you traded.''  that's how the best quarterbacks rule a huddle, and a locker room.  in his teleconference yesterday, coughlin spoke about how manning needed to play more consistently and how ''we know the talent is there because we've seen him bring us down the field.'' the likelihood of a new offensive coordinator or a new quarterback tutor should help manning's development. so may a psychologist who can bring him out of his shell.  during a conversation with eli's father, archie, about eli's reticence as a rookie, archie said, ''you don't get much out of eli.''  archie manning meant ''much'' information or small talk. the giants would agree. they've gotten a 19-13 record and two playoff berths out of eli's two full seasons as the starter since he was the overall no. 1 choice in 2004, but the giants haven't gotten as much as they would like. and nowhere near as much as they hope they will.  eli manning doesn't have to be a locker-room pillar next season. but two or three other giants do.  sports of the times  