in the region/westchester; art house to get a campus   in 2001, when the three-screen 18,500-square-foot jacob burns film center opened on manville road here, it was a much-welcomed addition to this sleepy suburban village, which had a handful of pizza parlors, several restaurants and one or two bars, but little else in the way of entertainment. even the rome theater, the old single-screen movie house, a 1925 spanish mission-style structure that the burns center took over, had been shuttered for 14 years.  now, building on five years of success, the film center, a nonprofit organization, has broken ground on a new $12 million 25,000-square-foot media and education center that is scheduled to open in 2008.  the two-story slate, concrete and glass structure is being built on two lots about a block up the street from the film center, where an empty print shop, the higham press, which once did printing jobs for reader's digest, now stands.  stephen apkon, the founder and executive director of the burns film center, said the construction site, at 405 manville road, was chosen for its proximity to the movie theater, which is at no. 364. ''our idea was to have the new facility as close to the theater as possible to create a campus environment in the village,'' he explained.  the organization acquired higham press's property two years ago for $1 million and the second lot for $500,000. together, the lots encompass about 12,000 square feet.  the new modernistic-style building will have five classrooms, including a 55-seat master classroom for film and video projection; an animation room, where small sets can be built and cartoon cels created; three editing suites and a large open editing station; a recording studio with an isolation booth; a 1,000-square-foot soundstage; and workshop space for set designing. the facilities would be used by school groups and adult continuing-education programs.  the theater has three screens: one with a 250-seat capacity; a second with 140 seats; and a third with 70.  a large reception space on the third floor is used for special events and receptions, panel discussions and lectures, which in the past have featured filmmakers, actors, scholars, critics and writers, including woody allen, john travolta, meryl streep, ang lee and george clooney.  the center also presents programs in conjunction with the film society of lincoln center and offers highlights from the new york film festival and foreign film festivals, as well as a regular schedule of revivals, documentaries and independent and first-run art films.  a capital campaign is under way to raise $20 million -- $15 million of it for the new building and equipment, the rest for educational programs and an endowment fund. so far, $12 million has been raised.  every year, some 15,000 local students in grades 3 through 12 take part in the film center's educational programs, and the plan for the new media and education center is that it will also offer adult programs in critical viewing and filmmaking.  janet maslin, a book critic for the new york times and formerly a film critic for the newspaper, is president of the jacob burns board. other board members include the director jonathan demme, who is the host of a monthly series at the burns on rarely seen movies, and the actor and director ron howard.  in response to the desire of the jacob burns board for environmentally sensitive construction, kaeyer, garment & davidson architects of mount kisco has designed the new media center with aluminum and glass energy-efficient windows, a geothermal heating system and photovoltaic solar panels on the roof.  before any new construction begins, however, contractors must demolish the run-down 60-year-old two-story former printing structure. in keeping with procedures for green construction, steel and concrete from that building will be recycled for use in future projects, said erik a. kaeyer, a principal with the architecture firm overseeing design of the new center. only plastics and synthetics that cannot be recycled will end up in landfills, he said.  ''for the past couple of years, clients have been asking for this kind of construction,'' said mr. kaeyer, whose firm has designed many westchester buildings, including the new york state judicial institute at pace university law school in white plains.  ''i don't know whether it was the al gore movie, the news that the polar ice cap cracked or the warm winter we're having,'' he said, ''but people are finally starting to believe what the scientists have been worried about for a long time.''  in keeping with another element of green construction, the architects' plans for the new media center make extensive use of materials that can be obtained locally.  one major exception is the australian slate that will be used for the building's southern exterior, where it will oxidize over time to a rust color. that side also differs from the rest of the mostly rectangular building in that it has been designed with a sharp curve.  the goal of the rounded design, according to mr. kaeyer, is to open up sight lines at manville road and marble avenue, an increasingly busy corner of the village, where congestion is expected to worsen when the new center opens. the curve has the effect of making the sidewalk wider than it would be at a regular corner.  ''it is a nod to better urban planning for both pedestrians and autos,'' he said.  in many ways, the increased traffic in the village has had a positive effect on local commercial real estate, according to sam archie, a real estate broker for century 21 haviland in pleasantville and an owner of 7,000 square feet of storefronts next to the theater.  the village was pockmarked with empty storefronts in the late 1990s, mr. archie said, but now it is thriving.  it is estimated that more than 200,000 people visit pleasantville each year to attend events at the burns center, often window-shopping on their way from a nearby parking lot and dining at local establishments before and after the show.  as a result, annual rents for storefronts in the downtown have risen to $25 a square foot or more, up from about $18 a square foot six years ago. in addition, landlords now often draw up triple net leases, requiring that commercial tenants pay the taxes and insurance on their stores as well as the rent.  residential real estate has also benefited, mr. archie said, noting that many for-sale listings advertise that a home is within walking distance of the jacob burns film center.  in the region | westchester  correction:  january 21, 2007, sunday  an ''in the region'' article in westchester, connecticut and manhattan copies last sunday, about plans for a new media and education building at the jacob burns film center in pleasantville, referred incorrectly to programs offered by the center. it no longer presents programs in conjunction with the film society of lincoln center.  