gophers don't go far in search for top players   the pull that the university of minnesota men's hockey program exerts on many of the state's top high school players is such that after erik johnson and kyle okposo were selected first and seventh in the n.h.l. draft in june, both chose to delay their pro careers in favor of playing for the gophers.  they said that their youth -- they are 18 -- played a role in their decisions. the chance to fulfill a dream they shared with thousands of boys statewide proved irresistible. johnson, whose father has gophers season tickets, made a historic decision by declining to sign with the st. louis blues as the league's no. 1 draft pick. no top selection had ever played college hockey instead of signing with an n.h.l. team.  ''it's part of the fabric of everything around there,'' said john davidson, the blues' president of hockey operations, who supported johnson's decision.  minnesota is the state's marquee college hockey team. its popularity predates the current coach, don lucia, and even herb brooks, who won three n.c.a.a. titles with the gophers before leading the 1980 olympic team to a gold medal in legendary fashion. the gophers regularly have capacity crowds at the 10,000-seat mariucci arena, and most of their games are televised.  though lucia has signed players from elsewhere, like the austrian wing thomas vanek (now of the buffalo sabres), and grant and ryan potulny, from north dakota, all of his current players are minnesotans -- except goalie kellen briggs, who is from colorado springs. the homegrown group may be part of the best gophers team of all.  since a season-opening loss to maine, minnesota (19-1-3) has run off a team-record 22-game unbeaten streak to earn a unanimous no. 1 ranking in both major college polls. that includes three victories in late december and early january without okposo, johnson and three others who won a bronze medal with the united states team at the world junior championship in sweden.  this is minnesota's strongest bid for a national title since winning championships under lucia in 2002 and 2003. no western collegiate hockey association team has ever gone undefeated in conference play. the gophers (11-0-3) are halfway there but face defending n.c.a.a. champion wisconsin in madison in a two-game series beginning friday.  ''they're deep; they're good,'' davidson said of minnesota in a telephone interview. ''obviously, we're hoping they get into the frozen four.'' it will be played in st. louis in april.  for decades, minnesota rarely looked beyond the state's borders for players. john mariucci, the coach for whom the hockey arena is named, insisted on home-bred talent during his tenure, from 1952 to 1966. that philosophy stayed mostly true and successful until lucia's arrival in 1999.  but lucia, himself a minnesotan, realized times had changed. with many more teams playing division i hockey and recruiting players the gophers formerly had to themselves, minnesota needed to adapt.  some gophers faithful were aghast when lucia recruited grant potulny from grand forks, n.d., across the red river from minnesota. but potulny became a gophers captain and scored the overtime goal to beat maine, 4-3, in the 2002 n.c.a.a. final.  ''i had a person e-mail me before that, saying we were one player away from winning a national title -- meaning we had one player from outside the state, and we shouldn't have that player,'' lucia said. ''after grant scored that goal, i got an e-mail from that person saying he was wrong and he guessed it was a good thing.''  the parameters have limits, though. many universities recruit canadians with junior hockey experience, but lucia chooses not to.  ''my philosophy has been, since i've come here, that we're always going to recruit minnesota first,'' lucia said. ''we're still going to maybe have to supplement our roster with some outside players if in fact we don't have that type of player within our state. but we're in the midst right now of another good run of players.''  that includes a stellar nine-member freshman class, the so-called 88s, after their birth year. headed by johnson, a defenseman, and okposo, a forward, the group's 42 goals and 99 points account for almost 40 percent of minnesota's scoring.  the 6-foot-4, 220-pound johnson, from the minneapolis suburb of bloomington, led united states scorers at the junior tournament with 10 points and was named the tournament's best defenseman. okposo, the first african-american to play for the gophers, leads the team with 15 goals.  okposo, a st. paul native whose parents are both minnesota graduates, was such a big gopher fan he kept trading cards of jordan leopold, ryan kraft and other minnesota players on his nightstand.  ''i memorized their stats,'' he said. ''i just wanted to be a gopher my whole life.''  okposo, a 6-2, 200-pounder who was drafted by the islanders, has been compared to the skillful yet tough former boston bruin forward cam neely.  one of okposo's goals -- after a spectacular between-the-legs move at minnesota state on dec. 2 -- was featured on youtube.com. moving right to left, okposo slipped the puck behind him before reaching back to lift it past goalie mike zacharias.  ''it didn't amaze me that he could do it, because he does so many crazy things with the puck,'' johnson said. ''it amazed me that he tried it in a real game. when i saw it, i was like, 'he didn't just do that.' he's got a lot of tricks up his sleeve.''  in all, 14 gophers -- all minnesotans -- are n.h.l. draft picks. with that depth the gophers could withstand the loss of the senior forward tyler hirsch, the team's leading scorer two years ago, whom lucia dismissed from the team last month. ''you're representing not only the university, but also kind of representing the state as well,'' said the gophers' captain mike vannelli, whose father, tom, played on two of brooks's n.c.a.a. title teams. ''it gives an extra sense of pride.''  hockey  