new setting can't quiet talk of steroids   a day after being elected to the baseball hall of fame, cal ripken and tony gwynn reflected fondly upon their careers during a news conference at a manhattan hotel yesterday. but for the second consecutive day, the issue of steroids, and mark mcgwire, arose, following them like a tin can attached to a car.  ripken and gwynn retired after the 2001 season, meaning their first year of eligibility for the hall coincided with mcgwire's first year. which means they have been left to answer questions about steroids and mcgwire, whose candidacy fared badly among the 545 baseball writers who cast ballots and who reacted badly to his suspected link to steroid use.  ripken and gwynn started off the day with a formal news conference in front of television cameras and were asked about a dozen questions about themselves, their best baseball memories and their feelings about being elected to the hall of fame.  but when they met later in a more informal setting with fewer reporters, the subjects of steroids and mcgwire came up again, as they did tuesday, when both former players spoke on conference calls in the wake of their election to the hall.  yesterday, gwynn spoke more about steroids than did ripken, who said, ''i think it's an important issue to be examined all the way around, but i just don't think it's my place to be the person examining that.''  gwynn was less restrained. in the tuesday conference call, he said that ''we all knew'' of players who used steroids in the years when use of such performance-enhancing drugs was rampant and that ''we didn't say anything about it.''  he was asked yesterday if, looking back, he wished he had done something different during a 20-year career with the san diego padres  ''what could we do?'' gwynn said. ''no player wants to be that guy to alienate himself from the rest of them.  ''i think players at that point were kind of trying to figure out what to do,'' he added. ''and at that point -- i said it yesterday -- i truly believe that a lot of people suspected, but you really didn't know how to go about it. to me, the game's in much better shape now because now you have rules.''  gwynn was referring to the testing and penalties that have been introduced into major league baseball in recent seasons and toughened on several occasions.  the past two days do not mark the first time that gwynn has spoken openly about the use of performance-enhancing substances in baseball. in 2003, he estimated that 50 percent of position players in the major leagues were using amphetamines, a substance that baseball now also tests for.  ''i don't know if we'll ever get to that point where there will be a test where you could test for everything,'' gwynn said.  ripken, who played in a record 2,632 consecutive games during a 21-year career with the baltimore orioles, said yesterday that he would be interested in buying the orioles if they ever went on the market. he also said he did not recall steroid use being that widespread.  ''sure, there were some suspicious signs, but there's no way that i thought that it was rampant through the league,'' he said. ''i thought maybe there was a few isolated cases.''  for his part, gwynn said the questions about steroids had not tarnished the past two days and his jubilation about being elected to the hall.  ''there's, like, a gigantic halo over my head right now,'' gwynn said. ''i'm just, like, in heaven.''  baseball  