maureen orcutt, early woman golfer and sportswriter, dies at 99   maureen orcutt, one of the nation's outstanding golfers for almost a half-century and one of the first women to become a sportswriter, died tuesday in durham, n.c. she was 99.  her death was confirmed by her lawyer, richard hatch.  starting in 1922, orcutt won more than 65 major tournaments. her first of 10 metropolitan amateur championships came at age 19 and her last at 61. her last title of any kind was a club championship in durham, n.c., when she was 82.  from 1932 to 1938, orcutt played on the united states team in the first four curtis cup matches against british amateurs. she was the runner-up for the united states amateur title in 1927 and 1936.  in her prime, there was no women's professional tour and only a handful of female pros, notably babe didriksen zaharias. once, when orcutt beat zaharias in an exhibition, zaharias was so upset that she stalked off without paying a $10 bet.  orcutt also played in exhibitions with the best male professionals. she was barely in her 20s when walter hagen, the celebrated pro, arrived in augusta, ga., and learned she would be his partner in an exhibition.  ''i would get a lady golfer,'' hagan said sarcastically. orcutt overheard him.  ''i didn't say anything,'' she once recalled. ''but the next day, i carried hagen for nine holes and we won.''  in friendly matches, she hit off the back tees used by men, and with her solid build she usually outdrove them, averaging 240 yards with wood-shaft clubs.  orcutt was born april 1, 1907, in new york city. her father was benjamin sinclair orcutt, a mayflower descendant who was the assistant sunday editor of the new york times and later an associate editor of the wall street journal. her mother was elizabeth kelly orcutt, a prominent golfer.  for their daughter's seventh birthday, they gave her a cut-down hickory-shafted mashie niblick (now called a no. 7 iron). at 12, for the first time, orcutt counted her strokes for an 18-hole round. she shot 128 (it would be her highest score), but she was hardly dismayed.  a year later, she told her mother, ''if you can be runner-up for the club championship, i can win it.''  her mother replied: ''you are a fresh brat. if you can beat me, i'll give you my golf clubs and my membership at the club.''  orcutt then borrowed her father's clubs, played her mother and won the match, the clubs and the club membership. her mother never played golf again.  at englewood high school in new jersey, orcutt started winning golf tournaments and was also captain of the girls' basketball team. in her first year at new york university, she injured a knee in gym class. a doctor advised her to recuperate in the heat of florida and play golf there. she did and never went back to college.  when she returned to new york, she covered women's golf for the new york journal, the new york evening world, the north american newspaper alliance, golf illustrated and the national golf review.  in 1935, she married john d. crews, a miami investment-bond broker. they were divorced in 1937 and had no children. she had no immediate survivors.  it was 1937 when orcutt began covering women's golf and writing a column called ''women in sports'' for the new york times. for years, she was the only woman among some 50 men in the sports department.  all the while she continued to play in tournaments. among orcutt's 65 victories were 10 women's new jersey association championships, 7 women's eastern match-play titles, 6 new jersey amateurs, 5 metropolitan seniors, 3 north and south amateurs, 2 united states seniors and 2 canadian amateurs.  in 1969, she received the first tanqueray award for contributions to amateur sports. she was elected to the world golf hall of fame and the new york sports hall of fame.  after retiring from the times in 1972, she moved to durham, where the mild winters allowed her to play golf year-round. at age 69, she had a hole in one.  