3,000 tests for amphetamines, but only bonds is in the spotlight   the statement was not a direct admission of guilt. but the 64 words attached to barry bonds's name last night will probably be viewed as an acknowledgment by the embattled 42-year-old outfielder that he indeed tested positive for amphetamines at some point in 2006, thus raising questions about his status for 2007.  in his statement, bonds did not dispute an assertion in yesterday's daily news that he had tested positive for the first time last season, an infraction that calls for follow-up tests but does not provide for a suspension or the disclosure of his name.  but now bonds's name is out, along with a separate assertion in the daily news that when he was first notified of the positive test he tried to pass the blame to a giants teammate, the utility player mark sweeney, saying he had taken a substance from sweeney's locker.  it was sweeney who was the focus of bonds's statement last night, with bonds calling him ''both my teammate and my friend.''  ''he did not give me anything whatsoever and has nothing to do with this matter, contrary to recent reports,'' the statement said. ''i want to express my deepest apologies, especially to mark and his family as well as my other teammates, the san francisco giants organization and the fans.''  the statement does not directly deny that bonds might have originally pointed to sweeney as the source of his problem. that could create continuing problems for bonds within a giants clubhouse in which he has long operated by his own rules.  bonds's criminal lawyer, michael rains, said his client was in los angeles yesterday, meeting with his agent, jeff borris, to discuss security issues surrounding the 2007 season, one in which bonds will need 22 home runs to pass hank aaron for the career home run mark.  bonds is already a highly controversial figure, currently under investigation by a federal grand jury in connection with the bay area laboratory co-operative steroid-distribution case. although bonds has reached a $16 million preliminary contract agreement with the giants for 2007, it has not been completed, and it is conceivable that the giants may attempt to walk away from the deal.  barry axelrod, the agent for sweeney, confirmed yesterday in a telephone interview that sweeney had been contacted last season and advised that his name had been brought up in connection ''with something involving bonds.''  who contacted sweeney? ''i wasn't privy to the conversation,'' axelrod said. ''he was contacted. i don't know if it was baseball or the union. we didn't get into the nature of the call. it was, 'your name came up, hopefully, you don't have anything that would cause you problems.' he said he didn't.''  if bonds did test positive for amphetamines, it was as one of approximately 3,000 tests that baseball conducted last season for the stimulant, which has long been part of baseball's culture. last season was the first time that baseball tested for amphetamines, with each player on the 40-man rosters of the 30 major league teams tested at least twice, and others tested more than that because of the 580 additional random tests provided for in the agreement between baseball and the players association. under the agreement, players who tested positive a first time would receive counseling and six follow-up tests over the next 12 months. any player who tested positive twice would be publicly identified and suspended for 25 games.  in 2006, no player tested positive twice, so no one was punished. but if bonds tested positive once, how many other players did, too? that answer is not publicly known because the testing agreement for amphetamines does not allow baseball to report the total number of first-time positive tests even though no players' names would be attached to the overall number.  the reason apparently has to do with concern within baseball, and particularly in the union, that amphetamine use would not disappear quickly and that first-year testing might produce an embarrassing number of first-time positive tests.  so what the number actually was for 2006 remains undisclosed. in contrast, there are no shields for players who test positive for steroids, whether they are first-time or repeat violators. they are identified and suspended, under guidelines that have been toughened several times. in all, 15 major leaguers and 119 minor leaguers tested positive for steroids over the past two seasons, with the number declining in 2006.  under the amphetamine testing guidelines, when a player tests positive for the first time, only the player, the union, baseball's vice president for labor relations and a committee that oversees the testing program are to be informed.  even the player's team is supposed to be kept in the dark, which may be why the giants issued a statement yesterday saying that ''last night was the first time we heard of this recent accusation against barry bonds.''  but now they know, and the question is, what do they intend to do?  baseball  correction:  january 19, 2007, friday  a sports article on wednesday about a positive drug test by barry bonds misstated the number of random drug tests allowed under an agreement between major league baseball and the players association. in addition to testing players on each 40-man roster, the agreement provides for 600 random tests, not 580.  