today in business   back door for corporate e-mail -- a growing number of internet-savvy workers are forwarding their office e-mail to free, web-accessible personal accounts offered by google, yahoo and other companies. employers, who fearfully envision corporate secrets leaking through the back door of otherwise well-protected computer networks, are not pleased. [page a1.]  calls for generic insulin -- as they examine their state health care budgets, 11 of the nation's governors are asking why there is no cheaper generic version of insulin, a drug that has been used since the 1920s. [a1.]  a second suitor for delta -- even as us airways increased its hostile bid for delta air lines by about 20 percent to $10.3 billion, northwest emerged as another potential suitor. delta is said to be hoping to fend off us airways, and has been in talks with northwest for weeks. [c1.]  g.m. takes aim at china -- how general motors will fare as toyota passes it in market share may depend on how it performs in china, its second-largest market after the united states. [c1.]  digital billboards ahead -- billboard companies are adopting digital technology that rotates advertiser images every six or eight seconds -- the better to catch the eye. [c1.]  court tackles union fees -- a case argued before the supreme court about how labor unions must handle the fees paid by nonmembers could turn out to be little more than a footnote to a long line of decisions about the respective rights of labor unions and dissident employees. [a24.]  house approves wage bill -- the house overwhelmingly approved a $2.10 increase in the federal minimum wage in a vote that democrats hailed as an overdue raise for low-income workers and a symbol of new leadership on capitol hill. [a28.]  bush opposes stem cell bill -- the white house jumped back into the debate surrounding embryonic stem cell research, urging lawmakers to vote against house legislation to expand such research. [a28.]  canadian cable deal -- canwest global communications, a canadian broadcaster and newspaper publisher, joined goldman sachs to buy alliance atlantis communications, owner of 13 cable channels. [c9.]  apple sued over trademark -- the computer networking giant cisco systems filed a trademark infringement lawsuit against apple, claiming rights to the iphone brand. [c13.]  kodak sells medical unit -- eastman kodak, as part of its struggle with the digital conversion in photography, said that it would sell its x-ray film and medical-imaging equipment operations to an investment company, onex of toronto, for $2.35 billion in cash. [c15.]  belarus signals oil deal -- belarus said it had reached a compromise with russia to end a dispute that had shut a russian oil pipeline to europe since monday, but the kremlin did not confirm any agreement. [a8.]  push for competition in europe -- european union officials challenged governments to loosen their grip on national energy sectors, calling for a fresh wave of competition and investment in infrastructure and technology to ease dependence on powerful exporters like russia and to combat global warming. [a5.]  financier received information -- in recordings that the hollywood private eye anthony pellicano secretly made of his own telephone conversations, a lawyer for the billionaire investor kirk kerkorian, left, said he told mr. kerkorian -- locked in a legal dispute with his ex-wife -- what the private detective was learning from what prosecutors say were his wiretaps. [c1.]  chÁvez avows socialism -- president hugo chávez was sworn in to a new six-year term at a ceremony in which he defended his decision to nationalize the telecommunications and electricity sectors and promised to seek greater control over natural gas projects. [a16.]  online  business briefing  articles on these developments are at nytimes.com/business.  imclone systems said that its erbitux cancer drug works as a first-choice treatment for bowel cancer, sending its shares up 5.3 percent. (bloomberg news)  genentech's fourth-quarter profit jumped 75 percent on surging sales of lucentis, its new treatment for the leading cause of blindness in the elderly. (reuters)  ebay will buy the online ticket reseller stubhub to bolster its share in the market for secondary sales of seats to concerts and sporting events. (bloomberg news)  