equal cheers for boys and girls draw some boos   thirty girls signed up for the cheerleading squad this winter at whitney point high school in upstate new york. but upon learning they would be waving their pompoms for the girls' basketball team as well as the boys', more than half of the aspiring cheerleaders dropped out.  the eight remaining cheerleaders now awkwardly adjust their routines for whichever team is playing here on the home court -- ''hands up you guys'' becomes ''hands up you girls''-- to comply with a new ruling from federal education officials interpreting title ix, the law intended to guarantee gender equality in student sports.  ''it feels funny when we do it,'' said amanda cummings, 15, the cheerleading co-captain, who forgot the name of a female basketball player mid-cheer last month.  whitney point is one of 14 high schools in the binghamton area that began sending cheerleaders to girls' games in late november, after the mother of a female basketball player in johnson city, n.y., filed a discrimination complaint with the united states department of education. she said the lack of official sideline support made the girls seem like second-string, and violated title ix's promise of equal playing fields for both sexes.  but the ruling has left many people here and across the new york region booing, as dozens of schools have chosen to stop sending cheerleaders to away games, as part of an effort to squeeze all the home girls' games into the cheerleading schedule.  boys' basketball boosters say something is missing in the stands at away games, cheerleaders resent not being able to meet their rivals on the road, and even female basketball players being hurrahed are unhappy.  in johnson city, students and parents say they have accepted the change even as they question the need for it.  several cheerleaders there recalled a game two years ago, long before the complaint, when the squad decided at the last minute to cheer for the girls' team because a boys' game was canceled.  the cheers drowned out directions from the girls' coach, frustrated the players, and created so much tension that the cheerleaders left before halftime.  ''they asked, 'why are you here?' '' recalled joquina spence, 18, a senior cheerleader. ''we told them, 'we're here to support you,' and it was a problem because they kept yelling at us.''  but, as the new york state public high school athletic association warned in a letter to its 768 members in november, the education department determined that cheerleaders should be provided ''regardless of whether the girls' basketball teams wanted and/or asked for'' them.  the ruling followed a similar one in september in the philadelphia suburbs, and comes as high schools nationwide are redefining the role of cheerleaders in response to parental and legal pressures as well as growing sensitivity to sexism among athletic directors, especially as more women step into those roles.  federal education officials would not specify how many title ix complaints concerning cheerleading the office for civil rights is investigating. but a spokesman said the department received 64 complaints nationwide last year concerning unequal levels of publicity given to girls' and boys' teams -- which includes the issue of cheerleading -- most from new york state. that compares with a total of 28 such complaints over the previous four years.  in september, the prince george's county, md., public schools agreed to provide publicity equally for its male and female athletes, including cheerleaders at competitive events, as part of a lengthy list of changes after the national women's law center raised title ix complaints against the 134,000-student district.  last february, a statewide group of physical education teachers in california called for cheerleaders to attend girls' and boys' games ''in the same number, and with equal enthusiasm'' as part of its five-year goals.  and for the first time this fall at westborough high school in the boston suburbs, cheerleaders were provided for all the varsity athletic teams, including girls' field hockey and volleyball. ''in our minds, there's no major or minor sports,'' said brian callaghan, westborough's athletic director.  here in the binghamton area, three schools named in the original complaint -- two in elmira, n.y., and one in horseheads -- are rebelling against the ruling, in the latest in a series of arguments over fulfilling the requirements of title ix, which has been a source of contention among educators, athletes and feminists alike since its adoption in 1972.  james young, a lawyer for the horseheads central school district, said cheerleaders there compete in their own tournaments and are not seen as support players. he noted that the ''rowdy raiders'' pep group is already dispatched to cheer for boys' and girls' teams alike.  ''we regard our cheerleaders as athletes, while they are working on a 1970s stereotype that cheerleaders are here to support the boys,'' mr. young said of the education department's ruling. ''we have a really solid women's athletics program and we support it our way.''  richard t. stank, president of the southern tier athletic conference, which represents the 17 schools in the binghamton area named in the complaint, said even some of the school officials and coaches complying with the ruling question its validity. ''i don't see how cheerleaders having to be at boys' and girls' games is what title ix was set up to do,'' he said.  under title ix, all schools and colleges that receive federal money are prohibited from gender discrimination in any area, from academics to athletics. the education department has interpreted that mandate to mean, among other things, that girls' and boys' teams must receive equal treatment, from the salaries of their coaches to the condition of their locker rooms.  intended to expand opportunities for female athletes, title ix essentially requires schools and colleges to spend equivalent amounts on men's and women's sports programs. but some title ix supporters complain that some schools have twisted the letter of the law to skirt its spirit, cutting lower-profile men's sports like wrestling or swimming to offset the costs of football rather than adding women's teams. but others complain that the law has expanded women's teams of limited interest at the expense of more popular boys' teams.  cheerleading has long been a source of contention. some women's sports advocates complain that schools count it as a varsity sport as a sneaky way to increase the numbers of the female side of the athletic department balance sheet without changing historic disparities. others see the varsity letters as a mark of respect for the athletic and acrobatic feats the squads perform.  so while the complaint that originated here was based on whether the boys and girls basketball players were being treated equally, the ruling has renewed questions about cheerleaders' status.  rosie pudish, the parent who filed the original complaint, said she did so even though her own daughter, keri, a varsity basketball player at johnson city high school, did not particularly want cheerleaders at her games.  ms. pudish said that as many as 60 cheerleaders, along with their friends and parents, would attend the boys' games, injecting a level of excitement and spirit that was missing from the girls' contests.  ''it sends the wrong message that girls are second-class athletes and don't deserve the school spirit, that they're just little girls playing silly games and the real athletes are the boys,'' said ms. pudish, an accountant who works for the federal government.  at most high schools, including those in new york city and its suburbs, cheerleaders traditionally follow the boys' basketball and football games, and only occasionally root for other teams -- like girls' basketball -- if a playoff berth or a championship is at stake.  so far, no one here has suggested that football cheerleaders have to show up for field hockey games next fall. but the education department ruled that if the binghamton-area schools provided cheerleaders for boys' basketball games, then they must provide them on the same terms for girls' basketball.  to comply, nearly all of the schools have decided to send cheerleaders to an equal number of boys' and girls' games, and only at home to avoid overloading the cheerleaders' schedules. that drew complaints from cheerleaders who liked traveling to away games -- and from boys' basketball players and fans who were left cheer-less half the time.  ''it's probably toughest on some of the parents,'' said john allen, athletic director of the chenango valley central school district, just northeast of binghamton. ''all of a sudden they're at games, and there are no cheerleaders.''  at a small school like whitney point, with 525 students, the ruling has devastated a cheerleading program that had just begun to rebound after being eliminated in budget cuts in 2002. some of the girls who dropped out just did not want to cheer for other girls, while others said the team was not as fun without traveling to away games and being able to check out routines by rival cheerleading teams. (since most schools in the league are complying with the ruling by keeping cheerleaders on their home courts, the squads are now left to rah-rah without response.)  the girls' basketball players complained about the change, too; the coach asked cheerleaders to stay on the bench at crucial moments during the first few games so as not to distract his players. but after an awkward start, the girls have settled into a routine of sorts, and have posed together for post-game pictures.  katelin maxson, 17, a senior who is the cheerleading captain, said that while she does not mind cheering for the girls, it has doubled her workload: she has continued the tradition here of decorating the lockers of the basketball players on game days and bringing them treats.  ''we joined sports to have fun, but they're basically taking the fun away and giving us more work,'' she said. ''the interest is down so much, and it's going to keep dropping, until there's no cheerleading anymore.''  