hong kong: the mandarin oriental   the basics  the mandarin, long a mainstay of the hong kong luxury hotel scene, reopened in late september after a $140 million, nine-month renovation and with an opening date picked by the hotel's feng shui master. the hotel is, indeed, spiffy, but all that matters is the moment you open the door to your room and take in the breathtaking, panoramic view of bustling victoria harbour -- a sight that even the most jaded travelers find mesmerizing. no one will be surprised if you blurt out, ''i am never leaving this room.''  the scene  the sparkling, airy lobby, with its inviting seating area off to the side, was largely untouched in the renovation, which should be reassuring for old china hands who have long used the mandarin as a convenient spot for business meetings or to rendezvous with friends from out of town. the rooftop bar, the m bar, is jammed in the early evening with elegantly dressed workers from the nearby financial district (the norman foster-designed hsbc building is a block away) mixing with guests from the hotel. you can tell the latter because they're the ones staring out the windows.  location  could not be better. the terminal for the fast-speed train to the hong kong airport is just two blocks away, as is the terminal for ferries to kowloon, a rite of passage for any first-time visitor. (go at sunset and make sure you get a ticket for the upper deck.) the bars and restaurants of lan kwai fong, along with the antiques stores of hollywood road, are about a 15-minute walk away.  rooms  outfitted in rich, dark woods and elegant furnishings, the spacious rooms come with all the modern conveniences -- a cd player, a jack for your ipod, high-speed internet access, a flat-screen tv, even a set of binoculars for that harbor view -- plus an impossibly complicated message system. here's how it works. step 1: you retrieve a voice mail from your phone, which directs you to the message system accessible through your tv. step 2: you turn on the tv, and 10 minutes later -- after getting the screen cursor to work properly -- you read your text message, which tells you to call the front desk. step 3: you call the front desk, which puts you on hold while they find your message. and what is it? a reminder that the checkout time the next day is 11 a.m. couldn't someone just have said that in the first place? (on the other hand, when that flat-screen tv mysteriously stopped working, a call to the front desk resulted in a visit by two maintenance men within six minutes.) bathrooms come with both a capacious soaking tub and a large shower stall and a choice of two kinds of bathrobes -- plush terry cloth or soft silk -- await in the large closets.  room service  a pot of delicious chinese tea was delivered, unbidden, within 10 minutes of check-in, and breakfast ordered the next day at 9:06 a.m., and promised ''about a half an hour from now,'' arrived 19 minutes later.  amenities  the hotel has a full-service spa and a huge gym with more than a dozen stationary bicycles and treadmills (each with its own tv screen), and a full complement of weights. one odd thing: there are four tv monitors in the weight room showing demonstration videos of how to use the kinesis weight-and-pulley system, but not a single mirror so that you can check your form or admire your abs. (well, maybe that's a good thing.)  bottom line  standard rooms start at about 3,600 hong kong dollars (about $450 at 7.94 hong kong dollars to the american dollar), but there's probably no point in staying at the mandarin unless you're in one of its harbor-view rooms. those start at 4,500 hong kong dollars; 5 connaught road, central hong kong; (866) 526-6567; www.mandarinoriental.com/hongkong.  stuart emmrich  check in /check out  