just dump him already   him her him again  the end of him  by patricia marx.  232 pp. scribner. $24.  you know that woman friend of yours who has been inexplicably, miserably, annoyingly hung up on the wrong guy for years -- or has it been a decade? you know who i mean: she's smart, funny and attractive. lots of men -- even desirable ones -- fall for her, although she never seems to like any of them. or else, just when she begins to notice their existence, he steps back into the picture, pulling her focus away once more. she's the friend to whom you had to issue a ban on ever mentioning his name in your presence again, and then broke it repeatedly because she seemed so desperately in need of advice (which she promptly ignored). well, she's the heroine of a very funny novel, ''him her him again the end of him'' by the former ''saturday night live'' writer patricia marx. unfortunately, he's in here, too.  as an everywoman of sorts, marx's heroine doesn't have a name. he, who is named eugene, refers to her by a rotating list of endearments -- ''my orbital core,'' my ''terra firma,'' ''my one'' -- which seems to be one of the few endearing things about him, until you realize the convenience of such anonymous terms, given that their recipient is not his ''one'' by a long shot.  our young woman friend meets eugene at cambridge university, where she is an american graduate student whose exact thesis topic she can never quite remember, and he is a teaching fellow in philosophy from princeton who arrives after working with vista to eradicate poverty in scarsdale. (scarsdale? she wasn't sure she'd heard him right, either.) judging by her parents' recent acquisition of a telephone answering machine, the year appears to be somewhere in the early 1980s.  like kingsley amis, david lodge and, more recently, zadie smith, marx wrings a lot of humor from academic life. while some jokes will be familiar -- eugene gives a talk titled ''the fallacy of fallacies is a fallacy'' -- the supporting characters, mostly drawn from the students rather than the professors, won't. there's the handsome theology student from trinidad who brandishes a walking stick, the bourgeois-denouncing french guy who demands sex from his girlfriend three times a day, and the girlfriend, a beautiful somalian who wants to be a chef and loves her boyfriend in part for his dishwasher.  memorable mostly for their neuroses and zingers, this kooky cast nevertheless helps to make marx's rendering of the experience of studying abroad recognizable in the best possible way. from the ridiculous lengths to which one goes to satisfy an american craving (like bicycling 45 minutes while balancing 12 bottles of a beloved brand of diet iced tea) to the record speed with which the veneer of sophistication acquired during one's months overseas can be stripped off by a visit from one's parents, to the liberating effect of being a foreigner -- ''it was the life that falls in the forest'' -- marx nails this inimitable rite of young adulthood with the authority of someone who has lived it and kept very detailed journals.  after eugene's marriage to a hypochondriacal homeric scholar renders him (temporarily) unavailable, the narrator returns to the united states where she begins a checkered career as a television comedy writer in new york city. based on marx's bio, this experience resembles the author's own, yet her portrait of that world -- though she ups the absurdity factor considerably -- feels slightly canned. or perhaps, as aaron sorkin has discovered with his ratings-challenged show ''studio 60 on the sunset strip,'' to get the joke, you had to have been there.  even so, marx's novel made me laugh so hard that i kept trying to read lines aloud to my boyfriend, who -- looking up from ''the magic mountain'' -- wasn't persuaded. maybe, too, since he's an academic, he recognizes that characters like eugene -- whose pretentiousness, obtuseness and narcissism provide much of the comic relief -- make for easy and ultimately boring targets. you already know this guy, you got stuck sitting next to him at a dinner, he's the son of your aunt's next-door neighbor whom said aunt insisted you go out with on the basis of his résumé; you were married to him for a while until you realized it had been years since you even faked an interest in what he was saying, and he still kept talking. and you already know how our heroine's story will turn out.  she tries, unconvincingly, to explain her attraction: eugene's compliments are astute and original enough to seem genuinely heartfelt (she resembles a certain french actress; her face looks beautiful in shadow); or as a narcissist, he doesn't require any bolstering of his self-esteem; or, as the homeric hypochondriac observed, he was also learning about the female body. but this is a story about romantic obsession, and obsession isn't rational, though it can be repetitive and predictable at times.  still, there's much to like and admire here, and, no doubt, there are many romantically obsessed friends to whom it can be recommended. unfortunately, reading ''him her him again the end of him'' probably won't hasten your friend's coming to her (or his) senses. as marx's heroine asks toward the end of the novel: ''so why, after enduring so much so long, did i come to be enlightened only at that moment? why put my foot down now? ... it really may be, as it was in my case, about, hmm, time.''  bliss broyard is the author of the short story collection ''my father, dancing.'' her memoir ''one drop: my father, his family and an unusual inheritance'' will be published in the fall.  