teeny-weeny rules for itty-bitty atom clusters   it is hard enough to regulate something when you know what it is, what it does, how it works and who is actually making it.  nabil al-hadithy had none of those advantages when he began to consider what -- if anything --berkeley, calif., wanted to do about regulating nanotechnology.  that issue became a concern for mr. al-hadithy, the city's hazardous waste manager, when a federal research laboratory affiliated with the university of california filed an environmental impact statement three years ago for its latest building project -- a ''molecular foundry'' to make nanoparticles.  ''we sent them a bunch of questions, starting with: 'what the heck is a nanoparticle?' '' mr. al-hadithy said.  it turns out to be a deceptively complicated question, but that did not stop mr. al-hadithy from coming up with his own answer. when the city council adopted his regulation last month, berkeley became the first government body in the united states -- and possibly anywhere, according to some analysts -- to explicitly regulate businesses that make or use nanoparticles.  nanoparticles are generally defined as clusters of atoms and molecules used in a rapidly growing range of invisible products and microscopic manufacturing processes measured in nanometers, or billionths of a meter. the largest particle subject to mr. al-hadithy's regulation is roughly 800 times thinner than a human hair.  for now, nanotechnology is limited to somewhat mundane applications, including stain-resistant clothing, transparent cosmetics and antimicrobial surfaces for medical and household products. promoters, however, have not been shy about predicting how nanotechnology might transform everything from health care to energy production. but when the same folks talk to health and environmental regulators, those promises tend to be replaced with soothing assurances that there is no reason -- at least not yet -- to presume that nanotechnology is unusual enough to present unique regulatory concerns.  that seeming contradiction did not go over well in berkeley, which has long been skeptical about the marketplace's ability to anticipate disaster. hence the new regulation that requires businesses to annually identify for mr. al-hadithy's office any materials they use or produce with at least one dimension of 100 nanometers or less, no matter how small the quantities. they must also share what they know about how toxic the particles might be and describe procedures for tracking, handling and disposing of them.  unlike most definitions of nanoparticles, berkeley's has no lower size limit and so presumably covers individual atoms a fraction of a nanometer in diameter if they have been ionized -- that is, given positive or negative charges.  it would be a stretch to call the new ordinance a home run for critics of nanotechnology. the lawrence berkeley national laboratory and the university of california are exempt, although the lab said it planned to voluntarily supply any relevant data it gathers as a byproduct of its research. mr. al-hadithy said he had no reason so far to believe that any business in berkeley actually made or used nanoparticles. none has stepped forward, anyway.  but he said he hoped that berkeley's move would draw attention to animal studies suggesting ways that at least some nanoparticles might harm the lungs or brain and would influence regulators elsewhere to seek more information. federal and state regulators, like their counterparts overseas, have so far been happy to sponsor meetings and studies that call for regulation but notably reluctant to engage in any. a very small fraction of the billions of dollars being invested in nanotechnology research is being used to ferret out potential risks.  ''governments are scared of regulating nanotechnology out of fear of losing the benefits,'' mr. al-hadithy said.  those in the industry, like dennis schneider, director of marketing and sales for nanohorizons, a nanotech startup in state college, pa., say there is a more straightforward explanation for the inactivity: the nanoparticles now being used are made in such small volume and are so bound up in other material that people are not exposed to quantities worth regulating.  ''you can't pump them or blow them,'' said mr. schneider of his company's products. ''you have to bind them to something and drag them around, then change the binding forces to put them somewhere. or grow them where they are going to be used.''  when regulators encounter nanotechnology, they have tended to apply existing laws to new products in ways that can seem odd at first glance. in november, for example, the environmental protection agency said it would classify samsung's silvercare line of washing machines as a pesticide because the machines ionize silver atoms and add them to the wash -- 100 quadrillion per load, samsung says -- to kill bacteria and viruses.  while some would argue that the ions are too small to qualify as nanotechnology, the logic of the e.p.a. ruling would appear to apply to a wide range of nanotechnology-based antimicrobial products that have been advertised this year, including a.r.c. outdoor's e47 underwear, sharper image's line of ''fresherlonger miracle food storage containers'' and motorola's i870 cellphone.  the e.p.a. said that its ruling had nothing to do with particle size and will be clarified in an official publication this month. of course, the way to avoid any dealings with the e.p.a. on the subject under the current pesticide law is to simply stop making the antimicrobial claim.  sharper image has already done just that without changing the containers or other products with silver particles. such loopholes underscore the need for tighter regulation and public-private partnerships to more thoroughly study potential hazards, according to the critics.  ''we don't know enough to wield a hammer on anything,'' said jennifer sass, a senior scientist at the natural resources defense council in washington.  berkeley legal  