picassos' theft contributes to mystery of eccentric collector's art trove   when the colorful manhattan gadfly known as william m. v. kingsland died in march, leaving an unexpected trove of important art in his upper east side apartment, a mystifying art world caper began to unfold.  much of the artwork, it turned out, was stolen.  in the latest twist, the authorities said yesterday that a moving contractor from queens whom public officials had hired to help clean out that apartment had been charged with making off with two precious works: drawings by pablo picasso. the mover's mother-in-law has also been charged.  ''not only are these defendants charged with stealing from their own customers, but from the dead,'' said rose gill hearn, the chief of the city's department of investigation, which announced the arrests yesterday of nahum kohen, the mover, and ori lellouch, his mother-in-law.  ms. gill hearn said the arrests were made after her office was told by the office of the public administrator for manhattan and the f.b.i. that the picasso drawings were missing, and that one was being offered for sale to several auction houses. the drawings, worth an estimated $60,000, were not thought to have been in mr. kingsland's possession illegally.  mr. kohen, 38, of fresh meadows, was charged with taking the drawings, each about 12 inches square, of a guitar and of a mandolin. he will face up to 15 years in prison if convicted, the authorities said.  ms. lellouch, 56, of kew gardens hills, who investigators said had tried to sell one of the drawings through a broker, is charged with possession of stolen property and could face one year in prison.  a lawyer for mr. kohen, roger l. stavis, said: ''my client is absolutely innocent. there is no evidence against him whatsoever, and we hope that this grave injustice will be rectified immediately.''  the authorities said they did not know who was representing ms. lellouch.  although their lives seemed far removed from each other, the stories of the recently deceased and the newly arrested are bound in a web of intrigue.  mr. kingsland, who died without a will, had lived a life shrouded in mystery. his real name, unbeknownst to many of his upper east side acquaintances, was melvyn kohn. his age was unclear; he was perhaps 58 or 62.  mr. kohn was an occasional art dealer who seemed to have boundless knowledge of the buildings in his neighborhood and their residents, and he cultivated an aura of someone rooted in upper east side aristocracy. but he was a recluse who lived alone and welcomed few people into his unkempt, dusty one-bedroom apartment.  after mr. kohn died, the contents of that apartment came as a shock to those who thought they knew him. among the trove of art, besides the two picasso drawings, were works by giacometti, john singleton copley, odilon redon, kurt schwitters and others.  the apartment was ''chockablock with interesting treasures,'' said colin stair of the stair galleries in hudson, n.y., who was hired by the public administrator to sell some of the lesser works in the apartment, including many watercolor-on-ivory miniature portraits.  as it turned out, according to the f.b.i., many of the most important works had been stolen, although how mr. kohn obtained them remains unclear.  ms. gill hearn said yesterday that the public administrator had hired a consulting firm to examine the collection and to help sell the most valuable items. the consultants photographed the two picassos, which later disappeared.  when the public administrator informed ms. gill hearn's investigators that the drawings could not be found, they compiled a list of everyone who had entered the apartment on east 72nd street after the consultants took their photographs.  mr. kohen's name was on the list. meanwhile, according to ms. gill hearn, the f.b.i., which was investigating reports that other works in mr. kohn's apartment had previously been stolen, was tipped off that a manhattan broker was trying to sell one of the missing picassos, and that he had obtained the drawing from ms. lellouch.  the broker, whose identity was not disclosed, is not being charged and did not know that the drawing presented by ms. lellouch was stolen, said an official directly involved in the case who insisted on anonymity because the case remains under investigation.  ''stealing on the job is not a fringe benefit,'' ms. gill hearn said in announcing the arrests yesterday. ''most realize that it could lead to jail and a criminal record.''  