rutgers can't get shots to drop against tough syracuse defense   a young, rebuilding rutgers team might have learned something wednesday night. it probably is not going to win a jump-shooting contest.  against the syracuse zone defense, rutgers could do little else but shoot long-range jumpers, a strategy that failed. hitting 18 of 61 shots (29.5 percent) from the field and scoring just 20 points in the paint, the scarlet knights were no match for syracuse, losing by 68-58.  only the reserve guard courtney nelson, who led rutgers with 14 points, seemed to be in any rhythm for the scarlet knights (8-8, 1-2 big east). but he made only 3 of 9 field-goal attempts.  ''i thought we did a good job of getting the ball inside, but, of course, any time you see a zone you've got to make shots,'' rutgers coach fred hill said. ''there are a lot of different ways to attack a zone, but you've got to make shots to loosen things up a bit. we got some great looks, but they didn't go down.''  the orange (13-4, 2-1 big east) offered a far more diverse attack. shooting 46.9 percent, they got solid interior play from darryl watkins (9 points, 10 rebounds) and demetris nichols (12 points, 7 rebounds), as well as good perimeter shooting from guard eric devendorf, who led all scorers with 19 points.  ''these games are made for eric,'' syracuse coach jim boeheim said. ''teams will go way out with their defense. that creates space for him to get to the basket.''  the orange also helped itself at the free-throw line, making 18 of 21 attempts.  rutgers was cold throughout, making 9 of 32 field-goal attempts during an opening half that ended with syracuse leading, 28-25. ten syracuse turnovers helped rutgers stay close.  the orange got an immediate lift from an unlikely source. guard andy rautins, who was averaging 5 points a game, scored 9 of syracuse's first 11 points. he did not score again.  syracuse took control early in the second half. a dunk by nichols with 16 minutes 4 seconds left extended the lead to 39-30, and for rutgers, it would only get worse. when roberts dunked with 4:55 to go, the orange had a 60-43 lead. rutgers cut the deficit in the closing minutes, and when marquis webb scored on a putback with 54.4 seconds left, the lead was 6 points. nichols responded by making a pair of free throws, and seconds later, devendorf sealed the game by making two more free throws.  ''the shots weren't falling,'' rutgers forward j. r. inman said. ''it just wasn't outside. we were missing midrange and a lot of shots we usually hit. it was an adjustment for us. we haven't played a team that big down low. when you see a zone and with a lot of big, athletic guys, it's hard to adjust.''  the loss came just four days after rutgers played what might have been its best game of the season, a 54-42 victory at cincinnati. the 42 points were the fewest scored against rutgers by a big east opponent.  the orange have beaten rutgers six straight times, which includes an 86-84 overtime victory last season at the carrier dome. three of syracuse's four losses have come against teams that were ranked at the time.  college basketball  