art world luminaries recall marcia tucker   marcia tucker, the influential curator and founder of the new museum, was remembered yesterday at a memorial service as a woman whose insatiable curiosity and ability to ignore her fears led her to alter new york's museum landscape and become a mentor to a generation of curators and artists.  the service at the new school for ms. tucker, who died in october at 66, turned into a kind of reunion for many of the curators who had worked for her and with her over the years, and also a gathering of art world luminaries, including chuck close, kiki smith, elizabeth murray, fred wilson and james rosenquist.  john baldessari, who was a little-known artist when ms. tucker met him in 1968 near san diego and then championed his work, said that he first learned about the larger art world from her and later discovered how radically open she was to questioning the accepted definitions of art.  ''i thought i was pretty wiggy,'' mr. baldessari said, ''but she was wiggier than i was.''  among those who spoke about ms. tucker -- lisa phillips, the new museum's current director; ned rifkin, a former new museum curator who is now undersecretary for art at the smithsonian institution; martin friedman, director emeritus of the walker art center -- there was also a student at brooklyn college, larissa simpson, who said that as an art-struck teenager she e-mailed ms. tucker after seeing her name in a library book. ms. tucker soon wrote her back and kept up a correspondence for months, encouraging her in her studies and giving her advice.  ''keep going straight ahead,'' ms. tucker told her, but then amended that directive: ''no, take the crooked path. but don't stop.''  mr. rifkin, whom ms. tucker hired when he was a little-known young curator, said following the crooked path of a visionary was not always easy for those who worked for her. mr. friedman, who said he often disagreed with her choices, nonetheless said he was amazed by her ''extraordinary antenna'' for good art.  ''she had an eye for what would happen and what was important,'' he said.  toward the end of her life, as she turned to writing, singing, buddhism and even -- again facing her deepest fears -- stand-up comedy, her enthusiasm for finding innovative new art rarely flagged. pat steir, an artist who knew ms. tucker for 40 years, described a studio visit in which ms. tucker, exhausted by her battle with cancer, still summoned up the energy for a long series of questions for a video artist whose work she had seen. the interview went on so long, in fact, that ms. steir left before it was over.  she said that ms. tucker's curiosity always remained that of a child's, ''as though she was stupid, and the art would tell her something she needed to know.''  