a tepid winter warms some wallets   the recent warm weather in the northeast might not have been great for makers of winter coats, but the economy and markets could be poised for a small fillip. benefits of the balmy days may extend from poor families to big-time investors, but are they just borrowing present prosperity from the future?  climatologists have placed 2006 in a virtual tie with 1998 as the warmest on record for the contiguous united states, and, according to the national oceanic and atmospheric administration, about a fifth of the economy is directly sensitive to the weather. those sensitivities, however, don't always express themselves where you may expect.  so far, for example, agricultural markets have not experienced a widespread impact. while 2006, particularly december, was especially warm in the northeast and parts of the midwest, there was stormy weather in the mountain states and an unusual freeze in louisiana. experts at the agriculture department are waiting to see what the next few months hold.  of special concern is the moisture built up in the unfrozen ground from a warm, rainy winter, which could delay planting of cash crops. ''we hope that would dry out some,'' said gerald a. bange, chairman of the department's world agricultural outlook board. ''generally, we like to see about half the corn crop planted by about may 15 or so. we don't want to see any delays there.''  plants that last through the winter, like apple, peach and cherry trees, are also a worry. ''in the case of tree fruits in the northeast, the problem of maybe an earlier bloom because of this warm weather could raise the risk of flowers on the trees being there when a frost comes along in early may or late april,'' said john m. love, a specialty crops analyst at the board.  he said he was also watching louisiana's sugar cane, whose leaves and stalks may have been damaged by the cold, and minnesota's sugar beets, which are being stored in unusually warm temperatures. temperatures in minnesota there have been 6 to 12 degrees above normal in recent months, said bradley r. rippey, an agricultural meteorologist at the department.  putting agriculture aside, there are other potentially important macroeconomic effects, said michael greenstone, a professor of environmental economics at the massachusetts institute of technology. ''the basic idea is that extremes of temperatures, really hot and really cold, are dangerous for human health,'' he said. ''to the extent that the recent warm weather on the east coast moved us from cold days to more moderate days, that's likely to reduce mortality rates. having more people around is obviously good for consumption and economic activity.''  there's an additional boost to construction, which can move faster in good weather, he added. but that effect can be short-lived. ''over some long period of time, it's unlikely that the number of houses built would change much just because of one year's slightly more moderate weather,'' professor greenstone said. as such, the economy is ''stealing a little'' growth from the future when the weather turns unexpectedly warm.  of course, if the climate is changing for the long term -- if we are experiencing just the early effects of global warming -- all bets are off. professor greenstone noted that economic repercussions of long-lasting changes could swamp these short-run effects.  the temporary warm weather does have very real benefits for poor families.  a warm winter can relax their financial constraints by requiring less spending on heating, said steven j. haider, an associate professor of economics at michigan state university.  ''they often are making very tough decisions, whether those decisions are paying bills, child care, clothes or food during a particular month,'' he said. ''if there is a cold-weather shock, and their heating bill goes up in a particular month, there are poor people who struggle.''  professor haider and three colleagues researched the effect of weather on poor families' budgets and found that there were substantial effects from extreme temperatures.  ''for the short-run effects that we're seeing this year, the answer is, yes, the poor families are feeling a little less constrained,'' he said. ''i'm sure the families have other important uses for that money.''  indeed, lower demand for heating oil in the united states, along with rising inventories for other refined petroleum products, has helped to push crude oil prices down-- a boon for the rest of the world, too.  at the wealthier end of the economic spectrum, warm weather seems to have a salutary, though hard to explain, influence on stock prices.  ''there seems to be a correlation between sunny days -- days with low cloud cover -- and higher stock price returns,'' said william n. goetzmann, a professor of finance and management studies at yale. he and his colleagues tried to explain the effect by comparing the bullishness of investors in several american cities on given days with the weather in those cities. they found no significant links, but changes in the bid-ask spreads for stocks suggested another explanation.  ''if there is any psychology involved, it's not the man on the street in chicago, dallas, san francisco, etc.,'' professor goetzmann said. ''it seems to be associated with the people who are making the market in new york city.'' he added that ''if a few people are grumpy because it's a rainy day, and they control billions of dollars, maybe they are the marginal investors'' -- the ones who affect prices on a day-to-day basis.  more sun and warmth may bode well over all, but there are still a couple of months to go in this winter season -- and several more before farmers and construction companies may really feel the difference. as mr. bange at the agricultural board said, ''a heck of a lot can happen over the next six months, weather-wise.''  economic view  