today in business   eyes on employment contracts -- employment contracts like the one that gave robert l. nardelli a $210 million exit package from home depot have been blamed for virtually guaranteeing huge payouts even when an executive fails. [page c1.]  jury orders insurer to pay -- a federal jury ordered state farm insurance to pay a $2.5 million penalty for refusing to cover damages to a mississippi couple's house that was destroyed in hurricane katrina, throwing into question settlement talks intended to resolve hundreds of lawsuits filed after the 2005 storm. [c1.]  i.r.s. deals are criticized -- top officials at the internal revenue service are pushing auditors to prematurely close tax audits of big companies with agreements to have them pay only a small fraction of the additional taxes that could be collected, according to dozens of i.r.s. employees who say that the policy is costing the government billions of dollars. [c1.]  brighter skies for airlines -- w. douglas parker, below, the chief executive of us airways, with a sunny disposition and a $10.3 billion takeover proposal for delta air lines, has helped make the airline industry feel better about itself again. dreary laments about sky-high fuel costs and fractious labor relations are being drowned out by the sweet murmurings of speculation as the industry regains a little glamour on wall street. [c1.]  class-action status for bias suit -- a judge granted class-action status to a lawsuit filed on behalf of more than 700 female workers at costco wholesale claiming that the retailer had discriminated against women seeking jobs as managers. [c9.]  smaller payments for farmers -- with a costly war in iraq, mounting budget deficits and record-high crop prices, administration officials said that farmers should expect to receive smaller agricultural payments in this year's farm bill. but some lawmakers, many from farm states, say more money is needed to expand the production of biofuels. [c2]  guilty plea in tax shelter case -- a former accountant pleaded guilty to lying to federal investigators as part of a widening criminal inquiry into questionable tax shelters. [c2.]  redefining consumer gadgets -- apple's new iphone appears to be the clearest statement yet of what steven p. jobs's impact has been in the world of consumer electronics. it is not that he invents new technologies; he refines existing ones. [c3.]  oil prices at 19-month low -- oil prices sank to the lowest level in 19 months, providing potential relief to consumers. [c3.]  fed policy maker to retire -- the president of the boston federal reserve bank, cathy e. minehan, said that she would retire in 2007, adding to a list of vacancies among top fed policy makers. [c3.]  vw executive steps down -- wolfgang bernhard, the executive who pared costs at volkswagen but angered its unions and chairman, will leave as part of a broad shake-up of its managing board. [c4.]  xbox in the lead -- the xbox 360 outsold the wii, which outsold the playstation 3 during the crucial holiday season. [c4.]  detective to plead guilty -- a former hewlett-packard private investigator is expected to plead guilty to federal charges that he posed as a reporter to get phone records for the company's internal investigation of boardroom leaks. [c7.]  russian billionaire detained -- mikhail prokhorov, a billionaire often described as russia's most-eligible bachelor, was detained during an investigation into a suspected international prostitution ring operating at an upscale ski resort, a french prosecutor said. [a6.]  bush threatens to veto drug bill -- president bush threatened to veto legislation that would require the government to negotiate with drug companies to obtain lower prices for medicare beneficiaries. [a17.]  toyotas in leading roles -- toyota is joining forced with the speed channel cable network to produce an unusual program in which the toyota fj cruiser plays a starring role. stuart elliott: advertising. [c6.]  'de-branding' cingular -- one of the biggest ''de-brandings'' in advertising history is to begin monday when at&t, now the sole owner of cingular wireless, starts changing all cingular marketing to adopt the at&t name. [c6.]  bristol-myers makes deals -- four months after the drug maker bristol-myers squibb all but announced that it was for sale, no suitor has emerged publicly. instead, the company has entered several comparatively small deals, including one yesterday in which it announced a partnership with the british company astrazeneca to develop two diabetes compounds. market place. [c3.]  mtv executive to leave -- in another management change at viacom, michael wolf, the president and chief operating officer of the company's mtv networks, is leaving. [c6.]  bank of england raises rates -- the bank of england surprised investors by raising interest rates by a quarter of a percentage point, to 5.25 percent, to head off rising inflation amid a boom in the housing market. [c7.]  drop in oil prices lifts shares -- investors regained some of their swagger, sending stocks higher after oil prices plunged and a drop in unemployment claims indicated that the economy was not slowing too quickly. [c9.]  online  business briefing  articles on these developments are at nytimes.com/business.  advanced micro devices warned that fourth-quarter revenue would miss estimates. (reuters)  six flags, the theme-park operator, struggling with falling attendance and a large debt load, said that it would sell 7 of its 30 north american parks for $312 million. (ap)  airtran holdings made a sweetened offer of about $345 million in cash and stock directly to shareholders of the midwest air group, which rebuffed an earlier bid. (ap)  samsung electronics reported an 8.5 percent drop in its quarterly profit, hurt by lackluster shipments of flash memory chips. (reuters)  