paid notice: deaths   roeder, dorothy (nee friedman)   roeder--dorothy (nee friedman). died peacefully at home in her 90th year surrounded by love. darling daughter of the late rena f. and stanleigh p. friedman. dear sister of dr. edward w. friedman and the late mary f. schwartzreich. beloved wife of over 60 years to the late martin a. roeder. adored mother of katherine roeder and thomas roeder. dearly loved mother-in-law of susan b. roeder. cherished grandmother of kenneth and erik (pamela heller) hartog, sarah and louisa roeder. loving great-grandmother of madeline and charlotte. much loved aunt. dear friend to stanleigh morris and so many others. in lieu of flowers, contributions may be sent to the central park conservancy or the child development center. family will receive friends on monday 6-9 pm at frank e. campbell, 1076 madison ave. at 81st st. funeral services tuesday 11:30 am at frank e. campbell. $(6$)roeder--dorothy (nee friedman). died peacefully at home in her 90th year surrounded by love. darling daughter of the late rena f. and stanleigh p. friedman. dear sister of dr. edward w. friedman and the late mary f. schwartzreich. beloved wife of over 60 years to the late martin a. roeder. adored mother of katherine roeder and thomas roeder. dearly loved mother-in-law of susan b. roeder. cherished grandmother of kenneth and erik (pamela heller) hartog, sarah and louisa roeder. loving great-grandmother of madeline and charlotte. much loved aunt and friend to stan morris and so many others. in lieu of flowers, contributions may be sent to the central park conservancy or the child development center. family will receive friends on monday 69 pm at frank e. campbell, 1076 madison ave. at 81st st. funeral services tuesday 11:30 am at frank e. campbell. $(6$)roeder -- dorothy. the board of trustees and staff of the jewish board of family and children's services, child development center (cdc) and friends of the child development center acknowledge with profound sadness the death of dorothy roeder, a most devoted supporter. an active divisional committee member, dorothy was single-handedly responsible for the nearly new thrift shop whose proceeds benefited cdc programs for two decades. through her steadfast support, tireless energy, wise counsel and warmth dorothy made an enormous difference in the lives of children and families we serve. we will miss her dearly. our condolences to her family. john a herrmann, president fran levy, chair, center for child devel and learning renee ward, president friends of cdc alan siskind, phd, exec vp and ceo paul levine, assoc exec vp marion davidson amodeo, cdc director  