a tough defense lawyer finds he's in need of one   back in the 1980s, paul w. bergrin was a hard-hitting prosecutor in essex county, n.j., who then became an assistant united states attorney in newark.  later, as a defense lawyer, he was known for taking on unpopular causes, including defending a sergeant convicted of abusing prisoners in abu ghraib and an american soldier accused in the murders of three iraqi men.  but yesterday, he found himself on the opposite side of the law, as prosecutors charged him with money laundering and with running a call-girl service in manhattan after its owner, who was his client, had been arrested.  mr. bergrin was accused of running $800,000 in credit card receipts through two shell companies over six months in 2004 and 2005 to disguise the fact that the money was the proceeds of a tribeca-based call-girl service called ny confidential, prosecutors in manhattan said.  they said that when the owner of the escort service, jason itzler, was arrested in january 2005, mr. bergrin, who was mr. itzler's lawyer, and two associates took over the business, keeping it going for two months before business flagged and the company was dissolved.  eugene hurley, an assistant district attorney, said at a news conference yesterday in manhattan that one indication that mr. bergrin controlled the escort service was ''the frequency with which he and friends he brought to the agency were given free sex.''  prosecutors also charged that mr. bergrin was receiving as much as $5,000 a week in cash payments from the proceeds of the escort service.  john edwards tiffany, mr. bergrin's lawyer and friend of 15 years, said yesterday that he was shocked at the charges, and could not help wondering whether mr. bergrin had invited some kind of retaliation by stepping on too many toes as an aggressive defense lawyer.  ''sometimes you're very good at what you do, you can rankle a few individuals,'' mr. tiffany said. ''there are prosecutors out there that may have very distinct opinions about mr. bergrin. they should worry less about getting their names in the paper, and focus on their job, which is to prosecute crimes, not to attempt to tarnish or belittle the reputation of an attorney.''  mr. tiffany said that mr. bergrin, 51, is a retired army reserve officer and the married father of two children, and has represented military personnel in more than 100 courts-martial. he was the lawyer for sgt. javal davis, who was sentenced to six months in a military prison in 2005, after he admitted abusing detainees at abu ghraib.  he is currently the lawyer for pfc. corey r. clagett, one of a group of soldiers accused of killing three iraqi men last may.  in 2004, the united states attorney's office in newark tried to have mr. bergrin removed from a drug case, saying that he had passed along the name of a government informant, who was later killed, to a drug gang, the associated press reported at the time. mr. bergrin, who lives in morganville, n.j., said he passed on the name as part of his duty to evaluate evidence.  ny confidential became notorious in july 2005 when natalie mclennan, who said she was one of its call-girls, posed for the cover of new york magazine.  prosecutors said mr. bergrin, his law clerk, james cortopassi, mr. itzler and others laundered prostitution receipts through two shell companies, gotham steak and tribeca models. they said mr. bergrin also had falsely claimed that mr. itzler was a paralegal on the abu ghraib case.  mr. bergrin and mr. itzler went to the same law school in florida, prosecutors said, although mr. itzler was not a practicing lawyer. mr. itzler has pleaded guilty to money laundering and attempted promotion of prostitution, and is expected to be sentenced to up to three years in prison, prosecutors said.  new york prosecutors are trying to extradite mr. bergrin from new jersey, where he was arrested yesterday and later released on $500,000 bail, his lawyer said.  