blair urges britain to pursue an aggressive foreign policy   as he seeks to define his legacy and stamp his imprint on the future, prime minister tony blair on friday urged his successors to maintain the warlike foreign policy that he promoted, sending troops into battle in africa and the balkans, afghanistan and iraq.  to retreat in the face of global terrorism, he said, would be ''a catastrophe.''  mr. blair, who has said he will leave office this year, made his appeal in the sixth of a series of lectures on social, political and defense issues, offering a valedictory résumé of his almost 10 years in power.  he spoke one day after britain said it would not follow the united states in committing more troops to iraq, prompting speculation among analysts that the trans-atlantic allies had begun to follow markedly divergent strategies, after years of close partnership.  mr. blair chose to give his speech to an audience of military specialists aboard the albion, a transport vessel moored near plymouth. the choreography recalled president bush's ''mission accomplished'' address aboard the aircraft carrier abraham lincoln in may 2003. while mr. blair avoided any triumphalism, he advocated a muscular commitment by britain to overseas military deployment alongside what he called softer options.  ''there are two types of nations similar to ours today,'' he said. ''those who do war fighting and peacekeeping and those who have, effectively, except in the most exceptional circumstances, retreated to peacekeeping alone. britain does both. we should stay that way,'' he said.  some left-wing critics dismissed the prime minister's attempt to justify his use of military action as a tool of foreign policy. ''he has made the world much more dangerous, much more divided,'' said clare short, a former minister who quit the government as the iraq campaign unfolded.  john kampfner, an author and the editor of the new statesman, said in a radio interview: ''i say with regret that this calamity that has been iraq has diminished not just britain and its role in the world, but has set back this cause that tony blair espouses'' of ''humanitarian intervention to do things around the world which are for the broader good.''  mr. blair's remarks, mr. kampfner said, also offered a challenge to his probable successor, gordon brown, the chancellor of the exchequer, ''to say: what would you do in my position?'' like mr. bush, mr. blair is suffering from declining popularity because of the wars, particularly in iraq, and it is not at all certain that his successors -- even in his own party -- will adhere to his policies.  to some extent, mr. blair's speech reprised an address he gave in chicago in 1999 that set out a doctrine to justify intervention beyond britain's borders. he made a similar argument on friday.  ''the frontiers of our security no longer stop at the channel,'' he said. ''what happens in the middle east affects us. what happens in pakistan, or indonesia, or in the attenuated struggles for territory and supremacy in africa for example, in sudan or somalia -- the new frontiers for our security are global.''  ''our armed forces will be deployed in the lands of other nations far from home, with no immediate threat to our territory, in environments and in ways unfamiliar to them,'' he said. ''they will usually fight alongside other nations, in alliance with them; notably, but probably not exclusively, with the u.s.a.''  the speech offered a response to ever-more-vociferous complaints by serving and former high-ranking officers that the british army, in combat in iraq and afghanistan and deployments elsewhere, is overstretched, badly equipped and poorly housed in its home barracks in this country.  ''my choice,'' mr. blair said, ''is for armed forces that are prepared to engage in this difficult, tough, challenging campaign, to be war fighters as well as peacekeepers; for a british foreign policy keeps our american alliance strong and is prepared to project hard as well as soft power; and for us as a nation to be as willing to fight terrorism and pay the cost of that fight wherever it may be.''  but, he said: ''the covenant between armed forces, government and people has to be renewed. for our part, in government, it will mean increased expenditure on equipment, personnel and the conditions of our armed forces, not in the short run but for the long term.''  as he has done in the past, mr. blair said he believed that the campaign against jihadist terrorism would be long. ''it has taken a generation for the enemy to grow,'' he said. ''it will, in all probability, take a generation to defeat.''  