reporters tail a killer croc   ''primeval,'' which opened yesterday without having been screened in advance for critics, is one of several recent movies to bill itself as ''inspired by true events.'' so was this review, though in both cases ''inspired'' may be too strong a word.  having spent 10 and a half of this newspaper's dollars on a ticket, i ascended to the top floor of my sad little local multiplex and watched a few very loud digitally projected trailers: ''live free or die hard,'' ''zodiac,'' ''the 300.'' cool! then the feature started, and among its first images were some rotting corpses crawling with maggots. this may have explained the presence of the flies that buzzed around in the theater's projector beam; they had come to see their cousins on the big screen.  as it turned out, ''primeval,'' directed by a television veteran, michael katleman, is not quite as rotten as all that. it follows a crew of american television journalists -- dominic purcell, brooke langton and orlando jones -- to war-torn burundi, where they hope to capture, on film and in a giant metal cage, a giant predatory crocodile.  in africa they are joined by a naturalist (gideon emery), a great white hunter type (jürgen prochnow) and a young man named jojo (gabriel malema), who has lost his family to the croc and is quietly itching for payback. local politics complicate the mission, since the area is not only menaced by the man-eating reptile, whose name is gustave, but also by a mysterious and ruthless warlord, known as -- what else? -- little gustave.  the screenplay, by john brancato and michael ferris, tosses out a few chewy bits of b-movie wit, most of them supplied by mr. jones, who expresses the ambivalence of an african-american visiting the motherland through a series of bitter jokes. mr. purcell and ms. langton compete to see who can leave more shirt buttons undone, and for too long they all sit around waiting for gustave.  he arrives first for some murky, poorly edited nighttime snacking, and when he finally shows himself in the light of day, he looks a good deal less fearsome than the dinosaurs in ''king kong'' (or the alligator in ''alligator.'') the steady diet of human flesh seems to have left him overweight and irritable.  gory though it is, ''primeval'' is notably lacking in the grim sadism that characterizes many recent horror movies. it even shows something of a humanistic streak and a glancing concern with real-world unhappiness. at the very least, its use of africa as a backdrop for genre entertainment is no less opportunistic than what you can find in movies like ''blood diamond'' or ''the interpreter,'' and a conversation among the journalists about the west's indifference to african suffering makes some good points, even if they are points the movie itself ultimately proves.  gustave, meanwhile, chooses his victims carefully, at one point even behaving with a kind of gruesome chivalry. he is not evil -- just, well, primeval -- and therefore in some ways more admirable than many of the humans with whom he deigns to share the screen.  ''primeval'' is rated r (under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). people rarely watch their language when they're about to be eaten by a giant crocodile or shot in the head by a glowering thug.  primeval  opened yesterday nationwide.  directed by michael katleman; written by john brancato and michael ferris; director of photography, edward j. pei; edited by gabriel wrye; music by john frizzell; production designer, johnny breedt; produced by gavin polone; released by hollywood pictures. running time: 94 minutes.  with: dominic purcell (tim manfrey), brooke langton (aviva masters), orlando jones (steven johnson), jürgen prochnow (jacob krieg), gideon emery (mathew collins) and gabriel malema (jojo).  film review  