apartment, art in itself, hits market for first time since 1920s   since 1020 fifth avenue opened in 1925, members of the kress family, the founders and heirs to a dime-store fortune, have lived high above central park among their artwork, antique woodwork and extravagant mantels. the duplex apartment, taking up the top two floors of the building, has 17 rooms, with five bedrooms, six baths, a grand salon and solarium, as well as large roof terraces.  but in the last few weeks, the family has quietly put the penthouse, once home to one of the great private collections of italian renaissance art and still full of antique treasures, on the market to a select group of brokers, discreetly keeping it off the shared broker listing system operated by the real estate board of new york.  discretion may be in order with a grand, historic apartment like this, but the kress family was not at all shy about the asking price: in excess of $50 million, which if reached would challenge the records for the highest price of a prewar manhattan co-op apartment.  ''it is a unique, one-of-a-kind penthouse, with a remarkable provenance, and it is this category of property that has been fetching record prices in the last year,'' said kirk henckels, executive vice president and director of stribling private brokerage, who has taken several buyers to see the house. he said the price was in line with other recent listings.  the apartment, on the corner of east 83rd street, across from the metropolitan museum of art but north of the busy main entrance, was advertised as a ''house in the sky'' when was it was built on 13th and 14th floors of 1020 fifth avenue.  samuel h. kress, the founder of the long-gone but once ubiquitous s. h. kress & company variety stores, picked it up for the grand price of $150,000, according to a press account at the time. the price was, as one advertisement put it, ''a fraction of what it would cost to own a home which would be at all comparable in size and location.''  by then, mr. kress, who began with a notions store near wilkes-barre, pa., had become a serious collector of european furniture and art during his frequent buying trips in europe.  mr. kress installed a ceiling from a 17th century venetian palace and shaped the apartment's 20-by-40-foot sunken grand salon and sometimes ballroom to fit. a short staircase was carved from a marble quarry in pietrasanta, italy, where michelangelo got his marble.  the 30-foot-long master bedroom came from a complete room in an english home designed by robert adams in the 18th century. the library, later converted to a bedroom, was transplanted from 18th-century france. and all around the house, mr. kress, and later his brother, rush h. kress, who inherited the apartment when he died in 1955, installed artwork from their collections.  much of it was later donated to the national gallery of art in washington, the metropolitan museum of art, and other museums around the country.  at one point, a 14th-century painting, the coronation of the virgin by agnolo gaddi, hung in the foyer, just beyond the elevators. and old photographs show that a row of renaissance paintings by van dyck, titian and giorgione turned a wall in the solarium into an exhibition hall. the paintings are now in the national gallery of art in washington.  after rush h. kress died in 1963, the apartment was inherited by his wife, virginia, who died several years ago, and is now being sold by her estate, according to her daughter, jocelyn kress, who is representing the estate in the sale and provided details on the apartment's history. (there is no web site; interested buyers can call 646-441-0125.)  brokers say buyers interested in the penthouse would have to modernize the bathrooms and outdated kitchen, and then decide how much of the antique european décor that gives the space its sense of place to preserve or change.  the record for closed co-op sales is still the $44 million paid by rupert murdoch when he bought the triplex owned by laurance s. rockefeller in 2004. the rockefeller apartment is considerably larger than the kress apartment, but prices have risen sharply since then.  the highest sale for a private house in new york was the $53 million sale in october for the harkness mansion at 4 east 75th street, and the highest price of a condo was the purchase of several units at the time warner center to david martinez, a financier, for $54.7 million.  barbara fox, the founder of the fox residential group, said that there were very few older apartments on the market, and those that were available were attracting multiple bids. she said the mantels and fireplaces could add value, and that the history of the apartment could appeal to some buyers.  ''but chances are that if someone is paying $50 million for something,'' she said, ''they will tear everything out.''  angels or gargoyles, probably permanent  imagine living in a town house with the busts of sigmund freud and franklin delano roosevelt staring at each other on the second floor, above your beaux-arts front door. is it a cosmic therapy session? are they there as guardian angels? progressive gargoyles?  some lucky bidder will soon have a chance to find out, and to own the images of both freud and roosevelt (clenching a cigarette holder between his teeth), as well as a 9,500-square-foot town house on west 73rd street just off central park west.  the building has six and a half stories of living space and an ancient manual, two-person elevator. the town house is to be auctioned off in march; its estimated price is $7 million.  the spacious 20-foot-wide building was once the home of a flamboyant psychoanalyst and clinical psychiatrist, dr. edward j. hornick, who in the 1960s and 1970s cut a dashing figure in a cape and shoulder-length earrings and decorated the house in the unmistakable colors and furnishings of that era.  the hornick family bought the house at the end of the 1950s when the west side was in a deep slide and turned a series of small apartments back into a residence and consultation rooms. dr. hornick added the busts of freud and roosevelt because ''he grew up in the depression, and they were his personal heroes,'' his son joshua hornick said.  there was once a bilevel sofa made out of airplane wings that was 16 feet long and 5 feet wide, large enough so that it could hold all the guests at a dinner party, sometimes including allen ginsberg, mr. hornick said. for decades, the house has been decorated with oversize plastic and metal light fixtures. the kitchen cabinets are red, yellow and blue.  dr. hornick was the chief of psychiatry at the manhattan psychiatric center and the head of psychiatric residency training at the albert einstein college of medicine, in the bronx. he was once an author of a paper that put forth, but failed to prove, a theory that there was an association between mental illness and phases of the moon.  dr. hornick and his wife, joy, eventually divorced, and dr. hornick transferred title of the house to his three sons before he died in 1984. ms. hornick continued to live there, but the décor was little changed. after she died several years ago, the sons could not agree on what to do with the house and went to court to settle the dispute.  after several years of litigation, during which the value of the house shot up, a state judge ordered that the house be sold at auction at the courthouse to the highest bidder, with the final details of the auction to be set in the next few weeks.  but rather than leaving the auction to chance, and to the usual investors and speculators who follow foreclosure auctions looking for huge discounts, two of the brothers hired a broker,dexter guerrieri, the president of vandenberg inc.  mr. guerrieri is helping to stage the house, to hold open houses and to show it to prospective buyers. brokers who bring in the eventual buyers will receive commissions similar to those offered for conventional sales. mr. guerrieri said that details of the auction would be made available at his web site, townhouseexperts.com, as soon as they were approved by the court.  the house is part of a landmark district, so anyone seeking to remove dr. hornick's personal heroes from the facade would have to apply to the landmarks preservation commission.  gwyneth paltrow buys a penthouse  gwyneth paltrow, a mother with two young children who also occasionally appears in films, is still in a nesting phase.  two years ago, she and her rock-musician husband, chris martin, bought a condo with 7,000 square feet of space on three-and-a-half floors in a small two-unit building in tribeca for $7.95 million. in august, they bought a summer house in amagansett, n.y., for $5.4 million.  and then at the end of 2006, ms. paltrow signed a contract to buy the last unsold apartment at river lofts in tribeca, a 4,400-square-foot sixth-floor penthouse with three bedrooms, three-and-a-half baths, a library and two terraces.  the sale was put at just over $5 million, somewhat below the $5.5 million asking price. the river lofts project comprises a restored five-story warehouse with new penthouses on top on washington street and an adjacent new 13-story building on laight street.  brokers from the sunshine group, which marketed ms. paltrow's apartment for the developer, shaya boymelgreen, declined to comment.  it was not clear why ms. paltrow and mr. martin, the lead singer and guitarist of the british rock band coldplay, had the real estate itch once more.  stephen huvane, her publicist, declined to comment. ''sorry, but we cannot confirm or deny,'' he said.  big deal e-mail: bigdeal@nytimes.com  