republicans on panel back president's plan, masking divisions   republicans on the senate armed services committee came to the defense of president bush on friday, lending support to his decision to send more troops to iraq and hoping to head off a senate resolution criticizing the plan.  in contrast to the bipartisan barrage of criticism a day earlier by the senate foreign relations committee, republicans on the armed services panel with few exceptions portrayed the troop increase as a risky but necessary move to regain control of baghdad, and they portrayed democrats as lacking the will to see the war through to victory.  ''to my colleagues, i would ask, at least in the short term here, that we measure our words, that we not have a political stampede to declare the war lost when it's not yet lost, or to embrace strategies that would lead to defeat,'' said senator lindsey graham, a republican from south carolina.  but the public show of support for the white house plan masked deep concern about sending additional troops among some republicans and outright opposition among others. senate democrats are preparing a nonbinding resolution opposing the plan that senator carl levin, a michigan democrat who is chairman of the armed services committee, said might attract enough republican votes to overcome parliamentary hurdles and pass if democrats bring it to a vote.  to reassure senators worried about an indefinite commitment of more american troops, defense secretary robert m. gates told the panel that, while there is no explicit time limit on how long they will stay, he viewed the deployment as likely to last ''months, not years.''  he added that withdrawals were possible this year if the additional troops being sent to baghdad reduce the violence significantly.  testifying on capitol hill about the plan for the second straight day, mr. gates said that iraqi lawmakers might decide to replace iraq's prime minister, nuri kamal al-maliki, if he failed to take steps to carry out the new plan to regain control of baghdad.  ''the first consequence that he has to face is the possibility that he'll lose his job,'' mr. gates said. ''there are beginning to be some people around that may say, 'i can do better than he's doing,' in terms of making progress.''  administration officials have discussed among themselves whether they might need to withdraw support for mr. maliki if he doesn't perform, notably by building a new coalition in the iraqi parliament. mr. gates's statement was the first mention of the subject in public by a senior administration official.  mr. gates and other administration officials have had trouble explaining to lawmakers why they are confident that mr. maliki will carry out promises to send more iraqi troops to baghdad and to permit them and the additional american forces to operate in shiite neighborhoods, where they have been blocked from conducting operations in the past.  mr. gates conceded that the iraqi government's record of fulfilling its commitments is ''not an encouraging one,'' but said mr. maliki now seemed to him ''eager'' to follow the plan worked out with american commanders.  he acknowledged that mr. maliki initially had wanted to carry out the intensified military effort in baghdad without more american troops. in addition, american military commanders feared that, without american forces monitoring their operations, there could been even worse sectarian bloodshed.  ''there's no question in my mind that prime minister maliki wanted to do this operation on his own,'' mr. gates said, but he was ''persuaded that additional american forces were needed in order to make his plan succeed.''  senator susan collins, republican of maine, seemed to sum up the skepticism about mr. maliki among lawmakers in both parties when she noted that he ''did not seem to welcome'' the idea of sending more american forces when she met with him in iraq just weeks ago.  ''i'm really skeptical that the prime minister has really bought into this plan,'' she said.  on friday, mr. bush invited the top republican leaders in the senate and the house to camp david for a weekend session. the retreat was planned in advance, aides said, but took on new meaning as the white house sought to prevent further republican defections over the administration's iraq strategy.  mitch mcconnell of kentucky, the senate minority leader, and representative john a. boehner of ohio, the house minority leader, and their deputies were scheduled to spend the evening at camp david on friday with the president.  asked by cbs news on friday whether he believed he had the authority to send additional troops to iraq no matter what congress wants, mr. bush replied that ''in this situation i do.''  the president's iraq strategy remained a deeply divisive subject during a private senate republican conference breakfast meeting on friday. republicans began discussing an alternative resolution, senior aides said, offering lawmakers an avenue to express their opposition without joining the senate resolution to be offered by democrats as early as next week.  at the closed-door session, senator john mccain of arizona urged senators to spend time reading the president's plan and studying intelligence reports before making up their minds. mr. mccain, one of the administration's biggest allies on iraq who has been arguing for months for a troop increase, also began meeting privately with undecided senators in hopes of slowing republican fallout.  despite a torrent of criticism from republicans about the plan, it remained an open question whether every senator who has spoken against a troop increase would cast a recorded vote in opposition to the president. senior republican officials disputed an assertion from the senate majority leader, harry reid of nevada, that 12 republican senators would support a nonbinding democratic resolution opposing the president.  the most vocal republican opposition to expanding the military operation in iraq, for now, has been largely contained to senators in the party's moderate wing. but republican congressional leaders said they feared the discontent could grow when lawmakers hear from their constituents during the three-day weekend.  ''people have strong views. they are well informed by their own constituents, by their consciences, and there are a lot of different voices on this,'' said senator john thune, a south dakota republican. ''this is the dominant issue of the time. it eclipses everything else.''  republicans were keeping a close watch on public opinion polls, particularly a survey by cnn and the opinion research corporation on friday showing that 66 percent of americans oppose the president's plan to send more troops to iraq.  the reach of war  