an out-of-towner arrives to show she's kept the faith   in american cities outside new york, modern dance thrives by the grit of individuals like jean isaacs, who has lived in san diego since 1970 and has devoted much of her life to spreading its faith. so her choreographic output, judging from a performance by her san diego dance theater at danspace project on thursday, is fairly traditional, with few surprises in her highly structured, emotionally wrought dances.  ms. isaacs's ''three quartets'' is a carefully polished work, set to music by steve reich, that follows a strict choreographic formation. in the first movement, six dancers dressed in white converge and break apart in simple patterns that make the most of strong legs and straight arms. in ''cheers,'' ms. isaacs takes a less stringent approach, pairing damien rice's songs with fitful, temperamental movement to relate a tale of unreciprocated love. the opening duet, for bradley lundberg and sadie weinberg, is full of tense stares and slow-motion overhead lifts. in one climactic moment, more mannered than sexy, mr. lundberg ferociously rips off his shirt.  ''her it age'' explores issues of aging, beauty and italian-american heritage. drawing on ms. isaacs's journal entries, the work begins with a voice-over reciting things she has lost, including her right knee and her maidenhood. one by one, the dancers leave the stage. the italian angle comes in later. (''i like italian food,'' ms. isaacs says; she then lists a menu.) but the earnest delivery, both in the text and in much of the repetitive movement, makes ''her it age'' rather cloying fare.  the program also includes ''giallo per quattro,'' a quartet by the guest choreographer jeffrey gerodias, a former member of alvin ailey american dance theater. here, vigorous movement is undermined by mr. gerodias's choice of overly familiar music: beethoven's ''moonlight sonata'' and ''pathétique,'' and a bach violin concerto. in his lighthearted final section, mr. gerodias even refers to paul taylor's bach masterpiece ''esplanade.'' it suffers by comparison.  the jean isaacs san diego dance theater performs tonight at danspace project, 131 east 10th street, east village; (212) 674-8194.  dance review  