paid notice: deaths   whitman, r. eugene (gene), whitman   whitman--r. eugene (gene), whitman, 71. pioneer in emerging markets described as ''larger than life,'' ''charming, irreverent and fiercely competitive,'' mr. whitman was ''a true original.'' he died unexpectedly on january 7th, 2007 near his home in sarasota, fl. born october 12, 1935 in montevideo, uruguay, mr. whitman grew up in buenos aires, argentina. he graduated from hebron academy in 1954 and brown university in 1958. in 1961, he earned an mba from new york university while serving in the national guard. mr. whitman began his career as a bank trainee with irving trust company in new york city in 1960. over the following 19 years, he worked for several wall street firms, including warburg paribas and arnold & s. bleichroeder. in 1980, he founded his own investment banking firm, whitman & company, inc. located in boston ma. starting in 1991, mr. whitman raised over $6b in assets for genesis investment management group in london, one of the first firms focused solely on emerging market equity investing. at the time of his death, mr. whitman represented longview partners, another london based investment manager. he maintained homes in wellesley hills, ma, south dartmouth, ma, and sarasota, fl where he relished being with friends and family. mr. whitman gave generously of his time and resources. his favorite commitment was his alma mater, hebron academy, where he served on the board of trustees. there, he conceived of an entrepreneurship program. he is survived by his wife and partner of 46 years daphne tewksbury whitman, a son, chip (ralph e., jr.) of new york city, a daughter, hilary allinson of wellesley hills, ma, two grandchildren, ashley and justin, and brother, charles of new york city. to celebrate mr. whitman's life, a memorial service will be held on january 19 at 11am at the wellesley hills congregational church in wellesley, ma. in lieu of flowers, the family asks that donations be given to the gene whitman entrepreneurial & leadership fund, hebron academy, po box 309, hebron, me 04238.  