bush's legacy vs. the 2008 election   during the midterm elections, a question nagged at republicans who agreed to follow the white house script on the iraq war: does the president care more about his legacy than the party's in pushing his course?  by last week, many republicans on capitol hill had come to believe that their interests and the president's may be diverging even wider.  on one end of pennsylvania avenue is a president who argues that history will judge him favorably on the war; on the other are increasingly skeptical republicans who blame the president's stay-the-course strategy for the loss of majority status in congress and fear that it may cost them again in 2008.  the unusual circumstances of the 2008 election may only aggravate the situation. congressional republicans face high stakes, particularly in the senate, where 21 are up for re-election, compared with just 12 democrats. and the democrats have already put targets on senators in the northeast and midwest where antiwar sentiment helped democrats sweep into office.  the president, on the other hand, cannot run again, and has no chosen successor, leaving him unbound to electoral concerns.  like any president, however, he is concerned with how history will judge him. mr. bush has frequently likened himself to harry truman, an unpopular president when he left office, but one applauded by history.  ''to coin a phrase, he's no harry truman,'' said robert dallek, a presidential historian. ''truman is now seen as a near great president because he put in place the containment doctrine boosted by the truman doctrine and the marshall plan and nato, which historians now see as having been at the center of american success in the cold war.''  ''if you ask yourself, what is bush's legacy, what is there?'' mr. dallek asked. ''what's his larger design to meet the dangers of islamic terrorism?''  the parallels, some historians say, are more to lyndon johnson.  robert a. caro, the johnson biographer, says that the similarities are striking if you look at newspapers from 1967 as the nation headed into the tumultuous election year of 1968.  ''you see this pouring in of the national treasure, this rise in troops against the background of failure,'' he said. ''the opposition to this starts to be expressed more and more on the floor of congress. you have a president who is unbending in each case.''  president johnson was increasingly concerned about his legacy. he wanted it to be the great society, but more and more he feared it would be overwhelmed by failure in vietnam. ''both presidents seem absolutely convinced that their course is correct,'' mr. caro said. ''they both feel that if they're only allowed by public opinion to pursue that course, they will win.''  mr. johnson faced most of his opposition from within his own party. in 1964, only two senators voted against the gulf of tonkin resolution, escalating the american involvement in vietnam. by 1966, senator j. william fulbright, who voted for the resolution, gave a speech at johns hopkins university on the arrogance of power, and the next year, senator eugene mccarthy announced that he would challenge mr. johnson for the democratic presidential nomination. by 1968, mr. johnson announced he would not seek re-election.  republicans are not close to such an all-out revolt, but their opposition last week was a striking turnaround from just six months ago, when all but one member of the republican majority in the senate rejected a plan to begin withdrawing troops within the year.  seven republican senators have said publicly that they oppose the president's plan. many more have said they will wait for more information to make a decision, or have expressed only qualified support; a washington times survey late in the week found only 21 of 49 republicans expressing ''unqualified support.''  those opposing the plan include senators facing tough re-elections, like senator norm coleman of minnesota, who democrats have already declared one of their top three targets for 2008.  those who oppose or express reservations about the president's plan say it is not primarily a matter of politics; they question the iraqi government's commitment to deliver on promises, and have had their doubts reinforced by visits to iraq and the excruciating pain of calling families who have lost loved ones in the war.  ''politics is lurking beneath the surface but the facts themselves compel, repeat compel, our colleagues to dig deeper,'' said senator john w. warner, the virginia republican who is a member, and was recently chairman, of the armed services committee. he says he wants to study the president's proposal before deciding whether to support it.  but they also recognize public opinion.  ''many republicans, like americans, are increasingly disappointed in the lack of resolution in iraq,'' said senator susan collins, republican of maine, who has argued to withdraw, not increase, troops in baghdad. ''the fact that the strategy that the administration has pushed in the past did not work leaves me, and many of us, to ask questions about the president's new strategy.''  the split seems likely only to widen. some lawmakers called to the white house to discuss the plan last week said mr. bush did not seem interested in what one called ''an exchange of views.''  ms. collins said she was struck by ''how confident he was.''  ''i think this issue is so thorny and so plagued with uncertainty, and yet he seems so certain,'' she said.  on the hill, meanwhile, even those who did support the president's plan in iraq offered less than the hearty endorsements of the troop surge. some, like mr. warner, said they needed more information before they committed to any increase. at an armed services committee hearing on friday, mr. warner asked the pentagon to provide results of the war game analyses it has done to evaluate the results of adding more troops.  in the house, as fierce a partisan as representative jack kingston said he was not ready to lend full support, but looked forward to hearings on the plan.  other republicans supported the president but emphasized that the commitment in iraq must not be open-ended -- a democratic refrain. and they argued for the need for benchmarks to evaluate the success of the increase, all of which leaves room for them to peel away from the president if the war does not show more success soon.  heading toward 2008, republicans are no longer expecting the kind of party discipline on the war that they expected in 2006. instead, party leaders say members must speak their consciences.  ''voters will recognize a phony and a fraud,'' said representative tom cole of oklahoma, who is leading the republicans' 2008 efforts to gain back the majority they lost in the house. ''if you believe the president is right you should say so. if you have a legitimate and honest difference with the president, you shouldn't hesitate to draw that difference.''  the nation  