spy case comes to u.s. as agency urges testing   health officials in the united states have begun to tell some people who traveled to london last year that they may want to be tested for exposure to the radioactive poison that killed a former russian spy.  officials at the centers for disease control and prevention in atlanta said yesterday that the notification process began this week after health authorities in london gave them a list of people who may have been exposed to polonium 210, a radioactive substance that killed alexander v. litvinenko, the former spy. he died on nov. 23.  as the criminal investigation into his death has progressed, british health authorities have slowly widened the circles of people known to have been exposed and those suspected of having been exposed to the substance. on thursday, in a news conference, the british authorities said they were working with officials from 48 countries to evaluate the health of about 450 people who were in london around nov. 1, when the authorities suspect mr. litvinenko was poisoned.  in atlanta, c.d.c. officials said that they were notifying particular states and that state health authorities were in turn notifying people who might have been exposed to or poisoned by polonium 210. the officials refused to disclose the number of states or people involved.  bernadette burden, a spokeswoman for the centers, said that agency officials had decided to keep the figures confidential ''to keep down hysteria,'' but that they might eventually release the overall numbers.  ''we're going through a very careful process to make the notifications,'' ms. burden said. ''people are being made aware that the possibility of exposure is significant.''  urine testing is the standard way of detecting polonium 210 in the body. ms. burden said that the people were being advised to talk to their doctors and that the physicians could in turn have the analysis done by two companies, eberline services in richmond, calif., and general engineering laboratories in charleston, s.c.  