film in review; verdict on auschwitz -- the frankfurt auschwitz trial 1963-1965   opens today in manhattan  directed by rolf bickel and dietrich wagner  in german, with subtitles  not rated; 180 minutes  the timing may be coincidental, but for perspective on the hanging of saddam hussein it would be difficult to do better than a viewing of ''verdict on auschwitz,'' a stark, emotionally draining documentary on the trial in frankfurt of 22 defendants accused of being part of the nazi death machine.  the film, initially produced in 1993 by a german public television station for the 30th anniversary of the start of the trial, seems ragged and disorganized by the current standards of american documentaries, but that doesn't detract from its power. instead it enhances it, serving as a reminder that hollywood treatments of the holocaust, as excellent as some of them have been, are no match for the unvarnished reality.  rolf bickel and dietrich wagner built the film around audiotapes of the trial, which included testimony by more than 200 auschwitz survivors. the prosecution's painstaking case offers contrasts with the trial of mr. hussein, which has been faulted by some rights groups, but so does the long delay in pursuing the defendants. which is more unsettling, the relatively quick justice meted out to mr. hussein, or the picture of the midlevel managers of auschwitz living free of repercussions for almost 20 years after the war?  another point of comparison: against the chutzpah of the nazis in this film, mr. hussein, with his protestations and weak attempts to turn the tables, registers as a pipsqueak. in a particularly jaw-dropping clip, adolf eichmann, whose conviction in an israeli court in 1961 was a sort of prelude to the frankfurt trials, blames higher-ups for his crimes and applies the v-word to himself.  ''the subordinates of these superiors are now victims,'' he says. ''i am such a victim, and it should not be forgotten.'' some defendants at the frankfurt trial tried similar hogwash, claiming they did not know that mass murder was taking place in their camp. it rings ludicrously hollow, a reminder that those who take responsibility for their own actions fare best in the eyes of history.  neil genzlinger  