come to our club. or not. whatever.   if the owners of the anchor, a lounge on spring street in the west village that opened two weeks ago, were hoping to create something other than a downtown hot spot, they seem to have taken all the necessary precautions.  the anchor, a moodily lit cubbyhole with an americana theme, has no sign, no bouncer, no bottle service and no velvet rope. the point, the owners say, is to avoid growing too popular too soon. but if last weekend was any indication, they may be falling short of the mission.  ''last saturday was a little crowded,'' said chrissie miller, 30, a fashion designer who is one of the owners, recalling the crush at the bar around 1:30 a.m. ''i was a little freaked out. i don't want it to get to the point where our friends can't get in.''  if you haven't cracked the code of the newest night spots in manhattan, there might be a reason: like the anchor, they are discreet to the point of invisible, quiet to the point of skittish, intimate to the point of anonymous.  there is graydon carter's out-of-the-way restaurant, the waverly inn, which has become a most-talked-about table without even being officially open (the latest word is february). or the rose bar at the gramercy park hotel, which requires reservations just for drinks after 10 p.m.  these cozy bars and clubby restaurants signal a retreat from the night-life largess of the meatpacking district and west chelsea. instead of v.i.p. seating, they rely on techniques, some from the speak-easy era, like obscure locations, secret (and oft-changed) reservation numbers and ''soft openings'' that cater to insiders, to create the perception of exclusivity. while these are well-worn sleights of hand, a flurry of subtle arrivals suggests that small and quiet is back in vogue.  mostly downtown, the newcomers include home sweet home and the box on chrystie street, east side company bar on essex street, death & co. on east sixth street and the beatrice inn in the west village. some, like anchor, refuse to hire doormen or d.j.'s, relying instead on ''friends who have the cool music collections,'' ms. miller said.  ''you don't hear people in fashion going to big clubs,'' said dani stahl, the accessories director at nylon magazine and a dedicated clubgoer; she said she has detected a significant shift recently away from noisy clubs. ''it's, 'let's go for a mellow dinner at the waverly,' '' she said.  death & co., a shadowy cocktail lounge, seats 54 and is unmarked except for a name written in script on the pavement at the door. ''we want a clientele that is curious in the direction of what we're doing,'' said david kaplan, an owner. ''we don't want to take a party from n.y.u. and shift them away from jäger shots.''  relying on word of mouth and dining blogs, it opened to the public on jan. 2, mr. kaplan said, and within three days, patrons were facing a two-hour wait.  jared bassoff, 27, a chef from greenpoint, brooklyn, who stopped in on monday night, said he had been following the lounge's progress on dining web sites like egullet. ''people like to think they are the first ones to discover the jewel in the rough,'' he said.  at home sweet home, which opened four months ago after a two-month soft opening as a subterranean bar decorated with shabby sofas and taxidermy animals, the owners seem as interested in avoiding customers as luring them in.  ''i can't tell you the countless times people have told me to put a sign up because we would get more business,'' said kristin vincent, one of the owners, ''and i'm like, 'no, we don't want more business.' ''  last sunday night, a group of young new yorkers went searching for an unmarked lounge that they had read about online -- the east side company bar, at 49 essex street. but when they got to the listed address, they found only storefronts barricaded by steel gates and an apartment building, said may lightfoot, 27, a nursing student.  unsure if the bar lay behind the steel gates, was actually located extra-secretly in the apartment building or was simply closed, ms. lightfoot recalled saying to her friends, ''o.k., this is no. 49. do we just go in here and start knocking on random apartment doors?'' (the bar is closed sundays).  ''it fires the imagination,'' ms. lightfoot said later that night from a nearby bar, milk & honey. the hunt, she said, ''makes it feel like you're playing.''  while it is easy enough to hide among shuttered vegetable stands, it is harder to maintain an air of secrecy at, say, the rose bar. which is not to say the management did not try. ian schrager, who conceived the bar as part of his $200 million makeover of the gramercy park hotel, has said from the beginning that it should be less like a ''scene'' than like a literary salon.  ''i tried to get in here several times,'' konrad camilleri, 37, an investment banker, said as he hovered over the red-felt pool table at a birthday party on a recent evening. ''it's a strenuous exercise. you have to send an e-mail, and they never reply.''  while he liked the low-key space, and particularly the lack of loud music, mr. camilleri admitted to feeling a little resentful. ''i would come in here and probably spend $1,000 a night,'' he said, but all the fuss has dissuaded him from making further attempts to get in. ''when they do start replying to my e-mails, i won't come here.''  but owners insist they are not trying to be elitist. ''i guess we just believe in not drawing attention to ourselves in all things,'' said matthew bromcheck, an owner of the beatrice inn on west 12th street, which officially opened a few weeks ago and does not let media photographers inside.  it was once a neighborhood restaurant beloved for its red-sauce specialties; its new incarnation is already drawing young people from the music, film and literary scenes -- the kind of clientele who would actually care that the bar is owned in part by paul sevigny, a sometime d.j. and a brother of the actress chloë sevigny.  but perhaps no new establishment has inspired more chatter, in part by its coy refusal to officially open, than the waverly inn, tucked away beneath a brick town house on bank street at the corner of waverly place. for months, the restaurant has dragged out its soft opening, catering to celebrities and friends of mr. carter, the editor of vanity fair and one of several owners. news reports and gossip circles have been filled with formulas for gaining admittance -- call mr. carter's office at vanity fair, or call the chef, john delucie, on his cellphone.  last sunday, as salman rushdie, lou reed, bob costas, carolina herrera and mr. carter dined there in red booths beneath the edward sorel murals, a party of four waited, only to be told by a hostess that no tables would be open because a ''private party'' was coming. they left, looking dejected.  perhaps they should have stuck it out. a party of two, denied because of the same ''private party,'' remained and was seated in 30 minutes -- probably less time than it would take to get a table at carmine's in times square without reservations.  the march of the ''inns'' continues: the inn lw12, at ninth avenue and little west 12th street, the brainchild of jeffrey jah of lotus and daniel boulud, opens in february.  but the secret-clubhouse allure does not last for long, said serge becker, one of the owners who in 2005 opened la esquina, a famously secret restaurant hidden behind a taco stand (and a discerning doorman) on cleveland place.  ''the staying-under-the-radar thing is a little bit of an illusion,'' mr. becker said. ''anyone with a camera or a blackberry or a phone'' can expose you on the internet. then the secret is out.  which may not be so bad, he said. ''you get bored of seeing the same 50 people all the time,'' mr. becker said. ''it makes it a little inbred.''  