designing a starter town house with a twist   when andrew c. friedman, a manhattan architect known for his elaborate (and expensive) classical residences, chose a nondescript little brick and fake-stone building in the bedford-stuyvesant neighborhood of brooklyn to redesign, he already knew the kind of urban couple he imagined there -- and they were very different from his usual clients.  no, this imaginary makeover was not for the people who commissioned the eight-room park avenue pied-à-terre that mr. friedman is currently working on, nor the guy with the town house who wants his new ballroom to take up an entire floor.  the house at 9a pulaski street -- listed at a $695,000, negotiable -- would be ''for a very hip couple without a great deal of money,'' he said, ''who might start out by renting out the bottom floor to pay a chunk of the mortgage, and then, later, take over the whole house and maybe eventually add on.''  so far, so good.  but when mr. friedman and his assistant krzysztof a. nowak (known as kris) got out of a taxi on pulaski street two weeks ago, their faces showed only disappointment, with a tinge of horror. ''i'm wondering what we have gotten ourselves into,'' mr. friedman, a partner in the studio for civil architecture, said as he climbed the slightly off-kilter stairs to the slightly off-kilter second floor. ''well, we wanted a challenge.''  the second floor, although bright enough, was a jumble of little rooms; the only redeeming factor was an ornate wooden parquet floor, a mystery in such an ordinary 1920s building. but the views were intriguing: over the tops of equally short buildings, over the new home depot a block away and over what seemed like miles of brooklyn's cityscape.  things started getting interesting on the first floor.  when the caretaker opened the door to its separate entrance, mr. friedman broke into his first smile. ''wow,'' he said, ''this is the place the couple would like to live in, not the upstairs.''  the first floor has high ceilings, perhaps 11 feet, and opens out into a wonderful wide loft space, even if it is a dark one. in the back of the big room, a table was set for four, complete with lace tablecloth, cloth napkins and red plastic roses. (we ignored the tasty banana mouse trap on the linoleum floor.) mr. friedman went farther back, into the kitchen, freshly covered with formica. behind the kitchen, in a wing added much later, he found a bedroom balanced on a platform about a foot higher than the hallway.  and then, through a door, was a well-proportioned backyard that could definitely benefit from a landscape designer -- or even a few shrubs from that home depot nearby.  standing in the backyard and looking toward the rear of the house, mr. friedman was clearly planning something. ''i see a roof terrace,'' he said, ''or maybe adding another story, which would make it the same height as the building next to it.''  meanwhile, mr. nowak, wielding his digital camera, had left the house for an exploration of the neighborhood. he returned, excited by his discovery of what lay around the corner, on nostrand avenue.  ''we were wondering what this building had been, why the first-floor facade had been blocked up,'' he said. ''just come around the corner and see. this building has brothers and sisters. what we have here is one small piece of a whole neighborhood.''  he had discovered that the house on pulaski street was one of perhaps a dozen ''twin'' buildings, built with the identical brick diamond-shaped ornament and twinned double windows on the second floor, stretching across the whole nostrand avenue blockfront and reaching down pulaski.  the house at 9a pulaski originally had a first-floor storefront, with a large shop window and a recessed corner door supported by an iron column. the shopkeeper -- a grocer or dry-goods merchant, perhaps -- probably lived above the store, and knowing that immediately gave the building a certain warmth, a certain context -- even a certain future.  ''i knew if we came out here we'd find something, something we couldn't have predicted,'' mr. friedman said. ''now we just have to figure out a way to restore this sort of detailing in a contemporary manner -- and have some fun doing it.''  two weeks later, in his soho office, mr. friedman, joined by his partner, donald m. rattner, as well as mr. nowak, put a silvery disk into a giant-screen computer and showed off their automated rendering of the project. as one image metamorphosed into another, the many surprises of the plans for this intriguing building became evident.  what was that in the backyard? a weatherproof movie screen. where do you watch it from? the new bleachers on the new terrace off the second floor, of course. what's that on top of the second floor? the new third floor. and above that were saw-toothed skylights that look like an alligator's back.  the team had decided to keep intact the upper part of the building -- the original facade, with its broken pediment that shouts the mid-1920s as loudly as a flapper's cloche hat -- but to add a 21st-century rendition of the shop window, which would provide much more light. there, too, is the corner door supported by the pillar.  it is not a true restoration, a slavish following of each and every detail, but a streamlined version, more in keeping with the streamlined interior.  inside, mr. friedman and his team created what corbusier might have called a machine for living in brooklyn, a slick residence for the couple he had always kept in mind, and even a child or two, depending on how the spaces would be used.  in terms of structure, the team knocked off the ill-fitting rear addition and moved the kitchen to face the street, where the newly created ''shop window'' has translucent glass, allowing in light but keeping the neighborhood out. in the back is the garden, with its movie screen and plantings.  ''what is rare in town houses -- you won't find it in classic brownstones -- is that you can just walk out to the back garden from the living room,'' mr. rattner said. ''you don't have to walk up from the ground floor, or down a staircase from the parlor floor.''  the first-floor bedroom has been lost, but upstairs there are more, either one or two on the second floor, depending on their size. then, on the third floor is the new master bedroom and a 16-by-20-foot room, facing north and the back of the building. this could be a studio, an office or a playroom.  there is a new half bath on the first floor, one or two bathrooms on the second floor and another bath on the top floor. in the setback of the new third floor, a front-facing terrace has been added, shaded by a wood pergola.  when balanced against the creativity of the plan, and its complexity, the estimates for the transformation seem moderate and not out of line with mr. friedman's imaginary owners.  the first phase would be minimal, costing perhaps $20,000, and including the demolition of a few ungainly sheetrock walls downstairs -- plus some painting and refurnishing. if the out-of-kilter stairs are structurally sound -- something that would be learned in any structural inspection before the closing -- the architects suggested that they be left alone, for now.  the second phase, costing perhaps $225,000, would include completely renovating the first and second floors, turning the building into a one-family house for the couple. the third phase, at about $180,000, would add the top floor and terrace.  (jerry minsky, one of the listing agents, said that if the second floor were rented out much as it is now, the new owners would have mortgage payments of about $1,600 a month, at today's rates, assuming a 10 percent down payment. if the owners decided to rent out both floors until they could afford to move into the whole house, he said the property would generate a positive cash flow.)  the three architects, buoyed by their discovery of the block's common style, think that the renovation of this one house might be only the beginning of the neighborhood's rebirth.  ''this could be part of a bigger story,'' said mr. friedman as his colleagues nodded vigorously. ''what we're doing is designing a prototype that might catch fire and go around the block. the whole block might be restored.''  mr. nowak opened a large black portfolio. in it was a rendering of what the entire block of nostrand avenue might look like with trees and with each building restored with the same type of contemporary storefront as the town house on pulaski street.  some could house restaurants, mr. friedman said, and some might be boutiques. and in a flight of fancy that would warm any preservationist's heart, these small businesses might even have their owners living above them again.  but what about the existing owners? what about the fact that a church congregation makes its home in the corner building -- a building that, in the rendering, is drawn with bittersweet-orange canvas awnings on its pulaski street side?  ''developers can accomplish anything,'' mr. friedman said, laughing. ''you'd be amazed!''  the specs  sketch pad focuses on an apartment, loft, house or shack now for sale that has unrealized potential. each month, a different architect or designer is asked to create a vision of what the place might look like. there are no guarantees that the plans would be approved by co-op boards, municipal building departments or planning boards. but they can help real estate shoppers learn to see past ugly paint, too-small kitchens and a warren of rooms.  architects  andrew c. friedman, donald m. rattner and krzysztof a. nowak  studio for civil architecture  (212) 625-3336  property  a two-story brick building, divided into two apartments with separate entrances, at 9a pulaski street, between nostrand and marcy avenues, in brooklyn  $695,000  renovation cost  stage 1: $20,000; 2, $225,000; 3, $180,000  real estate agents  jerry minsky (718) 210-4010  jessica buchman (718) 832-4193  corcoran group  sketch pad  