round up the usual lawyers   no one who has followed president bush's policies on detainees should be surprised when a member of his team scorns american notions of justice. but even by that low standard, the administration's new attack on lawyers who dare to give those prisoners the meager representation permitted them is contemptible.  speaking this week on federal news radio, a web site and am radio station offering helpful hints for bureaucrats and helpful news for the administration, cully stimson, the deputy assistant secretary of defense for detainee affairs, tried to rally american corporations to stop doing business with law firms that represent inmates of the guantánamo internment camp.  it does not seem to matter to mr. stimson, who is a lawyer, that a great many of those detainees did not deserve imprisonment, let alone the indefinite detention to which they are subjected as ''illegal enemy combatants.'' and forget about the fundamental american right that everyone should have legal counsel, even the most heinous villain.  in his interview, reported yesterday by the washington post editorial page, mr. stimson rattled off some of the most respected law firms in the country that, after initial hesitation, have courageously respected that right. he called it ''shocking'' that they were ''representing detainees down there'' and suggested that when corporate america got word of this dastardly behavior, ''those c.e.o.'s are going to make those law firms choose between representing terrorists or representing reputable firms.'' he added: ''we want to watch that play out.''  when his interviewer asked who was paying these firms for the work, mr. stimson said, ''it's not clear, is it?''  actually, it is quite clear. mr. stimson surely knows that the vast majority of those cases are being handled for free by law firms that have not signed on to mr. bush's post-9/11 revision of the american rules of justice. still, he persisted, saying some lawyers were ''receiving monies from who knows where.''  the interview was a greatest-hits remix of bush administration nonsense about guantánamo, including mr. stimson's message to corporate executives that lawyers ''are representing the very terrorists who hit their bottom line in 2001.'' the only terrorists at guantánamo associated with 9/11 were transferred there recently after being held for years in secret c.i.a. prisons where no lawyer could enter.  not only do we find mr. stimson's threats appalling, we differ with him about 9/11. the tragedy and crime of that day was that thousands of innocents were slaughtered -- not that it hurt some companies' profit margins.  editorial  