maryland hands clemson its first loss, and dreams start anew   a big chunk of the hardwood floor that maryland played on en route to winning the n.c.a.a. championship in 2002 is attached to a wall inside the comcast center. the terrapins walk past the floor on their way to practice. the junior forward james gist said he stares at it and thinks about bringing the university another title.  ''i've even had days in class where i just zone out, feeling like i'm in a championship game,'' gist said after maryland's 92-87 victory saturday against no. 17 clemson, which was the nation's last unbeaten team. ''i've zoned out at lunch, too, just sitting there. my friends would tell me to snap out of it, and i'm like, 'man, i'm thinking about the championship.' ''  such thoughts have not moved beyond daydreams for the terrapins (15-3, 1-2 atlantic coast conference), who have played in the national invitation tournament for the past two seasons. and when maryland stumbled to a home loss against miami on wednesday, dropping to 0-2 in the conference, there was a sense it could be another season with a dream deferred.  but on thursday, the maryland seniors called a players-only meeting in their locker room. they discussed the need to convert easy baskets while stopping opponents from doing the same. while that may seem to be an all-too-obvious elixir, it seemed to work.  the terrapins shot 62.7 percent from the field, with many of their points coming on determined drives to the rim. their attack was constant and unavoidable.  ''defensively,'' clemson coach oliver purnell said, ''we just weren't very good.''  that has rarely been the case for the tigers this season, as their 17-0 start tied for the best in the university's history. for many years, conference games against clemson served as in-season rest stops for powerful teams such as duke and north carolina.  the tigers have never won the a.c.c. tournament, and they have had a losing conference record for nine consecutive seasons. they are the only original a.c.c. team never to reach the final four. despite clemson's bubbly start to the season, its place as an elite team remained tentative, as it had yet to face a team ranked in the associated press poll.  ''we felt our schedule was tougher than theirs, and we wanted to come out and show what we could do,'' maryland guard d. j. strawberry said.  both teams frequently used a full-court pressure defense in the first half. based on the high field-goal percentages, neither team was especially successful. with the skinny yet capable freshmen guards greivis vasquez and eric hayes handling the ball, the terrapins broke through the defense and converted 18 of 28 first-half field-goal attempts.  clemson established an inside presence midway through the first half, and the sophomore guard k. c. rivers took advantage of the resulting space around the 3-point arc. rivers, who does not start but is the tigers' leading scorer, made all six of his shots in the opening half, including four 3-pointers. still, maryland held a 48-42 halftime lead.  purnell said rivers's back tightened up in the second half, during which he made just 1 of 3 field-goal attempts. maryland opened a 10-point lead, but a layup by clemson's james mays (22 points, 15 rebounds) cut the deficit to 78-73 with 6 minutes 9 seconds left.  entering saturday's game, clemson had won the last 28 games in which mays had played. the tigers won their first 11 games last season before mays was ruled academically ineligible. clemson then lost 10 of its next 13. but the presence of mays was not enough saturday, as clemson was unable to pull closer than 5 points.  in the final moments, the inevitable chants of ''overrated!'' were heard. clemson will try to start a new streak wednesday when it plays host to no. 1 north carolina, which lost to unranked virginia tech on saturday.  ''it's a little bit off your shoulders,'' clemson guard vernon hamilton said. ''now we're like every other team in the country. we have a loss, and we're going to go play like we know how.''  college basketball  