star struck   the financier teddy forstmann beckoned one of his public-relations executives to hold up a recent issue of global people, a magazine published by people's daily, the chinese communist party's leading official newspaper.  he clucked at being the cover boy, as if he had followed george clooney as people magazine's ''sexiest man alive,'' and at being the subject of the cover line, ''american billionaire sets his eyes on beijing olympics.''  ''i was on page 22, and mao is on page 28,'' he said cheerfully one afternoon near dusk late last year in the 44th-floor office of his investment firm, forstmann little & company, with its crystalline view of central park.  forstmann, 66, is the chairman of img, the sports, fashion, entertainment and media marketer. he is trim, athletic and charming, a man who after decades of success is impressed with his results.  ''i know god gave me an unusual brain,'' he said. ''i can't deny that. i know that he did. i don't think you could work harder than i've worked.''  later, he said: ''i have a god-given talent for seeing potential.''  theodore j. forstmann is certainly less famous than img's biggest sports clients, like roger federer and maria sharapova, who are among the favorites to win the australian open, which starts monday, or tiger woods and annika sorenstam, the world's top-ranked male and female golfers.  and he is not as renowned as others, like the sportscaster john madden or the model gisele bündchen. but he considers himself ''inseparable friends'' with vijay singh, who won the 2007 season-opening mercedes-benz championship and has been his partner at the pro-ams at pebble beach in california and st. andrews in scotland.  forstmann little acquired img for $750 million in late 2004. img's cash flow, profits and value have since swelled, but it is not a public company and forstmann's claims cannot be independently verified.  in the past, however, he has generously rewarded his investors with large returns by selling companies like gulfstream aerospace, dr pepper and topps for many times the price he paid.  ''i have a pretty good record of not being wrong too often,'' he said.  forstmann is a philanthropist who put $50 million into a fund to finance scholarships for underprivileged new york city schoolchildren, a pianist who has played with the eagles at his annual tennis charity event, and the host of an annual a-list conference of politicians, moguls and entertainers in aspen, colo.  he is a friend of nelson mandela's, and is the never-married, white, adoptive father of two black south african sons, siya, 23, and everest, 19.  and forstmann acknowledged, for the first time, that he had a brief romantic relationship with diana, princess of wales, which turned into a long-term, non-romantic friendship for many years after.  forstmann spoke of how his friendship with monica seles brought federer to img and of meeting cesar millan, the wildly successful ''dog whisperer,'' through oprah winfrey.  ''i had two dogs that needed him,'' forstmann said. ''he said: 'it's not your dogs. it's you. how can you be a pack leader in business and such a wimp at home?' so he fixed me.'' millan is about to become an img client.  sweeping changes at img  sports have been a part of forstmann's life since childhood. the mansion where he was reared in greenwich, conn., had its own baseball diamond. at yale, he was a goaltender for the ice hockey team. he has played tennis and golf for years.  yet he sees no psychic underpinning to owning a company with a sporting foundation.  ''i have investors,'' he said. ''i'm a fiduciary. i've done this for a long time. is it fun to know federer the way i do? he's a real nice guy, and yeah. i knew vijay before i owned img. but i don't go to a lot of events; i went to the french open to see roger try to win. and i didn't go to the british open. i shouldn't advertise that, but i didn't.''  forstmann said img would be one of his last big acquisitions. to resell it for the steep profit he envisions, he has overhauled the ingrained agent culture nurtured in cleveland by its founder, mark h. mccormack, for 43 years until his death in 2003. he prefers not to even call it an agency.  he is running it like a profit-driven, even obsessed, property that for the first time is focused on cash flow or e.b.i.t.d.a., the acronym for earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization -- a measure of financial success that any buyer would use to determine the cost of acquiring img. the 2006 cash flow of about $100 million was five times higher than its average for the five years before forstmann's purchase, according to a company spokesman who was not authorized to publicly discuss the data.  ''i hadn't heard the term more than once from mark in 30 years,'' said alastair johnston, an img vice chairman and one of mccormack's longest-serving deputies. ''we hear it 10 times a day from teddy.''  forstmann has restocked most of img's top executive ranks, replacing mccormack stalwarts and others accustomed to the world of personal service with high-priced talent from nbc sports, the national hockey league and marvel entertainment. george pyne left nascar as chief operating officer to become img's president for sports and entertainment.  forstmann named himself the chief executive when he could not lure steve bornstein, the president of the nfl network, or dave checketts, who is an owner of the st. louis blues and is on the img board. he also tried to hire mark shapiro, the chief executive of six flags theme parks and a former espn executive, for a senior position.  ''ted's changed the fiber of img,'' said donald l. dell, a rival of the mccormack-era img when he ran proserv, and still a competitor as group president of sfx media. ''whether for good or not, time will tell.''  forstmann's vision emphasizes img's role in producing programming for the three-screen world of televisions, computers and cellphones. img turns out thousands of hours of sports and other programming, mostly overseas. it sends sports and entertainment segments to sprint customers and runs the web site of the laugh factory, the comedy club where michael richards had his infamous racial tirade.  forstmann also anticipates more business from china, as well as india, but said: ''in nothing i've signed off on is there a dollar for china yet. do i think we'll create a lot of value in china? i'm 90 percent sure.''  he said he wanted to build img's influence in motor sports (one reason for hiring pyne) and soccer. he also intends to aggressively expand its licensing of properties and personalities it represents and owns, and the brands it intends to create.  to date, his three acquisitions have been modest: two television production houses, and tennis week magazine and its web site, which puts img in the position of covering players it represents. it does the same with fashion magazines that chronicle some of its modeling clients.  putting on his own stamp  as much as forstmann has overhauled img, the memory of mccormack suffuses his creation. mccormack redefined sports marketing with his multitentacled and sometimes loathed agency. he preferred to pour his money into buying sporting events, opening new offices around the world or buying a french soccer team (since sold) rather than report taxable profits. he would not take img public, take in partners, sell to an outsider or offer stock to his devoted top executives -- an operational style that let him do as he pleased.  ''part of img's strength and weakness is that it was so personal to mark; he ran it out of his love for it,'' said sean mcmanus, a former img executive who is the president of cbs news and sports. ''teddy sees img as larry tisch saw cbs; come in and sell it for a lot more than he paid for it.''  by the time mccormack died, img was at least $200 million in debt. his top executives, bob kain and johnston, helped shore up its finances to sell the company, laying off workers, closing offices and selling assets, steps mccormack always resisted. that led to the sale to forstmann, who paid off the debt and slashed expenses that he considered excesses of the mccormack era.  rather than letting img define him, as mccormack did, forstmann is focused on fewer small details. todd mccormack, an img executive and the only one of his father's three older children not fired since forstmann took over, said: ''my father loved knowing how many first-round draft picks we had. ted doesn't care.''  forstmann said he admired mccormack's empire-building. ''he was a genius in that he built something from nothing to where i paid $750 million,'' he said. ''he created the potential for the potential.''  yet he cannot conceal his disdain for years of bad or profligate practices at img. ''previously at img, one and one didn't even equal two,'' he said. under his management, forstmann said, ''one plus one will equal six.''  he stops short of personal attacks on former executives, who themselves do not publicly speak ill of img because they signed non-disparagement agreements and own img stock, which forstmann sold to them at an 80 percent discount. but there is sensitivity to what several former high-level executives might say about forstmann. anna cordasco, his outside public relations counsel, reacted irately to the notion that they would provide anything but gossip from the past.  subsequently, four former executives -- kain, the former co-chief executive; peter johnson img's former chief executive for sports and entertainment; tom condon, once the top football agent; and casey close, formerly the top baseball agent -- declined to comment for this article.  forstmann said img lacked an upper management that could take it to a higher level if it continued to view the company as an agency. he said its divisions communicated badly with one another, expenses were out of whack and that the company ''grew like topsy'' without firm central direction.  sandy montag, a senior corporate vice president whose sportscasting clients include bob costas, said, ''our biggest problem, with 60 offices in 30 countries and over 2,000 employees, was communications.''  forstmann is more blunt: ''the way mark set it up, nobody knew what anybody else did.''  barry frank, vice chairman of img media, who has 30 years at the company, acknowledged the differences in mccormack's and forstmann's managerial styles, but said: ''in the long run, ted will have changed it for the better. i've been around long enough, and i see what needed to be done.''  addition by subtraction  mccormack built img into a diverse leviathan, representing athletes, broadcasters and models. it stages 15 fashion weeks around the world, with more on the horizon, owns or runs 60 golf and tennis tournaments, and creates made-for-tv events like the skins game. it represents the royal and ancient golf course of st. andrews, the world rugby cup and the all-england lawn tennis club, and owns the multisport img academies, which trains athletes, some of them into the pro ranks.  ''i can feel the potential,'' forstmann said. ''gosh, it's multiples of what i first thought.''  that potential will exclude a formerly high-profile part of its business: negotiating contracts for football, baseball and hockey athletes.  forstmann said the low fees img received from team athletes provided little to corporate profits, while endorsement deals for tennis players and golfers generate 20 percent commissions.  but phil de picciotto, the president of the octagon agency's athletes & personalities division, said: ''it's not automatic that an agency generates more profit from individual athletes. the marketing, management and servicing work for individual athletes is global, full-year and much more expensive than the provision of those services for a team-sport athlete.''  while forstmann said that img was better off without league players, he did not have a choice with the football and baseball agents. condon and close sold their practices to the creative artists agency when clauses in their contracts let them leave if peter johnson, their boss, left. when forstmann hired pyne for what was essentially the job johnson held, the agents were free to go.  img will continue to get the fees from contracts already negotiated for clients who went to the creative artists agency, and it retained some of the marketing rights to peyton and eli manning, ladainian tomlinson and joe montana.  forstmann would not discuss the events that led to the departures of condon, considered the most powerful football agent, and close, whose major client was derek jeter. instead, he preferred to look ahead, saying, ''we will make a huge amount of money on this company.''  then he offered his credo: ''this is not a golf or tennis or media business. we work for the greater glory of img.''  sports business  