4 die in fiery crash in new jersey; 3 are from freehold high school   three high school students and a school van driver were killed yesterday afternoon in freehold township, n.j., when the students' cadillac collided with the van about a mile from the campus and burst into flames, the authorities said.  the crash occurred at 2:12 p.m., shortly after classes let out for the day at freehold high school, said the monmouth county prosecutor, luis a. valentin.  the deaths sent shock waves through the school, which has 1,400 students and is part of the largest school district in new jersey.  the accident occurred on kozloski road near dutch lane road, mr. valentin said. he said the cadillac cts sedan was heading north when it collided with the southbound dodge caravan minivan, which was transporting a student.  the crash killed the driver of the cadillac, michael dragonetti, 17, and his two passengers, james warnock, 17, and andrew lundy, 16. the driver of the minivan, ruth a. macarthur, 68, of laurence harbor, also died, and her passenger, a 13-year-old student whom the authorities did not identify, was hospitalized with serious injuries.  mr. valentin said that the police were still investigating the accident and had not determined the cause, though he told reporters that speed appeared to have been a factor. he would not say which vehicle had crossed the center line dividing the two lanes.  as news of the accident spread, some of the victims' classmates gathered at the high school on robertsville road and at the crash site to hold a vigil.  ilse whisner, a spokeswoman for the school district, said that it had never before suffered such a loss, but that classes would still be held today.  ''all the counselors and grief counselors are going into the school tomorrow, for students, staff and the community, to help them deal with this tragedy as best they can,'' she said. ms. whisner said school officials would not release details about the students who died in the crash.  at the school, in freehold borough, where about 100 students and 5 grief counselors gathered yesterday, one student, michael lopez, 16, described mr. dragonetti as popular and respected among his classmates. mr. lopez, who said he considered mr. dragonetti his best friend, said he was a defensive lineman on the football team, a good student and ''a good guy.''  ''he had the world in the palm of his hand,'' mr. lopez said. ''he got 2100 on his sats and he wanted to be a physical therapist. he had good family morals. i can't believe it.''  mr. lopez said mr. dragonetti was part of the school's highly regarded medical science program and had hoped to attend boston university. he said mr. dragonetti was issued his driver's license two months ago and was a good driver.  the high school principal, linda jewell, appeared shocked as she emerged from the vigil, and said students were still trying to process their enormous loss.  ''these are kids who were at the peak of their lives,'' she said. ''and now it's over.''  before 4 p.m., friends were posting messages on andrew lundy's page at the myspace social networking web site, telling him they loved him.  on the page, he said he was interested in ''whatever makes people laugh'' and described working as a little league umpire. he also wrote that he played ''baseball, football, hockey and guitar since i was 10, even tho it seems everyone does nowadays.''  ''if i could, i would live on the beach with nothing but my friends and a waverunner,'' he wrote.  on the page, where he wrote that he would like to meet the comedian george carlin someday, one of his friends wrote at 5:27 p.m., ''only the good die young and it's never been proven more correct than today.''  on james warnock's myspace page, friends recalled his school spirit, his tae kwon do skills and his ability to make them smile. ''i look back at middle school and all the good times we had,'' one wrote. ''you always told me you had my back.''  another wrote, ''i hope you are safe now with god, my old friend.''  mrs. macarthur, the van driver, worked for unlimited auto, a transport company, and each day drove three or four handicapped students to various schools, her husband said in a telephone interview. mrs. macarthur retired from a nursing career several years ago but wanted to remain active and took a job as a driver, he said.  ''she was very considerate, she worried about the kids,'' said robert macarthur, her husband. ''she loved driving the handicapped kids to school.''  mr. macarthur said that the police would not let him near the crash site, but that he had been told that his wife's passenger had been asking about her well-being.  ''i understand the little boy in the hospital is still in there, he was asking for ruth, he wanted to know what happened,'' mr. macarthur said. ''he's such a young kid; they haven't told him yet that she died.''  with six high schools and 12,000 students in grades 9 through 12, the freehold regional high school district is new jersey's largest. it draws students from colts neck, englishtown, howell, freehold borough, freehold township, marlboro township, manalapan and farmingdale. freehold high school counts bruce springsteen among its distinguished alumni.  correction:  january 15, 2007, monday  an article on thursday about the death of three high school students and a school van driver in a vehicular accident in freehold township, n.j., misstated the given name of a friend of one of the victims, michael dragonetti, who said he was popular and respected by his classmates. the friend was greg lopez, not michael.  