preparing for farm bill cuts, or not   with a costly war in iraq, mounting budget deficits and record-high crop prices, administration officials said this week that farmers should expect to receive smaller agricultural payments in this year's farm bill.  but wait, say some congressional leaders, who are clamoring for more dollars for farmers. more money is needed to accelerate research into biofuels like ethanol, which is considered crucial to reducing the country's reliance on imported oil and for buttressing the midwest economy.  senator tom harkin, a democrat from iowa who is the chairman of the senate agriculture committee, said this week that energy would be a focus of this year's farm bill. on wednesday, at the committee's first hearing since the november election, mr. harkin explored ways to move quickly past corn-based ethanol into ''cellulosic'' ethanol made from nonfood crops like switch grass. such a move would help avoid the debate over the use of corn for fuel rather than food. some economists are worried that higher commodity prices could soon lead to higher food prices.  ''there ought to be a little bump up'' in farm spending, mr. harkin said wednesday. ''in 2001 and 2002 maybe farmers were in more trouble. but the nation is in trouble today. we now know that the pathway to the future is biofuels. what we really need to do is jumpstart this and push it, so we can cut down on the importation of foreign fuel.''  mr. harkin's position could limit the potential for this year's farm bill to enhance the country's position in global trade talks. farm subsidies have long been a bone of contention in the talks, with the united states, europe and japan clinging to farm supports that distort trade. in addition to direct payments, american farmers also receive ''countercyclical'' payments and ''loan deficiency'' payments that are paid when crop prices fall below a certain level.  amid soaring crop prices, fueled in part by global droughts and rising demand for corn-based ethanol, subsidies are expected to drop by $7 billion this year, to about $13.5 billion. agriculture officials expect demand for corn in particular to continue to be strong as dozens of ethanol plants come online this year. that will mean farm payments are expected to be lower for at least a few years.  in this new environment, some trade specialists see an opportunity for congress to cement those savings by lowering the financing structure. that could give the united states greater leverage in negotiations at the world trade organization, which remain stalled over agriculture payments. whether congress will vote to lower those ''baseline'' levels ''is the question that a lot of discussion and debate will be devoted to over the next 30 to 60 days,'' agriculture secretary mike johanns said.  mr. johanns said the agriculture department would propose a leaner farm bill later this month to reflect ''very stark'' differences between the situation facing farmers this year and in 2002, the year of the last bill. before the 2002 farm bill, american agricultural exports had dropped for five consecutive years. back then, congress had a budget surplus and had been making emergency supplemental payments to a struggling farm sector. congress ultimately allocated $7.4 billion more a year for farm programs, a 75 percent increase over projected spending for the 1996 farm bill.  today the agriculture sector's debt-to-asset ratio has fallen from 15 percent in 2002 to 11 percent, the best in recorded history, mr. johanns said. and the agriculture department is projecting $77 billion in farm exports next year, up from about $53.3 billion in 2002.  more important, with budget deficits and the iraq war, ''very definitely the budget will impact the writing of this farm bill,'' mr. johanns said. ''there is no way around it.''  congress is also expected to allocate more for conservation programs and for fruit and vegetable growers -- so-called specialty crops -- that are requesting billions of dollars in indirect payments to help their industries better compete globally.  but no area is drawing more attention in this year's farm bill debate than energy. congress is already floating several energy-related proposals that would provide tax credits to spur investment in cellulosic biomass, expand the national ethanol market by raising the renewable-fuel standards and make ethanol pumps more available to drivers.  since president bush declared in last year's state of the union address that america was ''addicted to oil,'' bipartisan support has surged for renewable fuels like ethanol.  many experts believe that creating cellulosic ethanol from plant waste and other nonfood crops like switch grass will avoid concerns over using a growing amount of the american corn crop -- now 20 percent and climbing -- to make a renewable fuel that can substitute for gasoline.  the challenge remains less about technology than about efficiency. specialists who testified at wednesday's senate hearing agreed that a gallon of cellulosic ethanol is still about twice as expensive to produce as a gallon of corn-based ethanol. and they said that making cellulosic ethanol on a commercially viable scale was still at least three to five years away.  with corn remaining the crop of choice for ethanol production, some livestock producers are already complaining that higher corn prices, which nearly touched $4 a bushel in december, about twice what they were early last year, were increasing the cost of feeding cattle, hogs and chickens. about half of the country's corn is used to feed livestock. hogs and chickens can consume only a portion of an ethanol byproduct that is meant to substitute for corn.  the pork industry ''faces significant challenges because of the rapid rise in ethanol demand,'' gene gourley, an animal nutritionist from webster, iowa, told senators on wednesday.  some in congress are concerned as well. ''i fear continued price spikes will force some producers out of the business,'' said saxby chambliss, a republican from georgia and the ranking republican on the senate agriculture committee.  those higher prices could, over time, hit consumers, said keith collins, the agriculture department's chief economist. he said that an increase of $1 a bushel in the price of corn would increase the consumer price of pork by about 3 percent.  with these concerns in mind, mr. harkin is among those in congress who view farm bill spending as critical to maintaining the momentum of biofuels, which have reinvigorated rural economies.  ''the demand for corn and for soybeans is going to be strong over the next few years,'' mr. harkin said. ''but it is nice to have a safety net. those kinds of savings should be used to provide some transitional support for farmers to begin to grow some energy-related crops.''  