when dream cars are powered by pipe dreams   the front-page headline of the detroit news last monday blared ''gm powers up'' in letters of a size usually reserved for bulletins like ''war ends.'' for a day at least, general motors owned industry bragging rights with its introduction of the chevrolet volt electric car at the north american international auto show. investors were happy; g.m.'s stock price rose a bit.  there was, however, one problem: the volt does not run. the batteries it requires to deliver the driving range and economy g.m. promised have not been developed. granted, g.m. was candid about this shortcoming, and the volt is at least as close to reality as many of the so-called concept cars that appeared at the show in the past.  so why do carmakers push ideas that don't quite work, or innovations that aren't quite finished, into the bright global spotlight of the annual auto show here?  fact is, for decades automakers have used exhibitions like this to showcase dream cars with dreamed-up powertrains wholly incapable of their advertised feats. putting wings on the fenders may not make a flying car, but it may be enough to get some publicity for your company. journalists on the auto beat quickly learn to take the more outlandish claims -- cars with soybean-based bodies, or those said to have lightning-quick acceleration while achieving 100 miles a gallon -- with several grains of salt.  the people who create such dream machines say they are just continuing a long tradition of using auto shows as idea factories. with their concept cars they are testing the waters, thinking out loud, exploring the outer edges of what might be possible -- or playing a game of liar's poker, trying to psych out the competition.  bill visnic, an engine expert and former technical editor of ward's automotive reports, said he thought that fewer automakers were engaging in this ethically questionable practice.  ''just as with the concept cars themselves, the days of goofy, totally far-out engines with no relationship to reality are waning,'' mr. visnic said.  these days most automakers just don't have the money to put into developing dead-end ideas. ''most every power plant you see these days in concept vehicles is an engine already in production, is near production, or essentially is production-feasible,'' mr. visnic said.  this has not always been the case, mr. visnic said, citing egregious examples of bogus power sources from the industry's past. perhaps the most outlandish was the ford nucleon of 1958. best described as a cross between a ranchero pickup and the enterprise from ''star trek,'' ford said the car would be powered by an onboard nuclear reactor. fortunately, no working version, just a scale model, was ever produced.  one of the more interesting concepts in the post-world war ii era was the 1963 chrysler turbine car. it was a far-fetched idea -- a basic form of a jet engine adapted for cars -- that very nearly proved viable. (dozens of the turbines were actually built and driven by private citizens.) turbines that could operate on a wide variety of fuels might have changed the geopolitical balance of power in the 21st century.  a notable misfire was the chrysler patriot, a concept racecar from 1995, supposedly destined for the 24 hours of le mans, that was said to be powered by a revolutionary system that included a huge flywheel. when chrysler unveiled the patriot at the detroit show, the company showed footage of the car speeding around a racetrack. later, it was revealed that the patriot engine had never run successfully. the racetrack video had been staged, with the patriot hauled up to speed by a tow truck.  ''patriot is definitely a standout,'' mr. visnic said. ''not just for the hidden tow truck, it also breathlessly promoted the technology du jour: flywheel energy storage. man, for a brief period, there was a lot of hype about flywheels.''  the stillborn flywheel technology was supposed to store energy like a friction toy being wound up. but when a prototype of the huge flywheel was installed in the patriot's chassis and the motor activated, it carried a lethal wallop. evan boberg, the author of a book on concept cars, ''common sense not required,'' said the flywheel broke away and tore through the chassis.  in the book, ''modern chrysler concept cars,'' the author matt delorenzo noted that from 1987 to 1999, chrysler produced nearly 50 concept cars. of those, more than half were powered by pie-in-the-sky engines that chrysler lacked the means, intent or technical know-how to produce, including those propelled by hybrid electrics, fuel cells and propane. a breakthrough promised by the 1992 cirrus -- a supercharged two stroke v-6 fury engine -- was said to produce 400 horsepower. the engine later proved to be mockup made of wood.  as word leaked out that these and other concept car engines were less than sincere efforts by manufacturers perhaps more interested in headlines than making real products, reporters began to ask tougher questions about powertrain feasibility.  in 2000, in response to skeptics who wondered whether the current crop of concept cars would really run, g.m. invited the press, including me, to drive the cars at its michigan proving ground. the test was tightly regulated: a g.m. employee was to accompany the driver and the cars could not be driven above 25 m.p.h.  the results were not persuasive; the buick lacrosse, a retro-themed concept bristling with electronic controls, trapped its occupants inside because an electrical failure prevented the experimental quiet servant voice-command system from obeying a crucial spoken command, ''open doors.''  the engine froze up on another concept car, the cadillac imaj. when i asked the engineer assigned to the gmc terradyne pickup to accompany me on a drive, he muttered something like, ''i told them this wasn't a good idea.'' after about 100 feet of slow-speed chugging, the terradyne's engine (said to be a 6.6-liter turbodiesel v-8) seized up and the pickup was towed away.  and while g.m. was forthright this year that its volt wasn't yet a running vehicle, not all manufacturers seemed inclined to full disclosure. many of today's concepts, unveiled amid great fanfare, still don't have roadworthy engines. some have no engine at all.  for example, nissan is showing off its engineless (and hoodless) bevel concept car at this year's detroit show. nissan says the bevel's power would come from a hybrid electric version of a ''small, efficient v-6,'' although nissan has not made that powertrain. obviously, the bevel isn't going anywhere -- literally or figuratively.  a company spokesman, tim gallagher, said that the bevel was a design study, so its power source was beside the point. hoods need not necessarily be opened at auto shows; in fact, fire codes often require that the power plants of show models be disabled. omitting the engine is merely a sensible way to keep down the cost of a concept car, mr. gallagher said.  the engine almost seems irrelevant with two of mazda's 2007 design studies, the nagare and ryuga, which appear to have been styled without considering where the mechanical bits might be installed.  ford's airstream concept, in theory at least, would be a plug-in electric-hydrogen hybrid car using a system that remains unperfected even after years of technical exploration.  