bicoastal retrospective   the comprehensive retrospective of paintings by colin campbell cooper at the heckscher museum of art is anchored at both ends by distinguished paintings. at one end of the museum is ''broad street cañon, new york'' (1904), a skyscraper scene that made the artist's reputation; at the other end is the dreamy, atmospheric ''palace of fine arts, san francisco'' (1916), a high point in the movement now known as california impressionism.  these paintings, which could hardly be more different in terms of style, subject matter and palette, provide an apt metaphor for the artist's career, which can be divided into two distinct phases. the first consists of his new york and east coast city skyscraper scenes, for which he is remembered and to which he would constantly return throughout his career. the second phase involves more rural, nostalgic and exotic scenery, mostly painted in california. this show affords an opportunity to compare these two largely distinct bodies of art.  organized by the curators william h. gerdts and deborah epstein solon for the laguna art museum in laguna beach, calif., ''east coast/west coast and beyond: colin campbell cooper, american impressionist'' brings together about 70 of the artist's paintings, gathered from museums and private collections all over the country. (the show travels to laguna beach after it closes here.) together these works form a portrait of a successful, peripatetic artist, one who accumulated extensive honors and critical acclaim during his lifetime but who since has largely fallen into obscurity. the show suggests the reason for that: while individual pictures are wonderful, taken as a whole his work is less than compelling.  born in philadelphia, cooper (1858-1937) was a student of thomas eakins at the pennsylvania academy of the fine arts. later, in paris, he attended the académie julian, where he studied with william bouguereau, jules-joseph lefebvre and henri lucien doucet. it was also in paris that he developed an interest in architecture, beginning with paintings of medieval architectural monuments, especially the great gothic cathedrals. though trained as a figurative painter, he would prefer the subject of architecture throughout his career.  cooper exhibited at the paris salon in 1890, returning to america the following year. he continued to paint and travel widely, like other american artists of his generation, spending summers in europe and winters back home working in his studio. dordrecht, in the netherlands, became one of his favored stomping grounds, and was the subject of several paintings from the mid- to late 1890s. among them is ''dordrecht harbor'' (circa 1898), the most vibrant and accomplished of his early european scenes. he also painted in england, producing at least one masterpiece of atmosphere and light, ''wells cathedral'' (circa 1902).  cooper's interest in historic european architecture led him, beginning around 1903, to take up painting the theme with which his art and reputation have largely become associated: towering buildings and the smoky skyline of the new american skyscraper city. it was epitomized by new york, though this was not the only modern city that he painted. showing here is a fine pair of views of philadelphia, the artist focusing on architectural structures like the curved glass and iron shed built over broad street station.  in many ways, cooper's modern city and skyscraper paintings reflect the mood of optimism and ambition that pervaded american society in this period. more prosaically, they also capture the changing face of american cities, the artist picturing landmark structures as they are being built or when newly constructed -- for instance, the distinctive, domed 47-story singer building (1908) in new york, which is the centerpiece of his panoramic ''mountains of manhattan'' (circa 1903). at the time, this was the tallest building in the world.  though cooper made a specialty of this theme, he was neither the first nor the only artist to paint the modern american city. new york street scenes and modern urban architecture attracted the attention of many artists, among them childe hassam (1859-1935), the american impressionist painter with whom cooper is most often compared. with the exception of hassam's famous flag series (1916-1919), his new york street scenes date primarily from the early to mid-1890s, thus predating cooper's by almost a decade. they are also better painted.  in the exhibition catalog, the curators make much of the fact that hassam preferred to paint more intimate urban views, whereas cooper concentrated on buildings and the majestic skyline. this is true, but it is not to say that hassam did not also paint these things, as shown by his ''lower manhattan (view down broad street)'' (1907), recently on view at the metropolitan museum of art in a retrospective of his work. it is painted from almost exactly the same place as cooper's ''broad street cañon, new york'' and another, similar picture, ''the financial district'' (circa 1908). yet hassam's painting is far superior.  whereas hassam's painting is tighter and more focused, the artist using scale, composition and light to create a sense of spatial compression to convey a dark canyon between buildings, cooper includes too much open sky at top, while also widening the foreground roadway to a point where the viewer's eye nearly drifts out of the bottom of the painting. the two artists are not in the same league. perhaps this is why, despite the rising interest in american impressionism starting in the 1960s, cooper's work has largely been ignored.  ''east coast/west coast and beyond: colin campbell cooper, american impressionist,'' heckscher museum of art, 2 prime avenue, huntington, through jan. 28. information: (631) 351-3250 or www.heckscher.org.  art review  