wal-mart chooses ad agencies yet again   for the third time in less than three months, wal-mart stores has made major decisions affecting the advertising agencies that handle its giant marketing assignments.  wal-mart, the nation's largest retailer, chose two agencies yesterday -- the martin agency and mediavest -- to handle important assignments for ads that the company aims at mainstream consumers and that appear in major media like television, magazines and the internet. wal-mart spends an estimated $580 million a year on such ads.  the announcement came five weeks after wal-mart stunned madison avenue by overturning decisions made by senior marketing executives on oct. 25 to hire the draft fcb group, owned by the interpublic group of companies, as the lead agency to create ads, and carat usa, part of the aegis group, to handle what is called media planning and buying -- that is, determining where ads run and how much to pay for them.  wal-mart attributed the reconsideration to what were described as improprieties in the selection process involving draft fcb and two wal-mart marketing executives, julie roehm and sean womack, who were subsequently fired. ms. roehm and mr. womack have denied any wrongdoing.  wal-mart barred draft fcb from taking part in the new selection during the holiday shopping season, but invited carat usa to try again, which it did, only to fall short the second time.  wal-mart let another agency owned by interpublic, the martin agency, participate in the second round as it had in the first. that paid off for interpublic as martin was chosen to replace draft fcb as the creative agency.  martin is best known for its popular gecko ads for geico insurance and campaigns for united parcel service that celebrate the color brown.  ''we are very pleased with wal-mart's decision,'' interpublic said in a statement.  shares of interpublic fell sharply on dec. 7, when the creative assignment was taken from draft fcb. they climbed 33 cents, or 2.5 percent, to close at $13.37 yesterday.  in the second review, martin bested one other agency for the creative assignment, ogilvy & mather worldwide, part of the wpp group. ogilvy had also taken part in the first review and accepted wal-mart's invitation to participate again.  carat usa lost this time as mediavest, part of the starcom mediavest group unit of the publicis groupe, was chosen to handle the media assignments.  carat usa and mediavest vied in the second review against mediaedge:cia, also owned by wpp. other large advertisers that use mediavest include coca-cola and procter & gamble -- two of wal-mart's biggest suppliers.  martin and mediavest were chosen for their ''deep retail experience, recognized creativity and an understanding of our customers,'' john fleming, chief marketing officer at wal-mart, said in a statement.  wal-mart originally began scrutinizing its advertising agencies in may after working for decades with two, bernstein-rein and gsd&m. the review was part of a comprehensive reassessment by wal-mart of how it speaks to consumers, spurred by a slowdown in sales growth and increased competition from rivals like kohl's and target.  wal-mart has been struggling to find the right balance in its ads between playing up low prices on items like pantry staples and basic clothing or promoting pricier products like flat-screen tv sets and designer clothing.  bernstein-rein, a wal-mart agency since 1974, was notified in august that it would not be rehired. gsd&m, part of the omnicom group, a wal-mart agency since 1987, was notified oct. 25 that it had lost its assignments.  after wal-mart declared the do-over last month, it invited gsd&m to take part, but executives at the agency declined.  also yesterday, wal-mart named three agencies to handle assignments aimed at multicultural consumers. those assignments were being reviewed separately from the creative and media assignments for the general market.  global hue was named to create ads aimed at black shoppers. the iw group was chosen for ads for asian-american consumers. and lópez negrete communications was selected for ads aimed at spanish-speaking shoppers.  