nice and ambitious: either, neither or both?   the power of nice  how to conquer the business world with kindness.  by linda kaplan thaler and robin koval.  144 pp. currency (doubleday).  $17.95.  ambitchous  by debra condren.  320 pp. morgan road books.  $23.95.  making up your new year's resolutions? looking for a battle plan for world conquest? consider the strategy recommended by linda kaplan thaler and robin koval, two kind-eyed, shaggy haired advertising executives who would like to introduce golden-retrieveresque sunniness to the dog-eat-dog world of business. in ''the power of nice: how to conquer the business world with kindness,'' they attribute the success of their firm, the kaplan thaler group, to their you-first philosophy. be complimentary, they adjure. be kind to doormen, assistants, cabbies and moguls. listen, admire and praise.  their book is a potent compendium of humorous and shrewd personal anecdotes, dedicated to the proposition that niceness is ''a powerful force,'' which ''can literally save your life.'' the index reads like a stand-up comic's list of bits, like ''vampire bats'' (a wise vampire bat doesn't hoard its blood feast, but shares it); ''listening: being quiet and''; basic ''principles'': for instance, ''negative impressions are like germs.''  the authors have lectured around the country and have been championed by influential and voluble optimists, like jay leno, who writes in the foreword that ''doing good things will improve your life,'' and donald trump, who rewarded their solicitous treatment of his wife, melania, during the filming of an aflac commercial by returning the favor when ms. kaplan thaler appeared on ''the apprentice.''  the two women won the account for aflac, by the way, by thinking to ask its chief executive, daniel amos, ''what really bothers you the most?'' it turned out that mr. amos was fed up because nobody could pronounce his company's name. one talking duck later, the problem was solved.  but you do not need to hobnob with hotshots to partake of the authors' theories. in little snippets labeled ''nice cubes'' they provide constructive tips for general use. when they advise ''exercise your niceness muscles,'' they assign repetitions like an entrepreneurial personal trainer: ''every day for the next week, do five nice things that have no immediate payoff for you,'' they instruct. the smallest good deed, ''can have a multiplier effect strong enough to change the world.''  let's hope the golden rule pays off for ronald m. shapiro and mark a. jankowski, who wrote a similarly titled volume a few years ago, ''the power of nice: how to negotiate so everyone wins -- especially you!'' (true to form, the two women mention the earlier book right after their title page.)  in the 1880s, when the chief achievable career goal for nice girls, apart from marriage and motherhood, was teaching school, a young woman named laura ingalls wilder wrote an essay in praise of ambition. it appeared later in ''these happy golden years,'' part of her ''little house'' series. the essay read in part, ''without an ambition to excel others and to surpass one's self there would be no superior merit.''  since then, as the laurels women can win in the working world have multiplied, female ambition has received a bad rap.  the book, ''ambitchous,'' by the psychologist and career coach debra condren, is a defiant charge to women to ''reclaim ambition as a virtue.''  ambitious men are seen as go-getters, she writes, but there is a public distaste for smart, aggressive, successful career women, who are too often labeled with the insulting epithet in the book's title.  why can't women admit they are ambitious, she asks. ''wouldn't it be inspiring if you could acknowledge straight up, to yourself and to others, that you have big, wild and precious professional goals?''  in 16 strongly worded chapters, ms. condren's corrective manifesto urges women to pry apart the bars of ''common self-imposed traps,'' which cause ambitious women to ''sell themselves short'' unwittingly by acts of ''socially sanctioned self-sabotage'' like giving away credit, not asking for advice, downplaying accomplishments, refusing awards, avoiding confrontation and ''being too responsible to others -- and irresponsible to our own needs.'' in other words, falling into the ''nice'' trap.  of course, stinting on niceness can also backfire, as judith regan has lately discovered. but ms. kaplan thaler, ms. koval and ms. condren, who have been paying attention all along, have worked out a way to make charm and ambition pay. nice work if you can get it.  books of style  