scrutiny for loans by allied   federal investigations into small-business loans issued by a unit of the allied capital corporation are growing, as a former executive of the unit faces fraud charges in michigan.  the former executive, patrick j. harrington, is accused of falsifying information on 76 loans with a value of nearly $77 million over six years, according to an indictment that was handed up on wednesday by a federal grand jury in michigan. mr. harrington has not entered a plea to the charges.  federal investigators are now looking at loans issued by the unit, business loan express, in other parts of the country, according to several people briefed on the investigation.  and the federal small business administration -- which typically guarantees 75 percent of the value of these small-business loans -- is considering suspending the preferred lending status of business loan express, pending the outcome of an investigation. that would mean that every loan business loan express issues would have to be vetted by the agency, those people said.  the s.b.a. this week also suspended the unit's ability to sell the loans it issues to large institutional investors in the secondary market, which could affect the ability of business loan express to make loans, those people said. the unit can still originate loans, but only if it intends to hold those loans on its own books, which is not something the firm has historically done.  there have been questions over lax controls and oversight at the small business administration, and the latest investigations are likely to spur further scrutiny. in recent years, the s.b.a. has come under sharp criticism for its lack of oversight in special loans after the sept. 11 attacks, which wound up being used by businesses in texas and iowa, and for its delayed response in providing disaster loans after hurricane katrina.  ''the concern is that this situation is emblematic of a larger management problem at the s.b.a.,'' kate l. davis, a spokeswoman for nydia m. velázquez, democrat of new york, the new chairwoman of the house small business committee, said in a statement. ''there are indications that this situation has been developing over the past few years.''  the house committee, which oversees the s.b.a.. has begun its own investigation of the loans in michigan, and possibly in other states, she said.  ''the committee will be investigating s.b.a.'s involvement and how the agency could have failed to detect this,'' she said.  the s.b.a. said in a statement, ''we welcome the opportunity to work with the committee and share information about the steps we have taken and will take, and work with them to share ideas on how to further refine the process.''  the s.b.a., which has paid out more than $28 million in claims for loans that originated from the michigan office of business loan express that later defaulted, has said it has the authority to recover any funds lost to fraud.  as part of the investigation, the s.b.a. plans to re-examine more than five years of loans issued by the allied unit and could seek restitution if there are additional cases of fraud, according to people familiar with the investigation.  lanny j. davis, a washington-based lawyer for business loan express, said, ''this is a good company, with good people, and i believe, in the final analysis, this will be borne out.''  the broadening investigation and the indictment are blows to allied, which in recent years has been battling with hedge funds that have contended, among other things, that the business loan express unit was profiting through obtaining fraudulent loans. since reports of the indictment appeared on wednesday, allied's stock has tumbled 7 percent.  based in washington, allied is known for its strong ties with the capital's elite. one of its directors, for instance, is marc f. racicot, the former governor of montana and the former chairman of the republican national committee.  designated a ''business development company,'' allied invests in small- and midsize private companies that it also typically lends to. business loan express, which constitutes about 6 percent of the assets of allied, is the company's largest holding.  one of the most vocal critics of allied's business loan express unit has been david einhorn, the founder and manager of greenlight capital, a hedge fund with more than $4 billion under management. mr. einhorn first publicly challenged aspects of allied's accounting and business model at a charity dinner in the spring of 2002.  in letters to directors on allied's board dating back to march 2005, mr. einhorn told allied's directors that allied and business loan express were involved in a scheme ''dependent on the commission of systematic fraud against the small business administration and, as a result, against the taxpaying citizens of the united states.''  ''allied has been aware of misconduct by mr. harrington for half a decade and it won't be hard to find many more similarly fraudulent loans in other parts of the country,'' mr. einhorn said.  in the summer of 2004, the securities and exchange commission and the united states attorney's office in washington began an investigation into allied that focused on business loan express, according to regulatory filings by allied.  while those investigations continue, red flags were being raised about business loan express loans inside the small business administration about a year ago.  the s.b.a. works with more than 2,200 lenders -- big and small -- across the country to make loans to small businesses. lenders who undergo an exhaustive examination of their internal controls, procedures and underwriting standards, and whose performance of their overall loan portfolio meets certain criteria can participate in the s.b.a.'s preferred lender program. members of the program have virtually none of their loan applications examined by the s.b.a.'s district or regional offices. the s.b.a. does, however, conduct random audits of all loans it guarantees.  about a year ago the s.b.a., which gives its lenders an internal rating on a one-to-five scale, lowered business loan express to the lowest rating that would allow it to remain in the preferred lending program, based on a rising level of late payments and defaults on loans it had made, according to people involved in the investigation.  one of business loan express's branches that had a rising level of defaults was in troy, mich., which mr. harrington headed until it was closed on aug. 1, 2006.  from early 2000 to july 2006, mr. harrington, working with a number of other people, qualified buyers for the s.b.a.-guaranteed loans by fraudulently misrepresenting the buyers' financial status, their work experience, as well as the value of the property, according to the indictment. several michigan residents were charged in criminal complaints as acting as borrowers in the scheme, according to court filings.  a lawyer for mr. harrington questioned the value of the loans federal prosecutors contend were fraudulent. ''he says he made a mistake, but not near to the extent that the government claims,'' said the lawyer, clyde b. pritchard.  a federal prosecutor in michigan said the investigation into business loan express was continuing.  correction:  january 16, 2007, tuesday  a headline in business day on saturday about a federal investigation that led to the indictment of a michigan executive, patrick j. harrington, on charges of falsifying information on 76 small-business loans, referred incorrectly to the company under scrutiny. it is business loan express, a unit of the allied capital corporation -- not allied capital itself.  