a move with more bends than beckham's   juan pablo montoya is 31, just like david beckham, and is bringing his game to the united states, just like beckham. therein the comparison ends.  whereas beckham is looking for a cushy spot to land in major league soccer, montoya has already ascertained that there are no soft edges to the tracks of nascar.  montoya, who was one of the stars of the worldwide formula one circuit, had to evacuate a burning wreck after he hit a wall on the 251st lap in his first major stock-car race nov. 19 in florida.  ''that's racing,'' montoya said yesterday. ''it was a big hit, but it looked more spectacular than it was.''  on monday morning, montoya will begin training at the hallowed track at daytona, at speeds up to 200 miles an hour. he tooled around those banked curves a week ago, in a hybrid 24-hour car at the relatively modest speed of 160 m.p.h.  ''i was surprised how bumpy it was,'' montoya said yesterday. ''it's really bumpy.'' just to make sure this was not his imagination, montoya asked some regulars at daytona and they assured him, well, son, that's just the way it is.  ''it didn't seem like any big deal to them,'' montoya said.  the worst thing likely to happen to beckham is that players he has never heard of will run around his increasingly immobile body, and that his still-superb free kicks will go to callow teammates who haven't got a clue what to do with the sudden gift.  in nascar, danger pops up faster than you can say dale earnhardt.  ''you don't want the track to be more bumpy,'' montoya said. ''it can get messy real fast. it should be interesting.''  montoya, a native of bogotá, colombia, does not lack for guts. he proved that in his first year of formula one in 2001, when he passed the famed german driver michael schumacher on a tight corner in são paulo, brazil.  ''there's not a lot of passing in formula one,'' montoya noted yesterday in a telephone interview from miami. ''that was a massive deal. it was like, wow!''  that aggressive maneuver certainly got schumacher's attention, and it made montoya instantly popular. but over the course of five years, montoya gained the reputation of a competitor who was sometimes his own worst enemy, never winning the formula one title. schumacher retired last fall as the reigning superstar, with somewhat of a sneer for montoya's move to nascar.  ''personally, i wouldn't do it,'' schumacher said. ''what do you do in nascar? what is exciting there? i can't see that, running around on ovals.''  he added: ''i don't know how heavy the cars are, but they are heavy, very low-developed cars compared to formula one. i don't see the challenge.''  montoya said yesterday that he had ''pretty much done everything i was going to do, and to be realistic i wasn't going to win a championship'' with the cars he was racing in formula one. he knew chip ganassi, who was looking for a driver for his nascar team, and montoya had driven in other united states circuits, so he made the leap.  ''look, formula one is the most technologically advanced, from that point of view,'' montoya said. ''but is it the most fun for racing? probably not.''  montoya is expected to be an attraction for latinos as nascar tries to keep expanding around the united states. the sport seemed to be running with a caution flag last season, when attendance slipped and television ratings slumped, although in sheer numbers nascar is second only to football.  the manifest destiny of nascar also ran into the ultimate not-in-my-backyard dis recently, when the fetid outback of staten island was rejected as a site for a new york track.  at the same time, the quirky 10-race championship series, the chase for the nextel cup, which allows also-rans to clutter up the track for the 10 or so finalists, has not exactly caught up with the super bowl or the world cup as the big payoff. in fact, nascar's signature event remains its first race of the season -- the daytona 500, on feb. 18 this year -- which makes the sport appear to be driving in reverse.  this daytona will be worth watching if only because montoya, driving the no. 42 texaco/havoline dodge, will become the first formula one regular to join nascar as a full-time driver. (last fall, he competed in seven events at three levels; he and two teammates will drive in the 24-hour road race at daytona on jan. 27-28.)  montoya acknowledges he has a lot to learn about competing in close quarters and drafting behind opponents at nearly 200 m.p.h. conversely, drivers like dale earnhardt jr. and jeff gordon speak respectfully of the skill needed to control formula one cars. ''jeff is pretty good at it, to be honest,'' montoya said.  montoya, who had a house in madrid, saw beckham play once for real madrid last season, but does not consider himself a huge fan of soccer (as schumacher is). montoya will follow beckham's arrival this summer, but their migrations are vastly different. at worst, beckham might get kicked in the shins. montoya will be out at daytona on monday to investigate those bumps that have already made an impression on him.  sports of the times e-mail: geovec@nytimes.com  