nice night for a norse shout-along (bring devil horns)   they came to the b. b. king blues club & grill on wednesday night: two groups of traveling musicians, one from sweden and one from norway, both playing traditional scandinavian music for an audience of connoisseurs. religious sagas were retold, ancient norse runes were evoked, festive costumes were worn. who says americans don't appreciate world music?  to be fair, the musical tradition on display on wednesday night was a relatively recent one. this was a celebration of black metal, the brutal but mystical subgenre that calls scandinavia home. one headliner was enslaved, from norway, a band that has spent 15 years perfecting a mutated form of black metal. and the other was dark funeral, from sweden, known for sticking to black-metal basics: black-and-white face paint, blurry-fast playing, screeched vocals (whereas death-metal fans usually prefer to growl), unrelentingly blasphemous lyrics. the band's banners depicted an upside-down cross inside a pentagram, along with a not-so-coded message: dclxvi.  the members of enslaved are far less theatrical (no face paint, no armor), and their set began unassumingly enough, with the chugging midtempo guitar line from a song called ''path to vanir.'' grutle kjellson, the lead singer and bassist, croaked the lyrics (''awaiting my death, gasping for air,'' et cetera), but the music never exploded into metal mayhem.  the first enslaved album was a split cd with the pioneering black-metal band emperor, but since then the members of enslaved have found their own path, drawing from 1970s progressive-rock to create albums that are both icy and elegant. in 2005 enslaved released ''isa'' (candelight), an engrossing cd that builds to a 12-minute finale, ''neogenesis.'' last year came ''ruun'' (candelight), which is slower and more abstract and maybe even better. open-minded tool fans, among others, should seek it out.  ''bounded by allegiance,'' from ''isa,'' was one highlight of wednesday's concert: mr. kjellson croaked in lovely nonharmony with the keyboardist herbrand larsen, who is also the band's only crooner; ivar bjornson, the lead guitarist, played a sinuous solo; fans defied the club's bouncers by starting a short-lived mosh pit. and the title track from ''ruun'' was another: a forceful but ethereal tribute to the old gods.  despite all that, dark funeral was clearly the fans' favorite: if metalheads want black metal unsullied by prog-rock or spaced-out interludes, then the members of dark funeral are happy (though they surely wouldn't use that word -- it's practically taboo) to oblige. in case anyone missed the point, onstage signs made it clear: ''dark funeral: swedish black metal.''  fair enough. the corpse-painted musicians did look pretty cool onstage, especially during ''open the gates,'' a satanic plea (''unholy master satan, make my wish come true/open wide your kingdom where all the evil rule'') that becomes, onstage, an exuberant shout-along. fans threw up their devil horns and chanted, ''open the gates/satan!''  even better was what happened before ''vobiscum satanas'': the lead singer, known as emperor magus caligula, paid tribute to old fans, saying, ''i've been screaming like this for 20 years.'' was a trace of self-pity detectable in his voice?  never mind: soon enough, he was screaming again. whereas enslaved's set was full of eerie melodies and nimble rhythmic shifts, the single-minded members of dark funeral are more concerned with carrying on a not-so-old tradition. that meant more opportunities for head-banging, and fewer for humming along. good news for god-fearing listeners: it turns out that the devil may not have the best tunes, after all.  music review  