when the ravens play defense, it is a bruising in disguise   linebacker bart scott had just been handed a bottle of tabasco sauce as a trophy for being the media-friendliest of the ravens when he began waving it in the air.  ''i'm going to pour a little of this on peyton this week,'' he said, referring to the colts' peyton manning. ''the whole bottle.''  tabasco was an appropriate gift for a player who drew notice this season when he said he had put some ''hot sauce'' on a tackle of reggie bush. but the legacy of scott and the ravens' defense, the most dominating in the n.f.l. this season, will largely be defined by how they play saturday against manning and indianapolis in their american football conference divisional playoff game.  earlier this week, linebacker ray lewis said this defense was more flexible, faster and better able to disguise its intentions than the one that almost single-handedly carried the ravens to their super bowl title six seasons ago. in 2000, the ravens set the n.f.l.'s 16-game, regular-season record for fewest points allowed, with 165.  that smash-mouth defense was nearly rudimentary in its form, lining up the same way most of the time and challenging offenses to block it. four down linemen, led by defensive tackles tony siragusa and sam adams, clogged the middle, freeing lewis and two other linebackers to race sideline to sideline making tackles.  the ravens have since evolved as part of a league trend toward using athletic defenders -- big, but still fast -- in a number of roles. it is almost impossible to accurately label how often they play a 4-3 defense or a 3-4 because it is unclear who is doing what until the ball is snapped. that makes it easier to confuse offenses about who is rushing and who is dropping back, and about whether or not a blitz is coming.  colts coach tony dungy said this week that the ravens' defense puts so much stress on an offense because it rarely looks the same way on a play twice.  nobody would have asked the hulking siragusa to cover a receiver. but what about the 270-pound linebacker adalius thomas, who sometimes plays defensive back? sure.  ''they're like interchangeable parts,'' said the ravens' defensive coordinator, rex ryan, who was the defensive line coach in 2000. ''some guys say they're like 'tweeners, but you don't know which guys are dropping or which is covering. we can certainly be more creative with the players we have. i really think it was the fact that we had a guy that had a defensive lineman-type body that could cover the tight ends in the league in a. t. we evolved around that.''  thomas, who will be a free agent after this season, was regarded that way -- as a 'tweener -- when the ravens drafted him in the sixth round in 2000.  ''the same thing that hurt me coming into the league is now the same thing that's becoming a trend -- big, fast and can run,'' thomas said.  the new england patriots were the first to draw up the blueprint for beating the colts in the playoffs, battering their receivers, often with safety rodney harrison, to throw the offense off rhythm. last year, the pittsburgh steelers amended the blueprint, adding a substantial dose of pressure on manning, who is rarely sacked during the regular season because of his quick release and ability to read defenses.  the ravens will borrow more than a formula when they play the colts. they will also hijack a mind-set, tagging the colts with a subtle insult even before play begins. ''they're more finesse,'' lewis said, borrowing a word that counts as a smear in the n.f.l. ''we're more in-your-face and aggressive.''  that model plays well to the ravens' strengths. they used a variety of blitzes to record 60 sacks, second in the league behind san diego, which had 61. baltimore led the league in interceptions with 28.  manning has beaten the ravens in their past three meetings, including the 2005 season opener. but he threw three interceptions last weekend against the kansas city chiefs, a decidedly lesser defense.  it is hard to imagine that the colts expect the rookie joseph addai, who rushed for 122 yards against the chiefs, to carry their offense against the ravens, who yielded just 75.9 yards rushing a game. addai's performance apparently made little impression on the ravens. when addai's name was mentioned during a news conference this week, lewis raised an eyebrow and replied, ''who?''  the ravens are overlooking no detail in preparing for manning. several players, and ryan, were being only slightly facetious when they asked the thundering ravens fans to not begin screaming for about five seconds after the colts reach the line of scrimmage so the defensive players could get their calls straight. then they want the noise to intensify, so that manning cannot adjust to their adjustments and so that his offensive line struggles to hear the snap count. that would give the ravens' pass rushers an extra split-second to get to manning.  ''i've heard some coordinators in the league say, 'well you can't get to him, so don't even try,' '' ryan said. ''i have a feeling we'll try to get to him.''  ryan is the son of buddy ryan, the defensive wizard who made the 46 defense a phenomenon with the chicago bears in the 1980s. that defense was predicated on pressure, but not just on the quarterback. it put pressure on the receivers as they made their hot reads and on the offensive line.  when the ravens won the super bowl, their defense was compared favorably to that of the 1985 bears, which was widely regarded as one of the greatest in football history.  this season's version might be only weeks away from drawing the same comparison. but first, it must pass the tests that the patriots and the steelers aced: beating the colts on the way to the super bowl.  ''you have to win the super bowl,'' ryan said. ''if you don't, will you be considered one of the best of all time? i doubt it. and you don't deserve it.''  pro football  