a family that kept on growing   a decade ago, maritza simard first raised her big idea with her husband, tom. by then they'd been married 13 years, had bought a three-bedroom, one-bath starter home here for $105,000, and felt safe that they'd reached the middle class.  mr. simard, a carpenter, was working steadily, building 25,000-square-foot houses for wealthy people in the hamptons. ms. simard was helping with his business and selling kitchen utensils on the side. they had two children, tom jr., then 12, and rachael, 8. ''two was all we could afford when we was starting out,'' ms. simard says. her husband was one of nine, and, as his wife says, ''often had to do without, and we didn't want that.''  as for ms. simard, her childhood was so awful, she'd never talked much about it to her husband. when she was 20 and they were courting, she says, ''he was the first man who was gentle and sweet, not wanting to attack me, not making comments about sex all the time. if he knew what i'd been through, i was afraid he'd treat me fragile.''  her big idea: ''we was watching tv. i said, 'what do you think of taking in foster kids?' he said, 'i don't know, why would you want to?' ''  over the next year, ms. simard says, she told him just enough to win him over. ''he still don't know all of it,'' she says. she told him that her mother had been a drug-addicted prostitute; that her early years in brooklyn had been spent in boarded-up buildings, on the run from child welfare workers; that she had been sexually abused by a family member and at an early foster care placement; that she hadn't even known who she was until she was 12.  ''i thought i was maritza ruiz,'' she says. ''i thought my father was getting out of rehab and coming to take me and my brother out of foster care. i said, 'you come for me too?' he said, 'you're not my daughter.' '' turned out her ''brother'' was a half-brother, her name velez. ''oh yeah, you get all these blows, but like a boxer you get back up.''  what saved her, she told her husband, was a foster mother, margaret stadier, who took her in from age 11 until she married. ''treated me like i was hers. my husband didn't know a foster child's point of view. now that he heard it, he says, 'o.k.' ''  for his part, mr. simard says he didn't make too much of his wife's stories. ''i just let it go as what happened before. i was just, 'o.k., let's try it, see what happens.' we just floated into it.''  ms. simard called the same agency that she says saved her, little flower children and family services of new york. while madonna and angelina travel the planet to adopt, there's a plentiful supply right here. federal officials report that each year 300,000 children need foster care; 118,000 are ready for adoption; and 19,000 age out, unadopted.  over the next few years, a dozen foster children came and went, some staying a day, some two years, some easy, some badly damaged: a 5-year-old who couldn't chew; a 7-year-old who made animal noises; a 10-year-old who wet the bed; an 11-year-old who didn't talk.  mr. simard was surprised. ''i didn't know they'd be so bad off,'' he says.  ms. simard wasn't. ''it was one of them things i didn't say much about,'' she says.  in august 2000, they got a request to take a 3-month-old boy with bruises on the face and shoulders. ''i never refused a child,'' ms. simard says. ''what if somebody didn't take me in?''  by then, mr. simard had acclimated. once he held the baby, mr. simard says, ''that little guy wasn't going nowhere.''  ''jordan,'' says ms. simard. he's now 6 and adopted by the simards. a year later, a 1-week-old arrived. he'd been abandoned at the hospital, says ms. simard.  ''vincent,'' says mr. simard. ''jabber jaws.'' mr. simard wakes for work at 4:30 a.m. -- it's a 90-minute drive to the hamptons job site -- and vincent, now 5, gets up in the morning darkness to talk with daddy.  ''he likes a bowl of waffle crisps,'' says mr. simard.  in 2002, the simards took in two more, whom they also adopted, steven, now 16, and his sister, ashley, 11. shortly after steven arrived, ms. simard got a peek at his past. she and her husband were arguing. later, she said, ''steven asks me, 'how come you don't hit each other when you argue?' ''  by now, the simards' two biological children take this life in stride. ''once they get here, it doesn't feel like a change, just more people,'' says tom jr., 22, who lives at home and works with his dad.  ''it's a good thing steven and ashley stayed, because i was used to them,'' says rachael.  the simards are not the kind who get noticed at school. rachael, a junior, does not participate in sports or activities. ''i just go to classes and come home,'' she says. but they're a purposeful bunch. she works as a waitress at a catering hall several nights a week, and wants to go to suffolk community college to become a veterinary technician. steven plans to take vocational courses to become an electrician and work with his father. tom jr. has a rap group, akademy, that plays on weekends.  ms. simard works three shifts a week as a clinician's assistant at stony brook university medical center ''to get us health benefits'' and will soon take the test for her real estate license.  the older children helped mr. simard add two bedrooms and a bathroom to their house. after dinner, the simards play board games -- yahtzee, scrabble, cranium, pictionary.  vincent, the youngest, probably summed it up best when asked what he likes most about his parents. ''i love my mommy and i love my daddy,'' he says. he knows no other.  this is not to say it's easy. jordan's a loud, aggressive child, and ms. simard says even she has trouble handling him. he's been diagnosed with attention deficit and oppositional defiance disorders. they tried to mainstream jordan, but because of his behavior, he was sent to a special education program. or as jabber jaws put it, ''jordan was on a big bus, but he spit on it, so they put him on a little bus, littler than mine, and i'm in kindergarten!''  asked about this, mr. simard says, ''to me, jordan's a normal boy.''  ms. simard says she doesn't know if her husband's in denial or putting a positive spin on things for a reporter, but either way, she loves him for it.  parenting e-mail: parenting@nytimes.com  