goldman and canadian firm in deal for 13 cable channels   canwest global communications, a canadian broadcaster and newspaper publisher, joined goldman sachs on wednesday to buy alliance atlantis communications, producer of ''csi: crime scene investigation'' and owner of 13 canadian cable channels, for about 2.3 billion canadian dollars (about $1.95 billion) in cash.  because of the participation of goldman sachs, the deal has a complex structure to circumvent canadian laws that ban foreign control of television channels and movie distribution companies, another unit of alliance atlantis.  as a result, the two purchasers said that final equity stakes had not been determined and the television channels would be placed in trust until the takeover was approved by the broadcast regulator.  while the ''csi'' franchise, which is jointly owned by alliance atlantis and cbs, is lucrative, canwest has no interest in entering the film and television production business. under the terms of the deal, the ''csi'' holding will eventually go to goldman sachs. cbs will also take over the international distribution of the program and its spinoff shows.  canwest is hoping to revive its core canadian broadcasting business with the alliance atlantis channels, including bbc canada, hgtv canada and national geographic canada.  when the canadian government first licensed specialty television channels during the 1990s, canwest's late founder, israel h. asper, was openly disparaging about their prospects. as a result, at a time when viewers are increasingly switching to specialty offerings, the company has just a single specialty channel with widespread distribution, which mostly features reruns of sitcoms, and seven channels with very limited distribution.  by contrast, canwest's major private-sector competitor, ctvglobemedia, built a large and profitable portfolio of popular specialty channels, including tsn, canada's leading sports service, and the canadian version of the discovery channel.  the canadian government's heavy regulation of cable television helped many ctv and alliance atlantis channels succeed. because the companies were early movers, all cable companies were required to provide their channels to most customers. that guaranteed those channels substantial revenue from monthly subscriber fees and potentially large audiences.  paul holman, an analyst at the dominion bond rating service in toronto, said that leonard j. asper, canwest's current president and chief executive, did not share his father's negative view of specialty channels and was eager to expand in that segment.  at the same time, canwest's main conventional television network, global, has stumbled and lags ctv in both profitability and audience levels.  ''global got their eye off the ball a little and ctv was able to get programming that showed very well,'' mr. holman said.  success for the conventional networks of canwest and ctv mostly involves bidding for hit shows from the united states. (cable and satellite companies, which provide the overwhelming majority of canadians with their television signals, override american broadcasts of such programs with transmissions from the canadian networks.)  some of the financial constraints of global stem from canwest's decision to buy most of the canadian newspaper holdings of hollinger international for $1.8 billion in 2000.  but moving into newspapers also left canwest global heavily leveraged.  recently, canwest has announced plans to sell its majority stake in the australian television channel, network ten. if the sale goes through, it is expected to bring the company about $1.3 billion, but it is unclear if that money will go toward debt or toward financing the alliance atlantis deal, which is valued at $53 a share.  media  