murcer says tests reveal brain tumor is malignant   bobby murcer, a former yankees outfielder and their longest-serving current announcer, said yesterday that a tumor removed from his brain during surgery on dec. 28 was malignant. he did not describe his prognosis.  ''as we begin a new year, i find myself facing a new challenge -- the biggest of my life so far,'' he said in a statement released by the yankees in which he revealed the findings of pathology tests on the tumor.  ''i'm not having to battle this alone,'' said murcer, 60, ''but i am fortified with the most loving family, an overabundance of wonderful friends and fans and the very best class of physicians.''  he added, ''i'm gaining confidence that with god and my faith leading the way, we will as a team put up an incredible fight.''  his wife, kay, did not return a call seeking comment.  a magnetic resonance imaging scan detected the tumor on dec. 24 after murcer had been experiencing headaches and fatigue. the tumor was removed during a five-hour operation at m. d. anderson cancer center in houston. later that day, murcer watched the independence bowl, and kay murcer said that he ''came through it beautifully.''  george steinbrenner, the yankees' principal owner, said in a statement yesterday that murcer ''has true grit, is a fighter and our entire yankee organization offers our prayers to him and his family for a big win in this battle.''  since 1987, at least three prominent baseball figures have died of brain cancer: dick howser, the former yankees and kansas city royals manager; dan quisenberry, the star closer for the royals; and tug mcgraw, the exuberant mets and philadelphia phillies reliever. in quisenberry's case, one operation removed 80 percent to 90 percent of the tumor, and he needed a second one when the cancer spread.  murcer, a five-time all-star, played in the majors from 1965 to 1983. he batted .277 with 252 home runs and 1,043 runs batted in with the yankees, the san francisco giants and the chicago cubs.  baseball  