something in the air | jan. 7-13   a stench  the news -- odorous enough to seem ominous, a sulfur-like stink briefly enveloped new york city and parts of new jersey, causing schools and offices to close, commuter trains to be rerouted, and government officials to scramble to alert.  behind the news -- the odor was first reported about 9 a.m. on monday. it hung around for about two hours, long enough to become the talk of manhattan. but it wasn't so funny at the time. mayor michael r. bloomberg felt obliged to take to the airwaves to reassure residents. though the odor resembled the smell of mercaptan, a natural gas additive, no major leaks were reported and the source remains a mystery. suspicion fell on new jersey, but officials there, also holding their noses, were indignant. said one: ''we're going to get some industrial fans and blow the smell back over new york.''  a mystery  the news -- more than 60 birds -- pigeons, grackles and sparrows -- were found dead near the texas state capitol, causing nervous officials to lock down the city's downtown as they tested the air and autopsied some of the birds.  behind the news -- the initial commotion seemed like an opening to ''24.'' according to the dallas morning news, ''birds first began acting strange -- wandering aimlessly in the street, attempting to fly and making crash landings -- and then dropped like flies.'' the police were alerted. the national guard was called in. a mobile lab was dispatched. workers in yellow hazardous-materials suits collected dead birds for on-site necropsies. within hours, officials concluded there was no threat to people. they still don't know what killed the birds, but their response would have made jack bauer proud.  greenhouse gases  the news -- gov. arnold schwarzenegger of california announced that he would order state regulators to set new rules requiring petroleum refiners and gasoline sellers to reduce the carbon content of fuels they sell for passenger vehicles by 10 percent by 2020.  behind the news -- only nine nations in the world emit more greenhouse gases than california, according to the state's climate change center at the university of california at berkeley. the transportation sector is responsible for about 40 percent of the state's carbon dioxide emissions, with cars making up about half of that amount.  to address the problem, lawmakers passed legislation last fall that mandates a 25 percent reduction in greenhouse gases by 2020. the governor's order, announced in his state of the state address, was the first major step toward that goal. but mr. schwarzenegger, a republican recently elected to a second term, told lawmakers that his action would also reduce the nation's reliance on foreign oil. ''i ask you to set to motion the means to free ourselves from oil and from opec,'' he said.  given california's enormous market power, the move is expected stimulate significant investment in alternative low-carbon fuels, like corn-based ethanol and biodiesel fuels. mr. schwarzenegger estimates that 20 percent of california's on-road gasoline consumption would be replaced with lower-carbon fuels, which would triple the size of the state's renewable fuels market and put more than seven million alternative-fuel or hybrid vehicles on the roads -- 20 times today's number. ''california has the muscle to bring about such change,'' the governor told lawmakers. ''i say use it.''  snowflakes  the news -- snow made a fleeting appearance in central park on wednesday, but it was enough to set the mark for the park's latest recorded snowfall, eclipsing the previous record, set on jan. 4, 1878.  behind the news -- the brief flurries, which began in the morning and lasted about 15 minutes, represented the first snow to fall in the park since last april 8. the ground was too warm for the snow to stick; only four days earlier, the temperature in central park hit 72 degrees, breaking the previous high of 63 degrees in 1950. while parts of the west have been buried in snow, the weather in the northeast has been unusually warm -- so much so that one connecticut man bought three plastic bags of colorado snow on ebay for $40 this past week for his daughters. but things are expected to change, as cold weather in the west heads east this week.  the week  