rustic streams hiding complicated traditions   mieczyslaw weinberg: 'on the threshold of hope': chamber music  richard margison, tenor; arc ensemble. rca red seal 82876-87769-2; cd.  many european jewish composers fled west to avoid nazi persecution, but the polish composer mieczyslaw weinberg, who died in 1996, went east. moves to minsk, belarus, in 1939 and tashkent, uzbekistan, in 1941 both saved his life (his family in warsaw was killed in the holocaust) and resulted in a lifelong friendship with shostakovich.  mr. weinberg's music, like the chamber works on this new recording, reveals both his jewish roots and the influence of shostakovich. this disc, featuring admirable performances by the members of the arc ensemble (artists of the royal conservatory, toronto), takes its title from the brief period of relative freedom enjoyed by jews in the soviet union during world war ii. then stalin's anti-semitic postwar purges squashed hope on the threshold; mr. weinberg was arrested in 1953, but shostakovich intervened on his behalf.  the highlight of this disc is a fiery reading of mr. weinberg's intense five-movement piano quintet (op. 18), written in 1944. it opens with a warmly lyrical melody soon tempered by dissonance and angst. but mr. weinberg is playfully satirical where shostakovich might have been bitterly sardonic. the intense allegretto offers by turns dense, wild climaxes; spare, staccato textures; and gentle lyricism. the ensuing presto sounds like cafe music spun through a carnival funhouse. an introspective largo leads to the spiky, driven allegro agitato, with a jagged folk dance and earlier thematic material winding through it.  in the three-movement klezmer-tinged sonata for clarinet and piano (op. 28), written in 1945, joaquin valdepeñas plays the virtuoso clarinet part with flair, and the pianist dianne werner provides sensitive accompaniment. also included here are mr. weinberg's ''jewish songs'' (op. 17), set to yiddish poems by shmuel halkin. the songs, one of which alludes to the 1941 massacre at babi yar, are given tender and passionate readings by richard margison.  vivien schweitzer  classical recordings  