news summary   international a3-15  bush's new iraq plan meets broad criticism  president bush's call to increase the american military commitment in iraq ran into intense congressional opposition from democrats and moderate republicans who expressed profound skepticism.  a1  iraq's shiite-led government offered only a grudging endorsement of president bush's proposal to deploy more than 20,000 additional troops in an effort to curb sectarian violence and regain control of baghdad.  a15  u.s. raids iran office in iraq  american troops backed by attack helicopters and armored vehicles raided an iranian diplomatic office and detained as many as six of the iranians working inside. a1  bangladesh delays elections  bangladesh's president declared a state of emergency, suspending some rights and effectively delaying elections to be held this month. an alliance of political parties had vowed to boycott the vote.  a3  poland eyes secret police law  prime minister jaroslaw kaczynski of poland promised a new law that would take aim at former secret police agents and exclude them from serving in numerous public posts, leaving many with no pensions.  a10  skull hints at human migration  scientists say they have obtained the first fossil evidence establishing the relatively recent time for the dispersal of modern homo sapiens out of africa.  a11  national a16-19  accuser in duke case revises her account  the woman who has accused three former duke lacrosse players of sexual assault now says two players attacked her, dealing a new blow to a faltering case.  a1  democrats choose denver  the democrats chose denver over new york as the site for their 2008 nominating convention for president, capping months of debate .  a16  preparing for terrorism trials  the bush administration has set up a secret war room in a virginia suburb and is assembling evidence to prosecute high-ranking detainees from al qaeda, including the suspected mastermind of the september 2001 attacks, khalid shaikh mohammed, government officials said.  a16  attempt to block ethics rules  after campaigning for months on a promise to tighten ethics rules, senate democratic leaders tried unsuccessfully to block a measure that would shine a light on the practice of earmarking federal money for lawmakers' pet projects. a17  science/health  stem cell research wins vote  the house voted overwhelmingly to broaden federal support for embryonic stem cell research, stepping up a confrontation with president bush over a thorny scientific and ethical issue that democrats hope to capitalize on in the next election.  a19  new york/region  b1-5  new york traffic data dispels popular myths  recent data reveals a detailed and often surprising portrait of traffic in new york city. for example, while many city drivers assume that suburbanites make up a majority of the commuters who drive to work in manhattan, in reality, more than half are from the five boroughs.  a1  officers' risky strategy  the decision by four of the five police officers involved in the killing of sean bell, an unarmed queens man, to voluntarily speak to prosecutors poses certain risks for both sides. b1  neediest cases b5  business day c1-10  i.r.s. faulted on tax audits  top officials at the i.r.s. are pushing auditors to prematurely close tax audits of big companies with agreements to pay only a fraction of the additional taxes that could potentially be collected, costing the government billions of dollars a year.  c1  business digest c2  sportsfriday d1-7  beckham signs to play in u.s.  the los angeles galaxy has signed david beckham, saying that the european soccer star would make $250 million over the five years of his contract, including endorsement income.  a1  editorial a20-21  editorials: negotiating lower drug prices; pork, peanut butter and security; wake up your computer; tina rosenberg on drug cartels and the mexican press.  columns: paul krugman, thomas l. friedman.  crossword  e24  obituaries  b7  public lives  b2  tv listings  e38  weather  d8  