berlin: mondos arts   there are some in berlin who seem determined to erase the city's history from its own landscape (like the slow, melancholic dismantling of the cookie-cutter palace of the republic in the former east berlin). so as mitte becomes more and more like soho, prenzlauer berg like park slope and potsdamer platz like who knows what, it's a triumphant moment when one comes across mondos arts, a small, dusty shop immortalizing the german democratic republic deep in the city's disheveled, least commercial district, friedrichshain, in the former east.  there is more here than the ubiquitous che t-shirt. for the diligent student of 20th-century history (and communism) there's a shirt with the image of the revolutionary rosa luxemburg and her famous proclamation ''freiheit ist immer freiheit der andersdenkenden'' (''freedom is always freedom for those who think differently''), along with shirts emblazoned with karo cigarettes, an eastern brand, and the schwalbe, the poor man's vespa.  perhaps more popular than the t-shirts (10 to 15 euros, or $13.25 to $20 at $1.35 to the euro), according to a salesman with a long ponytailed goatee, are the dvds (in the same price range). one favorite is ''die legende von paul und paula,'' a 1973 love triangle with political and moral implications. so, too, are eastern bloc cowboy-and-indian movies of the '60s and '70s, with the suffering indians always the good guys and the beloved serb actor gojko mitic, the eastern bloc's john wayne, playing the lead indian.  one bit of berlin lore that was preserved from the former east -- thanks in part to the owners of mondos arts -- was ampelmännchen, the distinctive red-and-green man on the traffic crossings who wears what appears to be a porkpie hat. his image is everywhere in the store -- on keychains, mugs, clocks.  but what gives mondos arts its charm is the unexpected: from weighty political-theory books (by the leftist politicians gregor gysi and hans modrow) to the just plain weighty (small busts of marx and lenin), from kids' stuff (toy trabbant cars, board games and cutouts of the plattenbauten, the lego-like apartment blocks) to kitsch (bottles of the soviet pilsner brand roter oktober and original plastic democratic republic helmets that were worn for parades when it was too hot to wear the real ones).  it all feels very far away from the shiny mall under potsdamer platz. mondos arts, schreinerstrasse 6; (49-30) 420-10778; www.mondosarts.de.  michael j. agovino  foraging  