friends, romans, countrymen, lovers, haters, murderers, barbarians   on the season premiere of hbo's ''rome,'' decline, fall and foul-smelling visigoths seem just around the corner. it's true that the upheaval that followed caesar's assassination in 44 b.c. made life bleak and oppressive, but it was centuries before the empire turned really rotten to its core.  the lugubrious tone of the second (and final) season that begins on sunday night may mark the mood at hbo more than that of the ancient forum. the network's lavish, costly drama, which was filmed on a set at the cinecittà studios at a reported cost of $100 million, was supposed to mark a new augustan age in programming. mostly, though, ''rome'' looks like x-rated ''masterpiece theater.''  the series weaves the story of two fictional roman soldiers into the historic narrative of antiquity's best known players: caesar, marc antony, cleopatra, cicero et al. for all its license and vivid detail, ''rome'' never stirred the kind of excitement and devotion that surrounded ''the sopranos,'' or ''sex and the city.'' the only new series that comes close is ''entourage.''  network fortunes rise and fall too. hbo may once again become the most daring and innovative premium cable network, but for the moment it is most distinguished for serving as the extreme makeover version of pbs.  ''rome'' is hbo's most ambitious collaboration with the bbc, but it's not the first. the bbc was also a partner for the mini-series ''band of brothers,'' ''tsunami, the aftermath'' and ''the gathering storm,'' a portrait of the marriage of winston and clementine churchill, starring albert finney and vanessa redgrave. hbo made ''elizabeth i,'' starring helen mirren with a different british network, channel 4, but it too could just as easily have been on pbs. even hbo films about celebrity scandals are artsy and cerebral, from ''the life and death of peter sellers,'' which starred geoffrey rush, to ''mrs. harris,'' with annette bening as the private school headmistress who killed the scarsdale diet doctor.  ''rome'' is engaging even if it isn't a swords-and-sandals version of ''the sopranos,'' as hbo had hoped. it may not be as knowing as ''i, claudius,'' but it does excellent work with slit throats, severed limbs, pagan rituals and barbaric sexual acts. (though strangely there is almost no sex in the first of this season's 10 episodes, perhaps another sign of limp morale at headquarters.)  the second season of ''rome'' begins where the first left off: caesar is sprawled in his own blood on the floor of the senate. as the news of the murder spreads to his friends, romans and countrymen, his bodyguard vorenus (kevin mckidd) is in shock, hugging his wife's corpse; when told of her infidelity, he left caesar's side and stormed at her in such a murderous rage that she threw herself off a balcony.  afterward, vorenus and pullo (ray stevenson), veterans of the gallic campaign and mismatched best friends, reverse roles. vorenus was the serious-minded, law-abiding good soldier, but goes mad with grief and guilt, turning into an angry, bloodthirsty bully. pullo, who was a good-natured but violent lout, turns responsible, marrying the former slave girl he loves and trying to look after his unhinged friend.  the cohesion of the roman republic crumbled after caesar's death, and ''rome'' is a bit awry at the outset without ciarán hinds, the actor who plays caesar. rome's first dictator was not as richly imagined as tony soprano, al swearengen of ''deadwood'' or ari, the agent on ''entourage,'' but he had a worldly intelligence and a sly charm that centered the saga.  octavian, who became emperor augustus, eventually steps in to fill the void, no longer the brainy, pompous teenager played by max pirkis, but a young, confident leader played by an older actor, simon woods.  james purefoy is still a pleasure as the libidinous marc antony, crude but clever and unscrupulous. he is well matched by his lover, caesar's conniving niece, atia (polly walker), who is the series's designated endearing monster. she still has her moments: she tells an errant slave that she would geld him, only eunuchs are no longer in fashion. but as marc antony's attention strays to cleopatra (lyndsey marshal), atia mostly seems glum and bored, all petulance and not much passion.  the creators of ''rome'' took pains to recreate rome as it really was, crowded, fetid, brutal and corrupt: as much ''mad max''as circus maximus. but behind all that gritty squalor the glory that was rome gets lost.  as a character in ''monty python's life of brian'' pointed out when asked what the ''bloody romans'' have ever done for him, after all they built the aqueducts.  rome  hbo, sunday night at 9, eastern and pacific times; 8, central time.  directed by allen coulter, alan poul, steve shill, tim van patten, adam davidson, carl franklin, john maybury, alik sakharov and roger young; john melfi, executive producer; anthony pratt, production designer.  with: kevin mckidd (lucius vorenus), ray stevenson (titus pullo), polly walker (atia of the julii), james purefoy (marc antony), tobias menzies (marcus junius brutus), lindsay duncan (servilia of the junii), max pirkis (younger gaius octavian), kerry condon (octavia of the julii), lyndsey marshal (cleopatra), zuleikha robinson (gaia), simon woods (older gaius octavian).  television review  