once a power, for better or worse   charles engell france was ''a great girlfriend,'' in the words of susan jaffe, the former american ballet theater dancer. but he was more than that. as the powerful assistant of mikhail baryshnikov when he was artistic director of ballet theater in the 1980s, mr. france was second in command in a particularly fertile period of the company's history.  an early admirer of the choreography of twyla tharp, mr. france was instrumental in bringing her to mr. baryshnikov's attention. along with her dances, ballet theater during that time commissioned new productions by experimental choreographers including karole armitage, david gordon and mark morris. mr. france was also influential in programming and casting, and he worked closely with the press and marketing departments at ballet theater, where he helped to shape the careers of many young american dancers, including ms. jaffe and robert la fosse.  but his brash opinions and perceived favoritism alienated dancers; he played the bad cop to mr. baryshnikov's good cop. fond of alcohol and drugs (''i have a very low tolerance for pain and a very high tolerance for painkillers,'' he is said to have told a doctor), he found his world crashing in 1989 when jane hermann, the newly appointed executive director of ballet theater, let him go. he attempted a second career as a dealer in costume jewelry -- one of his passions -- but he never bounced back.  his carefree girlfriend days were over, and he died on christmas 2005 at 59. he seemed at least a decade older.  but even in those last years, as his health declined and his financial situation grew dire, mr. france never stopped caring deeply about ballet. just before the anniversary of his death, friends and colleagues shared memories about a man some people loved to hate and others just loved.  mikhail baryshnikov  charles was a passionate man -- about a lot of things. but in particular i think he appreciated true flair and glamour in life. he understood dance and dancers very well for a civilian, so to speak, and i think he found that sparkle in them. it's possible he was happiest working his way through a vintage clothing store, picking out dresses and costume jewelry he thought were perfect for one dancer or another. he wanted them to be beautiful, to reflect the beauty of their art really. he was pure in this sense.  elena gordon  former colleague, american ballet theater  he was the one who made sure that the point shoes were shiny and that the hair and the earrings were just right. before that -- i was there for four years before he worked with misha -- and then after they left, there was never anybody to do that. there was nobody who even saw that those kinds of details are very, very important.  susan jones  régisseur, american ballet theater  charles was a huge mentor to me. i think that as well as being encouraging and always respecting my abilities, he was also someone who taught me how to fight. he was so confrontational, and it made me really defend my point of view when we had our disagreements. at times i wanted to strangle him, but the end result is that i can stand my ground.  robert greskovic  critic and friend  when he had a favorite dancer, you couldn't budge him. natalia makarova, gelsey kirkland, martine van hamel. he loved to tell the story that [the dance critic] walter terry, who was, shall we say, less enthusiastic about her, once said, ''martine van hamel is a figment of charles france's imagination.'' charles liked to repeat it and laugh. he loved a certain kind of vibrancy. i think he loved the way antoinette sibley would almost squint and twitch her nose. in makarova's case i think he just loved the absolute luxury of watching her plastique. for him suzanne farrell was ''beyond the beyond.''  cheryl yeager  former principal dancer, american ballet theater  he was controversial, and a lot of people didn't like him. he wanted to push us. he wanted to give us range, and he wanted to see how we would be in comedy and drama and contemporary work, or in jumping versus turning. he wanted to figure out what we couldn't do, and not in a negative way.  robert la fosse  former principal dancer, american ballet theater; currently a guest artist with new york city ballet  it's a known fact that charles did the dirty work. he made the phone calls saying, ''i'm sorry.'' he spoke for misha a great deal of the time, protected misha. a lot of what charles did goes unrewarded. he did it for the love of it. charles was incapable of making something difficult to say to somebody sound nice. he couldn't skirt around the issue. he would say, ''you're about 5 or 10 pounds overweight.'' he didn't know how to be subtle  susan jones  there's no way a director can do it on his own. you need an awesome team behind you, a very strong support system. and charles was that. that was his job. and he had to determine whose problems were big enough to go to misha. there's not been one person like that in ballet theater history who did what charles did, who coordinated between press and the artistic company to such a degree. he did not make it easy, but it wasn't just all about him. it was really about what was best for the company. i think that he was often misperceived as someone who stood in the way of getting to misha, for the dancers especially. he had to try to fix the problems because there was no way that misha could deal with them. when any dancer mustered up the courage to come in and sit down and talk, charles was really there for them. no one tried to help patrick bissell more than charles. [bissell, a ballet theater principal dancer, died of a drug overdose in 1987.]  robert greskovic  if a critic wrote a strongly opinionated piece on very few facts or examples, he would make the press people show him the press list and then go to said writer and say, ''now, see here: you're saying all this strong stuff. you know how many shows you saw? two. you know how many we did? eight.''  susan jaffe  i was doing ''swan lake'' and ''other dances'' and 500 different ballets, and i said: ''charles, please, i'm so exhausted. could you just let up?'' and he looked at me and said something like, ''the day you start telling me how to cast you will be the day that you won't dance at all.'' i remember going, ''oh, o.k.,'' and just walking out. he definitely had a bite. he could bite you.  david gordon  for ''murder'' [mr. gordon's second piece for ballet theater], misha said that he wanted to be in it, but just a little. i was taking him at his word, and i determined that there would be a situation in which there were possibly a series of literary characters that were killed and carried off in a triumphant funeral. misha would be one of them, possibly the first, and then would join the others who were in every scene. i described this to charles, who looked at me like i was just a poor retarded youth. he said: ''misha can't be part of a crowd. it's not because he doesn't want to be. it is because the audience is looking to see where he is, and if you send him off the stage, they are wondering, 'when he is coming back?' '' so i said, ''well, suppose that misha is every character? and he keeps dying and being reborn as someone else?'' and charles said, ''now.''  rhoda grauer  american ballet theater colleague  i was at ballet theater during the period when charles really began to lose it. he was not liked by the board; i think the board felt that he was too manipulative of misha. which he wasn't. no one manipulates misha. i used to say to him, fearing the worst: ''charles, get over this. what is the point?'' and that's when i realized that he had to be seriously on drugs because there was no logic to his actions.  jane hermann  i let him go because he was sick. it's one of the most difficult things i ever did because, to be perfectly honest, i didn't dislike charles at all. i can't say that i agreed with everything he did, but we never overcame the health issue. he refused hospitalization. it had nothing whatsoever to do with whether or not i liked the way he was running the company for misha. it probably would have, to be perfectly honest, but it hadn't yet. i'll never know.  cheryl yeager  i probably didn't follow up on charles as i should have, but dancers are incredibly selfish. i'm not a dancer anymore, and i can say that. when i left the company, i felt that same thing that i'm sure charles felt too. it's a very sad and unfortunate way to end things. you can even have those big hurrah farewells, but you're done. and they don't call you anymore. charles had the world at his fingertips, and then he had nothing.  robert greskovic  he thought he was indestructible. he had a quintuple bypass in 1990. however untimely his death was at the age of 59, the fact that he wasn't dead 10 times 20 years before is a miracle. you cannot keep living on the edge and not have to pay the price. i really think he thought he could.  susan jaffe  i think that what misha and charles both drilled into the dancers was the love and the reverence toward classical ballet with the utmost attention and detail. there was a devotion to the classics, which today you find less and less with young people. it was so important to them, and it was such a hurdle for us to tackle those kinds of roles with as much detail and education and fervor as we could conjure up in our little, young minds.  dance  