the week ahead: jan. 14 - 20; art   it wasn't until the hungarian photographer martin munkacsi (1896-1963) turned his lens on fashion models that he made his fortune. but he established his reputation with reportage, much of it published in german photo weeklies. now the international center of photography is mounting an exhibition of his work. the show, ''martin munkacsi: think while you shoot!,'' organized by f. c. gundlach at the haus der photographie in hamburg, includes more than 125 vintage photographs, along with magazines and page layouts. mr. munkacsi's images of models running on the beach revolutionized fashion photography by being natural rather than posed. friday through april 29, 1133 avenue of the americas, at 43rd street, icp.org.  it was the photographer henri cartier-bresson who arguably put mr. munkacsi on the map, so taken was he with mr. munkacsi's photo ''three boys at lake tanganyika,'' taken in 1929 or 1930. cartier-bresson said of the picture, ''i suddenly understood that photography can fix eternity in a moment.'' it seems appropriate, then, that the international center of photography is simultaneously featuring an exhibition of cartier-bresson's work, which also starts friday. called ''henri cartier-bresson's scrapbook: photographs, 1932-46,'' the show includes 251 prints personally selected and printed by the photographer. the show was originally assembled by the museum of modern art as a memorial when cartier-bresson was presumed dead after having been held in german prisoner-of-war camps during world war ii. (he actually escaped the camps and died in 2004 at 95.)  the winter antiques show returns to the seventh regiment armory on friday with a core of 28 specialists in american antiques and art, including shaker, folk art, american indian, colonial, federal, arts and crafts, and aesthetic movement pieces. the show also features exhibitors showing british, european and asian antiques, from old master paintings to chinese export porcelain. through jan. 28, noon to 8 p.m. (to 6 p.m. on jan 21, 25 and 28; to 6:30 p.m. on jan. 20), park avenue at 67th street, winterantiquesshow.com; $20.  