senator dodd of connecticut announces bid for presidency   as he formally announced his candidacy for president on thursday, senator christopher j. dodd of connecticut said he saw himself as the ''dark horse'' in the expanding democratic field, an ''unknown quantity with experience.''  he made his announcement on ''imus in the morning,'' a nationally syndicated radio and cable television show featuring don imus, and later, in an interview, he said this would be a one-time shot at the white house.  ''i am not going to run again -- this is not a warm-up,'' mr. dodd said. ''i realize i am not a household name, but in 12 months we'll still be talking about primaries. it is a long way away, and there are plenty of chances to break through.''  mr. dodd will have stiff competition in the democratic field. the announced candidates include john edwards, the former senator from north carolina; senator joseph r. biden of delaware, an ally of mr. dodd's in washington; and tom vilsack, who stepped down as iowa governor on thursday. the potential democratic candidates include senators hillary rodham clinton of new york and barack obama of illinois.  mr. dodd was first elected to the house in 1974, in a democratic wave after watergate. he was elected to the senate six years later, taking the office once held by his father, thomas j. dodd.  he has about $5 million on hand for his run, and his advisers say they hope his fund-raising ability will be bolstered by his position as chairman of the senate banking committee. he is also a former chairman of the national democratic party.  a senior democrat on the senate foreign relations committee and a former peace corps volunteer, mr. dodd said he would spend much of his time concentrating on international affairs.  ''people are asking a critical question -- what kind of experience do you need? -- especially after watching an administration that seems to have needed more on-the-job training instead of understanding as you go in. i have worked at this stuff for a long time.''  mr. dodd voted in favor of the 2002 senate resolution supporting the administration plan to invade iraq, but he has since said he regrets that vote.  in a senate hearing with secretary of state condoleezza rice on thursday, the day after president bush's televised address calling for more troops in iraq, mr. dodd said it would be ''unsound strategy'' to add more troops and urged a greater effort at diplomatic contacts instead.  in the interview, he also said he would vote in favor of withholding money for more troops. ''everyone knows this is a failed policy,'' mr. dodd said of the president's war leadership. ''this is hardly a change of policy; it is more of the same, which hasn't been working.''  mr. dodd traveled to iowa on thursday afternoon and is to spend part of the weekend in south carolina, to rally support in two states that are critical in early campaigning.  even as he cited his decades in congress, mr. dodd joked that he is a ''fresh face'' in the presidential field. during the radio and cable show, mr. imus needled mr. dodd by saying he was particularly impressed with mr. obama and planned to vote for senator john mccain of arizona, a republican.  ''now wait a minute, wait a minute,'' mr. dodd said with a chuckle and a bit of indignation. ''i come on the program, i blow everyone else off, i announce here -- at least leave the door open a little bit for me.''  mr. dodd, 62, is married to jackie marie clegg, a consultant, and they have two young daughters.  he plans to name the connecticut attorney general, richard blumenthal, as his state campaign chairman, and representative rosa delauro of connecticut, who was once mr. dodd's chief of staff, as a national chairwoman.  