young players race to the top, but the over-30 set holds on   a popular misconception about chess is that older players are better because they are more experienced.  but the advent of strong chess-playing computers that can be used for training and extensive databases of games has fueled an extraordinary youth movement. younger players are now well prepared -- and they have more energy and stamina.  a century ago chess players were not thought to mature until well into their 30's, but now most players hit their peak in their late 20's, just as in sports like basketball and football.  and it is no longer shocking to see a teenage grandmaster. the youngest is parimarjan negi, 13, of india. on jan. 5, david howell, 16, of britain satisfied the final requirement for grandmaster by tying for second in a tournament in stockholm.  young players have also infiltrated the game's top echelon. in the latest world chess federation rankings, 5 of the top 15 players are under 25, including shakhriyar mamedyarov, 21, of azerbaijan, who is no. 4.  against the onslaught of youth, perhaps it would not be surprising to see older players wilting. in fact, some of the old guard seems as firmly entrenched as ever; 4 of the top 10 are older than 35, including viswanathan anand, 37, of india, who is no. 2.  at the association of chess professionals world rapid cup in odessa, ukraine, which ended last week, two of the semifinalists were boris gelfand, 38, of israel, no. 10, and vassily ivanchuk, 37, of ukraine, no. 5.  while the event was won by peter leko, 27, of hungary, ivanchuk taught teimour radjabov, 19, of azerbaijan a lesson by whitewashing him 2-0 in their semifinal. game 2 was particularly brutal.  the opening was the slav defense, which among top players has become the most popular reply to 1 d4.  radjabov avoided complications by playing 4 e3 instead of 4 nf3, but that allowed ivanchuk to play 4  a6 and 5  b5, giving him space on the queenside. instead of responding 6 c5, radjabov could have played 6 b3, a more popular and flexible choice. he also played 6 c5 in defeating etienne bacrot in october 2006.  ivanchuk followed the path bacrot had chosen until he opted for 9  nbd7. the idea was to play e5 early to challenge white's center.  after 17  ne5, radjabov should have taken the knight to prevent ivanchuk from breaking down the white blockade of the black d pawn.  ivanchuk's 21  d3 was aggressive, but should not have met with success. instead of 22 ng3, radjabov needed to play 22 nc1, when after 22  qd4 23 nd3 qe4, black is clearly better, but white is not lost.  with black's pawn on d3 a constant thorn in white's position and white's attack more smoke than fire, it was only a matter of time.  chess  