wal-mart says health plan is covering more workers   wal-mart stores, the nation's largest employer, is expected to announce today that the number of workers enrolled in the company's health plan rose 8 percent last fall, the result of its introduction of cheaper insurance policies.  but the company said that, even with the increase, less than half of its 1.3 million employees -- 47.4 percent -- receive health insurance through wal-mart. about 10 percent of its employees, or 130,000, have no coverage at all.  wal-mart's health benefits have come under sharp criticism for not being affordable to many low-income employees. the company responded in 2005 with the introduction of less-expensive policies that allow someone to buy a plan with a premium for as little as $11 a month.  offering what it called an in-depth snapshot of its employees' health care, wal-mart said yesterday that most workers were insured, but many relied on coverage from a spouse, parent, previous employer or government program.  in a survey of 230,000 workers eligible for company heath insurance, wal-mart found that 90 percent have insurance. within that number, 22.2 percent were covered by a spouse's plan; 3.1 percent relied on medicaid or a state-sponsored plan; and 2.3 percent received insurance through the military.  over all, wal-mart said, 636,391 employees are enrolled in company insurance plans. but that number is lower than several previous estimates confirmed by wal-mart.  the percentage of workers covered by the plan, 47.4 percent, is also lower than the 48 percent figure quoted in an internal company memo sent by the former head of benefits to wal-mart's board in 2005.  wal-mart said yesterday that it was, in fact, insuring a higher percentage of its workers and contended that the numbers being released today were more accurate than previous numbers.  after introducing the cheaper insurance plans, about 82,000 employees, or about 8 percent more, enrolled in a company plan in 2006, wal-mart said. the increase reflected workers who were previously eligible for its coverage but had declined it in the past.  about half of the workers who signed up for the wal-mart coverage for the first time said they had been uninsured, according to the company survey, and more than a quarter said that they had not enrolled before because they could not afford it.  ''it's a step in the right direction,'' the executive vice president of benefits at wal-mart, linda m. dillman, said in a telephone interview yesterday.  but, she said, ''we don't think we have it all figured out.''  ms. dillman said the company was frustrated with the number of uninsured workers. ''we have to get to the root of that. it's a struggle to understand why at $11 a month you could not afford that.''  the $11 a month benefit allows for three generic prescriptions and three doctor visits before a deductible kicks in, typically $1,000 for an individual employee and $3,000 for an employee's family, the company said. the average wal-mart employee makes less than $20,000 a year.  wal-mart is reaching out to its uninsured workers, but the company may not be able to persuade them that buying insurance is worth the money, because they believe they are healthy or can rely on a hospital emergency room for care, said len nichols, a health economist at the new america foundation, a washington policy group.  the company cannot offer a plan much less expensive, he said. ''eleven dollars a month is about as good as it is going to get for low-wage workers.''  correction:  january 16, 2007, tuesday  an article in business day on thursday about an increase in wal-mart employees enrolled in a company health plan misstated the number of workers who signed up during an enrollment period this fall. it was about 45,000 workers, not 82,000.  