coping with grief, and the causes of a fatal crash   patrick cornell had already been to the morgue. a few minutes later, he planned to visit the scene of the fiery collision that claimed the life of his mother, ruth a. macarthur, and three students from freehold borough high school.  but first mr. cornell stole a few moments on thursday morning to share his grief with the students and staff at the high school and to assure them that he was not blaming anyone for the crash on wednesday afternoon that ended the dreams of so many.  ''we wanted to offer our condolences, to let them know there was a family, she had children, she had grandchildren, she was more than just a lady in the van,'' mr. cornell said, standing outside the high school with his wife, darlene. ''she's a sweetheart. she's like everybody's grandma.''  a day after the crash, classmates gathered in clusters to mourn and to try to make sense of the loss of three promising young men as well as mrs. macarthur, a 68-year-old grandmother of 13.  ''this school is a community,'' said linda jewell, the principal of the high school, ''and we are grieving.''  the victims of the accident were michael dragonetti, 17, and james warnock, 17, both seniors, and andrew lundy, 16, a junior, all from freehold township. they were riding in a 2006 cadillac cts, driven by mr. dragonetti, when it collided on wednesday afternoon, moments after school was dismissed, with the dodge caravan that mrs. macarthur was driving. a 13-year-old passenger in the minivan remained hospitalized on thursday.  the cadillac burst into flames, said luis a. valentin, the monmouth county prosecutor, whose office is investigating whether speed was a factor in the crash.  on thursday, the authorities declined to say which vehicle had crossed the center line of kozloski road -- the two cars were headed in opposite directions. but officials said that mr. dragonetti had a provisional driver's license, which allowed him to drive with only one other passenger who was not a relative, not with the two other teenagers who were in the car.  mr. valentin provided few details about the investigation into the crash, which the authorities said could take weeks to complete. but mr. cornell said he was told by the authorities that early indications showed his mother was driving properly.  ''they said she was doing everything that she was supposed to,'' mr. cornell said.  mr. valentin refused to confirm mr. cornell's account.  ''it's upsetting. it shouldn't have happened,'' mr. cornell said. ''our whole family feels bad for the children and their families. nothing was intentional here; that's why they call it an accident. wrong place at the wrong time.''  mr. cornell did say that he hoped the accident would promote greater awareness among young drivers.  ''whether it's better teaching in the schools or a graduated-type license,'' he said, ''it's something that needs to be looked at and taken care of.''  school officials agreed. james wasser, superintendent of the freehold regional high school district, said that the accident was the second fatal collision involving students in the last six months.  mr. wasser said that young drivers were often unaccustomed to handling cars on the winding roads of freehold.  ''i don't think they understand that when they get behind the wheel, it's not an automobile,'' he said. ''it's a potentially dangerous weapon.''  for grieving classmates, it was a lesson learned too late.  students observed a moment of silence on thursday morning and changed the adjustable message board outside the school. one side displayed the names of the three dead students and the other side read, ''it's not the length of life but the depth of life.'' throughout the day, students who gathered there wept and consoled one another.  and they recalled their classmates.  nick moss, a 16-year-old junior, said that mr. dragonetti -- who was captain of the school football team -- drove his car cautiously around the parking lot at the freehold raceway mall, where he worked. he had received it as a gift from his parents for earning straight a's in the challenging medical science program and getting high scores on his college board exams.  ''he loved that car,'' mr. moss said. ''he earned it by working hard in school, and his parents rewarded him.''  students remembered mr. warnock -- who played football until he injured his knee last year -- as the team's biggest fan and the student with the most school spirit, seldom missing a sporting event, no matter how far away. friends said he had recently been accepted by rutgers.  and he wore stylish hollister clothes, just like his best friend, mr. dragonetti, with whom he worked at the brookstone store in the mall.  mr. lundy played the outfield and pitched for the junior varsity baseball team in his freshman year, said eric silverman, a junior, who added that he had not tried out in his sophomore year so he could concentrate on his studies. like mr. dragonetti, he was in the school's medical-science program.  twelve miles from the school, in laurence harbor, friends and relatives gathered at the home ms. macarthur shared with her husband of 16 years, robert macarthur, 77.  the last time mr. macarthur saw his wife was at lunchtime on wednesday, when the two ate baked chicken and made plans to bake another one that evening for dinner. mr. macarthur got up at 6 a.m. on thursday to cook the chicken so it would not be wasted.  "it's still in the oven," he said.  