death of a shark leaves scientists grasping   to those who questioned the propriety of keeping the giant whale shark in captivity, the philanthropist bernie marcus liked to say that in his aquarium here, the shark, the world's largest fish, would also be the world's most pampered.  but a specialized diet of krill and fortified gelatin, a 6.2-million-gallon fish tank and state-of-the-art medical care were not enough to save ralph, one of the four graceful, dappled whale sharks that were star attractions at the lavish $290 million georgia aquarium that opened here to great fanfare just over a year ago.  ralph, an adolescent whale shark 22 feet long, died mysteriously on thursday, reopening questions about whether whale sharks, a species about which little is known, should ever be taken from the wild.  jeffery s. swanagan, the chief executive of the georgia aquarium, said that none of the four whale sharks -- the others are norton, alice and trixie -- had shown signs of stress. ''the only thing we saw is that occasionally they wouldn't eat,'' mr. swanagan said. ''but it was never serious.''  as some 20 veterinarians, pathologists and biologists began a necropsy on ralph, his online guest book swelled with affectionate messages from fans. many of them had never heard of a whale shark before the aquarium became the first outside asia to exhibit them.  ''we will miss you, ralph,'' wrote the ''kinard kids'' of oxford, ga. ''to be so big and to be so nice at the same time.''  bob roberts of atlanta was nostalgic: ''i remember when we first met and you swam by me -- our eyes met -- and it was like we had known each other our entire lives.''  ralph was the second highly publicized attraction at the aquarium to die this month; a beluga whale that had been seriously ill died on jan. 2.  whale sharks, which can exceed 50 feet in length, are rare. little is known about their social habits, migration patterns or even their life span and food intake.  ''relative to other species, sharks are very poorly understood,'' said robert hueter, a pre-eminent shark expert who was attending the necropsy, and whose research in the wild is partly financed by the georgia aquarium. ''relative to other species of sharks, the whale shark is even more poorly understood.''  dr. hueter, director of the center for shark research at the mote marine laboratory in sarasota, fla., said he had not yet seen any obvious pathology. ''there's been no 'aha' moment yet,'' he said. ''it's always possible that we'll never know.''  scientists are beguiled by the whale shark's habit of diving deep into frigid water, as deep as 4,000 feet, dr. hueter said. no one knows if they are seeking food, trying to rid themselves of parasites, cooling off, resting or reveling.  but scientists like rachel graham, who has researched whale sharks in belize, point out that such dives cannot be replicated in a fish tank.  ''let us continue our push for global whale shark conservation so that populations may be protected and in some areas restored following overfishing,'' dr. graham wrote in a mass e-mail message to her colleagues in august 2005, criticizing the atlanta exhibit. ''global protection will then render obsolete the excuse of procuring whale sharks for aquariums in lieu of fishing and leave these animals where they belong, in the open ocean.''  marie levine, the executive director of the shark research institute in princeton, n.j., initially opposed the whale shark exhibit in atlanta because the aquarium intended to take the sharks from a wildlife sanctuary, and because so many whale sharks have died in captivity in asia.  but ms. levine softened when the aquarium bought juveniles, which are more adaptable, from taiwanese fishermen, who can take a limited number each year, most of which are destined for the dining table.  ''it was really a rescue,'' she said, ''and they certainly gave those animals excellent care.''  