missiles, motorcycles and lost '60s innocence   ''october 1962'' by d. w. gregory, now having its world premiere at the new jersey repertory company in long branch, is an exercise in baby-boomer paranoia. set against the backdrop of the cuban missile crisis (a convenient weapon for upping the anxiety quotient of any narrative), it's the story of a suburban nuclear family's own implosion, triggered when a young man, implicated in a long-ago murder, returns to his childhood neighborhood.  tommy, now old enough to ride a motorcycle, has recently been released from prison after serving time for killing a 7-year-old boy when he himself was still a boy. his neighbors, the seemingly ordinary timmons brood -- david and laura and their daughters, jean and nan -- have a few family skeletons of their own, which are significantly rattled by the proximity of tommy and his mother.  like the cuban missile crisis, these mysterious characters are repeatedly alluded to but never seen, serving as the fearful engine that drives the family's internecine theatrics. the drama takes place entirely within the household, specifically the living room and a glimpse of kitchen, persuasively created in dead-on 1960's style by carrie mossman. jean and nan, played with giggly enthusiasm by jenny vallancourt and juliet kapanjie (whose performances become much stronger as the play progresses) are intrigued with tommy and set about recording his -- and their father's -- movements in a kind of fantasized diary.  for reasons of his own, david timmons (convincingly played by james patrick earley) has hired tommy to work for him. david's wife, laura (kittson o'neill), is jealous of tommy's red-haired mother. it seems that once upon a time, the two families were very close -- too close for comfort, as the denouement of the play ultimately suggests.  now that tommy is back in town, long-buried tensions and memories resurface. laura begins cocktail hour a bit too early, tries to sabotage tommy's job and quarrels with david. david soon realizes that things are spinning out of control. the gossipy town reproaches him for giving tommy work, tommy gets into scuffles with his hostile coworkers, and then there are nan and jean's increasingly troublesome antics.  the drama culminates on halloween, when the family is planning to attend the annual town parade. as the girls put on their costumes, other, deeper layers come off. david, about to attend an adversarial town meeting about tommy, discovers that his daughters have disobeyed him by talking to the young man -- and even worse, have kept a diary about it. but it's not what's in the diary -- which the girls have turned into a mystery romance -- but what is in jean's memory that is the major revelation.  as the family nervously waits for david to come home, jean taunts her mother with her childhood recollection of a traumatic scene at the timmonses' involving tommy. laura reluctantly yields information in response to the increasingly pointed details of jean's memory, painting a disturbing picture of her husband's behavior. while laura has apparently come to terms with it, jean is only now grasping its meaning.  but just when it could become really interesting, the play ends. the missile crisis is over, tommy and his mother are moving, and the timmons family gathers for a warm and cozy breakfast of scrambled eggs. all would be sweetness and light, except for the look on jean's newly adult face.  ms. gregory has all the ingredients for a compelling drama -- an external crisis, an internal crisis, recovered memories, potential abuse -- but somehow, like a failed soufflé, the whole thing falls flat. the two major forces that set the drama in motion, the missile crisis and tommy's return, never feel real. despite audio of president kennedy and the occasional sound of tommy's motorcycle engine revving up, neither is ever more than a remote, clumsy device for unlocking the family closet. an even more serious problem, though, is that the final revelation is unsatisfying. if the implications of jean's memory are what they seem, their ripple effect provides enough of a crisis for a whole other play.  ''october 1962'' is at the new jersey repertory company, 179 broadway, long branch, through jan. 28. information: (732) 229-3166; www.njrep.org.  theater review  