the two sides of the chargers: the thunder and the flash   the first time shawne merriman went to a high school football practice, the coaches asked him what position he played.  ''i just want to hit somebody,'' merriman said.  he was sent to the defense.  the first time philip rivers went to a high school football practice, he was a 4-year-old water boy. he stood next to the coaches and mimicked their play calls.  ''i just wanted to learn,'' rivers said.  he was destined for offense.  so began the evolution of the san diego chargers, vicious on one side of the ball and cerebral on the other. the chargers are proof that one kind of player gravitates toward offense, and a much different kind gravitates toward defense, and they are strongest when separated.  this dynamic exists on many n.f.l. teams, but it is especially stark in san diego.  ''just look at us,'' defensive tackle jamal williams said. ''the guys on our defense are always running around, acting crazy, attacking somebody. the guys on our offense are probably in the library reading shakespeare.''  when the defense grew mohawks in training camp, the offense politely declined. when the defensive players marched around the practice field this week, repeating chants about the super bowl, the offensive players stretched on the side, talking quietly about one game at a time.  the defense has seven players with a different sack dance. (linebacker marques harris does back flips in full pads.) the offense does not have one player who even shimmies after a touchdown. (receiver vincent jackson once tried to spin the ball on the ground, but he accidentally committed an illegal forward lateral.)  ''those guys are always celebrating something,'' offensive tackle marcus mcneill said. ''part of playing offense is being more strategic, more level-headed. guys on defense are taught to play faster, more out of control.''  heading into sunday's divisional playoff game against new england, the chargers lead the league in sacks and are among the league leaders in off-field problems. the defense has had five players in legal trouble in the past year. the offense has had one.  the offense is led by ladainian tomlinson, a tailback who has won several awards for sportsmanship. the defense is led by merriman, a linebacker who was suspended four games this season because he tested positive for steroids.  ''we're the ones who've gotten in all the trouble,'' said luis castillo, a defensive end who tested positive for steroids at the n.f.l. scouting combine in 2005. ''offensive guys are usually very cool-tempered. we're sometimes more fiery, and it can hurt us.''  before the first month of this season ended, linebacker steve foley had been shot three times by an off-duty police officer trying to arrest him for drunken driving, and safety terrence kiel had been arrested on five felony drug counts.  kiel has pleaded not guilty to the charges and is back in the lineup, but foley is still recovering from his gunshot wounds. to honor him, chargers defenders imitate his sack dance, kicking the dirt like a bull about to charge.  offensive players, famous for their complex game plans and flashy highlights, are often stereotyped as the smarter and more glamorous breed. defensive players consider themselves tougher and nastier.  studies show that athletes who participate in contact sports can have violent tendencies, but those studies do not take into account whether a defensive player has more violent tendencies than an offensive player.  ''we may have to look at that,'' said peter roby, the director of the center for the study of sport in society at northeastern university in boston. ''the defensive philosophy is to dominate your opponent, impose your will. there is an appeal to the macho side, and it can influence a group's overall attitude.''  the chargers' offense aims for grace and sophistication, with tomlinson bounding past opponents and rivers throwing passes over them. the defense aims to intimidate opponents, then physically overwhelm them.  last season, merriman hit kansas city running back priest holmes with a blow to the helmet so devastating that holmes has not played since. this season, defensive tackle igor olshansky punched denver center tom nalen after nalen dived at his knees.  even in the summer, the offense and the defense choose different ways to spend their spare time. rivers plays daily games of table tennis and one-on-one with tight end antonio gates. merriman throws roundhouses at a local boxing gym.  the chargers' defense has plenty of sparring partners. miami defensive end jason taylor said recently that merriman should not be considered for postseason awards because of his positive steroids test. in response, merriman sent taylor a care package this week with a t-shirt and a hat bearing merriman's nickname, lights out.  he got the nickname in high school, when he once knocked four players out of a game by halftime.  ''that's the way it is in football,'' said merriman, who is in his second season. ''on defense, we are the attackers. it's reflected in everything we do. it's about kinetic energy. a running back doesn't have to yell and scream when he's cruising into the end zone. but i have to yell and scream trying to get him.''  merriman said he did not believe he was born a defender. as a child, he patterned himself after two offensive stars, barry sanders and jerry rice. like many offensive players, he was initially drawn to the glory associated with the end zone.  then his family lost its home. he survived three fires. he witnessed a murder. he recognized the anger inside him and searched for an outlet. defense gave him a chance to inflict punishment instead of absorb it.  merriman was barred from practices in high school because he hit teammates too hard. his coaches received letters from the parents of opposing players saying it was unfair for him to be on the same field with their children.  right then, the coaches could have switched merriman to fullback and ordered him to block. they could have made him a tight end and let him catch passes. but it was too late. the evolution had begun.  merriman and rivers will start their first playoff game sunday. the chargers need merriman and his defense riled. they need rivers and his offense relaxed. one unit must work as a wild herd. the other must function as a calibrated machine.  the flip sides of football are going on display.  pro football  