if you're going to london, nashville or san francisco   'london is the place for me 4'  i deeply love this whole series of cds, which illustrate the interplay among west indian musicians, african musicians and jazz in london during the '50s and '60s. you can surely do better elsewhere for the apotheosis of nigerian highlife, for calypso and certainly for jazz. but these records (put out by the british label honest jon's) are fascinating for their magically agreeable mixture of cultures in exile, and possibly because such unimpeachably beautiful ''world music'' comes with lyrics in the queen's english. the fourth and newest volume (subtitled ''african dreams and the piccadilly high life'') is scattered with calypsonians like lord kitchener, young growler and young tiger, and high-life bands like the african messengers. there are also british afro-caribbean jazz bands, like those led by shake keane and cab kaye, playing cuban-derived music. very few of the musicians on this or other volumes of the series are known in the united states (except for the african messengers' bassist, david williams, who plays with the new york jazz pianist cedar walton's trio). but listen hard, take in valerie wilmer's evocative black-and-white photographs in the inserts, read the text, and you can begin to make out the dimensions of a great mongrelized music in gloomy postwar london, an underrated time and place if there ever was one. (order from honestjons.com.)  david crosby  from london circa 1954 to san francisco circa 1970: here's another record that suggests an entire social atmosphere. mr. crosby isn't one of my favorite figures in the history of music and may not be one of yours, but ''if i could only remember my name,'' his first solo record -- made after his initial success with crosby, stills, nash & young, but before that band entered its long tunnel of crassness -- is weirdly potent, a record with a fascinating melancholy. its woolly studio jams outnumber the more arranged pieces, yet everything is recorded so beautifully and richly that you can practically smell the pot smoke. (more so with the dvd surround-sound mix on the second disc of rhino's new reissue; it also comes with a pretty good unreleased track.) most of those who would become the senior partners of counterculture inc. were on hand: joni mitchell; jerry garcia (playing killingly beautiful steel guitar on ''laughing''), as well as phil lesh and bill kreutzmann of the grateful dead; graham nash and neil young; grace slick, david freiberg, paul kantner, jorma kaukonen and jack casady of jefferson airplane. it's all as self-indulgent as jack nicholson's opening monologue in bob rafelson's 1972 movie, ''the king of marvin gardens'' -- a work of art that seemed to come from the same transcendental malaise -- but just as intense.  deerhoof  when a postpunk band made its music more broadly likable, the stupidest kind of manichaean conversations followed: the general idea was that once its vocals were upfront and clear, instead of indistinct and mumbly amid the wash of midrange sounds, a band had crossed over to the other side and lost its individuality. the san francisco band deerhoof has now made its first completely clear-sounding album in ''friend opportunity'' (kill rock stars). gone are most of the scratching, scrunching noises that previously signified a low budget, and now there are crisp multitracked vocals. but the band hasn't gotten any less imaginative. preparation is the secret to control: besides making the music swell and crest like any of the best rock bands, deerhoof composes rigorously, with strange, stirring chord changes. a tune in the middle of the record called ''whither the invisible birds?'' makes it plain: with piano, synthesizer and satomi matsuzaki's guileless voice, it's an art song, condensed and episodic in just over two minutes.  bonnie (prince) billy  the release of bonnie (prince) billy's superb and mature ''letting go'' has been a protracted event. the album has been out since september, but its label, drag city, has released three singles from it, including the newest, an understated and beautiful folk-tronic ballad called ''lay and love,'' with extra tracks that didn't appear on the cd; there have also been four videos, and four commercials for the album. (they're all on the label's web site, dragcity.com.) this isn't such an odd strategy to get attention for a good record, but will oldham -- the man behind the bonnie (prince) billy moniker -- is a hero of the non sequitur, and he makes all this seem like an absurd imitation of music marketing. one of the best commercials for the album features the comedian neil hamburger furtively sneaking out of a hotel room, looking for an ice machine; the camera enters the room he's just left, and there's mr. oldham, bound and gagged in his underpants. one of the best videos, for ''ebb tide,'' features mr. oldham dressed as some sort of fowl, having a glass of milk and some birthday cake.  polwechsel  a german-austrian-british band that equally mixes electronics and acoustic instruments, and improvisation and composition, polwechsel is fully abstract, if you consider lack of melody the definition of abstraction in music. with ''archives of the north'' (hat hut), its third album, the group has reached a state of refined grace. it now has the drummers burkhard beins and martin brandlmayr, the saxophonist john butcher, the bassist werner dafeldecker, and michael moser on cello and computer. working together, they make the most beautiful bowings and chimings and scrapings, blending them so that it all becomes one fluid motion. it's lovely music that some people might not call music at all.  cortney tidwell  a young nashville-based singer and songwriter, ms. tidwell follows the idea of pop music as a slow, unfolding, abstract dream -- the kind of thing mazzy star used to do pretty well -- but it's a dream rooted in an actual place. the little bits of lazy, echoed steel guitar in her first full-length record, ''don't let the stars keep us tangled up'' (ever), and its layered vocal harmonies, make it more recognizably american and southern; it's a shaggy record, but there's extreme beauty in parts of it.  music: playlist  