huntington school district eyes its own wind turbine   as debate continues over proposals for broadwater energy's floating natural gas plant in long island sound and the long island power authority's wind farm off the south shore, another kind of energy plan is being advanced.  the huntington union free school district has taken a tentative first step toward building a wind turbine of its own in hopes of reducing its $450,000 annual electric bill.  the turbine would be the first of its kind in any long island school district and one of a handful of so-called small wind projects producing less than 10,000 kilowatts in environmentally conscious suffolk county.  locally, land-based wind projects have been limited by inadequate winds, high capital costs and a lack of suitable sites for stand-alone lower-capacity turbines that range in height from 30 feet to more than 100 feet, wind power advocates said.  but rising electricity bills, a new line of small turbines that can generate power in low wind, and government and utility financial incentives for alternate energy sources are changing the equation, they said.  huntington is taking a dollars-and-cents approach to a project that could cost more than $500,000 up front and require the approval of residents and the school board. the size, cost, height, location, estimated power production and payback time of the turbine are still to be determined.  david h. grackin, the district's assistant superintendent, said the school board had so far approved conducting a feasibility study on placing a turbine somewhere on district property. he said the long island power authority had agreed to pay half the cost of the study by aws truewind of albany, a consultant to lipa on wind power. it is expected to cost between $12,500 and $14,500.  wind studies draw on a databank of wind fields at different altitudes and take topography and development patterns into account. according to the american wind energy association, an industry group in washington, a rule of thumb is that a turbine needs to be surrounded by at least an acre of open space and should not be near taller buildings. small wind turbines are normally not affixed to buildings because of noise and vibration.  on long island, maps show low-altitude winds are generally most favorable on the east end. the best wind fields are off the south shore, where lipa is proposing a 40-turbine wind farm that could generate up to 140 megawatts of power in optimum winds. a megawatt is 1,000 kilowatts.  land-based wind turbines listed on lipa's web site include two 50-kilowatt units at the former shoreham nuclear power plant. michael lowndes, a lipa spokesman, said the turbines were operating now that initial technical problems were resolved.  other projects lipa listed are a 10-kilowatt turbine at the former southampton college, now a part of stony brook university; a 10-kilowatt turbine at brookhaven town hall; and a 50-kilowatt turbine at a calverton farm.  mr. lowndes said the authority was discussing small wind projects with another suffolk school district, middle country in centereach and selden, and a planned community for the elderly, peconic landing in southold.  gordian raacke, the executive director of renewable energy long island in bridgehampton, said solar and wind power held great potential for schools. ''wind turbines are a great learning tool because you can see something happening,'' he said. ''there isn't a whole lot of action when you look at solar panels.''  school turbines have been successful in some parts of the country.  at the spirit lake community school district in northwestern iowa, a 250-kilowatt turbine that began operating in 1993 and cost $239,500 -- with the department of energy paying for about half and the rest coming from a low-interest loan -- saves $20,000 annually on electricity costs, the director of buildings and grounds, james r. tirevold, said. in 2001, the district added a 750-kilowatt turbine that cost $780,000, financed with low- and no-interest loans.  now, the turbines supply 100 percent of the district's electricity needs, with loan payments covered by savings and reimbursements from the local utility for power generated beyond what the district uses.  the catch is that spirit lake gets steady winds off buffalo ridge, which funnels them through western minnesota and northwestern iowa.  