revisiting issue, u.n. chief clarifies death-penalty stance   ban ki-moon, the new secretary general, sought thursday to change the impression he left in his first public utterance as united nations head last week about his position on the death penalty.  ''i recognize the growing trend in international law and in national practice towards a phasing out of the death penalty,'' mr. ban said in a statement at a news conference on thursday, his first since taking office jan. 1. ''i encourage that trend.''  mr. ban, the mild-spoken former foreign minister of south korea, made unaccustomed waves last tuesday when he declined to criticize the death penalty applied to saddam hussein.  his comment appeared to contradict the longtime united nations stance against the death penalty and put him at unwanted odds with his predecessor, kofi annan, who frequently cited his opposition to capital punishment on human rights grounds.  after clarifying his position on thursday, mr. ban told reporters, ''ladies and gentlemen, thank you for letting me get that off my chest.''  but in another instance of his early actions raising doubts, mr. ban was asked about reports that he had not conducted formal job interviews with some of his appointees to high-ranking management positions. he has said that tightening the united nations' much criticized management would be a priority of his administration.  he said that these were ''unsubstantiated misperceptions,'' and that he had relied on his own associations and conversations with the candidates and on discussions about their qualifications with others.  ''i sincerely hope that instead of judging by what you heard from different sources that you will judge my appointments on the basis of merit and on the basis of their performance,'' he said.  the three people mentioned were asha-rose mtengeti-migiro, the foreign minister of tanzania, whom mr. ban chose as deputy secretary general; alicia bárcena ibarra of mexico, mr. annan's chief of staff, who becomes under secretary general for management; and john holmes, the british ambassador to france, who becomes under secretary for humanitarian affairs.  mr. ban said he would be demanding ''performance targets'' of senior officials, which would be reviewed at the end of the year to measure their achievement.  asked if he would use a scheduled visit to the white house next week to ask president bush to close the united states detention center at guantánamo bay, cuba, he said he agreed with his predecessor, mr. annan, that it should be shut down.  he added that he believed mr. bush himself shared that objective. mr. ban declined to give his reaction to president bush's announcement of new troop levels in iraq.  ''broadly speaking, however,'' he said, ''the united nations would welcome genuine efforts to improve security for ordinary iraqis as well as to stabilize the country through a combination of security, political and economic means.''  the united nations presence in iraq was sharply cut back in 2003 after the bombing of its headquarters in baghdad, which killed 22 people, including the mission chief, sergio vieira de mello.  since then, the united nations has provided assistance in drafting a constitution and organizing elections, two functions mr. ban referred to in answering a question about whether he planned to expand the current mission.  ''we will continue to participate in that process as much as we can, but our participation and contribution at this time is largely dictated by the security situations on the ground,'' he said.  