three more faces of aurora, and of her prince   on paper, the ''sleeping beauty'' tale known today is simple, even silly: a harmless delight for children. it's only in the telling that this tchaikovsky story ballet can become a classic.  in peter martins's sometimes overly efficient version, now in its second week of shows, this telling depends even more on the dancers. as illustrated by three successive viewings this week, different new york city ballet performers revealed different aspects of the narrative -- or, in the most dispiriting cases, obscured them.  on tuesday, ashley bouder's princess aurora illuminated the story's full moral depth. she attacked the daunting rose adagio attitude balances with her usual fierce joy, wobbling a bit at first and then growing into majestic strength. ms. bouder is that rare ballerina you cherish even more for her missteps. she inhabits choreography so fully that you stop keeping score, so to speak; perfection is of interest in gymnastics, not art.  making his debut as prince désiré, benjamin millepied matched her commitment. from his fine acting to his buoyant leaps, he portrayed the transition from a callow youth to an ardent suitor awakened by his desire to rouse aurora. he could hardly believe his good luck. neither could the audience.  as the lilac fairy, amanda hankes seemed wan by comparison, eyes too often downcast as though she were unsure of her steps, which never conveyed the necessary expansiveness. more convincing was ellen bar. in her debut on wednesday, the benevolent fairy became a supple diva, well suited to battle maria kowroski's deliciously wicked carabosse. they were the same type of woman -- one with whom you don't trifle.  they sparred over megan fairchild, making her debut as aurora. she gutted through the role's formidable technical demands, offering a fragile, winsome aurora. in his first crack at the role, joaquin de luz was every bit the prince, even if he didn't seem quite right as her prince; compatible in size, the two are often partnered, but mr. de luz's to-the-manner-born glamour and ms. fairchild's quiet mischievousness do not always mix. here, appreciation for their dancing did not build to a transformative experience.  in another set of debuts, sterling hyltin and jonathan stafford were thursday's lead couple, with mr. stafford replacing the injured jared angle. he acquitted himself admirably, if without flair, and the substitution could account for the couple's lack of chemistry. but the bigger problem was ms. hyltin, who struggled to summon both the physical and emotional reserves necessary for the central role. though her quick, light feet sparkled, she failed to deepen as the ballet progressed; her century-long slumber seems to have been dreamless.  in other notable debuts, ana sophia scheller shone as princess florine, while vincent paradiso had a bit of trouble with the bluebird's tricky, bounding footwork. antonio carmena was a puckish jester. and, of course, there were the constants, from tchaikovsky's swelling score to the charming flirtation of white cat and puss in boots to george balanchine's garland dance -- the sublime metaphor for a harmonious kingdom of youth.  ''the sleeping beauty'' concludes with performances at 2 and 8 p.m. today and 3 p.m. tomorrow at the new york state theater, lincoln center; (212) 870-5570 or nycballet.com.  dance review  