judge rebuffs u.s. scientist in lawsuit against times   a federal judge on friday dismissed a suit against the new york times by a former government scientist who said he was defamed by a series of columns about the deadly anthrax mailings in 2001.  the judge, claude m. hilton of federal district court in alexandria, va., granted a motion by the times to dismiss the suit but did not provide an immediate explanation. he is expected to file a detailed written opinion in coming days.  it was the latest and, perhaps, final chapter in a suit that has gone to the supreme court.  the scientist, dr. stephen j. hatfill, a specialist in biological weapons, had said in his suit that the columns by nicholas d. kristof about the anthrax mailings had defamed him.  mr. kristof wrote about a government scientist whom he initially identified as mr. z, saying he had become the overwhelming focus of the investigation. in august 2002, mr. kristof wrote that dr. hatfill, a former scientist at the army bioweapons center at fort detrick, md., had come forward and identified himself as mr. z and said the news media had treated him unfairly.  five people died in the anthrax attacks. although federal authorities identified dr. hatfill as a ''person of interest,'' he was never charged with any crime, and the attacks remain unsolved.  the times argued in its dismissal motion that dr. hatfill was a public figure, at least for the purposes of the suit, in that he had thrust himself into the public debate about preparedness for a biological attack. that would present him with a far greater burden in showing that he was defamed and could, as the newspaper argued, prevent such a judgment.  the times also argued that the columns did not blame dr. hatfill for the attacks, as he said in his suit. instead, the paper's lawyers said, the columns were aimed at pressing the federal bureau of investigation to move more swiftly and either charge or clear dr. hatfill as a suspect.  judge hilton had dismissed the suit earlier, saying that no defamation had occurred. a three-judge appeals panel voted, 2 to 1, to reinstate the suit, saying a jury should decide whether the columns were defamatory.  the full appeals court, based in richmond, va., split, and the supreme court refused to intervene.  judge hilton's latest dismissal, when his opinion is published, is expected to rest on a fuller argument than the last time and could thus be less vulnerable to being overturned. it is likely to deal with the issues raised in the times's dismissal motion and dr. hatfill's response, including the question of whether he is a public figure for the purposes of defamation law.  whether there is any leeway for dr. hatfill to mount an appeal as he did before would depend on how judge hilton fashions his ruling.  a lawyer for dr. hatfill, mark a. grannis, said, ''obviously we can't make any statements as to what we'll do until we see the ruling.''  mr. grannis said he did not believe that the case was over.  ''it has always been our position,'' he said, ''that the evidence of defamation was extremely strong and mr. kristof fabricated parts of his column to falsely implicate dr. hatfill in the anthrax attacks.''  david e. mccraw, a lawyer for the times, said in a statement: ''we are gratified by the judge's ruling today. in making our summary judgment motion, we believed that the plaintiff had failed to come up with the evidence necessary to bring this case to trial, and we are pleased that the court agreed.''  mr. mccraw said the case had required a significant investment of time and money on the part of the newspaper, ''but in the end, the law of defamation worked the way it was supposed to, by protecting aggressive, important journalism.''  