neighborhood report: urban studies | lecturing; pastries, and particle physics   as night fell last monday and the air grew colder, rolando gonzalez passed the wide plate-glass windows of picnic market and café, a french bistro-style restaurant on broadway near 102nd street. inside the bright interior -- all blond wood and papyrus lamps -- he saw virginia cornish, legs crossed, sitting on a stool against the wall and gesturing to an audience of 60 or so people sipping wine at their tables.  ''what's that?'' he asked. ''comedy?''  not really. ms. cornish, an associate professor of chemistry at columbia university, was fielding questions from the audience about her research, which involves engineering cells to produce new chemicals.  ''have you ever seen 'blade runner'? '' asked a man in a plaid shirt, who expressed worry about the potential misuse of her research.  ''i prefer 'the jetsons,' '' professor cornish retorted with a smile, before embarking on a more serious answer.  such is cafe science, a monthly series of informal talks by columbia university science professors, who visit picnic to describe their work and answer questions from a standing-room-only crowd. the scientists range from astronomers to nanotechnology experts, and the question-and-answer sessions can feel like a meeting between two species, neither much familiar with the other, but both eager to learn.  one woman had a question about gene splicing. ''do you use a pair of scissors?'' she asked. ''do you use a razor blade? do you use a computer?''  for the most part, the audience watched raptly, some even taking notes. excluding a pair of hyper-articulate eighth-grade boys, their average age seemed to be somewhere north of 40; many were seeking to update their scientific knowledge. ''it's fascinating for people who went to college 30 to 40 years ago, when science was very different,'' said jane bevans, an attorney in her 60s, as she left the restaurant with two friends.  leon waldman, a rabbi who is retired, came in the hope of better understanding his son, a pediatric oncologist. ''i came here so i can engage him more, and understand what he's talking about,'' he said.  and perrianne simkhovitch, a curly-haired woman scribbling in a journal, said she lived in humboldt redwoods state park in california, had been in town for two weeks, and was dropping in on physics departments around the city to pose questions about ''a time asymmetry where time runs backward.''  she asked professor cornish: ''have you ever thought of a new function for a molecule that no one's ever thought of before -- in a dream or something?''  professor cornish smiled, and began, carefully, to formulate an answer.  alex mindlin  urban studies | lecturing  correction:  january 21, 2007, sunday  an article last sunday about a monthly series of talks by columbia university science professors at an upper west side restaurant incorrectly described two eighth graders in the audience. they were sarah friedhoff, a 13-year-old girl, and miguel alonso-lubell, a 13-year-old boy -- not two boys.  