after a struggle to escape comes an effort to adjust   ''god grew tired of us,'' a sober, uplifting documentary that follows the resettlement in the united states of three young men uprooted as children by the civil war in sudan, is the softer, hollywood-sanctioned version of an earlier documentary, ''the lost boys of sudan.'' a national geographic production, directed by christopher quinn and narrated by nicole kidman in her loftiest a-student elocution, ''god'' won both the grand jury prize and the audience award at the 2006 sundance film festival. how could it not? handsomely photographed and inspirational, but not cloyingly so, it is the rare contemporary documentary that doesn't leave a residue of cynicism and outrage.  as it balances excruciating images of hardship, suffering and starvation with wry observations of newly arrived immigrants learning to use electric appliances and visiting their first supermarket, you are won over by the charm, good manners and nobility of its three subjects, john bul dau, panther bior and daniel abul pach. each is a member of the dinka, the christian, animist, agricultural people in southern sudan driven from their land by islamic government forces from the north. except for a couple of sentences about the hasty british partition of sudan, the film offers no historical background.  the three, who ranged in age from their mid-20s to their early 30s, were among the 25,000 ''lost boys,'' ages 3 to 13, who fled their villages in the 1980s to escape extermination or sterilization. they traveled on foot for five years, while starvation, dehydration, disease, wild animals and attacks from rebel soldiers reduced their number to a few thousand, before they landed in a united nations refugee camp in kakuma, kenya.  once in kenya, they formed their own communal society, which the movie portrays as a gentle, hierarchal brotherhood where the older children took care of the younger. during 10 years in limbo they received some education, secondhand clothing and meager rations.  john, daniel and panther were among a group selected for resettlement by the international rescue committee and flown to new york by way of nairobi and brussels. once in the united states, daniel and panther, best friends at kakuma, became roommates in pittsburgh. john, the oldest, settled in syracuse.  followed over the course of four years, each of the three men reacts differently (but positively) to the excruciating pressures of adjusting to a non-agricultural society where success is measured in dollars. after a year's initial support, each is expected to fend for himself and to pay back his airfare to the united states. that often means working three jobs a day doing things like flipping burgers at mcdonald's and busing tables in a restaurant, while sending as much money to relatives in africa as can be squeezed out of a minimum wage.  as time passes, their loneliness and feelings of being cut off from the culture in which they were born deepen and become a palpable ache. it is expressed in a sad reflection by john on the plight of sudan, which gives the film its title.  with the help of the international red cross and other agencies, john is able to locate the family he hasn't seen or heard from in more than a decade in a uganda refugee camp. in the most wrenching scene, his mother arrives in the united states and at the first sight of john collapses on the floor, clinging to him and emitting keening yelps of joy.  the movie shows very little social interaction between the three men and ordinary americans, beyond the polite exchanges of foreigners struggling to communicate. racial hostility is alluded to only once, when a group of lost boys is asked to go out in smaller numbers so as not to alarm the neighbors.  the movie's poignant early scenes, filmed in kenya, show a community sustained by a remarkable spirit of brotherhood. at the camp, john, who is unusually tall as well as one of the oldest, was a group leader for more than a thousand other boys. daniel, a natural entertainer, was also a leader and formed a group called the parliament. both he and panther, who returned to africa to marry (and is currently working to bring his wife to the united states), live in pittsburgh and attend college.  because its ratio of joy to horror is about 60-40, ''god grew tired of us'' is more user-friendly than its forerunner, which opened in new york three years ago, and addressed such touchy issues as the cultural gulf between sudanese immigrants and african-americans. if the more inspirational ''god grew tired of us'' hovers on the edge of sentimentality, it never goes overboard. as these hard-working learners struggle for a foothold, swallowing their anxiety and loneliness, they persevere with a stoicism that is almost saintly.  ''god grew tired of us'' is rated pg (parental guidance suggested). it includes harrowing images of starving children.  god grew tired of us  opens today in new york and los angeles.  directed by christopher quinn; narrated by nicole kidman; director of photography, paul daley; edited by geoffrey richman; music by mark mcadam, mark nelson and jamie staff; produced by molly bradford pace and mr. quinn; released by newmarket/national geographic films. in manhattan at landmark's sunshine cinema, 139-143 east houston street, east village. running time: 90 minutes.  film review  correction:  january 16, 2007, tuesday  a listing of credits in weekend on friday with a film review of ''god grew tired of us'' omitted an editor and a producer. in addition to geoffrey richman, johanna giebelhaus edited the film, and tommy walker was a producer, along with molly bradford pace and christopher quinn.  