in reversal, senate endorses plan on disclosing earmarks   senate democratic leaders on friday embraced a proposal to shed light on the murky practice of congressional earmarks, reversing themselves after trying to block an almost identical measure the day before.  the democrats' switch makes it likely that the senate will follow the new house rules requiring the disclosure of the sponsor as well as the cost and the purpose of any earmark. that would bring into public view for the first time a practice that last year allowed lawmakers to direct federal money to more than 12,000 pet projects worth more than $64 billion by tucking them into complicated spending bills, often anonymously. lawmakers tend to use the projects to reward constituents and contributors.  the reversal follows a white house statement of support for the measure and a day of news coverage noting that senate democrats were opposing a rule that their house counterparts had just adopted a week ago. senator harry reid of nevada, the democratic leader, said he had come around to the measure after some adjustments that he said had strengthened it.  ''yesterday was a rather difficult day, as some days are,'' mr. reid said, appearing to apologize for his effort to kill the measure thursday. ''there is a lot of confusion as to what people were trying to accomplish.''  while debating a proposed package of ethics and lobbying rule changes that would include the earmark disclosure requirements, the senate also voted 87 to 0 to deny federal pension benefits to any member of congress convicted of fraud or corruption charges.  sponsors of the measure said its inspiration was former representative randy cunningham, republican of california. he is in prison for selling earmarked defense contracts worth tens of millions of dollars in exchange for gifts and cash worth over $2.4 million, but he still receives his federal pension of $40,000 a year, becoming the latest in a long chain of corrupt lawmakers whose retirement benefits have galled taxpayers.  but while mr. cunningham's actions provoked the senate vote, he will continue to collect his pension. the main sponsors, senators john kerry of massachusetts and ken salazar of colorado, both democrats, said congress could not revoke the pension of mr. cunningham or other former lawmakers, only future congressional criminals.  the cunningham scandal also helped inspire bipartisan calls for more earmark disclosure last year. but any restrictions have always drawn the fierce opposition of the powerful house and senate appropriations committees, which dole out earmarks to other lawmakers as they write spending bills. in part because of internal resistance, the leaders of both parties initially proposed a weak earmark disclosure requirement with loopholes that excluded all but a small part of all earmarks. the senate had approved the same provision last year under republican control.  a bipartisan agreement to settle for the weaker earmark measure fell apart thursday when senator jim demint, republican of south carolina, sought to impose the new house rule on the senate. ''our version of earmark disclosure was going to be an embarrassment to the senate, especially after nancy pelosi placed a much stronger version on the house side,'' mr. demint said. ''some of the democrats bought that argument.''  a move by senate democratic leaders to kill mr. demint's amendment unexpectedly failed, with nine democrats, the independent joseph i. lieberman and 41 republicans voting to keep it alive. the surprise threw the senate into chaos as the democratic leaders sought to block its immediate passage and regain control of the debate.  on friday, democratic aides said republican leaders failed to deliver on a pledge to support the weaker measure. republicans aides said there was no such agreement.  