colts push onward in playoffs, advancing 3 points at a time   the indianapolis colts, the team of peyton manning and the franchise that once had the legendary quarterback johnny unitas, probably never thought they would rely on a formula like this to win in the playoffs: let the defense stop the opponent, have the place-kicker score all the points, and hope the offense does not make too many mistakes.  who did they think they were -- the baltimore ravens? the ravens, the team that brought football back to baltimore, patented that game plan when they won the super bowl in 2001. but the colts borrowed a page from that playbook saturday, beating the ravens, 15-6, to advance to next sunday's american football conference championship game.  the colts, for years the n.f.l.'s most dazzling offense, won in the most unexpected fashion -- without scoring a touchdown and by allowing fewer than 10 points for the second time in the playoffs. they have made their way through the playoffs without the white-hot spotlight and the staggering weight of outside expectations bearing down on them. manning, whose postseason struggles have threatened to blemish his career résumé, has thrown five interceptions and only one touchdown pass in the past two games.  but if the new england patriots defeat the san diego chargers in sunday's a.f.c. playoff game, the colts will play host to the championship game -- a perk they were supposed to enjoy last year, when they were the overwhelming favorite to reach the super bowl.  in the waning moments of the victory, after adam vinatieri had nailed his fifth field goal, colts coach tony dungy stood beside defensive tackle anthony mcfarland. dungy and mcfarland had been together in tampa bay, too, when the buccaneers' repeated playoff runs were foiled by a terrible offense. the bucs fired dungy for his failure to win a title and he was quickly hired by the colts, who hoped he would build a defense that would be a complement to manning's offense.  with two smothering defensive efforts in the playoffs so far, dungy seems to be fulfilling his mandate at precisely the moment when manning has stumbled. so, on the sideline, dungy and mcfarland christened the colts' victory: call it buc-ball.  ''we won a lot of games like this,'' dungy said of his buccaneers. ''we were having a laugh. these guys are all nervous. every game we won, we won like this. it's ravens ball. we outplayed them at their game.''  actually, the ravens have never had a quarterback like manning. but the arrival of quarterback steve mcnair, who once shared league most valuable player honors with manning, energized the offense and created a balance with the defense that propelled the ravens to the no. 2 seeding in the a.f.c.  but on saturday both offenses were virtually beside the point. this was just the fourth time in n.f.l. history, and the first since 1979, that neither team scored a touchdown in a playoff game. the ravens had the best defense in the league this season, but manning said he could not recall, in his nine seasons in the n.f.l., ever winning a game without scoring at least one touchdown.  except for the outcome, this was a forgettable performance for him. scrambling to avoid pressure, manning frequently overthrew his receivers. he was intercepted twice while completing only 15 of 30 pass attempts, statistically an even worse day than mcnair had, with his two interceptions and 18-of-29 passing. manning's 39.6 quarterback rating was nearly as bad as the 35.5 rating he posted when the patriots battered the colts in the 2005 a.f.c. championship game.  ''the plan coming in was to score touchdowns,'' manning said, laughing. ''we were not planning to score 35 points, but we thought maybe 20 points. i knew it would be tough sledding.''  but manning completed the most important pass of the game, in the middle of a clock-chewing fourth-quarter drive that kept the ball out of the ravens' hands when they were trailing by only 6 points. on third-and-5 from baltimore's 45, manning zipped a pass to tight end dallas clark, who was blanketed by ravens cornerback corey ivy.  at the most critical moment, the ravens' defense could not make a stop. the colts' defense, particularly against the run, was shredded for most of the regular season, but with the return of safety bob sanders from an injury that forced him to miss almost all of the regular season, the colts have had consecutive lockdown performances. they held the chiefs' larry johnson to 32 yards rushing last week, then held the ravens to 83. they thwarted baltimore's preferred style to get an early lead and then unleashed blitzes.  the ravens never had the lead because the colts had the one weapon they lacked last season: a reliable field-goal kicker. the colts signed vinatieri away from the patriots expressly for games like this.  last season ended for the colts when mike vanderjagt badly missed a field goal in the divisional round. the league's most dynamic offense, and the improving defense, could do nothing to replace those 3 points, so the colts replaced vanderjagt as soon as free agency started with vinatieri, one of the most clutch kickers in n.f.l. history.  vinatieri has had plenty of highlight-reel moments, none more memorable than his successful field goals in a blizzard against the oakland raiders that propelled the patriots to their first super bowl title. but if the colts go to the super bowl, vinatieri might have provided an omen to their postseason.  his third field goal of the game, late in the second quarter, was a 51-yarder. he did not hit it well and the ball seemed to die as it got near the goal post. it barely hit the cross bar and with its last bit of momentum, it bounced over.  it was not pretty, but it got through. just like the colts.  pro football  