measuring eternity, and lives   twice in a single week they landed within a mile of my home, the satellite trucks that swarm wherever the waters are roiled on what we hope, what we pray, is the otherwise placid surface of our days.  sometimes they come in wonder, as they did the first time, about a week and a half ago. a stray piece of the universe had crashed through the roof of a house, a great cosmic spitball -- a 4-billion-year-old meteorite that had fallen screaming out of the sky and had chosen new jersey as its target.  it was a big story partly because of the novelty value of a visitor from outer space. but it lingered in local conversations for days afterward because it also told us just how small a piece of the universe we are. it was a glimpse of something we don't see very often: eternity.  ''of all places,'' people said wherever they went, ''why here?''  and then the satellite trucks returned on wednesday. ''there's been an accident,'' my daughter said over the phone, calling to say that track practice was ending early, and she was coming home. ''three boys from my school were killed.''  three boys, it soon turned out, and the driver of another vehicle, a school transport van. at 2 p.m. on a day when the first few stray snowflakes of the season fell on our town, the three boys were among the 1,400 other students spilling out of freehold borough high school, just another part of the swift tide that surges toward freedom at the end of each school day. the sun had come out by then, but it was still colder than anyone had yet gotten accustomed to in this weirdly warm winter.  by 2:12 their car was a flaming wreck on kozloski road, not much more than a mile away. michael dragonetti, 17, a senior lineman on the football team, was driving the cadillac cts. james warnock, 17, also a senior, was sitting beside him in the front seat. andrew lundy, 16, a junior, was in the back. driving the van was ruth macarthur, 68, a retired nurse from old bridge married to a retired firefighter. she had 4 children, 13 grandchildren and 1 great-grandchild. ms. macarthur and the three boys were all pronounced dead at the scene. the lone student her van was carrying went to the hospital with injuries.  you all know what happened next, because you've seen it in your own town more recently than you wish to recall, or remember it from your own high school years -- all the terrible, sad machinery of sudden death. the agonized crowd and the flashing lights at the accident scene. the sobbing classmates melting into each other. the endless rounds of phone calls before the names are released: where are you? who was it? do you know what happened? and then the deeper, more elusive questions, the whys.  ''of all places,'' people were saying again, ''why here?''  and so the satellite trucks beamed out the news, the lights burned late at the high school as grief counselors arrived, and students drifted back to a place that had been whole just a few hours earlier, seeking solace in one another. parents embraced their children and wondered how they would ever let them into a car again.  in the morning a new message went up on the sign in front of the school that i can read from my front porch, and that recently celebrated the girls' soccer team's state championship. ''mike james andrew always in our hearts,'' it read on one side, like a heartbreaking yearbook inscription. and on the other: ''it is not the length of life, but the depth of life.''  freehold borough high school, bruce springsteen's alma mater, is an old, close, spirited place -- after that soccer championship game, the fire trucks welcomed the team back to town with a horn-blaring escort up main street -- and its students will probably grow closer from facing these deaths together. they will also, perhaps, lose a layer of the dangerous shell of immortality that encases the young. they may even drive more slowly, at least on the road where their classmates died, a new, undivided four-lane speedway through former farm fields that puts swift cars at what feels to me like dangerous proximity.  the family visited by the meteorite hasn't quite decided what to do with it yet, except to say that they want people to learn from it. those who stand within the ancient rock's presence can hardly help but be changed, measuring their place in the universe by a cosmically new scale.  sudden, tragic, inexplicable death changes your measure of yourself, too, roughening that placid surface of life. and there will be -- inevitably and heart-rendingly -- more fiery crashes before there are more meteorites, more unwelcome chances to glimpse eternity from an angle that is far more terrifying, and far less enlightening.  jersey  