il duce's architect   the eighth wonder of the world  by leslie epstein.  461 pp. handsel books/other press. $24.95.  this is a cacophonous barn of a restaurant'' ran the opening line of a recent review in a london magazine. i blessed the critic and read no further: he had fulfilled the function of filter admirably well, at once killing my interest in the subject of the review and in the review itself. i wish to render the reader of this review a similar time-saving favor.  ''the eighth wonder of the world'' concerns an american architect, amos prince, who wins a competition to commemorate mussolini's victory over ethiopia by proposing to build a mile-high monument, the highest edifice ever, the eighth wonder of the world. but although he combines the flamboyant megalomania of frank lloyd wright and the folksy anti-semitism of ezra pound, prince does not exist as a character. all he really consists of is a single, endlessly repeated verbal tic -- the making of bad puns.  here's prince contributing, as pound did, anti-semitic broadcasts to the fascist radio in wartime italy: ''now we got ourselves into a war. a warburg, i otta call it. this was cooked up by the chews. that's right. by the kikes and the hyperkikes against the not-sees. they want to put a dent in mister hot-leer's prestige.'' and here's prince addressing mussolini: ''ain't no your-rump-pee-on, that's for sure. just a farm boy -- like you, mr. musty-loin-ee.''  mussolini himself has two modes of speech. he pontificates in capital letters, the roman numerals of rhetoric: italian men and italian women -- countrymen at home and throughout the world: lift your banners, your swords, your hearts, to salute the reappearance after 15 centuries of an empire, a fascist empire, upon the fateful hills of rome. will you be worthy of it? otherwise he talks like a 1950s tv italian. ''this building,'' he says, asking prince about the monument, ''how's-a she going to stand up and not fall-a down?'' besotted with the architect's beautiful young daughter, he exclaims: ''i'mma taste already, like roast pigeon, that neck onna my tongue.''  this stupefyingly unfunny attempt at comedy, bad enough in itself, has another unfortunate effect. it continually breaks the spell of the narrative, shattering a story back into mere words on a page. the fate of the jews who are building the tower -- and the fate of the tower itself -- are of no interest because they don't even possess the substance of fiction. the stories of the other principal characters are similarly without savor. this is especially unfortunate since mussolini and his italy haven't been strip-mined like so many other subjects in fiction and history. mussolini's rome might have been the perfect venue for the sort of felliniesque opera buffa with tragic glints that leslie epstein presumably had in mind.  it's not that he can't write well. he has both the genes and the track record. his father and uncle won an academy award for their work on the ''casablanca'' screenplay, and in nine other works of fiction (including ''p. d. kimerakov,'' ''king of the jews'' and ''san remo drive''), he has demonstrated his range and agility. in patches of this book epstein can be poetic: ''why had a sob, like a knot in a handkerchief, caught in his throat?''; ''bombers in formation resembled a thousand christian crosses in the sky.'' and he can be insightful: ''at the heart of fascism there was a certain playfulness, the same malignant merriment that ran through all of nature. thus did the german cat toy with its jewish mouse.''  but whenever he begins to write well enough to draw the reader back into the story, epstein unfailingly undercuts himself. a strong description of the desecration of the corpses of il duce and his mistress (''the men opened their pants; the women, kneeling, lifted their skirts. they soaked the bodies in urine, as if they meant to douse them with kerosene'') is followed, just a few lines later, by a reference to mussolini as ''messy-linguini.''  i would hope that by now most of my readers would have given up, but there's no accounting for taste. for those who may have found these puns hilarious and could scarcely wait for more plays on hitler's name, i offer the following: ''a-doff hatter'' and ''a-daft hater.'' and if they ever consider traveling to london, i think i know of a restaurant they might like.  richard lourie is the author of a forthcoming novel on the betrayal of anne frank, ''a hatred for tulips.''  