in obliging waco, dr pepper is the king   you step off the plane, rent a car and notice a gun club off the side of the airport access road. fifteen minutes later, with a stranger's shotgun in your hand, you're merrily blasting away at clay pigeons across a poplar-lined field within site of the control tower. welcome to the wild west as it's lived in the old cowboy town of waco, tex. -- hospitable, liberating and as broad as the dry, grassy plains around town.  ''we'd prefer folks call first if they want a loaner gun,'' said greg surber, manager of waco skeet and trap club, one of the largest gun clubs in the country, where nonmembers can borrow guns, buy ammunition and shoot clays launched from a series of towers that (phew!) face away from the runway. but even when i wandered in without any warning, he and the club members were happy to oblige an out-of-towner. that just seems to be the waco way.  it has been more than a century since cowboys last drove a herd of cattle though its rip-roaring streets, across the brazos river and up the chisholm trail, but waco is still a live-and-let-live kind of place that attracts larger-than-life characters with lots of firepower -- a mixed blessing that has helped earn it, in some quarters, the nickname wacko.  waco's unique geography -- it's a bowl lined by the elm-shaded plains of central texas -- might be the key to understanding it. from the air, the city looks like a frontier fort (which is what it originally was) in the middle of a vast flatland. but on the ground you see that the plains have a corrugated quality, undulating into narrow, deep valleys ideal for small ranches with lots of privacy. this is compound country.  and where you have a lot of miniworlds, you have a lot of local color, for better or worse. the rocker ted nugent, the fitness entrepreneur gary heavin and president bush all built high-caliber compounds around waco. so did david koresh. in waco, opening sentences are often punctuated with ''sir'' or ''ma'am'' and closing sentences with ''hon.'' rustic shacks abut 19th-century pillared mansions. great restaurants masquerade as holes-in-the-wall.  baylor university, a baptist school that has been known for its politically conservative alumni, houses a shrine to a group of bohemian poets. in a state that prides itself on an independent, cowboy spirit, waco seems to epitomize easygoing individualism. not surprisingly, this is the city that gave the world steve martin and dr pepper.  the dr pepper museum, with a wealth of regional lore and history, is a must-see. in 1885, charles alderton, a local druggist, created dr pepper, designing it to ''taste like a drugstore smells.'' now his quirky soda has become so deeply ingrained in hometown culture that wacoans serve it heated over a slice of lemon as an alternative to coffee or tea. ''it's quite refreshing, like a hot toddy without the rum,'' said becky hodges, a local innkeeper.  inside the museum, in an old bottling plant with squat arches and multicolored brickwork, an animatronic doc alderton tells the story, and tour groups file into a checker-tiled vintage soda fountain where, on a day last summer, a woman in a white hat was setting out dr pepper floats made from the original cane-sugar recipe on a marble countertop. murmurs came up from around the room as people took their first sips.  ''this is how it tasted when i was growing up,'' a middle-aged man in a stetson hat announced before herding his family into the museum store to buy a crate of it.  farther uptown toward the river, sprawls baylor, one of the oldest universities in texas. inside the armstrong-browning library on the main green is an impressive repository of all things related to robert browning, elizabeth barrett browning and their circle of counter-victorian free spirits. all would have undoubtedly felt right at home in this neo-renaissance building with its vast stained-glassed windows, where many of their possessions -- personal papers, paintings and furniture -- are on display. andrew armstrong, who wears robert browning's personal signet ring in the full-length portrait overlooking the reading room, assembled the collection in the early decades of the 20th century.  eight blocks north along baylor's pleasant greens, the old suspension bridge, now open only to pedestrian traffic, spans the brazos. the resemblance to the brooklyn bridge is no accident. this one was finished in 1870 from cables supplied by john a. roebling, who designed the brooklyn bridge. on a languorous evening, watching romantic couples huddled along the rails enjoying the sunset, it's hard to imagine that cowpokes used to drive giant herds of cattle over this bridge, headed for northern markets.  a five-minute walk east along the river walk leads to the texas ranger museum, which preserves the mystique of the law enforcers of the old west days with silver badges, white cowboy hats and lots and lots of guns, including shotguns that the rangers took from bonnie parker and clyde barrow after ambushing them in their car.  of course, waco's most famous shootout happened a lot more recently. ''we get asked about it all the time,'' a genial woman at the waco tourist office said, handing out a map to the site of the former branch davidian compound, the site of mr. koresh's last stand, six miles east of town. it's now little more than burnt concrete foundations amid windy plains of dry grass.  in front of the ruins stands a memorial grove of 86 white-blossomed crepe myrtle trees, one for each person who died in the confrontation between government agencies and the branch davidian sect -- most of them in the fire on april 19, 1993.  ''i still find old ammo casings all over here,'' said ron goins, who moved to the former compound after the shootout (although he said he was not a member of the sect) and sometimes greets visitors coming up the gravel road. the memorial chapel built over the ruins of the main building exhibits photos and artifacts.  for a more cheery view of a religious community, drive three miles north of waco to the homestead craft village, a nondenominational settlement founded in 1973 in new york. the group has about 1,000 members and emphasizes simple farm living and old-fashioned craftsmanship.  ''we use cars and telephones, but we strive for the dignity of simple self-sufficiency and well-built things,'' said kevin durkin, who quit his graduate studies at columbia university and became a master carpenter in the community. the village bakery, presided over by young women, is popular with wacoans. it's easy to taste why. most of the baking ingredients -- right down to the molasses used to sweeten the food -- are produced by the community, and, counterintuitively, downing a doughnut or a cinnamon roll feels healthy.  the whole village is a 19th-century pastoral vision, with a smithy and a gristmill. its artisan shops sell elegant community-made wooden funiture, soaps, candles and unique copper-tinted pottery. on a sunny summer day, you can watch the colony's straw-hatted menfolk piling rounded haystacks with pitchforks, just the way haying was done 150 years ago.  back in waco, other visions of the past await: a string of gorgeous greek revival and italianate mansions lining cameron park, witnesses to the vast wealth that was here when waco was a world center for cotton growing in the last half of the 19th century. a half-dozen homes open up for public tours every weekend, but the one that stands out in full ''gone with the wind'' glory is the earle-harrison house, built in 1858. in its gardens one saturday evening last summer, a boisterous crowd danced to shania twain and prince. most of the men wore tuxedos and cowboy boots, the approved outfit for texas-style weddings, many of which are held at the house.  just downhill in cameron park, a place of lush vegetation and miles of winding paths, another creature appeared to be dancing. on a trail along limestone cliffs overlooking the brazos, a roadrunner rushed wildly on spindly legs in a ''happy feet'' dance, darting in and out of the brush.  armadillos, too, appeared and reappeared, and the rhythmic sound of crickets and soft evening light gave the place a primordial, edenesque feel. the smell of barbecued beef came wafting through the trees from the open-pit fires down by the riverbank where wacoans gather every weekend.  had the chisholm trail cowboys come back, they would have felt right at home.  if you go  waco has many chain hotels, but there are also several bed-and-breakfasts that provide local color and texas hospitality. the judge baylor house (908 speight street; 254-756-0273; $72 to $115) has registered henry mancini and shelby foote in its guest rooms. the cotton palace (1910 austin avenue; 877-632-2312; $109 to $139) is run by becky hodges, a gregarious font of local knowledge.  there's fine dining in waco, but for a meal with regional spirit, look at the places with formica tables. elite circle grille (2132 south valley mills drive; 254-754-4941), sister to the now-departed downtown elite cafe, where pvt. elvis presley was a regular when he was stationed at nearby fort hood, is decorated with elvis memorabilia and serves chicken-fried steak ($9.95) and baby-back ribs with dr pepper barbecue sauce ($16.95). it hops with live jazz on friday nights.  rudy's country store & bar-b-q, next door at 2510 circle road (254-750-9995), serves ''wet'' (juicy) or ''dry'' (lean) brisket sandwiches ($3.49) with some properly fiery barbecue sauce. it also sells a ''sissy'' sauce, but you haven't come to waco to be a sissy, have you?  or drive south on franklin avenue to the giant revolver pointing into the parking lot of michna's bar-b-q (2803 franklin avenue; 254-752-3650), featuring succulent slabs of meat, sides of beans and salad, and the hallowed texas concoction of corn chips, cheese and chili sauce called frito pie ($4.95).  admission is $5 at the dr pepper museum (300 south fifth street; 254-757-1025) and at the texas ranger hall of fame and museum (100 texas ranger trail; 254-750-8631). the armstrong-browning library (710 speight avenue; 254-710-3566) is free.  at waco skeet and trap club, (7209 karl may road; 254 753-2651), 25 clay pigeons and ammunition are $6.  homestead craft village (254-754-9600) is at 608 dry creek road.  a schedule of downtown house tours is at www.historicwaco.org. the antebellum earle-harrison house (1901 north fifth street; 254-753-2032; admission $3) is open by appointment.  american journeys  