why the vanishing mailboxes? e-culprits abound   one day last month, fran brunn looked out a window of her home and noticed a white pickup truck driving up to the mailbox across the street.  ''i saw a man, who was not wearing a postal uniform, get out of the truck and walk over to the mailbox,'' ms. brunn, 74, recalled. ''at first i thought he was going to mail a letter, but then, to my surprise, he began pulling the mailbox out of the ground.''  ms. brunn, who has lived on brooks boulevard for 50 years, about 10 years before the mailbox was installed, hurried down her front steps to confront the man making the unusual pickup.  ''what are you doing?'' she asked.  ''i'm taking out the mailbox,'' he said, according to ms. brunn.  ''why?'' she asked.  ''there isn't enough mail being put into this box on a day-to-day basis,'' the man explained. ''it's no longer worth the post office's time, so they asked me to remove it.''  according to george flood, a united states postal service spokesman who is based in newark, scenes like the one that unfolded in front of ms. brunn's home have been playing out across new jersey, and the country, for the past year. the removal of mailboxes in manville was merely the most recent in the state.  ''the market demand for mailboxes has been declining,'' mr. flood said. ''as a result, we have been removing them.''  mr. flood, who noted that a surge in electronic mailing is the main reason the mailbox is being labeled an anachronism, said that ''over the last five years, we have seen a decline on a nationwide level of five billion pieces of first-class mail.''  as a result, 28,000 mailboxes were removed across the country last year, although 267,000 remain -- 9,100 in new jersey. in the past year, northern new jersey had more than 2,300 mailboxes removed, leaving 4,300 in place.  mr. flood said that while records had not been kept for mailboxes removed in other areas of the state, 1,190 remain in central new jersey. he said that local postmasters monitor each mailbox for volume over a two-week period, and if at least 25 pieces of mail are not dropped in the box during a single day, it is removed.  ''it's an issue of efficiency,'' mr. flood said, with too much staffing devoted to pickups. ''besides, people can always leave outgoing mail in their own mailboxes.''  pat mcgovern, a postal service spokeswoman who is based in manhattan, said that in addition to people corresponding by e-mail and paying bills online -- not to mention private shipping services like u.p.s. and federal express -- additional services have made customers less reliant on mailboxes.  as an example, she noted the postal service's click-n-ship service, which allows customers to print a shipping label at home and arrange for next-day pickup.  ''it's an increasing resource that people are using,'' she said. ''to not even have to leave your home to mail a package is a pretty easy way to conduct business.''  ms. brunn, who must now walk three blocks to her local post office to drop off mail, said she could understand why mailboxes were being removed, although she still felt as if an old friend had moved away.  ''i appreciated that mailbox a lot more after it was gone; like anything else, i took it for granted,'' she said. ''i thought my mail was safest in that box, and now that it's not available, i prefer walking to the post office as opposed to mailing stuff out of my own mailbox.''  one of ms. brunn's neighbors, marty geiger, a painting contractor who has lived on the block for 10 years, said he too had been inconvenienced by the removal of the mailbox.  ''i often send out letters and bills later in the day, long after the regular mailman makes his rounds,'' mr. geiger, 45, said. ''the mailbox across the street was great because it had a late-day pickup and an early-morning pickup, but now those options are gone.  ''i guess most everyone is now doing business online,'' he said with a sigh. ''but as far as traditional mailing goes, i'm sure there are still a few dinosaurs out there, like me.''  downsizing  