it's not easy staying green   once i floated through life in a haze of good fellowship. i believed in recycling and saving the planet; i wasn't an activist out on the barricades or sitting at the top of a threatened redwood tree, but i certainly supported the people who were. i recycled back in the days when going to the recycling center meant a 20-mile round trip. i used cloth napkins and unbleached paper towels. i didn't use disposable coffee filters. i shopped with string bags to keep plastic out of the landfill and embarrassed my daughter by packing her school lunch in reused bread bags. i bought my cleaning products at the health food store, refilling bottles to save on packaging.  i liked to feel that i trod lightly on the earth -- that is, until eight years ago, when i bought a little house at the jersey shore and became someone i wouldn't even have wanted to know before. it was a gradual metamorphosis -- i didn't wake up a cockroach, but i did wake up considering the use of serious pesticides to get rid of the huge ones in my kitchen. not to mention the termites the house inspector told me had chewed a sill in the crawl space or the carpenter ants leaving little piles of sawdust in the bathroom.  i, who believed in nothing stronger than pyrethrins and who had previously controlled pests with an organic, orange-peel-based spray, was confronted by an army of pest-control agents with vans full of toxic chemicals and a nuclear attitude toward the insect kingdom. it kept me awake nights. how could i put chemicals into the air and ground, maybe the water table? but how could i not? this house was the biggest investment of my life to date -- the previous big-ticket item being a two-door ford fiesta. in a panic, i researched lower-impact alternatives like termite bait stations, but in the end i gave in to the pest-control guys with the best environmental spiel. i know they were winking when my back was turned.  then demolition began on the back part of the house. as the work crew passed by toting wood and wallboard, i wrung my hands and asked exactly what they were going to do with it. oh, they assured me, it would all be dumped in the right places. but dumped? not salvaged? (i seemed to have forgotten that i had a humble, jerry-built seaside cottage with little worth salvaging, not some antebellum plantation house with hearts of pine floors.) suddenly i was the cause of destruction and questionable renovations. should i really have demolished the owner-built enclosed side porch with the five-foot ceiling? the house did look different. had i trespassed on its cottage nature? i couldn't even look at the wreckage in the dumpster; i imagined it multiplied by the dumpsters all over town, then the state, the country.  meanwhile, i was still locked in a battle with the natural world, whose cause and future i had so firmly espoused. maybe roaches and termites had never been a big part of it, in my view, but trees! having bought the house in the spring and being a little vague about tree species, i thought the norway maples might be sugar maples and waited hopefully for the blaze of color that never came. now, after years of bagging leaves and pulling up seedlings, i refer to the maples as weed trees and find myself planning their demise. i have already gotten rid of the gone-wild privets that were sucking up nutrients from my garden.  i had such plans for my garden. nature and i would work hand in hand. i would plant only native plants at home in the acid, sandy soil. i would maintain a xeriscape. i would not be prodigal with water like my neighbors with their fancy watering systems, their total disregard for so precious a commodity. i guess i hadn't counted on the power of garden books and glossy magazine articles. how could i resist those twining roses, the huge stars of clematis, billowing lilacs? it was hard to work up the same enthusiasm for chokeberry and jersey tea. the lilacs sulk and have to be fed lime, which creates a stifling dust. the roses do well, with constant feeding and watering. i use organic fertilizer and soaker hoses, but i know it isn't really right. at least, i tell myself, i'm not planting anything invasive: no porcelain berry for me, and no wasteful attempts to grow more grass. yet i can't see how to get rid of my scrap of front lawn, the buffer between my porch and the sidewalk.  at least i planned to get a push mower to cut the lawn, like my friend linda in boston who mows a grassy space at least twice the size. instead i got a lawn service. i didn't mean to do it. my neighbor recommended it when i was overwhelmed by my efforts to reclaim the neglected garden. years later, i still have it, the workers spewing noise and smoke, adding to the cacophony and pollution that is suburbia. i hide in the summer when the men pull up with the big trailer and unload a machine almost the size of my lawn. i cringe in the fall at the racket of their leaf blowers as they generate a cloud of leaves and exhaust that all but dims the sun. but who else will clean my gutters?  back when i was first looking at houses, my real estate agent took me to see a tiny cottage. we looked around as the owner stood anxiously by. it was too small for me, but neat as a pin and lovingly restored.  ''why is she selling?'' i asked when we were outside.  my agent shrugged.  ''she's one of those people who shouldn't own a house. it makes her too nervous.''  i imagine myself in that homeowner's place one day. the question is asked. the agent shrugs.  ''she's one of those people who shouldn't own a house. it makes her feel too guilty.''  home work  