on the speed channel, the lead roles in a new show are played by 2 toyotas   toyota feels the need  the need for speed -- speed channel, that is, as the automaker and cable network join forces for an unusual program in which the toyota fj cruiser plays a starring role.  the hourlong special, called ''two roads to baja,'' is scheduled for 8 p.m. (eastern time) tomorrow on speed, owned by the news corporation; plans call for four repeats in the next three weeks. speed is promoting the show with a two-minute trailer that can be watched on its web site (speedtv.com).  the program follows the adventures, and misadventures, of two teams that competed in november in the 39th edition of the baja 1000 off-road endurance race. both teams -- one composed of amateurs, the other of professionals -- drove fj cruisers, a sport utility that toyota motor sales u.s.a. revived last year with a restyled version evocative of its predecessors, which were made from 1960 to 1983.  although the toyota agency, saatchi & saatchi, worked on making the show, along with @radical.media, it was produced like an entertainment program rather than an ad or infomercial. the sole clue of its provenance is the copyright notice at the end, shared by speed and toyota motor sales u.s.a.  ''two roads to baja'' is an example of an increasingly popular marketing tactic known as branded entertainment, in which advertisers embed brands and products into the plots of tv shows. other marketers adopting the practice include match.com, nike, officemax and unilever.  the concept may be borrowed from the early days of television, when marketers produced the programming, but it is intended to solve a contemporary problem: the growing ability of viewers to avoid traditional commercials.  ''two roads to baja'' will carry commercials, but none for the fj cruiser; advertisers include castrol, b. f. goodrich, lowe's and yamaha. one could make the case that because the toyota sport utility plays such a crucial part in the show, commercials for it would be redundant.  toyota has no plans to run tv commercials anywhere for fj cruiser because of a belief that the target audience -- primarily men from 25 to 49 -- is more effectively reached through nontraditional marketing efforts like branded entertainment.  ''it's new for us to be producing a program,'' said kim mccullough, corporate manager for marketing communications at toyota motor sales u.s.a. in torrance, calif. ''but it's very much in keeping with our strategy as we look for different ways to engage with consumers.''  it was important that viewers perceive the program as ''entertainment-oriented, something you would very much see on speed,'' ms. mccullough said, because ''these are savvy people who can tell if it feels artificial.''  ''speed wants to protect its brand, too,'' she added, ''and put on shows that feel genuine.''  bobby akin, vice president at speed in los angeles, which is focused on motor sports programming -- ''anything with an engine that goes fast,'' as he put it -- agreed with ms. mccullough.  ''it does us no good if viewers say, 'why am i watching this for?' '' mr. akin said.  ''at the end of the day, the fj is a big part of the show,'' he added. ''but kim was very clear that this story was going to get told no matter what happened, even if the car fell out 100 yards into the 1,000-mile race.''  ''two roads to baja'' is the first show on speed with this kind of advertiser involvement, mr. akin said. ''we don't have anything else like this in the works right now. but on a case-by-case basis, if the right pieces of the puzzle came together, we'd love to do something like it.''  the team for ''two roads to baja'' also included paul czaplicki, truck advertising manager at toyota motor sales u.s.a.; jeff zwart, who directed the show for @radical.media; and two members of the creative staff at the los angeles office of saatchi & saatchi, bill courtney and napper tandy.  ''the show's a great example of how we as an agency are trying to move beyond pure advertising,'' said chuck maguy, group account director at saatchi & saatchi, part of the publicis groupe. ''the mission is to harness and influence pop culture on behalf of our brands.''  for fj cruiser, mr. maguy said, if you approach the target audience ''directly with a marketing message, they'll tune it out; you have to connect with them, with their passions.''  to that end, video clips from ''two roads to baja'' will appear on web sites like heavy.com and youtube.com in addition to toyota.com.  print ads for fj cruiser are running only in magazines read by what ms. mccullough described as ''hard-core enthusiasts'' like 4-wheel & off-road and four wheeler, along with publications aimed at owners of the original versions of the sport utility.  the ads, featuring black-and-white photographs of parts like clutches, undercarriages and suspensions, are punched along the sides so they can be stored in binders.  toyota sold 55,809 fj cruisers last year, compared with a goal of 46,000. the goal for 2007 is 60,000. ad spending last year totaled $2.8 million, according to tns media intelligence, reflecting the absence of tv commercials.  advertising  