art in review; ¡merengue! this skin i'm in   el museo del barrio  1230 fifth avenue, at 104th street, east harlem  through jan. 21  ''¡merengue!: visual rhythms'' is made up almost entirely of paintings. but it's really about music, namely the national popular music of the dominican republic, merengue, which for many new yorkers is synonymous with latino culture.  to what degree merengue directly influenced dominican art is the main subject of the show, which originated at centro cultural eduardo leon jimenes in santiago. most of the 40 or so paintings document people performing or dancing to the music; a few pictures, by artists like raúl recio and jesus desangles, seem to be formal responses to its percussive beat. their pictures are semi-abstract; most of the others are in modern figurative styles that stay remarkably consistent over time. the basic look of a 1938 painting by jaime colson, or one by alfredo senior la paz from 1944, is still current in work by plutarco andujar and jacinto dominguez half a century later.  actually, all of this art is most interesting in the context of a second, smaller show, ''this skin i'm in: contemporary dominican art from el museo del barrio's permanent collection.'' here merengue's vaunted joie de vivre undergoes some critical prodding from several artists of dominican descent living in new york, whose take on it is shaped by postmodern identity politics, with its emphasis on gender, class and race.  nicolás dumit estévez, photographed wearing a cape, bikini briefs and flip-flops, sends up merengue's machismo ethic in his performances as super merengue. freddy rodríguez suggests the music's african links, and its combative history with haiti, in bright, geometric paintings. the artist named scherezade explores the propagandistic role it played in propping up the regime of the dictator rafael leónides trujillo.  these are serious subjects, but if you want to leave on an upbeat note, you can. go back to the big show, and listen to the classic merengue musician nico lora plaintively singing to his own accompaniment in a vintage film. his performance is worth a thousand paintings, easily.  holland cotter  