2 officers suspended; report was not fully reviewed   two police officers have been suspended without pay for failing to adequately investigate a 15-year-old girl's complaint that a man had tried to kidnap her, the police said yesterday. the man, a paroled sex offender, is now suspected of abducting and raping a 17-year-old girl just two hours after the complaint, the police said.  the officers, who have not been identified by the police, are assigned to the 101st precinct in queens, said paul j. browne, the police department's chief spokesman.  the suspect, eric mccoy, was arrested on jan. 3 and has been charged with committing two rapes in queens in a little more than four weeks. in each case, he posed as a police officer and raped his victims inside motel rooms, the police said.  in the first assault, which occurred on dec. 4, mr. mccoy abducted a woman, 27, as she was getting off a bus in jamaica and forced her to a motel, the police said. in the second episode, the authorities said, mr. mccoy approached a 17-year-old girl on jan. 2 in kew gardens and identified himself as a ''police special investigator.'' he said he had a gun and took her to a motel where he raped her, the police said.  hours before the second rape, mr. mccoy had told a 15-year-old girl that he was a police officer investigating an assault. after showing her a fake badge, he told her to wait inside a laundry. inside, she talked about the encounter with a woman, who called 911, the police said.  once the police arrived, mr. mccoy approached the squad car and told the officers that two girls had been in a fight. when the girl came to the car, they asked whether she had been fighting. they told her to get into the car, drove her to a subway station and told her to go to school, the authorities said.  the officers failed to check whether mr. mccoy had a criminal record and, apparently, to question others at the scene, the police said. mr. mccoy was arrested after one victim remembered that he had identified himself as ''investigator mccoy.''  