tbr: inside the list   early amis: it's too soon to tell if martin amis's new novel, ''house of meetings,'' reviewed on this week's cover, will climb onto the times list in hardcover. the odds, historically speaking, are against it. only two of amis's books have appeared here, and just barely: his novel ''london fields'' made the bottom of the list for one week in 1990, and ''night train,'' another novel, hung on for two weeks in 1998. ''house of meetings'' is amis's 19th book. his first, a novel called ''the rachel papers,'' was published in 1973, when amis was 24. it did not receive a warm welcome in this newspaper. writing in the book review, grace glueck described the book as a ''crotch-and-armpit saga of late adolescence'' that would probably not put amis's father, the novelist kingsley amis, in a competitive mood. in the daily newspaper, anatole broyard wrote: ''considering the advantages he has had, martin has not covered himself with glory. even allowing for his youth there is too much difference between his best and worst lines.'' broyard went on to call amis -- and this is not the kind of criticism a young novelist wants to hear -- a lousy writer about ''the minutiae of love.'' ''i find it difficult to imagine,'' broyard added, by way of example, ''a room that 'smelled of breasts.' ''  no opinion: for more than two decades, the arrival of a new amis book has been a genuine cultural event, both in england and the united states. oddly, though, for the past three decades or so, none of amis's books have been reviewed in this country's most austere and august literary journal, the new york review of books, according to a search of its electronic archives. why not? some have speculated it's because amis, in 1980, accused jacob epstein -- son of the late barbara epstein, one of the review's editors -- of plagiarizing passages of ''the rachel papers'' in his own first novel, ''wild oats.'' (amis observed at the time that ''epstein wasn't influenced by 'the rachel papers,' he had it flattened out beside his typewriter.'') epstein later admitted copying passages, and apologized. according to robert silvers, the editor of the new york review, there is no amis ban. ''we have sent previous books of his out for review,'' he said, ''but never received a review we could publish. it happens all the time.'' silvers added that amis's new novel will be reviewed in the new york review of books this month.  horrorism: amis made news in britain this fall not only for his new novel -- the london reviews were mixed -- but for an essay he published in the observer, at around the time of the 9/11 anniversary, called ''the age of horrorism.'' in an interview on australian television, amis explained what he meant by the title. ''when you're on your sleigh going through siberia and you hear a wolf howl, that is fear or concern. when the wolf is pounding after your vehicle, then that's terror, and horror is when the wolf is actually there. i think islamism has turned up the dial of terror. this is an ideology that has freed itself from reason and it is feeding on death.''  dwight garner  tbr  