on bended knee, with questionnaire in hand   a field notes column on dec. 17 (''marriage is not built on surprises'') and an accompanying list posted at nytimes.com (''questions couples should ask, or wish they had, before marrying'') addressed the fact that many who marry are oblivious to important things about their partners.  they may be unaware of the other person's hopes, quirks and dreams, for instance. or haven't discussed pragmatic matters such as who is going to balance the checkbook or when they will start trying to have children.  readers responded in extraordinary numbers, and those who shared their reactions, posted on a blog forum on the topic, were split fairly evenly between men and women.  one male blogger suggested that all of this questioning was misdirected. the most important questions, he said, are ones that would-be spouses should ask themselves: ''do you really understand why you want to get married at all? and to this particular person? understand what you want and expect in your relationships and you'll be less disappointed (and a whole lot less surprised) down the road.''  the fragility of marriage was a recurrent theme. ''ask your future spouse what they believe a marriage is, and whether they believe in divorce,'' one blogger suggested. he also noted, ''the level of commitment that a person perceives a marriage to involve differs greatly from person to person in this day and age.''  another said he'd ask a partner, ''how long do you expect to be married to me?''  ''people no longer expect to stay with the same job over a lifetime,'' he reasoned. ''and it's the same situation for a marriage.''  doubts about lifelong monogamy spurred one woman to ask: ''why on earth should an honored pledge to love and support one person be taken as a prohibition on loving and supporting another as well?'' her shorthand for getting at that issue was to ask, ''do the words 'i love you' mean: a) i want your happiness, or b) i enjoy possessing you?''  a number of you had pressing questions about grooming habits and personal requirements, some of which could provide dialog for a neil simon script. one reader asked: ''what do i do that embarrasses you the most? what if i started wearing really stinky perfume?''  another woman demanded: ''where do you throw your dirty underwear after you take it off? do you wear a hat to bed?''  on balance, the postings sought to offer serious advice. one blogger insisted that no piece of personal information should remain undisclosed before marriage. ''don't take any secrets into the marriage,'' she said.  but the same woman also warned against rushing to disclose all during the first blush of romance. ''some details of my husband's past might have given me pause when i didn't know him well,'' she wrote. ''by the time he revealed them to me, i could accept his previous bad judgment, because i loved him. (and he might say the same about me.)''  then there were those who wholly opposed the idea of engaging in such serious scrutiny. ''if couples answered these questions honestly, it would be the end of marriage as we know it,'' a man wrote.  another blogger, believing that love conquers all, wrote: ''these questions sound like something i would expect if i were interviewing for a job at burger king. i was married to the same woman for 47 years, and we solved all our problems as they arose because we loved one another.''  postulating that all of this probing represents a futile exercise, another male blogger complained, ''it doesn't matter how many questions you ask before marriage, after you cut the cake it all changes.''  field notes  