trains idling near homes called a nuisance   for years, the noise, vibration and fumes from long island rail road trains idling on a track siding in the village of patchogue have been a nuisance to residents. but after the installation of an automated signal system last may, the idling trains are now virtually in some residents' backyards.  jack eddington, a suffolk county legislator whose district includes patchogue, said a six-foot chain-link fence is all that separates the trains from the backyards of homeowners on academy street.  ''the trains are literally 10 feet from their homes,'' he said.  ann m. goodhue, who lives on the opposite side of academy street, said she found the ''train situation atrocious.'' she said vibrations from three trains that sat idling on the siding several years ago cracked her second-floor ceiling.  mr. eddington said he had been at the siding when two trains were idling and found the noise very loud. ''and they give off a diesel smell,'' he said.  until several years ago, the siding was about a mile west in a commercial area. mr. eddington said complaints from residents were fewer because a lumberyard and a bowling alley were on either side of the tracks and homes were far from the idling trains. but about six years ago, he said, trains were instructed to idle about three-quarters of a mile to the east, ''and it became a general nuisance because it was almost right in the middle of town.''  when a new signal system was installed last may about 200 to 300 feet farther east to align with a switch for the tracks, train engineers were instructed to idle there, said susan mcgowan, a railroad spokeswoman.  mr. eddington said that change put the trains ''right along the backyards of 12 or 13 homes'' on academy street.  ''i want the railroad to do the right thing'' for the residents, he said. ''i have looked up and down the track, and i see areas that don't have homes. i'm not telling them where they should go, but what i am saying is that where they are now is not acceptable.''  ms. mcgowan said that in an effort to ''minimize the inconvenience,'' the railroad had relocated two of six weekday trains that use the siding. one was moved 10 to 20 feet to the north siding, and a second was moved to a siding in speonk.  ''these are the first steps we have taken,'' she said. ''we're continuing to look at the situation.''  noticed  