q & a   i got a supply of clear plastic bottles clearly marked 100 milliliters from a drug store, as you advised on dec. 17, but had a problem with them when i went through security at bradley international airport (hartford/springfield). it seems the bottles must have a commercial label indicating the contents. i don't know if this is a local interpretation. i have not run across this at other airports since then, like cincinnati, chicago and seattle, where nobody even looked at the contents of my clear plastic quart-size zip-top bag. -- mary gorman, bloomfield, conn.  several readers have had similar problems. stanley shaldon in monaco writes: ''security at nice airport is the most draconian i have experienced. decanting liquids into clear 100-milliliter bottles will not work, unless the label clearly identifies the product and comes from a pharmacy.''  indeed, security agents may have their own interpretation of the rules, and they have the last word. i have been unable to find transportation security administration or european union rules stating that regulation-size bottles must carry a commercial or drugstore label. it is wise, though, to carry any prescriptions.  when possible, put liquids like duty-free liquor and perfume in checked baggage if you are connecting at a european union airport. tim hunt in pleasanton, calif., returning from nairobi, had his bottle of drambuie taken by security officials at schiphol airport in amsterdam. and martin milne, from aberdeen, scotland, writes that he and his wife, connecting at charles de gaulle airport enroute from dubai, were told by a rude security officer that the duty-free bottles they'd bought there would be confiscated. they were finally able to get them onboard in their checked luggage.  to sum up: if you are traveling nonstop from the united states to europe, you can take duty-free liquids of any volume; but if you are transferring onto a flight in one of the 25 european union countries (plus iceland, norway, and switzerland), only items bought at an e.u. airport and carried in a sealed bag with a receipt are allowed.  for those traveling from europe to the united states on a nonstop flight, duty-free liquids bought in the e.u. are allowed only if they are bought on the plane or after the security checkpoint or delivered to the plane.  if you have a connecting flight within the united states, the liquid items must be placed in checked baggage. a list of european union and united states rules can be found at www.tsa.gov (click on international travelers).  roger collis  