as states innovate on issues, schwarzenegger blurs the party lines   so, who is arnold schwarzenegger anyway?  is he an extreme environmentalist, proposing california be the first state to limit carbon dioxide emissions from cars? or a foe of wildlife, with his desire for above-ground water storage, announced hours after his move to limit emissions?  does his heart bleed for the disadvantaged, as suggested by his call for universal health care? or does he turn a hard eye toward entitlements, as his plan to cut welfare benefits for children seems to indicate?  in many ways, mr. schwarzenegger is sui generis, a celebrity-turned-politician hurled toward the center by california's democratic majority. and since he can never run for president, his governorship is most likely the outlet for his more audacious ideas.  but mr. schwarzenegger's recent leadership is also the largest example of a growing movement in which state leaders are crossing party lines to get things done. while partisan polarization limits activity in washington, d.c., state governments are addressing issues the federal government has not tackled.  massachusetts was first, with a republican governor and a democratic-led legislature compromising on an expansive health care law. colorado -- with bipartisanship -- and georgia both passed restrictive immigration bills last year after congress could not. indeed, 32 states approved 84 immigration laws in 2006, out of a record 570 immigration bills introduced, according to the national conference of state legislatures.  nearly 30 states have passed bills raising the minimum wage, many through ballot initiatives, but many others via legislatures. and last year alone, more than a half-dozen states tightened restrictions on relations between lawmakers and lobbyists.  ''in recent years as we have seen gridlock in washington,'' said william pound, the conference's executive director, ''you have seen the pressure building on states to do something. i think you are going to see even more of it in the next couple of years, because we are on a wave right now with the states being innovative on policy. and frankly the congress and the federal government have financial problems.''  often, the most effective approaches fly in the face of core political party values. mr. schwarzenegger is promoting ideas that offer something for everyone in sacramento to love, and to despise.  ''there is method to the madness,'' said bruce cain, director of the institute of governmental studies at the university of california, berkeley. ''the middle is a place of much inconsistency. the fact that no one knows exactly where arnold is on the political spectrum means that everyone can imagine that he is closer to them.''  the challenges mr. schwarzenegger faces for being, as he calls himself, ''post-partisan,'' and pushing the legislation he craves, were evident tuesday night in sacramento when he addressed the legislature.  his plans for spending money -- on new bond issues, on health care, on the environment -- were met with grimaces from many republican colleagues, who were buoyed by his promises to build more prisons and increase college tuition, ideas that offend more liberal lawmakers.  right before the speech, state senator abel maldonado, a republican, cornered mr. schwarzenegger's communications director, adam mendelsohn, to complain about part of the governor's health care plan that would charge businesses that have more than 10 workers but do not provide health insurance.  ''your district has a lot of e.r.'s full of'' illegal immigrants, mr. mendelsohn said, pointing out that those patients cost taxpayers money.  ''i've got a lot of family businesses in my district,'' mr. maldonado countered.  at the same time, the state democratic party was attacking the governor's budget as stingy and unfair.  yet partisan cross-dressing is in vogue in many states.  ''arnold wants to cut emissions, cover everyone's health insurance, possibly reduce prison crowding by sentencing reform,'' said william t. cunningham, who helped run both of michael r. bloomberg's campaigns for mayor of new york on themes of social liberalism and fiscal restraint.  ''eliot spitzer wants to cut property taxes and reform the medicaid system due to its costs,'' mr. cunningham added, referring to new york's new democratic governor. ''republicans domestically used to be the law and order guys and the dems were the education and social service guys. all that has changed.''  in his spate of policy and budget announcements this week, mr. schwarzenegger showed many sides to his political form, proposing to insure all citizens, but also to end welfare grants for children whose parents do not participate in return-to-work programs. he called for helping criminals reform, but cut drug treatment programs.  he also said he would ask state regulators to require petroleum refiners and gasoline sellers doing business in california to cut by 10 percent the emissions of heat-trapping gases, even as he pushed for the water storage methods opposed by groups that argue that above-ground storage disrupts the surrounding environment. ''we are not waiting for the federal government to act,'' mr. schwarzenegger said. ''we are not waiting, period.''  other states have reached the same conclusion. last summer, georgia and colorado enacted extensive laws intended to curb the effects of illegal immigration. ''immigration is the best example of where the feds bear the lion's share of the responsibility and have done almost nothing to fulfill that responsibility,'' said the speaker of the colorado house, andrew romanoff.  georgia's omnibus law, which goes into effect in july, makes many requirements of employers and workers. ''people were frustrated that federal government was not acting swiftly enough,'' the state senate spokeswoman, merri brantley, said. ''we are among the fastest-growing immigration states in the nation.''  in the interest of protecting residents from identity theft and privacy invasion, 35 states have enacted legislation in recent years requiring companies or state agencies to disclose security breaches involving personal information. the federal government has yet to pass comprehensive legislation on the issue.  other states have also passed or are seriously considering emissions standards, renewable energy requirements, education overhauls and comprehensive health care packages. on some of these issues, california -- led by its governor -- may simply be furthering its role as the nation's policy petri dish.  mr. schwarzenegger ''is showing what leadership can be when it is nonpartisan,'' said mr. mendelsohn, his communications director. ''it is where the country is.''  