barbaro set back by damage to a hoof   barbaro was said to be resting comfortably last night after his months of slow, smooth recovery were interrupted by 36 hours of pain caused by damaged tissue in his left hind hoof.  the colt's owners, roy and gretchen jackson, and the veterinarian who cared for him while he was racing, dr. kathleen anderson, said yesterday that they remained optimistic that barbaro would fully recover. they indicated that this latest setback, part of a long and harrowing convalescence, was not as serious as previous episodes.  each of them visited barbaro and said the colt's condition was improving as the day went on. anderson said barbaro was eating well and resting quietly in his stall in the intensive care unit of the george d. widener hospital for large animals in kennett square, pa., when she left him in the late afternoon.  ''i do not think it as dire as it was in july,'' anderson said in a telephone interview.  that was a reference to the period when laminitis, an often-fatal disease caused by uneven weight distribution in the limbs, first afflicted barbaro.  ''it's a step back, a disappointment and a shock because we thought we were over the hump,'' anderson said. ''but it's not insurmountable.''  veterinarians removed the damaged tissue tuesday night, and barbaro was listed in stable condition. the situation, however, was described as a ''significant setback'' to his efforts to properly regrow a hoof that was destroyed by laminitis, according to a statement released by the university of pennsylvania's new bolton center in kennett square.  barbaro, last year's kentucky derby winner, has been recovering at the center since he shattered his right hind leg in the opening yards of the preakness stakes on may 20. in fact, his recovery was going so well that the jacksons were making plans to move him to a facility or farm in kentucky before winter set in.  roy jackson said the colt had shown discomfort in the past 36 hours primarily from a cast put on last week that was intended to help re-align a bone in barbaro's left hind hoof. the cast was removed tuesday night. some new separation of a portion of his hoof was found, and the tissue was removed.  ''there was an area of his hoof where he was bothered by the cast, and by getting that cast off he has already shown some relief,'' jackson said in a telephone interview yesterday afternoon after visiting barbaro. ''i just left him and he was eating away at the hay, standing and putting weight on it better. the way it was explained to me was, the tissue removed was like getting an in-grown toenail removed.''  while the original fracture in barbaro's right hind leg appears to be healing well, veterinarians have always said they were more concerned about the severe laminitis that prompted the removal of 80 percent of the colt's left hoof.  until tuesday, barbaro's convalescence had been going well enough for the jacksons and the colt's surgeon, dr. dean richardson, to consider discharging him from the hospital for a more pastoral environment on a farm.  richardson did not respond to requests for an interview yesterday.  it takes a year for a horse to regrow a hoof, anderson said, and barbaro was six months into the process and doing very well, except for a portion of his inside heel. still, when anderson visited last week, she said the colt was at the top of his form and looked ready to take flight in the kentucky bluegrass.  ''he was looking ready and forward to big green pasture -- we all wanted it for him,'' she said. ''this sets things back, but not all the way to six months ago.'' she added: ''it's not an overwhelming problem; it can heal given enough time. we all have to dig down and regroup. he's had better days, but he's had a lot more worse ones, too. he's a fighter.''  as a longtime owner, roy jackson said he understood that a horse's health could change ''day to day or sometimes minute to minute.''  he and his wife have spent tens of thousands of dollars on barbaro's care and have said repeatedly that they would continue to do so as long as the colt can be free of pain and shows a will to live. barbaro's move is postponed indefinitely, but jackson said yesterday that the colt appeared to be meeting those standards.  ''hopefully this is just a hitch in the road,'' he said. ''all we can do is give him the best care and say our prayers.''  horse racing  