polish church to check ties to the secret police   the roman catholic church leadership of poland called friday for all of the country's bishops to be investigated for past ties to the secret police.  ''we will ask a special commission to check the past of all our bishops,'' the council of bishops' chief, jozef michalski, told reporters in warsaw after the episcopate's 45 bishops held an emergency meeting to deal with the worst crisis to hit the polish church in years. it culminated last sunday, when warsaw's archbishop of just two days, stanislaw wielgus, resigned after admitting that he had collaborated with the reviled communist-era sluzba bezpieczenstwa, or security service.  newspapers digging into archives of the secret police have followed with reports that other senior clergymen were once collaborators. the rev. tadeusz isakowicz-zaleski, who has researched the subject, is about to come out with a book naming 39 priests, including three bishops, who collaborated with the secret police between 1944 and 1989.  the scandal, which has already tarnished the catholic church's image as an unimpeachable moral authority during the communist years, has caused chaos in a church already divided between liberal and conservative camps.  ''the situation is so difficult, it would be impossible for the bishops to stay silent,'' the rev. jozef kloch, the spokesman of the bishops' council, said on friday. he said the bishops were discussing a systematic way of dealing with the files.  the revelations have embarrassed the vatican, which has complained that bishop wielgus misled pope benedict xvi about the depth of his ties until the polish news media published his file.  but the polish church, together with the vatican under pope john paul ii, a pole, has been criticized for keeping collaboration among the clergy quiet -- even though it was widely known inside the church that up to 10 percent of priests, monks and nuns had some contact with the polish secret police.  even after the news media began revealing cases of collaboration after john paul died, the polish church chose to treat the matter internally.  with archbishop wielgus's resignation, the scandal has forced the church to be more aggressive. it is not clear what the church will do with bishops it finds collaborated.  