the week ahead: jan. 14 - 20; theater   yasmina reza's new work, ''a spanish play,'' sounds perfectly suited to her strengths: conceptual playfulness, a highly developed sense of irony and a gift for the theatrical. it is a pirandello-like backstage drama about the rehearsal of a play that blurs the lines between fiction and reality. ms. reza, the only modern french playwright regularly produced in new york, has already written the audience hits ''art'' and ''life x 3,'' which were both blessed with starry casts. but they do not compare with what the director john turturro, who was also in ''life x 3'' with helen hunt, has to work with here.  scene-stealers like denis o'hare (''take me out''), larry pine (''stuff happens''), linda emond (''homebody/kabul'') and katherine borowitz (''illuminata'') will appear, but the real story is the return of the magnificent four-time tony winner zoe caldwell, that force of nature whose regal voice has helped animate memorable characters like jean brodie and lillian hellman. the last time she starred in a new show was as maria callas in ''master class,'' which opened more than a decade ago. in previews now; through march 4, classic stage company, 136 east 13th street, east village, (212) 352-3101, classicstage.org; $75.  in another return to the stage, the writer alan ball, who has proved himself quite skillful at uncovering the dark secrets of normal-seeming suburbia on screens small (as creator of ''six feet under'') and large (as screenwriter of ''american beauty''), tackles the subjects of imperialism and american-arab relationships in ''all that i will ever be,'' set mostly in west hollywood. jo bonney directs. begins previews wednesday, new york theater workshop, 79 east fourth street, east village, (212) 239-6200, telecharge.com; $60.  among the few happy things that you can count on in life is that the director richard foreman will open a show downtown in january. ''wake up mr. sleepy! your unconscious mind is dead!,'' the new work from this godfather of experimental theater, continues his exploration of the use of film onstage and touches on disparate topics like the birth of the airplane and the death of the unconscious mind. opens thursday at 8 p.m., ontological theater at st. mark's church, 131 east 10th street, (212) 352-3101, ontological.com; $23 ($28 on saturdays), $17 for students.  