in europe and elsewhere, bush's new war strategy is greeted with skepticism   whatever the impact of president's bush's new strategy for iraq in baghdad or in baquba, it has won few converts across a worried world, where dismay and hostility toward the american expedition have grown while support trickles away.  perhaps, some people whispered friday in the middle east, arab leaders might privately welcome the effect of 20,000 more american soldiers, but would not say so publicly unless their presence swung the battle for baghdad. maybe, others ventured, this moment recalled president nixon's invasion of cambodia -- ''extension of the fight amid promises of withdrawal,'' as a german columnist put it. but even britain, the onetime cheerleader for the white house, offered only an ambiguous response to the president's announcement, saying london remained on track to withdraw its forces, not increase them.  for some, the response was a study in haughty indifference.  ''it hasn't changed anything,'' said bernard bot, the dutch foreign minister, whose country withdrew its troops from the iraq coalition in 2005.  others painted their analogies in a more apocalyptic hue. in france, the newspaper le monde -- which, after the sept. 11 attacks, had declared, ''we are all americans'' -- published a cartoon depicting president bush as a bulldozer driver shoveling american soldiers into a ditch in the shape of iraq.  in germany, the liberal süddeutsche zeitung wrote, ''bush hopes to douse the iraqi fire with the blood of americans.''  mr. bush's announcement had been awaited across the globe, particularly since the publication of a report by the iraq study group had fed speculation that mr. bush might adopt a strategy avoiding higher troop levels and including diplomacy toward syria and iran. but the president's speech wednesday night dashed those hopes, confirming for some the sense that europe and the united states will not overcome a fundamental rift between american interventionism and a softer european approach.  ''europeans and germans believe you have to talk to regimes you don't like,'' said eberhard sandschneider, the director of the research institute of the german council on foreign relations. (pointedly, angela merkel, the german chancellor, declined to discuss iraq in an interview with correspondents on thursday.)  indeed, said philippe douste-blazy, the french foreign minister, only a broad political strategy would enable iraq to ''recover stability, and beyond iraq, stability in the region.'' that was the view, too, among spanish officials. ''only political solutions can solve the crisis which affects stability in the region,'' said miguel Ángel moratinos, the foreign minister.  at the same time, there was some sympathy -- if not always explicit -- for the american quandary: this was, many analysts sensed, a defining event, a last throw of the dice that would measure american prestige and credibility against the clamor of its adversaries.  ''this is a dangerous gamble,'' said the liberal newspaper asahi shimbun in tokyo, where the government formally supported the new american strategy. in london, the antiwar independent newspaper declared in an editorial, ''the u.s. military is now being called upon to fight the battle for baghdad all over again, in circumstances that are infinitely more complex than they were the first time around.''  in both the arab world and israel, analysts expressed a keen sense that iraq could turn into a zero-sum game, even if america scaled back its avowed ambitions for a democratic iraq and aimed simply to mold stability and moderation.  ''if the u.s. gets out before achieving these limited aims, iraq is going to descend into mass chaos -- we can see the country splinter,'' said chuck freilich, a former deputy national security adviser in israel and now a senior fellow at the kennedy school of government at harvard university. ''the region will be further radicalized. iran would become the regional hegemon.''  that same fear pervades many arab societies. ''the withdrawal would signify defeat, which would result in strengthening all the enemies' desire for expansion, such as iran's persistence in developing its nuclear weapons, and al qaeda would double its activities in iraq and the whole region,'' said an opinion article in the thursday issue of the pan-arab newspaper asharq alawsat, which is close to the saudi royal family and published in london.  some saw the arab approach in more nuanced terms. mansoor al-jamri, editor in chief of the bahraini newspaper al wasat, said he thought it likely that some arab leaders supported the increase in troops -- if for no other reason than to offset iran's rising influence -- but that they would never publicly express such an opinion. ''there is a mixed feeling,'' mr. jamri said. ''if america is involved more in some way to secure iraqi politics and secure the situation, i think some iraqis and some arab governments will like it.''  but there is a deeper pessimism, reflecting a widely held arab view that the american presence is the source of iraq's woes.  ''bush's strategy of surging troops is nothing new,'' said bassem alim, a saudi lawyer and political writer. ''he did that last year when he announced an additional 40,000 troops were being sent to iraq. that didn't do the job, and i don't think that an additional 20,000 troops will do the job either.'' he added, ''either bush doesn't understand the situation, or he is blinded by his evangelical beliefs.''  yet an immediate american withdrawal would be deeply troubling in many parts of the arab world. an egypt-based arab diplomat, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, so as not to antagonize americans, put it like this: ''the other side of the coin is the immediate departure of american troops will leave such a vacuum in power, it will have two results -- iran will fill the vacuum where it can, and the whole country will explode.''  or, as john howard, the australian prime minister and a close ally of mr. bush, put it: ''you have to understand that if america, the most powerful country in the world, our strongest ally, is defeated in iraq or retreats in circumstances of defeat in iraq, that would be the greatest propaganda victory the terrorists could ever win.''  yet russia bemoaned america's seeming rejection of regional diplomacy. ''it seems that the calculation remains the same: to achieve a settlement of the iraq crisis by force and not to consider proposals to establish a dialogue with iraq's main groups with the support of all its neighbors, including syria and iran,'' said mikhail i. kamynin, the russian foreign ministry spokesman.  in eastern europe, the grinding campaign in iraq has created divisions and splintered support.  ''president bush's arguments should be understood, because leaving iraq by americans would be a tragedy,'' argued stefan niesiolowski, a senator for the left-leaning opposition civic platform party in poland. he argued that the 1,000-odd polish soldiers serving in iraq should stay. ''it would not be nice if we would say to americans, 'it's your problem, not ours.' ''  but on the polish right, opinions were less sanguine. kazimiera szczuka, a literary critic, said, ''americans should find a way to withdraw honorably from iraq as soon as possible. polish troops should not stay there any longer.''  in the czech republic, there is a sort of unspoken pity for mr. bush's predicament and skepticism of his new iraq plan. ''the prospect for success is not large,'' wrote adam cerny, a columnist for hospodarske noviny, a czech business daily. ''why -- when similar attempts have not worked earlier -- should the same procedure lead to different results today?''  ''at the very most,'' he wrote, ''president bush will not find critics but very cautious partners among other europeans.''  that process has gone much further in italy, once a staunch ally of president bush under former prime minister silvio berlusconi.  but in an interview with a french television network on thursday, prime minister romano prodi, mr. berlusconi's successor, criticized president bush's new iraq plan directly. ''he should listen to the baker report and to the american public,'' mr. prodi said.  the reach of war  