all quiet at ridge hill   a battle between yonkers and its neighbors over ridge hill village, the $600 million residential, retail and commercial project the city wants to build near its border with the town of greenburgh, has gone quiet.  all sides have now settled a lawsuit that accused yonkers of conducting an inadequate environmental review in its rush to greenlight the project, which will include 1,000 homes, 1.3 million square feet of retail space and who knows how many cars barrelling -- or crawling, as the case may be -- along the roads in and around it, including the sprain brook parkway, the new york state thruway and tuckahoe road.  as settlements go, it doesn't offer much for yonkers's adversaries. greenburgh, hastings-on-hudson, ardsley and some residents of yonkers itself had complained that traffic from ridge hill would engulf their streets. they wanted the city and the developer, forest city ratner (which is also building the times's new headquarters in manhattan), to scale back.  but that didn't happen. about all the settlement calls for is $5 million to mitigate traffic at certain intersections, and the creation of a task force to jointly lobby westchester county and new york state to ease the traffic problem once and for all by creating a direct link to ridge hill from the sprain parkway.  many people can support this solution in theory, but the obstacles to building it are significant. this is partly because the multimillion-dollar system of ramps and exits envisioned by the yonkers city council president, chuck lesnick, would have to cross a westchester county park, and the county says it will sacrifice precious parkland to ridge hill at about the time hell freezes over.  in addition, the county has already raised serious questions about the scale and design of the so-called village, which it considers a closer cousin of a megamall. it insists further that offering a parkland boon to a private developer would set a catastrophic precedent with other builders and at other parks. the task force can lobby all it wants, the county says, but the sprain parkway ramps are roads to nowhere.  we love the idea of a regional task force -- of neighbors joining neighbors, crossing borders and putting heads together to solve development challenges that would otherwise lead to the usual endless and tiresome westchester border wars.  but in the case of ridge hill, where so many problems could have been solved early on, with the city of yonkers simply listening to its neighbors and working with forest city ratner to create a project on a more manageable scale, the great détente appears to have come too late.  westchester  