helping hand for veterans whose lives go off track   james murphy's story may sound familiar to many veterans. at 19, he was drafted by the army and soon sent to vietnam, where he was awarded, but never claimed, two bronze stars. after a year, he returned home to stamford, conn. it was december 1971 and he was physically uninjured, but he had seen close friends die, and he had killed more than one enemy soldier himself.  mr. murphy went to work and built a family, and in 1990, he took an early retirement -- at 40, a very early retirement. but like many veterans with idle time, he soon found himself anxious and depressed. he said he started drinking and using drugs, moved away and ended up homeless.  in 2004, family members found mr. murphy in the bronx and persuaded him to visit a veterans affairs hospital in west haven. he was eventually sent to homes for the brave in bridgeport, a transitional home for homeless veterans with mental illness or addiction that offers rehabilitation and vocational training -- the only facility of its kind in the state.  after almost two years there, mr. murphy moved back in with his family and took a job at the errera community care center in west haven, also run by veterans affairs, helping other wayward veterans. this fall, he had his family over for thanksgiving for the first time in more than 10 years. and six months ago, with the help of homes from the brave, he finally received those bronze stars.  while mr. murphy's tale is particularly hopeful, it is not unique. more and more homeless connecticut veterans are finding refuge with homes for the brave, a three-story, 42-bed, red brick former convent on an otherwise empty street, across from the vacant park city hospital and underneath a highway overpass.  ''homes for the brave is the last house on this block -- if you miss this house, you're missing a lot of opportunities,'' mr. murphy said to other veterans at a holiday party last month. ''we didn't have a home, but this is our home. we have a home now.''  the federal government says veterans account for about a third of the country's homeless population. the connecticut v.a. sees about 650 new homeless veterans a year, and administrators estimate that at any given time, there are 1,200 to 1,500 homeless vets in the state. but dr. laurie harkness, the director of the errera center, which works with homes for the brave, those figures are just the tip of the iceberg. ''for every veteran in a shelter, there are probably two more on the streets,'' dr. harkness said in an interview. ''the military teaches soldiers to survive in the harshest conditions, so they rarely seek out help.''  mr. murphy, 56, said he did not know what post-traumatic stress disorder was until he went to veterans affairs and received the diagnosis in 2004. ''a lot of vets in the streets don't know the v.a. exists,'' he said.  since homes for the brave opened in 2002, 362 veterans have come through. to qualify, they must be male, homeless, suffering from mental illness or addiction, able to contribute $50 a week and willing to work at getting back on their feet. they are allowed to stay up to two years, but most leave after one.  homes for the brave opened a second, nine-bed permanent residence in bridgeport in 2005, and organizers are hoping the vacant park city hospital will be converted to a permanent home for the elderly with a priority for veterans.  there is a statewide waiting list of 20 to 25 veterans looking for beds, and that number is predicted to rise. homes for the brave has already housed a couple of veterans from the war in iraq, and more are expected.  ''we're going to have to get ready, because we're finding that the iraq war is causing a lot of problems'' with post-traumatic stress disorder, state representative christel h. truglia of stamford, who helped secure financing for homes for the brave, said at last month's party. ''our boys are going to be coming home, and they're going to need places like this. we should clone it.''  shelter  