46 city schools join list of those failing in student performance standards under u.s. law   forty-six new york city schools have been newly identified as failing under the federal no child left behind law based on their students' performance in the 2005-6 school year, the state education department said yesterday.  elsewhere in the state, 27 schools have similarly been deemed failing, a designation that means they could eventually face penalties . at the same time, 52 schools across the state, including 27 in new york city, performed well enough last year to return to good standing.  for the first time this year, elementary and middle schools were judged not just by the standardized english and math scores of their fourth and eighth graders, but by the scores of all students in grades 3 through 8. and so, even though more city schools were added to the list than removed, the new york city education department portrayed the news as promising.  ''today's announcement shows that we have made lasting improvements in our schools and need to continue to make progress in order to ensure success for all our students,'' schools chancellor joel i. klein said in a statement.  schools are deemed failing, or ''in need of improvement,'' if they fail to make ''adequate yearly progress,'' a standard set by the state, in the same category for two years in a row. in a hallmark of the federal law, schools are judged not just on the overall performance of their student body, but also on the scores of various subgroups, like special education students. this means that even a school highly sought after by parents could wind up on the dreaded list.  only schools that receive federal title i antipoverty money are in danger of being designated as ''in need of improvement.''  in past years, the state released a complete list of failing schools in september. but last september, the state education department released a partial list naming only failing high schools, citing delays related to the new, more extensive testing regimen.  the schools identified yesterday include 16 in the bronx, 12 in manhattan, 11 in brooklyn, 5 in queens and 2 on staten island. one is a charter high school for students who have struggled elsewhere.  when schools are designated as failing, parents must be notified and given the right to request that their children be transferred. but new york city, like many school districts across the country, limits the number of transfer requests it grants.  each year that a school fails to make progress brings another set of requirements. ultimately, districts may close failing schools; over the summer new york city closed 19 poorly performing schools.  the state also named 17 schools, including 6 in new york city, that do not receive federal antipoverty money and are therefore not subject to the same scrutiny under the federal law, but that similarly underperformed. thirty-three schools, including 12 in new york city, were taken off that list.  because some failing schools closed, and the poverty status of others changed, the statewide total of failing title i schools dropped to 506 from 511 based on 2004-5 test results. new york city now has 335 such schools, up from 332.  