getting good habits started early   the six boys and girls, ages 2 to 5, ran on the child-size treadmills or shot baskets at the miniature hoops in the auditorium of sound shore medical center. the woman watching them -- iris rosario, director of the center's federal wic program, which provides nutrition aid for women, infants and children -- said she feared that without such early intervention, they would become obese adults.  the children are in a six-week pilot program aimed at preventing obesity that started this month with the help of a $21,000 federal grant. while the children ran and played, their mothers took a class on healthy cooking and the importance of incorporating fruits and vegetables into their diets.  ''we have some families that the only vegetables they use are potatoes or corn or french fries,'' said ms. rosario, who added that the wic program in new rochelle has at least 1,000 children who are overweight. the children in the pilot program were chosen because of their high body mass indexes, a calculation based on weight and height, she said.  their mothers are all from mexico and most did not speak english. the nutritionist explained in spanish how to find meats that were low in fat, how to limit their children's intake of sugary juices and soda and how to sneak more vegetables into meals.  it can be difficult, ms. rosario said, to persuade parents that their children's extra weight is not charming, but dangerous.  ''in different cultures, an overweight child is a cute child,'' she said. ''the parents say, 'but my son is so skinny, what are you talking about?' if your child keeps growing at the same rate  .''  indeed, the mothers taking the nutrition class said they did not believe that their children were overweight, nor did they fear that their children would become obese.  a mother of two from new rochelle said her daughters liked to eat vegetables like corn and broccoli. as she spoke, one daughter, who is 4, was flush from running on the treadmill, and the other, a 2-year-old, was perched on a pint-sized rowing machine.  to help parents afford fresh produce, the wic program is giving them extra $5 vouchers each month for three months expressly for fruits and vegetables.  noticed  