you can't go home again, but you can win there   the colts didn't dare return the way they left nearly 23 years ago: in a dozen yellow mayflower moving vans.  instead, the indianapolis expatriates arrived for yesterday's divisional playoff in the super bowl xli tournament in their usual caravan of buses, which exposed them to an ugly welcome from ravens loyalists as well as to thomas wolfe's observation that you can't go home again. at least not in the playoffs to bawlmore, as the natives pronounce it.  to get to the american football conference championship game next sunday, and maybe to the super bowl, it was fitting that the colts had to go through bawlmore and the ravens' vaunted defense. and they did, winning, 15-6, on adam vinatieri's five field goals.  coming into the postseason, the confusing colts had lost three of their previous five games. their defense was suspect, especially against the run. but after stifling the chiefs, 23-8, a week ago, the colts' defense limited quarterback steve mcnair and the ravens' offense to 244 yards, including 83 on the ground. what caused the turnaround?  ''just being in the right place, being sure you could play at 100 miles an hour,'' coach tony dungy said. ''the difference between winning and losing is like that,'' he added, holding up two fingers about six inches apart. ''it's a matter of lifting your game six inches.''  for the colts, it was also a matter of peyton manning using dominic rhodes and joseph addai for 95 of their 100 rushing yards, while completing only 15 of 30 passes for 170 yards. manning's third-down dart to tight end dallas clark for 14 yards sustained a 13-play drive that concluded with a 35-yard field goal by vinatieri to put the game out of reach.  in silencing the record crowd of 71,162 in m&t bank stadium, the colts also silenced the subplot that had surrounded this game and this city.  before the colts, on orders of the late robert irsay, packed their white helmets with a blue horseshoe on each side into those vans at their suburban owings mills, md., complex and departed for indianapolis in the darkness of night on march 28, 1984, the franchise had earned bawlmore's heart. it had won the national football league championship in 1958 and 1959, as well as super bowl v, all with the legendary johnny unitas at quarterback.  the franchise's departure didn't bother the locals so much as irsay taking the team name. the colts meant baltimore. in indianapolis, the team should have been called the vans.  when the ravens set up shop here in 1996 after abandoning cleveland, the ravens' owner, art modell, offered millions to rebaptize his new bawlmore team the colts, but irsay refused. hell hath no fury like fans scorned. longtime colts fans quickly accepted the ravens and hated the colts, while cherishing the old bawlmore names, especially unitas.  there's a statue of unitas outside m&t bank stadium. among the thousands of fans wearing purple-and-black replica ravens jerseys yesterday were hundreds wearing a black t-shirt with ''unitas'' and his no. 19 on the back, and ''beat indy'' on the front.  in a twist, the quarterback opposing bawlmore yesterday, the celebrated peyton manning, had blue horseshoes on his white helmet and had grown up listening to stories about unitas from his father, archie. and as an all-american at the university of tennessee, he had worn black high-top football shoes the way unitas did.  but after yesterday's game, manning resented bawlmore's distaste for the current colt players, who had nothing to do with what happened more than two decades ago. bob irsay's son jim is now the colts' owner and chief executive.  ''i understand what these fans might go through because of all the rumors about new orleans leaving,'' manning said. ''i grew up a die-hard saints fan and if the saints were ever to leave new orleans, i would feel the same way. but i wouldn't hold it against the players. i would hold it against the owner, and the owner that moved this team is no longer living and his son is our owner now.  ''i think they're two different people. i never knew the previous owner, and from everything i've ever read and heard about him, i don't think i probably would have liked him very much. but his son, our current owner, i do like. he's as good an owner and as good a man as there is. this thing has nothing to do with us, but there were a lot of middle fingers on the bus ride coming to the game.''  when unitas died early in the 2002 season, manning asked to wear black high-tops in the colts' next game in his honor, but the national football league said no.  ''i wish i had never asked,'' he told tom callahan, the author of the classic biography ''johnny u: the life and times of john unitas.''  ''i wish i had just done it,'' manning said. ''i think every quarterback in the league should have worn black high-tops that sunday. it's an honor for me to wear the same uniform. the fact that my number is one below his, and the fact that i wear the same horseshoe helmet, inspires me.''  and as the colts whooped into their dressing room, linebacker cato june thought back to the franchise's departure in 1984.  ''where's the mayflower?'' he said with a big smile, alluding to the vans that went to indianapolis. ''let's get out of here.''  sports of the times  