paperback row   arthur & george, by julian barnes. (vintage international, $14.95.) the arthur in barnes's extraordinary novel is sir arthur conan doyle, the creator of sherlock holmes. the other title character is george edalji, a half-indian solicitor who was convicted of a series of livestock mutilations in his rural parish in 1903. barnes dissects early-20th-century english society as he spins the real-life detective story of how arthur took up george's case and tried to exonerate him. (doyle's work on the case helped lead to the creation of a court of criminal appeal in 1907.) ''arthur & george'' was a man booker prize finalist in 2005; our reviewer, terrence rafferty, called it a ''cracking good yarn.''  alice, let's eat: further adventures of a happy eater, by calvin trillin. (random house, $12.95.) originally published in 1978, this was the second of trillin's three autobiographical books about food (the ''tummy trilogy''). guided by an insatiable appetite, trillin records his gastronomical odyssey -- from barbecued mutton in kentucky to latkes in london -- often with his wife, alice, who died in 2001, at his side. ''beneath the joker lies an incredibly resourceful food investigator,'' christopher lehmann-haupt wrote in the times in 1979.  what stalin knew: the enigma of barbarossa, by david e. murphy. (yale university, $18.) murphy, a former c.i.a. chief of soviet operations, brings his knowledge of russian history and intelligence gathering to this analysis of the soviet union's incredible passivity before operation barbarossa, the nazi invasion of 1941. in stalin's folly: the tragic first ten days of world war ii on the eastern front (mariner/houghton mifflin, $15.95), constantine pleshakov argues that stalin had failed to anticipate the invasion because he himself was planning a pre-emptive war against germany.  mother's milk, by edward st. aubyn. (open city, $14.) the first of st. aubyn's novels to be published in this country, ''some hope,'' examined the toxic childhood and protracted adolescence of the well-born patrick melrose. he turns up again in ''mother's milk'' (a man booker prize finalist last year), his aristocratic family having fallen on hard times. a london barrister, patrick now has a wife and two young sons, but he's still subject to the whims of his senile mother, who has turned the family house in provence into a new-age retreat. ''mother's milk turns out to be a bitter potion,'' charles mcgrath wrote here, ''that dooms a child either to become an imitation of the previous generation or -- it amounts to the same thing, almost -- the exact opposite.''  buffalo bill's america: william cody and the wild west show, by louis s. warren. (vintage, $16.95.) a mythical embodiment of the west, william f. cody (1846-1917), known as buffalo bill -- horse thief, civil war soldier, gold-seeker, indian fighter -- was one of the most recognizable men of his time. this exhaustively researched biography investigates cody's carefully constructed persona and his frontier extravaganza, seeing in them a ''vibrant culture of artful deception and imposture that characterized 19th-century american culture and especially that of the far west.''  door in the mountain: new and collected poems, 1965-2003, by jean valentine. (wesleyan university, $19.95.) valentine's poetry has long combined explosive vigor and extreme restraint, and this collection, which won a national book award in 2004, uses autobiographical storytelling and dreamlike sequences to explore her preoccupations with religious mysticism, imprisonment, mourning and erotic experience.  the fated sky: astrology in history, by benson bobrick. (simon & schuster, $15.) bobrick, who has written histories about stuttering, subways and the english bible, surveys astrology's ''impact on history and on the history of ideas,'' likening it to ''an underground river through human affairs.'' (according to ''the fated sky,'' between 30 and 40 percent of the american public gives astrology, the belief that human lives are ruled by the stars and planets, some credence.) in the book review, dick teresi called ''the fated sky'' an ''entertaining book'': ''bobrick is especially good at chronicling the battles between the roman catholic church and astrology.''  paradise travel, by jorge franco. translated by katherine silver. (picador, $14.) this noirish coming-of-age story traces a young couple, marlon and reina, who flee from medellín only to become separated on their first night in new york. franco -- one of a generation of colombian novelists who opt for a harder, grittier urban reality than their magic-realist forebears -- recounts marlon's yearlong quest to find reina, even as he struggles to make his way in the city's immigrant underworld.  ihsan taylor  