losing weight, gaining finesse in philadelphia   each week, the eagles' players have a culinary ritual called junk food friday. the problem, guard shawn andrews said, is that junk food friday too often became junk food saturday, junk food sunday and junk food monday.  ''now i know how to taper back and get on the cardio,'' andrews said.  since the end of the 2005 season, he has shed more than 60 pounds -- from 397 pounds to 335 -- motivated by the death of a close friend from a heart attack and his stated desire to become ''the next lebron james of the offensive line.''  there is less of andrews now as a person and more to him as a player. a first-round draft pick out of arkansas in 2004, he was voted to the pro bowl this season and has become the anchor of an offensive line that will play a critical role in saturday's divisional playoff game against the new orleans saints.  the eagles (11-6) have become a more balanced team since jeff garcia replaced the injured donovan mcnabb at quarterback in november. an offense that once threw the ball nearly 60 percent of the time now is split evenly between the run and the pass. and ball control could be philadelphia's best chance to defeat the saints (10-6) at the louisiana superdome.  new orleans possesses the n.f.l.'s top overall offense and passing attack. the eagles' defense could be particularly vulnerable to the pass on saturday, given the loss of lito sheppard, a pro bowl cornerback, with a dislocated elbow. the most effective way to control the saints' offense may be to keep it off the field.  on sunday, philadelphia held the ball for the final five minutes against the giants. brian westbrook ran for four first downs and 33 of his 141 rushing yards on the drive to set up the winning field goal in a 23-20 victory. much of his success came on the right side, running behind andrews and tackle jon runyan.  by contrast, on oct. 15, the eagles could not hold a 24-17 lead against the saints at the superdome. new orleans maintained possession for the final 8 minutes 26 seconds and won, 27-24, on a field goal as time expired.  lately, in building six consecutive victories, philadelphia has given its defense frequent rest, controlling the ball, keeping it on the ground behind a huge line that, as andrews puts it, ''is trying to road grade the pavement.''  ''if we get our offensive line on them early and often, we will wear teams down,'' westbrook said after sunday's victory.  andrews's weight loss has facilitated his speed and explosiveness, and kept him fresher at the end of the season, runyan said. finding the correct playing weight, he added, is something that a player must determine by experience, not by a predetermined number on a scale.  ''as he gets older, he'll learn what he needs to play at,'' runyan said of andrews. ''i don't think anyone knows. you have to figure it out for yourself.''  on the advice of his agent, andrews said, he went to a workout facility in san diego after the 2005 season and tipped the scales at 397 pounds. last april, he said, an overweight friend from his hometown, camden, ark., died of a heart attack shortly after his 24th birthday. andrews will identify the friend only as willie, but said his death scared him straight.  ''i got to realizing, i don't want to die young,'' andrews, 24, said. ''when i walk into a grocery store or a mall, my back's tight and it's 15 degrees outside and i'm still sweating. that's not a fun feeling.''  he had battled weight problems since childhood. he said he weighed 230 pounds as a 12-year-old, and, having grown up poor, was taunted by other kids for the cheapness of his clothes. today, andrews refers to himself as a big kid and keeps a shrine of equanimity, dedicated to spongebob squarepants, in the basement of his home.  ''i like how spongebob handles life,'' andrews has said. ''he gets picked on all the time, but he's still happy. he doesn't get angry; he just goes through life with a smile on his face.''  last off-season, andrews began to eat more frugally. for breakfast, he would have yogurt, fruit, turkey sausage and water. for lunch, he said, he ate tuna sandwiches for two consecutive months. fish and chicken became staples. recently, he hired a personal chef.  pancakes have become a type of dominant block, when the defensive lineman is left on his back, not a fat-laden breakfast food. before, andrews had to buy outsized clothes, even by professional football's hulking standards.  ''now, my closet is starting from scratch,'' andrews said. ''it's a great feeling. compliments is what keeps it going.''  his rookie season ended just after it began in 2004, as andrews fractured the fibula in his right leg and missed the eagles' run to the super bowl. last year, andrews was named a pro bowl alternate. this season he was named first-team all-pro.  he credited coach andy reid with handing the play-calling duties to the offensive coordinator marty mornhinweg, who prefers a more balanced attack. ''he was a big man by saying, 'hey, i'm going to step back,' '' andrews said of reid. ''he's highly respected for that.''  and the eagles' offensive linemen are highly excited by the chance to run the ball more. run blocking is proactive; pass blocking is reacting.  ''it is putting a little pressure on you when you have considerably more athletic guys on the other side of the ball, 300 pounds, running a 4.8, and they just fire off on you play after play,'' andrews said. ''you get tired of that, and you want to fire off on people every now and then.''  pro football  