penn proves too much for columbia   as fans filed into levien gymnasium last night, they could hardly contain their excitement. the prospect of columbia beating princeton and penn on consecutive nights was almost too much to handle. but the lions were already halfway there.  columbia, which has not had a winning season since 1992-93, opened its conference schedule friday night by toppling princeton, but all it proved last night was that it still has a long way to go before it can compete with the ivy league's best. penn, the two-time defending champion, led for nearly the entire game and won easily, 69-43.  ''i think our guys just didn't understand what we needed to do to win, and i put that back on myself,'' columbia coach joe jones said. ''i have to have our guys ready. i thought last night we were prepared to play the game. i thought we understood the game plan. tonight we didn't.''  a victory over penn would have sent shockwaves through the ivy league. after all, penn and princeton are perennial league powers, having won at least a share of the past 18 titles.  but the lions (10-6, 1-1) were outclassed in nearly every facet by penn (9-6, 2-0), and their leading scorer, john baumann, had no points in the first half.  ben nwachukwu, their 6-foot-8 center, might have been the lone bright spot. he had a team-high 15 points and added 9 rebounds.  columbia, which pushed the tempo against princeton, hoped to slow it down against penn. it failed miserably.  the teams traded baskets in the opening minutes before penn raced to a lead it did not relinquish. when steve danley and tommy mcmahon made consecutive 3-pointers midway through the first half, the quakers led, 18-10.  ibrahim jaaber scored a game-high 17 points for the quakers, who made six 3-pointers in the first half. but it was penn's swarming interior defense that kept the lions out of sync.  ''i did a poor job in the first half of getting the ball out quicker,'' said baumann, who finished with 10 points and a game-high 11 rebounds.  columbia shot 31 percent from the field in the first half (9 for 29) and 27.3 percent for the game. in the lions' 64-57 victory against princeton, they shot 66.7 percent.  ''i don't recall columbia having too many open looks,'' penn coach glen miller said.  brian grandieri seemed to deliver the knockout punch at the buzzer ending the first half. his 40-foot runner gave penn a 37-23 lead. grandieri sprinted into the locker room, taking much of the air in the gymnasium along with him.  nwachukwu was silenced in the second half, when penn double-teamed him.  penn scored the first 6 points of the second half, going up by 20 for the first time when mark zoller made a layup with about 17 minutes remaining. the quakers coasted the rest of the way, squashing columbia's hopes of forging a reputation as one of the ivy's elite.  ''definitely a big game for us, and we weren't able to win it,'' jones said. ''but it's a learning experience.''  college basketball  