bode miller's dazzling, all-out run wins the lauberhorn downhill   bode miller won the lauberhorn downhill saturday, crashing across the finish line to become the fourth american man to win in the event's colorful 77-year history.  ''this is one that stands out in the minds of the real enthusiasts,'' miller said.  miller took an aggressive line through the quirky and perilous obstacles of the classic course, which was featured in the 1969 robert redford film ''downhill racer,'' then sliced exquisite arcs through the final two turns. depleted after two and a half minutes of racing, he had no energy to land the final jump before the finish, and simply sat down.  ''i didn't want to leave anything out there,'' said miller, 29, who has won three other world cup races this season. ''i pretty much knew at the start i was going to do that.''  collapsing on the snow as he landed the final jump, miller spun across the finish line and slammed into air pads that separated him from 21,000 fans. he then got to his feet, pumped his fists and grinned.  ''it's unbelievably taxing,'' he said. ''you are so tired by those last turns that your body just tells you to go straight, and you have to mentally overcome it.''  a few hours later, he gave a news conference in the same schoolhouse where a year ago this week he publicly apologized for comments he had made about skiing while intoxicated.  starting 26th, miller was cheered by the swiss fans, even though their hearts ultimately belonged to didier cuche, the swiss racer who finished second, 0.65 seconds behind miller's time of 2 minutes 28.89 seconds.  a lauberhorn victory is a dazzling trophy for any skier, but it is an especially valuable one for miller, who is on pace to become the most successful american world cup racer. with four wins this season and 25 in his career, miller seems poised to surpass phil mahre as the american with the most career victories. but mahre, who won 27 races in the early 1980s, never won a downhill.  a celebrated institution in switzerland, the lauberhorn is the longest race on the tour at 2.8 miles. the track features idiosyncratic obstacles, restrictions and jumps, and has sections where racers reach speeds of more than 90 miles an hour.  four of the 67 racers were injured.  spectators took picnics on the grassy hillsides around the finish area, and the race's referee stood beside the course in a t-shirt as he used a walkie-talkie to coordinate everything from medical evacuations to television commercial breaks.  asked about the unseasonable temperatures, which have caused numerous cancellations and postponements in europe this season, miller did not discount the effects of global warming.  ''i can't believe they even got the races off,'' he said.  in that respect, he stands out from many of his european peers atop the sport, who rarely discuss climate change for fear of hurting sponsors and family members who rely on tourist money, which vanishes from alpine towns like this one as soon as the snow does.  ''there's certainly a trend; i've seen it in the last 15 or 20 years,'' miller said. ''i think the glaciers are going away. there might be more cold winters, and this winter might stand out as exceptional, but in general i think the trend is certainly going the wrong way for ski racers.''  gÖtschl prevails -- renate götschl of austria won a world cup downhill when julia mancuso of the united states lost her balance on the final jump in altenmarkt-zauchensee, austria.  götschl captured her fourth career world cup victory by finishing in 1:19.32. dominique gisin of switzerland was second, 0.23 back. mancuso was third. (ap)  winter sports  