earning a bad reputation   bangladesh is lurching in a dangerous direction. after weeks of violent protests that left at least 40 people dead, the government has declared martial law. only strong pressure from the united states and international help will keep this huge country from slipping further off a democratic path.  for weeks, a broad coalition of parties has protested what it charges is a clear attempt by the government to rig parliamentary elections, originally scheduled for later this month. it claimed that the voter rolls were padded; the national democratic institute for international affairs, an american monitoring group working in bangladesh, surveyed the voter lists and found 13 million fake names. the coalition also charged that president iajuddin ahmed, who had the job of overseeing the elections, was biased in favor of a rival party.  the united nations agreed that the run-up to the elections had been so flawed that the results could not be ''considered credible or legitimate.'' international election monitors pulled out of bangladesh, saying the existing conditions did not allow for a meaningful vote.  on thursday, mr. ahmed yielded to international pressure, resigning as the election caretaker and postponing the vote. mr. ahmed, who will stay on as president, a largely ceremonial position, said a clean voter roll was needed for ''free, fair and credible'' elections.  unfortunately, at the same time he declared a state of emergency, which revokes many basic rights and allows the army to enforce order. this is a particularly disturbing development in a country that has been subjected to long periods of military rule since gaining its independence in 1971.  the united states should use its substantial political influence to urge the government to restore suspended rights immediately. the united nations should quickly send an envoy to mediate among bangladesh's parties to ensure that this time the elections move forward in a clean and transparent manner. both the u.n. and the bush administration should encourage the protest's leaders to avoid further violence, assuring them that their demands are being heard. and they should redeploy their monitors once a new election date is set.  bangladesh is one of the poorest and most politically polarized countries in the world. the international community needs to help it build a stable democracy -- the best underpinning for development -- starting with swift, internationally guaranteed elections.  editorial  