writers scrutinize big mac and themselves   in an article that ran wednesday -- the day after he and his fellow baseball writers emphatically rejected mark mcgwire's candidacy for the hall of fame -- the toronto globe and mail columnist stephen brunt recalled a news conference the st. louis cardinals called for their outsized slugger the first day of spring training in 1999, six months after he obliterated the single-season home run record.  mcgwire was a media god, equal parts paul bunyan and jack armstrong, and, wrote brunt, the assembled sporting press was eager to revisit his feel-good story ''except that one of their number wasn't playing along (no, not yours truly). he stood up and asked a question about drugs, about mcgwire's admission that he had used androstenedione, about role models and messages to kids and sports ethics. the crowd reacted as though someone had broken wind.''  in the wake of the hall of fame vote, there was quite a bit of this kind of thing. sportswriters criticized themselves and they criticized one another; they lit into major league baseball and they ripped the players association; and mainly, of course, they went after mcgwire.  on the face of it, this was pretty strange. i happen to have a number of sportswriter friends, and used to do a fair amount of baseball writing, but you would be hard pressed to find an unlikelier collection of moral authorities this side of rosie and the donald. as dan shaughnessy of the boston globe delicately observed, he and his colleagues ''are probably not a group best suited to be judging other people's character.''  still, in a time as devoid of standards as this one, we will take our ethicists where we can get them, even if it is on the fly. the fact is, a survey of the commentary on mcgwire and the hall of fame vote reveals a general moral seriousness and no-holds-barred candor that we could probably stand more of elsewhere in the newspaper.  since ''integrity and sportsmanship'' are factors that baseball writers (unlike football writers) are asked to weigh in considering candidates for election to the sport's shrine, it is unsurprising that the hall vote occasioned much thoughtful musing on the meaning of those terms in the contemporary sports universe. more impressive is that many, like brunt, seized the opportunity to examine their own lapse in having refused to see what, in retrospect, was as obvious as the neck beneath mcgwire's face.  for sheer high moral dudgeon, it is likely no one topped gwen knapp of the san francisco chronicle. ''people who voted for mcgwire have a moral code, too,'' she observed, ''one that reveres what happens on the field regardless of how it happened, and one that equates not receiving the ultimate professional honor with not being allowed to roam free in the world. they stretch the principle of 'innocent until proven guilty' to 'no felony conviction, no foul.' ''  on the other hand, it's hard for those of us raised on ''high noon'' and other one-man-against-the-mob fare not to feel at least a grudging admiration for the integrity (if that is the word) of those who adamantly adhere to their own (if this is the word) standards.  ''the hall of fame was built to honor players who achieved greatness between the white lines -- not because they were selfless servants of humanity,'' said steve cameron of the merced sun-star in california.  ''i voted for mcgwire because i don't trust baseball writers (myself included) to be moralists or scorecard-toting c.s.i. units,'' said jim souhan of the minneapolis-st. paul star tribune, adding a cautionary note that should give even his most self-certain colleagues pause. ''i don't think we (i) know enough about this generation of players to separate presumptive cheaters from the hundreds who cheated more subtly or intelligently, or who have otherwise avoided scrutiny. like, oh, aging power pitchers who display tremendous resilience and longevity, not that i'm thinking of anyone in particular, roger.''  others struggled, like rabbis arguing the fine points of talmudic law, to find an ethical middle ground. were mcgwire's transgressions of such gravity that he should be denied entrance to the hall forever? might an asterisk be the answer? or why not have an entire wing of the hall reserved for veterans of the steroid age? for that matter, has mcgwire really been judged not so much for his use of steroids as for his pathetic performance before a congressional committee? linda p. campbell of the fort worth star-telegram wrote an article suggesting the reputation-saving testimony that mcgwire, if he were a different sort of man, or had a better lawyer, should have given that gruesome day.  i am certainly in sympathy with the impulse to understand and forgive. in more than five decades of baseball watching, i have seen more than my fair share of thrilling things: jim bunning's perfect game in 1964; reggie jackson launching those three home runs into the october night; bucky dent's memorable shot at fenway. but i have never been more dazzled in a ballpark than i was standing with my son by the left-field foul pole in shea stadium's upper deck watching mark mcgwire send 15 straight shots into the stratosphere during batting practice.  we are a generous-spirited people, and lots of us would love to see things work out for mcgwire. but as even most of the writers who cheered him on that season (along with the rest of us) seem to realize, the circumstances may demand a more serious moral reckoning. for in the months and years to come, the quality of their own ethical sincerity will surely be further tested by new revelations, and this time they should expect to be under closer scrutiny themselves.  as paul mirengoff wryly noted the other day on the conservative blog power line, the steroid story ''was staring them in the face during the 1990s. so the case can be made that no baseball reporter who was active during that time should be inducted into the writer's wing (yes, there is one) of the hall of fame.''  on baseball harry stein created the ethics column for esquire magazine. his most recent book is ''the girl watchers club.''  