spare times: jan. 12 - jan. 18; japanese new year's fair   tom cruise might have been ''the last samurai'' in one of his hollywood roles, but he is far from the last contemporary man to perform the rituals of the ancient japanese warriors. on sunday yoshi amao will demonstrate samurai techniques, but they're devoted to fun rather than feudal disputes. he and his troupe, samurai sword soul, will perform as part of the japanese new year's fair at the 14th street y. ''they choreograph the movements,'' michiyo kigawa, director of the y's japanese parenting and family center, said of samurai sword soul, which will be accompanied by yumi shindo on the shamisen (a three-string guitar). ''it's dancing, but it's also showing how to fight with the sword.'' (the swords are wood, not metal.) young martial-arts fans can watch demonstrations of karate too, again with an emphasis on nonviolence. but the fair will include some real beatings. taiko drums, will get a thorough workout from the group taikoza. and all families can participate in mochitsuki, left, the pulverizing process involved in making traditional rice cakes, or mochi. the y will provide the hammer, the huge mortar and of course the sweet steamed rice, ''which means prosperity and pureness and health,'' ms. kigawa said. the fair will also offer kamishibai (storytelling using illustrated cards) for preschoolers, and calligraphy, an opportunity for older children to write their names and other words in japanese. young visitors can make paper hagoita, or badminton rackets, and bookmarks decorated with tiny paper cranes, signifying good wishes. other entertainments will include a kimono fashion show and a concert with the koto, or floor harp. ''several performances are very energetic, but the kimonos and koto are very calm and elegant,'' ms. kigawa said. in other words, it's all about harmony and balance, another japanese value. (sunday from 1 to 5 p.m. at the 14th street y, 344 east 14th street, east village, 212-780-0800, 14streety.org. $15; $10 for ages 3 to 12; $12 and $8 for members; free for under 3).  laurel graeber  