high-toned scats and purrs by a low-profile jazz singer   the jazz singer nancy king has a fairly deep voice, a comfortable, well-worn purr. but during every song she sang in her late set at the jazz standard on wednesday night, whether she was improvising while singing lyrics or scatting, she jumped an octave.  that is not what makes her unique. other jazz singers can do this; jazz singing is an academic subject now and using one's range is basic, a primary skill. what was unique in ms. king's set was its pure efficacy: it worked every time. it seemed to make her feel good, it made you feel good and it wasn't put in there strictly to show her audience what she could do.  her pitch is excellent and so is her rhythm; her gig on wednesday put her in front of geoffrey keezer's trio, with piano, bass and drums, which brought out her swing. but there's nothing overthought in the way ms. king sounds. it's a rush of enthusiasm, and whether age has anything to do with it -- ms. king is 66 -- she possesses that special quality of older jazz musicians who have lived with their repertory for a long time and gotten close to the material.  in ms. king's case, the songs all came out like extensions of her open, curious personality. most of them were standards like ''it's you or no one'' and ''i didn't know what time it was,'' or the subset of jazz songs and standards with words by jon hendricks, like ''just friends'' and ''strollin' '' (performed in a friendly duet with karrin allyson).  ms. king has been singing in san francisco and the northwest since the mid-1960s. musicians eventually spread the word eastward, but it took a long time before anything happened beyond high-quality admiration. in 2004 the pianist fred hersch invited her to perform a duo concert and sneaked a recording of it. (informed afterward, she didn't mind.) the result, the 2006 album ''live at the jazz standard with fred hersch'' (max jazz), has been nominated for a grammy. this is ms. king's time; jazz singers in general have suddenly become very interested in her.  as they should. the only dip in her show was a heavy-handed ballad, ''love and respect,'' but just about everything else was medium or fast tempo, and the rhythm was beautifully articulated: mr. keezer arpeggiated chords a little flashily, but justifiably so; the bassist reuben rogers and the drummer jon wikan gripped the music hard with accents. and as ms. king sat on a high stool and threw herself completely into her work, there was full musical interaction between singer and band, not just the presentation of the vocalist as window dressing.  music review  