in gadgets, excitement is in the price   slumped on a bench at the end of the third day of the consumer electronics show here, ben leet stared at a sharp 108-inch flat-panel tv, the biggest television ever made, as he pondered what was remarkable about the thousands of products he saw.  ''well, this thing is wow,'' said mr. leet, a senior consultant at dtc worldwide, a british market research firm. ''each year the tvs get better.''  still, the size was really just an incremental expansion over last year. and mr. leet was hard pressed to come up with anything along the miles of displays of tvs, set-top boxes, dvd machines, appliances, and the like, that could be called startling or life changing. indeed, no new feature-rich product stole the consumer electronics show -- it seemed not to be aimed at ''first adopters,'' the guys down the street with the latest gadgets, but at the soccer moms with an eye for a bargain. ''it is going mainstream,'' mr. leet said.  for consumer electronics makers, the faster pace of price-cutting seemed to be even more of an obsession than a revolutionary new device.  certainly, apple sucked the life out of the annual electronics party this week with an announcement at its own show in san francisco of a sleek multidimensional cellphone that first adopters are sure to drool over. but, at least by one measure, the electronics industry has a lot to celebrate.  last year, manufacturers sold a record $146 billion worth of goods at wholesale in the united states. sales in 2006 increased 13 percent from 2005, twice the average rate of growth.  ''that has not happened in the past 20 years,'' said sean wargo, an economist with the consumer electronics association.  the industry sold 160 percent more liquid-crystal-display tvs and 154 percent more global positioning satellite navigation systems.  at the same time, however, prices for many products fell faster last year than the typical pace of decline. big-screen plasma tvs dropped 32 percent, according to the association's economists. competition pushed the average notebook computer price down 35 percent. the price of video players for cars fell 65 percent.  even as executives of the big manufacturers here insisted that the big drops would not happen again this year, consumers can expect to see more of the same. demand remains strong, and the relentless competition is creating a paradise for shoppers, who have packed their homes with an average of 25 consumer electronic devices, twice as many as just a decade ago.  in big-screen tvs, for example, ''as much as i say they won't fall as much,'' said robert scaglione, the senior vice president for marketing at sharp's north american operations, ''i can only hope they won't.''  sharp electronics is one of several tv makers adding capacity this year. its new factories are more efficient. sharp can produce six 52-inch flat-panels for l.c.d. televisions with the same amount of effort it took to produce just two of them in its older plant. sharp said production of all sizes of flat-panels would double this year and then triple in 2008.  manufacturers, especially the smaller contract companies in taiwan and china that make the panels for the lesser-known brands like polaroid or maxent, need to keep those factories running at full capacity and will cut prices to do so.  vincent f. sollitto jr., the chairman and chief executive of syntax-brillian, takes advantage of that trend. in a luxury suite at the las vegas hilton next to the convention center where the annual show was held, he explained how sales of the olevia brand tvs doubled in 2006.  ''a year ago, we were nobody,'' mr. sollitto said. but the company priced the tv sets 20 percent below those of the major manufacturers and, for a few days after thanksgiving, outsold sony three to one in circuit city stores. ''that's what we can do,'' he said.  ''we will be prepared for what is coming and that is very aggressive price reductions throughout the year,'' he said.  it is a similar story for computers, a category that only 18 months ago many industry analysts considered to be a sleeper. but sales of notebook computers grew 64 percent last year. craig marking, a product manager for toshiba, said microsoft's release of a new operating system, vista, will continue to stimulate demand. ''it creates the opportunity for higher average selling prices,'' he added.  he reasons that because vista turns the pc into a multimedia entertainment device, the computer needs more memory and more sophisticated disk drives.  once a putty-colored box for an office desk, the personal computer has been redesigned and is more often a sleek notebook, sometimes enrobed in shiny embossed carbon fiber. all those frills are supposed to entice consumers to pay more.  but executives at a scrappy pc maker, acer of taiwan, do not think that will happen. they took market share away from toshiba and dell in 2006 and they want to get more this year. ''we sold 1.6 million last year; we will sell 3.2 million this year,'' said rudi schmidleithner, president of acer's american operations.  acer's strategy is to put the latest technology in a pc, for example, installing devices that enable the highest speeds over a wireless network. but instead of considering the computer a niche product for the top of the market and getting fat profit margins, it then prices the products for the mainstream and makes money on volume. ''we do not need the highest margins to run our business model,'' mr. schmidleithner said.  that strategy ruins it for everyone else because the others have to lower prices if they do not want to lose market share. ''part of dell's problem is acer,'' mr. schmidleithner suggested. those discounts, of course, put a smile on the faces of consumers.  navigation systems, meanwhile, that use information from global positioning satellites were another fast-selling product category last year. that came as a bit of a surprise as well because most of the direction-giving devices intended for cars sell for $600 to $1,200.  change is a afoot here, too. the barriers to entry are low. a g.p.s. device is a few generic semiconductors, a small l.c.d. screen and software. garmin, an industry leader, has a gross profit margin of 50 percent.  not surprisingly, more companies at the show were displaying navigation systems. samsung electronics, which claims just bested sony as the no. 1 hdtv maker, has set its sights on this market. increased competition can mean only one thing: prices are coming down.  the show was not about prices, of course, no matter how much they were discussed in meetings between retailers and manufacturers. the consumer electronics show was supposed to be a showcase for retailers looking for the latest high-tech products that will lure consumers to the store. watch for powerline plugs that will use a home's existing wires to move digital content, including hdtv programs or movies, around the house. loads of hand-held video players are coming, along with new digital cameras that offer even more automated functions to improve pictures. (kodak hinted at a mode to remove the glow-eye from pet pictures.)  some of those technologies will never catch on. at the show, the big debate continued to be about whether hd-dvd or blu-ray would triumph as the standard for high-definition dvd players. lg electronics offered a solution to reassure the hesitant consumer: a device that would play both kinds of discs.  but at $1,200, the super multi blue is only for that first adopter. (the first adopters would be better off buying a toshiba hd-dvd player for $600 and a sony playstation 3, which contains a blu-ray drive, for $670 because then they get two players and a game machine.) jun dong-soo, the senior vice president for digital devices at samsung, scoffed at lg's effort: ''without an affordable price, i don't want to launch a dual format player.''  the fear of making the wrong bet on technology, by the consumer and the manufacturer, led whirlpool to come up with an innovative alternative to another lg product: the tv in the refrigerator door. what happens when the tv breaks or becomes obsolete? from a tiny meeting room tucked far in the back of one of the exhibition halls, the company showed consumer electronics makers a socket built into the top of a refrigerator's door from which any kind of device -- a tv, a tablet pc, a battery charger, a dvd player -- could be hung.  whirlpool doesn't plan on charging consumers any more for a refrigerator with the special socket, which it calls central park. that way more consumers will buy it and the larger installed base will entice electronics makers, which will further increase demand for central park.  matthew newton, an innovation consultant at whirlpool, said, ''we'd like to move as quickly as possible to get it into the mainstream market.'' it was a sentiment heard a lot at the show.  the follow-up: as the holiday shopping season began, your money outlined some online tools that can be used to find the best deals when retailers drop prices suddenly.  as you well know, the prices continue to drop after the holidays. take advantage of price-protection guarantees of the companies. they typically last for 30 days during which time the retailer will pay you the difference. but only if you notice the lower price and contact them.  the web site refundplease.com helps you automatically track price changes at amazon.com. there is the problem of making direct contact with amazon's customer service. with a bit of sleuthing, tim noah, a writer for the online magazine slate, found amazon's customer service phone number. it is (800) 201-7575.  your money email: yourmoney at nytimes.com  