diplomacy in maplewood   it's any librarian's nightmare. boisterous middle school youngsters just out of school barge through the library door and do what some kids have been doing since time immemorial: talk loudly, push each other back and forth and make a general nuisance of themselves for many of the other patrons trying to read, study or use the computers.  in maplewood, a middle class suburb just 10 miles west of newark, library officials said ''enough'' a few weeks ago and announced they would close both of the town's libraries each weekday starting tuesday from 2:45 until 5 p.m. by that time, they hoped, the obstreperous kids would be home or at least somewhere far from the libraries.  one can certainly understand the librarians' frustrations; after all, they are trained to assist patrons in locating library material and doing research, not to be disciplinarians. but the idea of closing a library during prime hours was an inappropriately heavy-handed way to react to a problem that many libraries across the country have been dealing with for generations.  not surprisingly, the announcement dismayed a great many people, and the township's governing committee asked the library board to reconsider its decision. both library and township officials met last week in an effort to avoid the closing, and the library board is scheduled to meet today to rethink the closings.  that would be a positive first step, and would give the township committee time to explore suggestions that the town create a permanent facility where youngsters could go after school lets out. many activists in town say teenagers with working parents simply have no suitable place to congregate during the late afternoon.  in the meantime, there are things the library can do on its own to accommodate the students. leslie burger, the director of the princeton, n.j. library and the president of the american library association, points out that youngsters started frequenting her library's new facility shortly after it opened a couple of years ago. she then hired three retired persons with skills in handling young people to work part-time with the youngsters in a positive rather than just a disciplinary way.  obviously, such a program would require modest funding, and that's where maplewood's township committee should provide some help.  at a time when student reading scores are declining and young people are spending more and more time tethered to all manner of electronic screens -- everything from text-messaging cell phones to video ipods to computers and, yes, tv's -- librarians have a responsibility to do almost anything to welcome students to their facilities. by resolving their current difficulties and keeping their libraries open during weekday afternoons, maplewood officials have an opportunity to set an example for public libraries across the country.  new jersey  