florida adopts plan for mentally ill inmates   about 300 mentally ill inmates in county jails throughout florida will eventually be moved to psychiatric hospitals and residential centers for treatment after state lawmakers agreed on wednesday to an emergency spending measure.  the legislative budget commission, a panel of the florida legislature meeting in an emergency session, voted unanimously to spend nearly $19 million before july 1 to provide 373 more psychiatric beds for mentally ill inmates and more community services for mentally ill people at risk of being jailed.  the decision comes after a state circuit judge charged lucy hadi, the former secretary of the department of children and families, with indirect criminal contempt for keeping mentally ill inmates in jail longer than state law allows. ms. hadi, who resigned last month, was fined $80,000.  state law requires the department to move inmates found incompetent to stand trial from county jails to psychiatric hospitals within 15 days of receiving a commitment order. the number of inmates found incompetent has increased by 16 percent over the last two fiscal years. as of tuesday, nearly 250 mentally ill inmates had waited more than 15 days for treatment. in all, nearly 300 inmates are waiting for treatment.  ''the state has not sat idly by,'' said bob butterworth, the new secretary of the department of children and families, a democrat chosen by gov. charlie crist, a republican, to head the beleaguered agency. ''we've taken action. that's all we can do.''  the extra beds will cost $16.6 million and be scattered across the state at private centers and state-run hospitals. one hundred secure beds, where patients are constantly supervised, will be available in south florida by may, said don winstead, deputy secretary of the department of children and families. the state plans to have a total of 1,822 secure and residential beds by june.  lawmakers also approved spending $3.1 million more to provide other services for the mentally ill, like housing, medication stipends and outpatient mental health services.  to continue to provide the additional beds and support services beyond june, however, the legislature will need to appropriate an additional $54.5 million, state budget analysts say. mr. crist said the legislature had a duty to provide the additional money.  state senator stephen r. wise, republican of jacksonville, said the state should try to save money by providing more residential treatment beds, which are less expensive than the secure beds.  ''i don't want to be able to buy a ferrari,'' mr. wise said, ''but i want to have the option of being able to buy a prius or a buick or something less expensive than a ferrari.''  