who'll pay for health care for all?   to the editor:  re ''california plan for health care would cover all'' (front page, jan. 9):  gov. arnold schwarzenegger of california has the right motives, to improve health coverage, but he should not consider including insurance companies in his proposal. they are a huge part of the problem, as are record-keeping inefficiencies and fraud.  has mr. schwarzenegger looked at the bill, introduced in the house by representative john conyers of michigan, that would extend medicare coverage to everyone?  why antagonize doctors and hospitals by requiring contributions from them, instead of making the whole system more efficient? what would work is a universal coverage system supported through a health care fund that includes contributions from all employers and workers.  esther confino  new hyde park, n.y., jan. 9, 2007  to the editor:  gov. arnold schwarzenegger is to be commended for trying to provide health insurance for all residents of california.  but asking doctors to contribute 2 percent of their revenues makes no sense. doctors' incomes have dropped as managed care companies have siphoned off more of the health care dollar for the profit of their shareholders and executives.  it would make much more sense for managed care companies to contribute 2 percent of their revenues instead. and the chief executives of these companies should be forced to contribute 20 percent of their income and 50 percent of their retirement packages.  this would shift the burden of financing health care for all californians off the backs of doctors and on to those who have profited the most from our current system.  donald fagelman, m.d.  sands point, n.y., jan. 9, 2007  to the editor:  lost in the coverage of the political maneuvering and analysis of potential winners and losers in gov. arnold schwarzenegger's health care plan for california was the emphasis he placed on prevention.  in order for health care to be sustainable, the demand for services needs to be reduced. in addition to expanding access, there needs to be a focus on prevention and making it easier to get healthier.  this is possible if attention is paid to what is making people sick and intervening early. it's great if children grow up having access to affordable medical services, but it's better if they're going for a checkup instead of surgery.  the governor's plan includes recommendations about prevention -- in particular, improving nutrition and physical activity -- that should be publicized and put into effect.  jeremy cantor  berkeley, calif., jan. 9, 2007  the writer is a program manager at prevention institute.  to the editor:  one element is key in gov. arnold schwarzenegger's plan: all californians would be required to obtain health coverage, either through their employer or on their own. that type of mandate is essential to make everything else work.  without such a mandate, younger and healthier people could choose not to participate, leaving disproportionately older and sicker people in the insurance pool. then insurers would face pressure to cherry-pick healthier customers.  without a mandate, insurers would resist the proposal to require them to take all comers, regardless of age or health status.  with a mandate, insurers could feel more confident that they would attract young and old, healthy and sick.  mandated coverage is the linchpin of any viable universal health care system.  harris meyer  hollywood, fla., jan. 9, 2007  to the editor:  kudos to gov. arnold schwarzenegger for his bold plan to insure every resident of california and to make health insurance obligatory to fairly spread the risk.  the governor is a republican, but his european background may have saved him from the cruel extremes of the ''ownership society'' supported by so many others in his party.  to the european mind-set, it is astounding and amoral to deny people access to health care because they are poor or have pre-existing conditions. add to this the fact that mr. schwarzenegger knows from personal experience that the need for medical care can confront anyone.  further add in the supreme self-confidence of a man who has always been successful in every endeavor, and perhaps we have the man who can propel our society into finally becoming civilized.  andrea gasten  scottsdale, ariz., jan. 9, 2007  to the editor:  in ''mr. schwarzenegger's modest idea'' (editorial, jan. 8), you give credit to gov. arnold schwarzenegger for his plan to guarantee health care for all of california's children.  the governor also deserves commendation for his plan, announced last summer, to expand health centers into 500 elementary schools. he recognizes that meaningful access requires more than an insurance card. school-based health centers assure access in a setting that is familiar and convenient for hard-working families.  governor schwarzenegger joins a growing list of state policy makers who are finding ways to finance school-based health centers that bring medical and mental health care services where students learn and grow.  john schlitt  serena clayton  washington, jan. 9, 2007  the writers are the executive directors of, respectively, the national assembly on school-based health care and the california school health centers association.  to the editor:  you write: ''guaranteed health care for children is the new political apple pie. no one can say he is against it.'' not true. i am.  while gov. arnold schwarzenegger proposes health insurance for all of california's children, he is also proposing to eliminate the welfare payments for the families of those who take care of those children, especially the illegal immigrants.  it seems the latinos have good reason to remain suspicious of this government.  your editorial didn't mention how the governor plans to pay for this new children's insurance. part of his plan is to levy a ''fee'' on physicians' income to pay for it. i hope my dollars then go for sex education and condoms.  john rochat, m.d.  fort bragg, calif., jan. 9, 2007  