books on broadway   when they say ''book'' on broadway, sometimes they really mean ''book.'' within the past few months, musical adaptations of ''high fidelity,'' ''how the grinch stole christmas!'' and ''les misérables'' (a revival) opened on broadway, neighbors tothat long-running page-to-stage success, ''the color purple.''can the marriage ofalice munro and precision choreography be far behind? here are a few songs from productions i'd like to see.  from ''middlesexy! the jeffrey eugenides musical''  i love options, they're awful nice  i like bein' a hermaphrodite.  still i'd like a long, german word for''the ++sadness of failed restaurants''  babe, i've got the depresso-jinxedlocation-  haunts.  hormone cocktail  everybody dance.  hormonecocktail  there's a party in my pants.  everybody has glands.  everybody, jazz hands!  from ''i feel bad about my neck:  nora ephron on broadway''  whenever i'm feeling squashed and beetle-y  i plan another trip to eataly.  eataly, eataly! i'm so glad we met.  eataly, eataly! think of all i et.  do i look unwell?  i once was svelte but now i have svelled.  am i going crazy?  my fat cells went condo and my skin is all crepey.  from ''ray of hope: the raymond carver musical  no heroics  mostly stoic.  he's a poet  it's no jo-ik  spare and brutal  lives so futile.  if age don't kill you  no doubt youth'll.  lives fast sinking  tortured thinking.  life is hinky --  drinky drinky.  lapses and losses  and the cause is  dope and sauce and  year-long pauses.  in this trailer  there's a sale on  what's avail'ble:  human failure!  carver country: strike up the band!  carver country: foreign land!  i wouldrai  if i couldrai  but i can't, ray  so go away.  (singer pulls out a gun and shoots himself.)  from ''freakonomics: an argument, with music''  i'm a rogue economist, yeah, that's me  (as rogue as university of chicago can be).  when i show how roe v. wade brought a drop in crime  you'll wish you were as perspicacious as i'm.  freakonomics! incentives govern life.  freakonomics! common sense gets the knife.  freakonomics! off the shelves i'll fly.  watch your back, mr. ''tipping point'' guy!  from ''lolita!''  ripe and nubile  juvenile.  o, lolita  what a cheetah.  she's covered in lace an'  then james mason.  really hinders  shelley winters.  world enraged:  underaged!  tension heightening:  picnic, lightning!  from ''the emperor's children: the musical''  this new book by claire messud?  it's rilly, rilly, rilly gud.  betrayal, envy, some ''et tu?''  3alums@brown.edu  human pride makes human goblins  wunderkinds have wunderproblems.  cultural elite: it's bittersweet!  entitlement: it's their vitamins!  talkin', talkin' 'bout emperor's children:  ivy league pimps and hos.  talkin', talkin' 'bout emperor's children  their daddy got no clothes.  from ''what to expect when you're expecting: a family musical''  (singer is dressed as a french chef. he is sifting powdered sugar onto pastries.)  bonjour, mes amis; hello and walcum  newborns, zey love a leetle talcum.  but zere is no finer sweet, no finer muffin  than ze bun maman makes in her own oven.  if you have woom in your womb  say hello to the bébé boom.  from ''richard dawkins's 'memealot': the 'selfish gene' musical''  this book coined a new term: meme.  or ''me-me'' for those with the selfish gene.  me me me me me me: me!  me me-me me me-me me me me.  there's no ''i'' in team  but there's ''me'' and i'm  (singer rips off his clothes to reveal a leotard.)  ... a miiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiime!  essay henry alford, who writes frequently for the book review, contributed to the anthology ''money changes everything.''  