sometimes it's the coaches who should stay in school   it won't be long before florida coach urban meyer hears his name mentioned as the next hot coaching prospect for an n.f.l. vacancy.  a word of advice for meyer: when the pros come running, run away. just say no.  many a fine college-coaching reputation have been ruined by a sojourn in the n.f.l.  for reasons that have to do with ego and control, great college coaches do not make great n.f.l. coaches, and they probably never will. the college coaching culture makes it so.  in college, the head coach holds all the cards, has all the power, gets all the glory. the players have one-year renewable scholarships, and the coach can bad mouth troublemakers.  when a college player and a college coach reunite in the pros, the cleat is on the other foot. the n.f.l. is all about the players. college coaches, by and large, can't get their minds -- or egos -- around that reality.  ''there are a lot of things that some college coaches never get accustomed to,'' dennis green said yesterday from his home in solana beach calif. ''you'll hear a guy say: 'i never got used to the players. i never got used to the way they practice.' ''  green, who was fired last week as head coach of the arizona cardinals, has enjoyed success at both levels. he coached at northwestern and was named the big ten coach of the year in 1982. he served as running backs coach for the san francisco 49ers, then was the head coach at stanford university before becoming the head coach of the minnesota vikings. in minnesota, he had a .500 record or better in each of his nine full seasons. he was hired by the cardinals in 2004.  ''in college football, a top coach can pretty much go out and it's going to be seven wins and up,'' green said. ''a 9-2 record, 9-3, you're really dominating. in the national football league, you're more likely to win four, lose two, win three, lose four. you've got these huge swings.  ''it's an up-and-down process and you have to be able to adapt to when you're up and also adapt and not be discouraged when you're down.''  on the surface, college coaches seem to be ideal n.f.l. head coaching prospects. coaching is year-round, training is year-round, planning is year-round. the major difference between the two levels is the relationship with players.  ''there's a different level and a different manner of motivation that must be reached with the pro athlete compared to the collegiate athlete,'' university of washington coach tyrone willingham said yesterday. ''it starts with your own confidence in dealing with men.''  willingham was also the head coach at notre dame and stanford. he spent three seasons in the n.f.l. with green and worked under green at stanford. in fact, willingham credits green with teaching him how to make the transition from college to the n.f.l.: treat the players as peers.  ''denny had been practicing the techniques of pro football on our college athletes,'' willingham said about their days together at stanford. green, his coaches and the players related to each others as teammates, not as coach to player. ''even though you're the coach, you're still very much a teammate.''  when he became an n.f.l. assistant coach, the transition was much easier, willingham said.  ''your relationship has got to be different, and sometimes it's possible that the collegiate coach coming in may not have that deep-seated confidence in dealing with relationships in that manner and respecting the player in that manner,'' he said.  look at the coaches in this weekend's n.f.l. playoff games: not one was a college head coach.  there have been two great n.f.l. coaches who made the transition from college: bill walsh and jimmy johnson. the list of flops is much longer. it includes lou holtz, steve spurrier and nick saban.  ''in college football you get a chance to build your program; you got some time,'' green said. ''in pro football, guys go to the playoffs and the teams still make changes because they didn't go far enough in the playoffs. there's a lot higher expectations than in the college game. in the national football league, the difference between being 6-10 and 10-6 are a few plays. it's that tight.''  free agency has made it even harder for any coach to succeed. with key players coming and going each season, the pro coach needs a level of flexibility that the college coach never has to exercise.  ''you'll find a player who wins a super bowl ring, goes as an unrestricted free agent to a team and the next year wins two games,'' green said. ''you'll find an assistant coach that was on a team that won two games. they get fired; the next year he's hired by a team that went to the super bowl and they go to the super bowl again. you have to be able to roll with the punches.  ''it's much more of an every-game, everyday battle in the national football league,'' green added. ''there are no teams that everybody wants to play for homecoming.''  bobby petrino left louisville for an n.f.l. lion's den in atlanta. perhaps petrino will succeed where so many of his fellow college coaches have failed.  the odds say no.  sports of the times e-mail: wcr@nytimes.com  