g.m. sees china, and the chinese, in a chevrolet   yang luzhou, who lives here in an industrial town facing north korea across the bay, is about as far as can be from americana.  he is even farther from john mellencamp's ''our country,'' the flag-waving soundtrack for chevrolet's latest marketing campaign in the united states.  but just the other day, the classic ''bear went over the mountain'' and the confederate anthem ''dixie'' wafted through the factory while he fiddled with a chevrolet aveo car door on a general motors production line.  ''i never thought i'd be building chevrolet products,'' he said. ''i never heard of the chevrolet brand when i was growing up.''  g.m. is hoping to change that for future generations of chinese. it is counting on mr. yang, 27, and his 2,300 fellow assembly line workers here to help produce 200,000 cars this year as part of a giant bet to turn the chevrolet brand into a household name in china.  as the world's top auto executives gather in detroit for the annual auto show, one of the biggest questions is how general motors will fare this year when toyota may pass it to become the world's largest automaker. the answer will depend to a considerable extent on how g.m. performs in china, its second-largest market after the united states.  the modern plant here is expected to double production this year. g.m. is also expanding at a second factory in southeastern china that makes tiny chevrolet spark sedans. and chevrolet dealerships, with gleaming windows and cushy chairs, 20-foot ceilings and advanced repair bays, are popping up along major avenues across china.  to compensate for its troubles at home, g.m. is in a big hurry here. but building a brand that will capture car buyers in a vast developing country, going from middle america to middle china, is a lot harder than building one at home.  for one, g.m. in china isn't exactly g.m. limited by beijing to no more than 50 percent ownership of any auto assembly operation, it relies on two rival joint ventures to manufacture chevrolets in china.  g.m. is heavily dependent in the chinese market on a different brand, buick, the first brand it re-introduced here as the country moved from rigid communism to a hybrid form of rough-and-ready capitalism. moreover, g.m. is in the midst of a corporate reorganization campaign just as it is starting to face in china, as at home, the same daunting competition from toyota.  g.m. now produces the chevrolet sail compact sedan, the slightly larger chevrolet aveo compact sedan and hatchback, and the considerably larger chevrolet epica midsize car at a joint venture here with the shanghai automotive industry corporation, known by its initials s.a.i.c.  but the tiny chevrolet spark subcompact comes from a separate joint venture with s.a.i.c. and the liuzhou wuling automotive company, and is manufactured at wuling's factory in liuzhou in southeastern china.  the mix in makers has created a bit of a mishmash in branding. at the beijing auto show in november, the sail, aveo and epica were positioned near buicks, cadillacs and other g.m. brands, attended by dapper young men in matching gray slacks, double-breasted blue blazers, yellow and blue ties with perfect windsor knots and lapel pins with tiny chevrolet ''bow tie'' logos.  but the three chevrolet sparks in a wuling display in a separate hall were draped with leggy young women in skimpy red-and-white miniskirts and knee-high white leather boots with stiletto heels.  kevin e. wale, the president of g.m.'s china operations, acknowledged in an interview that forcing the two joint ventures to work together on chevrolet's image will take some work.  ''there's no question we need to make sure the brands don't diverge,'' he said.  buicks were a symbol of luxury in china in the 1930s, when they accounted for a sixth of the cars on chinese roads. but sales halted after the communists won the country's civil war in 1949, and did not resume in earnest until g.m. opened a buick factory in shanghai in 1998. state-owned corporations buy buick regal sedans to chauffeur their executives, but a rising middle class has created a much larger market in the last five years for compact and subcompact cars.  buick began imperiling its luxury image by introducing smaller and smaller cars, including a compact buick sail sedan, to keep up. ''we had buick covering the whole market and trying to stretch probably too low,'' said nick reilly, the g.m. group vice president who runs the company's asia-pacific operations.  g.m. has now rebranded the compact as the chevrolet sail. but buick still sells its own compact car, the excelle, and a bare-bones excelle sells for less than a fully loaded sail.  ''there is some overlap, but the reality is we're positioning chevrolet to be more affordable fun,'' said steve betz, the chevrolet brand director in china.  another potential problem is that for hundreds of millions of chinese, insulated for decades from the global market, the chevrolet brand has no clear image. even mr. yang at the factory here, who has just bought himself a chevrolet sail, was unsure how to define the brand, and whether it is basically american or chinese.  ''i feel it's a bit chinese,'' he said.  still, g.m. seems to be having some success. shen lei, a 27-year-old machinery salesman, walked into a chevrolet dealership in shanghai on a recent afternoon and paid $9,700 for a gray chevrolet sail with antilock brakes, dual front air bags and many other features.  ''it's much more economical than a buick,'' he said.  complicating g.m.'s big push in china is a fundamental change in how the company does business. g.m. is trying to cut costs and improve quality by centralizing more of its design, engineering and purchasing activities, mainly in detroit, while erasing many of the bureaucratic differences that have long separated its operations in countries across the globe.  but g.m.'s china division became a juggernaut in part because it was practically a separate fief until 2005. the division was known for its quick decision-making and independence while it was under philip f. murtaugh, who helped negotiate the agreement that allowed g.m. to open its factory in shanghai in 1998. he then ran the company as it swiftly trounced toyota, honda, nissan, daimlerchrysler and ford and nearly caught volkswagen, the longtime market leader.  like carlos ghosn, who became a celebrity in japan by rescuing nissan in the late 1990s before moving on to run renault as well, mr. murtaugh became something akin to a rock star in the chinese media.  he resigned from g.m. in march 2005, though, when forced to give up some of his control over the chinese operation. after a year off, he has now joined s.a.i.c. as an executive vice president overseeing its effort to build its own brand of cars for the chinese market -- in competition with g.m., its joint venture partner.  ''phil murtaugh and the team did a great job of moving faster than we would normally do,'' mr. wale said.  but integrating g.m.'s china operations has produced some dividends, by encouraging managers here to draw on expertise elsewhere in the automaker, company executives said.  ''we just put up our hand and say, 'i need someone who can manage a supply chain,' '' mr. wale said. ''the best practices transfer more quickly.''  the aveo manufactured here was engineered partly by g.m.'s 51 percent-owned daewoo subsidiary in south korea and partly by a g.m. center in shanghai. the aveos sold in the united states are assembled in south korea while the aveos built by mr. yang and his co-workers are for sale only in china, where the overall auto market grew 36 percent in the first 11 months of 2006 compared with the same period in 2005.  for all g.m.'s internal difficulties, though, its biggest challenge here, as in the united states, is toyota. the japanese automaker has had a narrower product range than g.m. in china until now. but as toyota expands in new areas, like its current move to step up sales of camry midsize sedans, it is starting to catch up with g.m. and volkswagen.  industry analysts predict that volkswagen will continue to struggle but that g.m., while perhaps losing some market share, should remain a big, successful player in the chinese market.  ''toyota will be no. 1 in the china market by 2010, if not sooner,'' said michael dunne, the president of automotive resources asia, a consulting firm recently purchased by j. d. power and associates.  despite the stiffer competition, the mood among g.m. workers and managers alike in china is very upbeat. that stands in contrast to the company's many worries in the united states, and it harks back to a different era in detroit, when ''see the u.s.a. in your chevrolet'' once ruled the air waves.  ''everyone wants a piece of china,'' mr. betz said. ''every manufacturer wants to be here.''  