breaking ground   the westin st. maarten dawn beach residences  what -- residences at a caribbean resort.  where -- st. maarten.  amenities -- a casino and a full-service spa, among others.  prices -- units from $1.2 million to $2 million.  status -- the resort opened last month. the first residences should be completed in march and the rest in june.  developer -- columbia sussex.  contact -- (866) 978-0800 or www.westinstmaartenresidences.com.  details -- on the east coast of the netherlands-governed section of st. maarten, this project consists of 99 condominiums spread over four three-story buildings adjoining a new 317-room resort. the units, each 1,654 square feet with three bedrooms, are sold in full ownership. units that meet various requirements -- bedding and bathroom details, among others -- may be placed in a revenue-sharing rental program when the owners are away. some units will come with such details; others may be upgraded. fronting a mile-long beach, the development includes a large infinity-edge pool, lounges and a fitness center, as well as retail shops and restaurants. the on-site casino has 260 slot machines and 10 gaming tables.  star tower  what -- residential tower in a resort area.  where -- orlando, fla.  amenities -- a rooftop area with a pool and a fitness center, among others.  prices -- residences range from $500,000 to $2 million.  status -- scheduled for completion in august.  developer -- historic creations.  contact -- (407) 422-4664 or www.historiccreations.com.  details -- this project, an 18-story tower with 100 condominiums, is in downtown orlando near lake eola park and a short drive from the area's many theme parks. its one- to two-bedroom, 1,150- to 3,600-square-foot units are offered in five floor plans, including six two-story units and four penthouses. all the units, which will be sold in whole ownership, will have terraces. the rooftop area, which will be surrounded by cabanas, will have a lounge, a whirlpool and telescopes in addition to the pool and fitness center. a restaurant planned for the ground floor will offer room service.  nick kaye  breaking ground is a weekly look at projects, planned or under construction, that include weekend or vacation homes.  breaking ground  