inside art   neo-splendor in american wing  as the metropolitan museum nears the spring opening of its ambitious new greek and roman galleries, a more modest project is quietly taking shape on the opposite side of the museum, in its american wing. the first phase -- the new neo-classical galleries of american art on the wing's first floor -- opens tuesday.  ''we've been in this building for more than 25 years, so it's been a full generation,'' said morrison heckscher, chairman of the met's american wing. ''now it's time to rethink, upgrade and improve the facilities and the way we show the collection.''  one of the most drastic changes, which has yet to be installed, will be a large glass elevator. in addition the entire layout of the wing has been rethought, better to show off the collections, which include the famed period rooms spanning two centuries. an 18th-century room in the dutch tradition from the winne house outside albany will be added.  the met's decorative arts collection will have a more extensive display, and the american paintings galleries will also be renovated, expanded and totally reordered on one level instead of two. even the famed charles engelhard court will be refurbished to give its sculpture, stained-glass windows and architectural elements greater prominence. the entire project is expected to be completed by 2010.  for now visitors will be able to see the neo-classical galleries of american art from 1810 to 1840. the setting reflects american classical architecture and includes details from colonnade row on lafayette street in lower manhattan -- ''the grandest row houses of the period,'' mr. heckscher said.  for a gift, three's company  ten years ago the san francisco collectors richard and pamela kramlich established the new art trust, a nonprofit foundation to promote the collecting, care and exhibition of media art. it was started to help the san francisco museum of modern art, where the kramlichs are trustees, but in 2002 it branched out to include the museum of modern art in new york and the tate in london.  now the couple have given the trust 21 works by artists including bruce nauman, nam june paik, bill viola, matthew barney and doug aitken, to be shared by the three museums.  ''the trust was set up early on with the understanding that the ownership of media art is very different from that of painting and sculptures,'' said neal benezra, director of the san francisco museum of modern art. museums won't be showing these works constantly, so sharing them makes sense.  ''it's also a way of creating an interesting new alliance between european, east coast and west coast institutions,'' said glenn d. lowry, director of the modern in new york. ''this is a remarkable body of material that would have been impossible to have assembled today.''  price and rarity have made such works particularly difficult to collect. most important, said nicholas serota, director of the tate, the sharing arrangement enables the works to go on public view far more than they would be otherwise. ''it gives the public more access,'' he said. ''from the point of view of the visitor, it doesn't make any difference who owns the works.''  a russian favorite  a portrait of a bohemian-looking man in a dark jacket and a bright red scarf by the lithuanian-born expressionist painter chaim soutine is the cover image of sotheby's catalog for its feb. 5 sale of impressionist and modern art in london. the choice is fitting not because portraits have become particularly popular at auction, but because russian collectors love soutine and london is the place where many russian billionaires live and where others go to shop.  ''man with a red scarf'' (about 1921) is being sold by dorothy cherry. her husband, wendell cherry, was the president and chief executive of humana, the hospital management corporation based in louisville, ky. he died in 1991.  ms. cherry bought the soutine 10 years ago at christie's in london for $1.6 million, then a record for that artist. ''the art world thought i was nuts,'' she recalled. ''i never asked anyone's opinion. it was the greatest soutine i'd ever seen for sale.'' sotheby's now expects the painting to bring $5.9 million to $9.8 million.  ms. cherry said the strength of the art market, and particularly the russian market, made her decide to sell. ''it just seemed like the right time,'' she said.  both she and her husband sold paintings at sotheby's over the years for high prices. in 1989, at another high point in the market, they sold ''yo picasso,'' the blue period self-portrait from 1901, for $47.9 million to the greek shipping magnate stavros niarchos.  ''i hung the soutine in the same place i hung 'yo picasso,' '' ms. cherry said, speaking of her house in louisville. the similarities were striking: both were portraits of men with bright red scarves.  ''i think soutine is underrated,'' she said. ''to me he's one of the great artists. i used to think he was the poor man's picasso, but not anymore.''  hello, minneapolis  peter eleey, curator and producer for creative time in manhattan, has been named a visual arts curator at the walker art center in minneapolis. he replaces douglas fogle, who left the walker for the carnegie museum of art in pittsburgh. mr. eleey starts at the walker in march.  nato thompson, a curator at mass moca in north adams, mass., will replace him. mr. thompson will be joining mark beasley, who was an independent curator, writer and artist working in london before he joined creative time last month as a curator and producer.  inside art  