rutgers sees meaning in philosophy rank   each week last fall, those enamored of the rutgers university football team waited eagerly for the usa today and associated press polls to see how high their scarlet knights had climbed.  though the football team made it to no. 7 at one point, that paled before the ratings the honchos of kant and hegel and wittgenstein across campus received in the philosophical gourmet report. in the 2006 gourmet report rankings of graduate philosophy departments nationwide, rutgers was no. 2, behind new york university and ahead of princeton, which tied for no. 3 with michigan.  ''i guess the old academic joke is that mathematicians are the second- cheapest department to finance, since they only need pencils, paper and a wastebasket,'' said peter klein, a philosophy professor and the acting executive vice dean of the school of arts and sciences at rutgers. ''philosophers are even cheaper, since they don't even use the wastebasket.''  the two colleges that played the first football game back in 1869 -- rutgers and princeton -- are now atop the world of epistemology and metaphysics. when you add in n.y.u. and columbia, which was tied for no. 10 in the rankings with north carolina at chapel hill, could there be something in the air around here that attracts aristotelian mind-sets?  ''i do think that at a certain point, there is the desire for philosophers to find other good philosophers nearby, plus there was a great desire for intellectuals to live in manhattan when it was reviving in the 1990s,'' said brian leiter, a university of texas professor, who attended princeton and who started the ratings 17 years ago when he was a 26-year-old wondering where the best philosophers in academia were. ''princeton was always a good department, as was columbia, but special circumstances have brought rutgers and n.y.u. up to that standard.''  brian mclaughlin, the chairman of the rutgers philosophy department, said that in the 1980s the university consolidated its various colleges' philosophy departments at the same time it was endowing what it called world class scholar leader chairs. the department moved more quickly than other departments to ask for funds and was able to hire several good new professors.  ''like i said, it was cheaper than funding a physics lab: all we needed was a salary and an office, so the administration was supportive,'' said dr. klein, who was the department chairman part of that time.  as the department's reputation grew, along with the knowledge that there was money for new hires, more and more top graduate students came to rutgers.  a similar thing happened at n.y.u., dr. leiter said, with administrators lavishing money on humanities departments that required few physical elements. they also gave subsidies for manhattan housing -- ''a huge draw for anyone,'' he said.  by 2002, rutgers was ranked no. 1, along with n.y.u. and princeton; in 2004, it was no. 2, behind n.y.u. and ahead of princeton.  while most in the field agree that princeton, rutgers and n.y.u. are top philosophy departments, there is some carping about whether philosophy departments should be ranked like football teams. the american philosophical association says that it ''does not rank departments of philosophy and their graduate and/or undergraduate programs nor does it sponsor, endorse, approve or encourage any national rankings.''  dr. leiter solicits recommendations from about 300 professors every two years to get his ratings, but critics say his raters are skewed toward analytic philosophy -- the branch that emphasizes current, rather than historical, philosophy.  dr. mclaughlin said that rutgers is better in analytic philosophy -- things like philosophy of the mind and language -- while princeton excels in more historic areas.  some universities known to have good departments, like penn state, stony brook and vanderbilt, do not participate in the ratings.  ''schools like rutgers and n.y.u. emphasize analytic philosophy, and most of the evaluators emphasize that, so schools like vanderbilt and northwestern and penn state, which don't, aren't going to do as well,'' said john j. stuhr, a philosophy professor at vanderbilt. ''it's like asking about the best painters of all time. if you asked cubists, you would get a list of cubists; impressionists, the same thing. i'm sure rutgers has a good department. it just doesn't emphasize what we do.''  even at rutgers, some are skeptical. ''we are a society that is great for rankings, horse races, polls,'' said bruce w. wilshire, a philosophy professor at the college for 37 years. ''i'm not sure what anything like this does for us. i'm sure some people think it is nice, but it seems like in philosophy, we should not be emphasizing this sort of thing.''  still, dr. mclaughlin said that to the extent that people look at ratings, it has been good for rutgers to be at the top. because most graduate departments have only 6 to 12 new students a year, the competition for the best ones is great, and now rutgers is getting its share.  ''that only helps the undergrads taking courses, too,'' dr. mclaughlin said, noting that last year about 5,200 rutgers undergraduates took philosophy courses, many taught by graduate students. ''these are now grad students who will be teaching at yale or michigan, top places, in a few years. we have been able to place 100 percent of our grad students in teaching jobs, where the national average is about 60 percent.  ''leiter ratings or no, that says lots about how rutgers is viewed, a real positive thing.''  