mr. fixit, look what i did   i admit it. i never learned how to set the timer on my vcr. i rarely play the radio when i rent a car because i can't figure out how to stop the scan button from jumping from one station to the next. like a lot of new yorkers, i come from a long line of people who are good with their mouths but not with their hands, who, in the words of jackie mason, depend on ''the man'' to fix anything that goes wrong, from a leaky faucet to a shorted-out lamp.  when i rented my first apartment, a five-story walk-up in the east 60s, my mother wanted to know if there was a super on the premises. the idea of living in a building without a super or handyman was, in her eyes and mine, virtually unthinkable.  as a result, for nearly 40 years, whether living in an apartment or a town house, i have depended on a coterie of mr. fixits to fix my air-conditioners, install my stereos, rewire my lamps, rebuild my bookcases and paper my walls. as we all get older, i live in fear that they will either die or move away, which is why i nearly jumped through the phone and kissed richard kimmel, the man who installed my parents' first stereo and air-conditioners in 1954, when he promised to come into the city from cornwall-on-hudson to fix an air-conditioner that was spewing hot water rather than cool air.  a wiry 74-year-old who still wears his curly blond (now palomino) hair long and the same denim jacket in which he used to protest the vietnam war, mr. kimmel moves with the fluid grace of a much younger man.  in 60 seconds he has diagnosed the problem -- the air-conditioner was taking in more moisture than it could evaporate, because the workmen who reinstalled the machine after replacing the windows did not tilt it back correctly -- and in 30 seconds he has solved it, removing a plug so that the water drains out the window instead of inside the apartment. the charge is $85, considerably less than the price i was quoted by an air-conditioner dealer.  mr. kimmel is a friend. i know that he was born in the east bronx and began tinkering with radios and television sets in the back of his father's music store. after a stint in the coast guard, where he was trained as a radioman, he went to the rca institute and was hired by i.b.m. as a customer engineer, servicing card-punching machines.  but his first love was always sound and music, so when the early stereo cartridges for phonographs were manufactured, he began converting monaural turntables to stereo systems. he wound up quitting his day job and never worked for anybody else again.  it turns out that wiring my parents' apartment for sound was one of mr. kimmel's first jobs when he started his own business. although my father, an obstetrician, was good with his hands, he could barely change a light bulb, much less wire a stereo. mr. kimmel built the stereo/radio/turntable in a closet off my parents' den and wired the sound through a fireplace in the living room. with one click of a switch, we could hear ella in the living room or billie in the den. he also installed my parents' first air-conditioners, which lasted almost 40 years.  although mr. kimmel can also do carpentry, electrical work and plumbing, it's to another septuagenarian that i turn when a lamp needs rewiring or my doorbell or intercom goes dead.  josef arm, age 72, stands 5 feet 2 inches tall and bears a striking resemblance to the protagonist in art spiegelman's holocaust-themed comic book ''maus,'' to which his life is not dissimilar. mr. arm was born in romania, survived concentration camps and a dickensian orphanage, lost his mother, and was separated from his father for eight years. in 1946, he and his brother emigrated to israel, where he learned to build radios and became an electrician.  ''i was devastated mentally,'' mr. arm said during one of his visits. ''afraid of everyone. then i learned in the army that i could beat all those sabras and sephardic jews twice my size by getting the top scores in electronics.''  in 1962, he moved to new york, where he worked for a company that made burglar alarms and wireless walkie-talkies. he quit when he was refused a raise after 10 years, and he began a freelance career repairing alarms, doorbells, intercoms and locks for landlords on the upper west side.  although i am sure mr. arm is capable of rebuilding a tank, i first hired him to rewire an antique lamp i had found on the street, a graceful wrought-iron gooseneck. ''people in america just throw things out,'' he said in a thick east european accent when he saw my find. ''but there are things you can't throw out. there are things you have to keep, even if life is temporary.''  i admonished him for riding around the city on a bicycle without a helmet. i don't want to prematurely lose an electrician who will rewire a lamp for only $25. but because i know i will not be able to depend forever on him and mr. kimmel, i've already found a younger mr. fixit, an imposing 6-foot-2, 265-pound native of trinidad who can wire, repair, do masonry, move furniture and install air-conditioners. his name is tyrone knutt, and he is a 36-year-old jack-of-all-trades who originally worked for lexington hardware in manhattan but moonlighted for local residents and shopkeepers.  ''i never say no,'' mr. knutt announced the day he arrived to wire my terrace for lights, flashing a dazzling smile that made him look, for a moment, more like a rock star than a cabinetmaker. ''if i don't know what i'm doing, i'll call someone who does. i didn't know anything about refrigeration and air-conditioning until one of my cousins bought me the books and helped me study.''  despite the addition of mr. knutt to my stable of mr. fixits, there are times when i am forced to deal with a problem myself. one day, when mr. arm was on vacation and the handyman in my building was unavailable, i decided to take a stab at fixing a broken doorbell. i put on rubber-soled shoes to protect myself from electrocution, pried out the old buzzer with a screwdriver and carefully extracted the frayed and twisted wires. then i trotted into the kitchen, climbed on a ladder to test the bell, returned to the hallway, attached the new buzzer and shoved it gently into the hole near the front door.  the little button lit up -- a promising sign. i pressed the doorbell and instantly heard a loud buzz in the kitchen. i couldn't believe it. i'd fixed it myself.  who knows? maybe i'll replace the ball cock in the toilet, or sink a molly plug in the wall to hang my mother's portrait. i can't wait to report my success to my various mr. fixits. i'm sure they will be proud.  urban tactics  