belarus signals resolution in oil dispute   belarus announced wednesday that it had reached a compromise with russia to end a dispute that had shut a russian oil pipeline to europe since monday, but the kremlin did not confirm any agreement.  the announcement, by president aleksandr g. lukashenko's office, was the first sign that the dispute might be ending after two days of increasingly hostile remarks and threats.  the belarussian prime minister, sergei s. sidorsky, said later in televised remarks that his country would revoke a transit fee of $45 a ton on russian oil that it imposed last week, provoking a dispute with swift repercussions in europe.  russia had declared the transit fee illegal and refused to pay it. when belarus began siphoning oil headed to europe as payment, russia's pipeline monopoly, transneft, shut the pipeline. as a result, poland, germany, the czech republic, slovakia and hungary had to tap into oil reserves this week.  the conflict with belarus unfolded only days after russia's giant energy company, gazprom, negotiated a significantly higher price for supplies of natural gas to belarus, russia's smaller neighbor and one of its closest allies. the new price, $100 per thousand cubic meters, compared with $46 last year, infuriated mr. lukashenko, but a separate decision by russia to impose a customs duty of $180 per metric ton on russian oil prompted the belarussian transit fee.  mr. sidorsky said he would fly to moscow for more talks on wednesday, an indication that a final resolution had not been found. ''we hope to solve all other questions in the coming days,'' he said.  russia had said that it would hold no talks until the transit fee was lifted. the statement by mr. lukashenko's office said the two governments would settle the dispute by friday.  by wednesday night, semyon m. vainshtok, the president of transneft, said the company had reached an agreement to ship 79,000 tons of oil that belarus had siphoned into its own storage facilities. he said the company could resume full operations by thursday, though he suggested that outstanding issues remained.  the kremlin announced only that president vladimir v. putin had discussed the issue by telephone with mr. lukashenko. mr. putin was steadfast on tuesday, warning that russia would divert oil intended for european markets around belarus, though that could take time.  in the meantime, the pipeline, called druzhba, or friendship, remained closed for a third day, despite statements in slovakia that some oil was set to resume flowing.  druzhba stretches 2,500 miles and pumps 1.8 million barrels of oil a day in two trunks. it accounts for considerable amounts of the oil consumed in germany, the czech republic and poland, and almost all oil used by hungary and slovakia.  a swift resolution would ease jitters over the reliability of oil supplies in europe. russia has forced belarus, for years a close ally, to back off. but the episode has done further damage to russia's international image, already battered by a shut-off of natural gas to ukraine last january and a threat to do so to belarus this year.  ''we consider it unacceptable, this kind of event,'' the european commission president, josé manuel barroso, said in brussels, where the european union announced a sweeping energy policy meant to address concerns like those russia had raised.  echoing remarks by chancellor angela merkel of germany on tuesday, he criticized russia for stopping the flow of oil without first notifying the customers paying for it farther along the pipeline.  the dispute grew from russia's new strategy to increase energy prices for the other former republics of the soviet union. now independent, but still tied into the soviet-era network of gas and oil pipelines, those countries had long enjoyed subsidized prices.  russia has recently negotiated higher prices for natural gas with ukraine, georgia, azerbaijan and moldova. those deals have sometimes followed threats and cutoffs as deadlines, typically on new year's day, approached.  ''for russia, a small, victorious energy war is becoming a new year's tradition,'' the newspaper trud, or labor, wrote wednesday.  stefan czucz, the general director of transpetrol, slovakia's pipeline operator, said in a telephone interview that a resumption of oil shipments was scheduled for wednesday, but officials in russia said late wednesday that the pipeline had not resumed operation.  william c. ramsay, deputy executive director of the international energy agency in paris, which maintains and improves systems for coping with oil supply disruptions, said that refineries and other companies dependent on russian oil generally had 10 to 15 days worth of commercial stocks.  once those reserves run out, the refineries would have to turn to strategic stocks built by governments. those could last at least 90 days. ''they have learned the need to take care, especially since they are dependent on russia and have had some problems in the past,'' he said in a telephone interview.  the duty russia imposed on the oil exports to belarus, the same russia charges for exports to other countries, could cost the belarussian government $3.5 billion, more than 10 percent of the country's gross domestic product. belarus had long profited by refining the oil and exporting the products.  ''it simply puts belarus on the same footing as all the other countries of the world,'' andrei v. sharonov, a deputy economic development minister, said of the new charge in an interview published in the official state newspaper, rossiskaya gazeta.  