outrageousness, herr director, is a tough act to follow   when the director frank castorf was being considered to head berlin's second largest state-owned theater in 1991, the cultural powerbroker ivan nagel urged the german senate to take a risk on him and his politically minded troupe, saying, ''in three years they will either be dead or famous.''  mr. castorf got the job, and the following year he opened at the volksbühne, or people's theater, with a series of brash productions. under his direction, actors ignored huge portions of the classical texts they performed, stripped naked, screamed their lines for the duration of five-hour productions, got drunk onstage, dropped out of character, conducted private fights, tossed paint at their public, saw a third of the audience walk out as they spoke two lines at an excruciatingly slow pace, may or may not have induced a theatergoer to drink urine, threw potato salad, immersed themselves in water, recited newspaper reports of hitler's last peacetime birthday party, told bad jokes, called the audience east german sellouts and appeared to but did not kill a mouse. after their first season the prestigious magazine theaterheute (theater today) named the volksbühne theater of the year.  mr. castorf and his troupe were famous.  now 55, with gray hair and slight stoop, mr. castorf is still the director of the volksbühne. the new contract he signed in november will keep him in place at least until 2008, and most likely through 2013 under the contract's automatic extension: a remarkable tenure in a city where five-year contracts are often the norm. his innovative use of video on the stage and his radically personal approach to directing have won numerous prizes and inspired a slew of imitators. the extreme director has become mainstream.  such acceptance can present a problem. after you've broken all the rules, what comes next? ''in the last years he's had less success,'' said barbara burckhardt, an editor at theaterheute. ''his method is exhausted.''  rüdiger schaper, the theater critic for the newspaper tagesspiegel, said: ''we're tired of nudity. he took it all to the limit.''  carl hegemann, who formerly worked with mr. castorf as a dramaturg, said the only endeavor that made sense for him at this point was to direct a traditional play.  mr. castorf acknowledges that the critics, the public and his own theater are fatigued. ''other themes and forms are necessary,'' he said in an e-mail message, noting that next year's season will open with three comedies. yet he doesn't seem particularly worried with the future arc of his career. sitting in his wood-paneled office in front of a framed poster of stalin, he said he trusted his ''eruptive'' inner logic to guide him, just as it had done his whole life.  he still finds work consuming. he just returned from directing a play in brazil. his latest piece at the volksbühne was a shortened version of wagner's opera ''die meistersinger'' (''hitler's favorite,'' he noted), which he interspersed with texts from ernst toller, a jewish writer who escaped nazi germany and hanged himself in a new york city hotel room in 1939. instead of an orchestra, he used two pianos and a wind quintet. the choir consisted of theater technicians, stage hands, cashiers and other behind-the-scenes workers who came onstage and sang.  mr. castorf, who works almost exclusively with classics, said he only chose pieces to which he felt a connection. as a result the plays, in addition to being densely political and intellectual, are quasi-autobiographical.  leitmotifs, like difficult relationships between men and women, emerge over and over. ''from multitudinous personal catastrophes has arisen a certain radical fantasy,'' said mr. castorf, whose theater is known for its sexy, aggressive actresses. ''men and women and how they treat each other, how physical that is, who wants what from whom -- it's what you find in any psychotherapy. then it's dumped recklessly, with humor and sadism, on the stage.''  ''i don't have to go to an analyst,'' he added. (the suggestion that he should was made by one of his biographers, the theater critic robin detje, after one particularly long interview with mr. castorf.) ''i put certain problems i have in the art i make,'' the director said.  dr. hegemann remembered that ''one time he hung a life-size doll of himself in the second act, and people still didn't get it that it was all about him.''  mr. castorf was born in east berlin in 1951. his father ran his own store selling window blinds throughout the communist period. the young castorf studied theater at humboldt university in east berlin. in 1981 he was put in charge of the theater in a provincial east german city, anklam: either an exile or an opportunity, depending on who is telling the story.  his girlfriend was the actress gabriele gysi, the daughter of a high-profile communist politician and a former culture minister. she guided mr. castorf's early career. ''i understood the bureaucracy better,'' ms. gysi said. ''as part of an assimilated jewish family -- my mother was a very clever woman who survived the holocaust -- you learn to think in constellations. otherwise you don't survive the next pogrom.''  ms. gysi invited her father to mr. castorf's politically questionable premieres; when mr. castorf was fired from his position as director in brandenburg in 1979, her brother, gregor gysi, a laywer at the time and now a well-known politician, defended mr. castorf in a lawsuit. they won the case. while mr. castorf wasn't allowed to work for political reasons for a period, he was never jailed.  ''i read my stasi files,'' said mr. castorf, shrugging. ''they were always excusing me. sort of, 'yeah, he's a nut case, but he's not really political.' ''  he made ends meet with odd jobs and freelance directing. shortly before the berlin wall fell in 1989, he was back directing plays in munich and cologne with the government's consent.  now mr. castorf creates one or two new plays each year. the state subsidizes 80 percent of the theater budget, so he does not need to concern himself with making a profit. if the source is a novel, he brings the book to rehearsals and goes through it, chapter by chapter, with his actors. together they improvise, coming up with what to use and what to strike from the text. at the end of this grueling process the group runs through the improvisations that mr. castorf liked best, adding music, other texts, video and more. mr. castorf calls this process ''piratery -- marauding for aesthetic snapshots.'' in the end less than a 10th of the original text might remain, something that has led detractors to dub mr. castorf the ''text wrecker.''  his troupe of actors is as unconventional as he is. the core group has been together for more than a decade; some have been with him for 25 years or more. ''they're people other houses don't take,'' mr. castorf said of the people he hires. ''other directors say, 'oh, they're too alcoholic,' or, 'oh, he's a psychopath.' ''  milan peschel, one of the actors, said, ''working with frank, you always learn something new.'' mr. peschel played razumihin, raskolnikov's friend, in last year's adaptation of dostoyevsky's ''crime and punishment.'' at one point during rehearsals mr. castorf wanted to find a way to introduce a particular passage from the novel. ''we tried for a long time,'' mr. peschel said. ''frank said: 'do this, go over there, come on, help him! o.k., no!' ''  the solution? mr. castorf had the actor playing raskolnikov attempt to copulate with a sofa, then had mr. peschel pitch in and manually stimulate the raskolnikov character. ''then we had it,'' mr. peschel said. so in the production, the characters did just that.  mr. schaper, of tagesspiegel, said of mr. castorf's work, ''either it's really o.k. and fantastic or really stupid.''  of the acting troupe mr. schaper said: ''the biggest difference is they don't pretend. they are what they are. they're drunk or naked or loud -- they're very vulnerable, very much exposed. it has a family feel to it. everybody knows each other, it's angry, it's aggressive, it's boring.''  ''when it works,'' mr. schaper added, ''you get this castorf feeling. you feel free.'' he paused a moment. ''it's also a family -- a growing family -- of castorf girlfriends.''  there is more than one former girlfriend in his ensemble, and they often star (sometimes side by side) in his plays. and ms. gysi recently joined the volksbühne as the artistic director.  in an e-mail message, mr. castorf commented on his reputation as a womanizer: ''i like women. a life without women would be atrocious. eroticism is stimulating -- i'm not the only one who knows that.''  ms. gysi, said she was eager to see what this next stage of life brought for mr. castorf. ''he's at an age where you become more reflective,'' she said. ''i'm very interested to see how he gets older.''  theater  