cablevision buyout bid is raised   the dolan family, the controlling shareholders of the cablevision systems corporation, yesterday increased their bid for the company by about $1 billion, to $8.9 billion, from their october offer.  the family, which owns 20 percent of cablevision equity and controls 70.4 percent of the vote, said in a letter to the special transaction committee of the board, that this was the family's final offer and it was good until wednesday.  the company, which owns cable systems as well as several cable programming networks, issued a statement saying it had no comment on the offer.  the family, led by charles f. dolan and his son james, also said it would not resell the company if its bid for cablevision was successful. that effort is a type of insurance that aims to protect shareholders from a buyer flipping the asset at a higher price. the family said it would be willing to discuss a contractual agreement on the issue.  it also said that it would respect the vote on the decision by a majority of the minority shareholders and that it would not sell its control position if the company stayed public.  nevertheless, yesterday's sweetened offer did not hold much appeal for investors.  shares of cablevision fell 4.09 percent yesterday, to $28.39. the new offer was for $30 a share, up from $27.  one problem has been that since the dolans made their bid, stock in the closest peer company, comcast, the nation's largest cable operator, has risen 20 percent. comcast's stock closed at $44.09 yesterday.  ''the independent committee of the board will be hard pressed to accept this small a premium to the current price of cablevision, particularly in the wake of the recent appreciation of comcast, its main peer,'' said craig moffett, a media analyst at sanford c. bernstein & company.  mr. moffett said, ''the current offer values cablevision at $4,750 a subscriber, or just 7.2 percent above its estimate of the value of comcast subscribers.'' that, he said, ''is despite the fact that cablevision has higher average revenue per subscriber.''  he said that was ''not a very big premium for change of control.''  but other analysts were more positive that a deal would get done even if the price was somewhat below what they saw as a fair market value.  andrew baker, an analyst at cathay financial, said in a report yesterday that the offer was closer to fair value and that it was likely the special committee would approve it.  the revised offer comes as enthusiasm for cable stocks has rebounded. just a year ago, investors believed that as telephone companies entered the video market, the value of all distribution assets would fall.  a year later, the perception has shifted so dramatically that investors believe that rival services to cable will materialize slowly at best and that cable is still the best-positioned competitor to both the telephone companies and satellite television. that helps explain why cablevision's stock has held up. even if a bid falls through, analysts say they believe that the company's fundamentals are strong.  but if the special committee turns down the latest offer, analysts said, the only way the dolans might be able to sweeten it would be to bring in an equity partner. so far, there has been no indication that the dolans want an ally.  as it stands now, the equity portion of the bid has risen 11 percent, to $30 a share.  but at that level, the company may be beginning to bump up against its debt covenants, analysts said yesterday. the company currently has $11.2 billion in debt.  the newest offer would require the dolans to pay an additional $6.8 billion to buy out the 228 million public shares. that would bring the total debt level to about $18 billion, and the average annualized 2007 cash flow is expected to be about $2 billion. that puts the debt-to-cash-flow ratio at a multiple of nine times, which is the limit on the debt covenants, said chris marangi, who follows cable at gabelli & company. gabelli's parent company, gamco investors inc., owns 20 million shares of cablevision stock.  analysts also said that the dolans told the company that their advisers, merrill lynch and bear stearns, would provide preferred equity financing for the deal, although the family did not say how much of the financing would be preferred equity.  although preferred equity, which carries a higher interest rate than debt, does not count in debt-to-cash-flow ratios, the family said only that they did not do this because of debt covenants but because the capital structure made the most sense.  richard greenfield, a media analyst at pali research, said the financing was not his biggest concern.  ''all i know is that if they put this company up for sale, time warner or a private equity company would pay significantly more than $30 a share,'' mr. greenfield said.  