columbia uses hot shooting and late run to top princeton   the early signs indicated this might not be a typical basketball season for columbia, where losing had become a tradition. but a couple of perennial ivy league powers still stood in the lions' way. doesn't the ivy league always come down to penn and princeton, with columbia straggling far behind in the standings?  this season, maybe not.  columbia kicked off what might turn out to be the most significant two-day stretch it has played in years with a 64-56 victory over princeton last night at levien gymnasium in the ivy league opener for both teams. tonight, the lions (10-5) will have a chance to topple the other giant when penn visits. penn defeated cornell last night, 74-56.  ''princeton is a storied program, and penn and princeton are the two teams that are usually in the running for the league championship,'' columbia center ben nwachukwu said. ''we went into this game with the mind-set that we have to defend our turf and that's what we did. it feels good to win. tomorrow night, we will go into it with the same mind-set.''  the lions won with its offense, which did little wrong. columbia shot 66.7 from the field. princeton (9-5) leads the nation in scoring defense, but could not find a way to keep columbia players from continually shaking free for easy shots.  with the score tied at 49-49, columbia heated up. a 3-pointer by brett loscalzo with 5 minutes 9 seconds to go kicked off a 9-0 run that all but decided the game. mack montgomery had 5 points during the run.  ''i think that basket helped the whole team get back on their toes and play with a lot of confidence,'' loscalzo said. ''but everyone made big plays at the end, so i don't know if that was the spark or not.''  thanks largely to its shooting, columbia led, 33-23, at the half. the lions shot 77.8 percent from the floor, making 14 of 18 attempts. their biggest lead was 13 points, which they held twice in the first half and in the first minute of the second half, after a 3-pointer by john baumann gave columbia a 36-23 cushion.  without the help of the reserve forward michael strittmatter, princeton would probably not have stayed as close at it did. strittmatter had 10 points in the first half and hit all four of his field-goal attempts, including two 3-pointers.  princeton started to heat up from the perimeter early in the second half and reeled off a 10-0 run that cut the columbia lead to 38-36. the lions rebounded briefly and went in front, 44-39, but princeton managed to go ahead, 47-44, on consecutive 3-pointers by lincoln gunn.  nwachukwu, montgomery and patrick foley led columbia with 11 points each. strittmatter and gunn each had 13 points to lead princeton. kyle koncz, princeton's top scorer, had no points and was 0 for 6 from the field.  columbia coach joe jones has seen enough ivy league play to know that his team has a lot more to accomplish before it can dethrone penn and princeton. columbia has not been to the n.c.a.a. tournament since 1968 and has not had a winning season since 1992-93. what he wants to see is more efforts like last night's.  ''princeton and penn have figured out a way to play consistent basketball over the course of the season and that's why they have been champions,'' he said. ''that's what we have to do now.''  college basketball  