dolphins get head start on the hamptons season   despite the burst of colder weather on wednesday, in the hamptons it was the day of the dolphin.  unseasonable conditions, namely warm water and an abundance of bait fish in the bays, have lured an unusually large school of several dozen dolphins to the bays and harbors off east hampton and shelter island, where for the past several days they have been feeding on fish and thrilling residents as they glide from one place to another.  environmentalists and many longtime residents said it was the first time such a large school, more than 40 dolphins, had arrived and stayed so long. but with the constant movement and sporadic surfacing, who could count.  ''it's very unusual to see this many of them in the bays and that they have stayed here this long, at least three days in row,'' said kim durham, director of the rescue program of the riverhead foundation for marine research and preservation, a long island organization that tends to stranded dolphins.  dolphin sightings are not especially rare off long island, though the animals are usually in small schools just passing by.  ms. durham said the dolphins probably followed a school of herring or mackerel, swimming from the ocean into gardiners bay between the north and south fork and into shelter island sound near sag harbor.  ''there's something's down there they're interested in,'' and the dolphins have it trapped in the harbor, said larry penny, director of the town of east hampton's department of natural resources. he said the warm water and the fish attracted the dolphins.  on wednesday morning, the dolphins, a type known as common dolphins, were spotted feeding in a cozy section of northwest harbor with large sandbars and shallows rarely deeper than six or eight feet.  mr. penny said sandbars could hinder the dolphins' exit from the harbor, especially once the tide dropped and the dolphins were fatigued from their feeding frenzy.  but ms. durham said there was no cause for concern.  foundation officials monitored the dolphins at the landing using a hydrophone, an underwater microphone, to ''monitor the clicks and whistles and listen for any signs they might be in distress.''  ''judging by their behavior, constant breaching and tail slapping and moving rapidly and chasing bait fish, we feel they are acting normally and healthy,'' she said.  as word of the spectacle spread, amateur photographers and cars packed with families began arriving at a dirt parking area overlooking northwest harbor, a perfect spot to watch the dolphins at play.  all were entranced by the dorsal fins and dark gray backs surfacing in the waves and dolphins rolling over to show their white bellies. they seemed to enjoy the attention, moving to within several yards of spectators and sometimes leaping entirely out of the water.  the dolphin sightings were just one of several unusual appearances on the east end that environmentalists attributed to a warm winter. there have regular whale sightings off montauk, and on wednesday there were whales spotted off wainscott. last month, a pelican wound up in montauk and was later flown back to florida.  cliff clark, 62, who owns south ferry, which links southern shelter island with north haven, said he saw the dolphins moving westward near his ferry on monday.  ''there were maybe 30 or 40 of them stretching three quarters of a mile, just feeding and playing and rolling around in the waves,'' he said.  dan rizzie, 55, an artist from sag harbor who heard about the dolphins from a friend and called about 30 others, said: ''we heard them click and blow through their holes. it's amazing.''  susan nieland, 44, said, ''four different people called me today to tell me about this.''  dan loos, who lives in a house next to the landing, said, ''i can honestly say that before this morning, i never looked out my window and saw 30 or 40 dolphins.  ''we home-school my daughter, so today was like science class for her,'' mr. loos said. ''when i see polar bears out my window, then you know this global warming thing has gone too far.''  