some web job sites put out 'gray hair welcome' signs   as the work force grays, a small but growing number of job boards catering to the mature worker are emerging on the internet. the sites are gaining ground as employers realize that they must look outside traditional age ranges to find expertise.  such web sites say they are not trying to exclude younger workers. rather, the job boards are pinpointing companies that have expressed a commitment to hiring older workers, in an era when some workers can face barriers because of their higher salaries and costlier benefits.  most of these web sites list openings to attract people who are at least 50 to 55 years old, but at least one new entry -- jobs4point0.com -- is focusing on job seekers who are 40 and over.  some of the sites certify employers as having a work environment that is suitable and appealing for older workers. retirementjobs.com, for example, has certified borders group, rei, h & r block and robert half international, among others.  the web sites vary greatly in how they operate. some, like retirementjobs.com or seniors4hire.org, feature jobs available nationwide and offer positions ranging from executive to clerical. others are specialized; these include yourencore.com, which leads retired engineers and scientists to companies looking for short-term project assistance.  the number of workers 55 years and older who are employed has been growing, according to the federal bureau of labor statistics. during the 12 months ended in november, their numbers increased 5.6 percent, or more than two times the rise in the overall employment level. some need to make ends meet, including paying for health insurance; others just want to keep busy.  of the estimated 76 million baby boomers reaching retirement in coming years, some will start businesses. but the majority who continue to work will seek the familiarity and security of a regular paycheck. they want jobs that offer flexibility, with part-time or irregular hours, and those typically are in service industries like retail and fast food or the rapidly expanding medical care field.  those kinds of jobs are well represented on the web sites intended for mature workers, who can usually examine the listings free, although they may have to register to find a job's full details.  during the first week of january, seniorjobbank.com, for example, listed sales and marketing jobs at the girl scouts of central maryland, at a pay of $8 to $10.10 an hour. there were also some high-paying jobs, like a systems engineer for a military telecommunications firm in clarksburg, md., with a salary of $85,000 to $110,000.  retirementjobs.com organizes its jobs by zip code. a recent search for ''sales'' turned up 180 listings in multiple locations, many from the temporary agency, manpower. the bank of america was looking for tellers, and deloitte & touche for a variety of jobs, including health care consultants. salaries were not given.  usually, the employer pays to list jobs. for example, seniorjobbank.com, started in january 2000, charges the employer $89 to post a listing for 60 days, whether the position is clerical or executive, or full or part time.  since early 2005, when w. eugene burnard took over the web site, as many as 4,000 employers have listed jobs, he said. the site has 7,000 to 9,000 visitors daily.  mr. burnard says older job seekers still face a social bias. ''it's in the very early stages of changing,'' he said, ''but it's still a very tough road out there.''  he added: ''we've tracked visitors, and the average age is 57 years old. the number of job seekers has picked up recently, especially with downsizing and offshoring.''  seniors4hire.org attracts mostly men over 55 who have been laid off or have relocated, said renee ward, a recruiting executive who founded the site, which is based in huntington beach, calif.  the site gets 30,000 to 50,000 visitors monthly and has 1,200 registered employers, including radio shack, staples and bank of america. mostly full-time jobs are listed, along with about 68,000 job seekers, ms. ward said. companies are charged $65 for a 60-day listing.  jobs4point0.com, which began last fall, shuns listings from recruitment and staffing agencies and accepts only openings directly from companies, said the founder, steven j. greenberg of westport, conn. job seekers register, search under categories or company names and ask for the details to be sent via e-mail. companies pay $89 for a 30-day listing.  richard g. sobel, 47, who worked as a lawyer at marsh & mclennan, the huge insurance broker, turned to jobs4point0.com after he was laid off last fall. he has interviewed for a corporate legal position he discovered through the site, but does not yet know if he got the job.  mr. sobel said he was dismayed to discover that a legal recruiting agency where he was registered had never passed along his name for the position.  ''the job was a good fit,'' he said, ''but i never would have heard of it if it hadn't been for the web site.''  mr. greenberg said that he got ''e-mails every day about age discrimination,'' so he vets employers before signing them up. he has approved massachusetts institute of technology, starbucks, ubs, marriott, yale-new haven hospital and others.  for yale-new haven, personnel shortages have made the hospital receptive to finding new ways to hire workers.  ''we have 1,200 openings every year, and shortages in areas like nursing,'' said nancy e. collins, the hospital's recruiting director, ''so we are constantly grappling with finding innovative strategies, and this is one way to find experienced workers.''  