with city watching, the saints carry on   the new orleans saints advanced to the national football conference championship game for the first time saturday, providing a sense of renewal for both a long-hapless team and a hurricane-battered city.  running back deuce mcallister seemed to carry the hopes for all of new orleans on his shoulders as he bulled into the end zone on a 5-yard touchdown run in the third quarter, pile-driving into the end zone on second and third effort, losing his helmet, but not his determination.  eventually, new orleans defeated philadelphia, 27-24, in a riveting, momentum-swinging matchup of two of the n.f.l.'s most forceful offenses.  the saints (11-6) will meet the chicago bears or the seattle seahawks in the conference championship game next sunday. it was a remarkable turnaround considering that the team finished 3-13 a year ago during a vagabond season played, post-katrina, at makeshift home fields in san antonio and baton rouge, la.  mcallister rushed 21 times for 143 yards and also caught an 11-yard touchdown pass to put the saints ahead, 27-21, in the third quarter of a game that was viewed as the most important in the saints' mostly futile four decades of existence -- both in football and civic terms. saturday's victory was only the team's second playoff win in seven postseason games spread thinly over 40 seasons.  for residents who have returned here after hurricane katrina, the saints have come to symbolize the resolve of a city still half empty but determined to rebuild after suffering a staggering blow. for those still scattered from houston to atlanta, the saints provide a familiar link to what once was, and may become again, home, as well as a reminder of the good times that were had following a mostly bad team.  their newfound success -- coming amid reports of spiraling violence and the uncertain sustenance of the tourist trade -- also provides a sense of assurance that new orleans, even badly injured, remains a vital major-league city.  ''i think the fans that have followed this team so long have been through a lot of thick and thin, more thin than thick,'' saints coach sean payton said. ''they've been loud and passionate and they come from everywhere -- new orleans, mississippi, alabama. it's gratifying to be able to get them fired up about their team.''  payton added: ''everything that's gone on here within this last year and a half, katrina and how much recovery we still have to go, this is a bright spot. we said at the beginning of the year, we hope to be out front in a leadership role. we're not afraid of that. there's still a lot of work to be done in this city. we just hope we can give people a little kick in their step.''  on saturday, the saints proved too resourceful for philadelphia (11-7), ending an improbably resurgent season for the eagles, who seemed finished after quarterback donovan mcnabb tore a knee ligament in november but who rallied to win six consecutive games.  against the saints, the eagles nearly succeeded by doing something unlikely -- reverting to the big-play ambition they had with mcnabb but that they had abandoned with his replacement, jeff garcia. philadelphia had the longest scoring pass play in its playoff history (a 75-yard throw from garcia to donte' stallworth for a 7-6 lead) and the longest running touchdown (a 62-yarder by brian westbrook for a 21-13 advantage).  still, the saints prevailed with long, clock-chewing drives of 84, 63 and 78 yards behind mcallister's assertiveness, reggie bush's nimbleness and quarterback drew brees' patience to find holes in the philadelphia defense, especially in the second half on third down and with his tight ends.  bush bounced outside for a 4-yard touchdown run to put new orleans up by 13-7, recovering nicely after he was separated from the ball, and seemingly, his senses early on a jarring hit by cornerback sheldon brown.  ''it was probably the hardest i got hit,'' he said. ''they can knock me down 100 times, and i'm going to get back up 101 times.''  defensively, the saints proved impermeable for most of the second half, not allowing philadelphia a third-down conversion; halting a drive inside the 10-yard line and holding the eagles a field goal instead of a touchdown that would have given the visitors a 28-27 lead; and finally, after bush fumbled a pitch on a misdirection play with 3:19 remaining, silencing the eagles yet again.  still, philadelphia had a chance to win after that fumble, but a false start negated a fourth-down play on which garcia had apparently passed for a first down to receiver hank baskett.  instead, the eagles were forced to punt, mcallister burrowed for a crucial first down in his first career playoff game, and new orleans exhausted the clock. with two weeks to prepare to play a team that was playing on six days' rest, payton said he was determined to try to wear philadelphia down with the running game.  ''especially at the end, we really needed it,'' payton said. ''it ended up as the big difference.''  afterward, payton high-fived fans, who celebrated ecstatically, forgetting for a moment anyway that the team owner, tom benson, had considered moving the team elsewhere in recent years.  ''everyone counted us out,'' defensive end charles grant said, ''and now we're playing for a chance to be in the biggest game in the world, the super bowl. a lot people were displaced, and didn't have money, but to still sell out shows how much these fans love this football team.''  gone finally after four decades was what many had considered the curse of the superdome that had hamstrung a long-suffering team.  ''a lot has changed around here,'' payton said. ''this is a different team, a different time.''  pro football  