ahead | meditation retreats; breaks to calm those jangled nerves   finding calm and clarity is a tall order for frenzied urbanites, but there's help -- in the form of guidance, serenity and natural beauty -- at meditation retreats. buddhist, yogic or eclectic, most provide anxious beginning meditators with instruction and practice. several are scheduled around the country in the next few weeks.  ''people will say, 'i can't sit still for five seconds, let alone sit in a dark room for 20 minutes!' '' said mark thornton, author of ''meditation in a new york minute: super calm for the super busy'' (sounds true, 2005), who will lead a weekend retreat in march at the kripalu center for yoga and health in lenox, mass. ''but that's a misconception,'' he added. his specialty is showing how to incorporate meditation into daily lives. ''i help teach people how to meditate an hour a day, but cumulatively,'' mr. thornton said. ''it shifts the entire orientation of the day, finding peace and calm at different times.''  also at kripalu in march, bhavani lorraine nelson will lead a three-day retreat for both beginners and experienced meditators who may need a refresher. it will include chanting, guided meditation and an exploration of the common ''five hindrances'' to concentration generally referred to in buddhist meditation: sensual desire, ill will, sloth, restlessness and doubt.  for jangled city dwellers whose stress levels demand relief earlier than march, karmê chöling, a tibetan-buddhist retreat center in barnet, vt., in the green mountains, offers a retreat called ''simplicity: meditation for real life,'' jan. 19 to 26. it's designed as a weeklong program, but participants aren't required to stay for the full time. ''we're very much oriented to westerners who are in the world and busy with families and such,'' said john rockwell, a resident teacher at karmê chöling. this retreat consists of writing, walking, sitting and discussion, he explained, and takes its lead from each group's particular chemistry. ''it's very flexible, and can be rigorous or loose, depending on the people.''  the flexibility is also intended to ease the way for beginners hesitant about looking within themselves -- a common fear of a natural part of the process, mr. rockwell said. ''meditation is not just for stress reduction, but it also encourages us to look directly at what's going on with our experience, now.''  tibetan buddhist teachings also inspire the work of the shambhala mountain center, on 600 rural acres in colorado about 110 miles north of denver, which is offering a february meditation workshop called ''shambhala training level i: the art of being human.'' deborah knox, a publicist for the center, describes it as a calming place of natural beauty. ''you get a magical sense of the elements that's almost otherworldly,'' she said.  for a more rigorous, traditional vibe, seekers of peace can check out the zen mountain monastery near woodstock in the catskills, which follows the ancient buddhist practices of china and japan. its ''introduction to zen training'' weekend retreat introduces the eight gates of zen, a modern version of the original buddhist eightfold path, with a program that begins with 4:45 a.m. wakeups and continues with meditation, chanting, lectures, traditional brushwork, yoga and the rare opportunity to have a private, face-to-face meeting with a zen master. it's held monthly and sometimes attracts as many as 40 people who are willing to stick to the strict schedule and exacting instruction. ''they're trying to get to the root of their spiritual quest,'' said ryushin marchaj, the head monk.  even more intense is the nine-night retreat of the mountain stream meditation center in the sierra foothills of northern california, held in a lodge that overlooks the sacramento river. john travis, who founded the center, leads vipasanna, a method that seeks to achieve calm and insight through focus on the breath and alternating periods of sitting and walking silent meditation. the daily schedule starts at 6:15 a.m. and ends at 10 p.m.  it's not for most novices. '' 'beginner' lots of times means you've sat with local groups but haven't done retreats,'' catrinka holland, the retreat manager, said. but for those who work through it, there is spiritual rejuvenation, she said. ''it's just affirming of innate intelligence,'' she added, ''of who we are underneath all the helter-skelter.''  details  lenox, mass. kripalu center for yoga and health, (866) 200-5203; www.kripalu.org.  what: ''meditation in a new york minute.''  when: march 16 to 18.  barnet, vt. karmê chöling (802) 633-2384, www.karmecholing.org.  what: ''simplicity: meditation for real life.  when: jan. 19 to 26.  mount tremper, n.y. zen mountain monastery (845) 688-2228, www.mro.org/zmm.  what: ''introduction to zen training retreat.''  when: feb. 2 to 4.  red feather lakes, colo. shambhala mountain center, (888) 788-7221, www.shambhalamountain.org.  what: ''shambhala training level i: the art of being human.''  when: feb. 2 to 4.  auburn, calif. mountain stream meditation center, (530) 878-9485, www.mtstream.org.  what: nine-night retreat.  when: feb. 9 to 18.  ahead  