in surprise move, british bank lifts rate   the bank of england surprised investors on thursday and raised interest rates by a quarter of a percentage point, to 5.25 percent, to head off rising inflation amid a boom in the housing market and strong economic growth.  meanwhile, the european central bank, meeting in frankfurt, left borrowing costs at a five-year high of 3.5 percent. but the bank hinted it could increase rates as early as march to guard against rising prices if europe's economy continued to expand.  after a two-year slump, growth has been picking up steadily across much of the continent, led by a recovery in germany, the euro-zone's largest economy. the british economy has moved ahead even more rapidly, fueled by a housing market that helped the economy expand 2.7 percent in the third quarter, compared with the period a year earlier.  home prices in britain have surged 15 percent over the last two years, according to the halifax house price index.  still, the decision by the bank of england to raise rates -- bringing them to the same level as in the united states -- surprised investors who had said they believed the bank's most recent increase, which was in november, would be its last for a while.  the bank of england has raised interest rates three times since august.  one reason for such a view is that oil prices have eased in the last six months. lower oil prices generally temper inflation by helping to trim prices on a range of consumer purchases, from gasoline to airplane seats. british airways, for instance, said it was lowering some fuel surcharges as crude oil prices slid.  meanwhile, the british pound has also been enjoying a run-up against the dollar, the euro and other major currencies. in new york trading, the pound was fetching $1.9447 thursday; in early december, it hit $1.98. traders expect the pound to cross $2 by the end of the quarter, a mark not seen since 1992.  ''it is likely that inflation will rise further above the target in the near term,'' the bank of england's monetary policy committee said.  the bank's move alarmed businesses and some economists in britain, who said it could harm the economy and curb spending. many british consumers have taken on substantial amounts of debt, including home mortgages and credit card borrowings.  ''this is an unnecessary blow,'' said the director general of the british retail consortium, kevin hawkins.the bank of england has ''overreacted by stepping up the pace,'' said holger schmieding, an economist with bank of america in london. the worst case scenario, he added, would be for the bank of england to raise rates another quarter of a point in a few months, and ''realize too late they are overdoing it.''  the european central bank has steadily been lifting rates, and it forecast thursday that the european economy would expand at a reasonable pace in 2007, led by germany, which grew in 2006 by 2.5 percent, more than double the rate in 2005.  for 2007, the economies of the 13 nations that share the euro are expected to expand at an average rate of about 2.6 percent.  although euro-zone inflation has fallen below the bank's goal of less than 2 percent for four consecutive months, the president of the european central bank, jean-claude trichet, warned the bank would lift rates again in march if companies pass on previous increases in energy prices to their customers, or if the price of oil, which has retreated recently, spikes again.  ''i would say nothing here that would change expectations by the market that we could do something at the end of the first quarter,'' mr. trichet added. ''i would not contradict that.''  the european central bank is responsible for setting euro interest rates and has ordered increases over the last year that some politicians have complained could put europe's economic growth at risk.  