in the region/new jersey; a couple of mini-paradises   so far, winter here in the state's scenic northwest corner has been frustrating for skiers and rewarding for golfers.  at the mountain creek ski resort, where olympic snowboarders regularly cavort on the half-pipe this time of year, the slope was empty -- and grassy -- in early january. but at crystal springs resort's six golf courses, tee times were still being snapped up in the season when the resort's biggest draws are usually its highly rated restaurant latour with its 50,000-bottle wine cellar, or maybe its elegant -- and indoor -- elements spa.  ''right now, the weather is our best friend,'' said andrew mulvihill, president of crystal springs builders, the development arm of the company his father, gene, set up four decades ago to run a ski lift and a small amusement park here, in what is now known as the sussex county ''skylands'' resort area. the ski lift ultimately became mountain creek, which is now separately owned.  ''so we're lucky,'' mr. mulvihill said, ''and mountain creek is having a hard time at the moment.''  the vagaries of weather are currently hampering sussex county's overall goal of promoting itself as a four-season vacation spot, and second- and retirement-home enclave -- ''at least a little,'' he acknowledged.  but mr. mulvihill said his company was currently at work on a remedy, even for the weirdest weather: a climate-controlled eden, set at 84 degrees.  crystal springs plans to create two indoor water parks with translucent glass roofs, exotic waterfalls, tropical gardens and rainforestlike environments. these would exist in conjunction with two condominium hotels: the grand cascades lodge, which will open this summer, and the proposed paradise quarry hotel, which would be built into the rock walls of a quarry and which is currently awaiting planning board approval.  ''it's going to be shangri-la,'' said mr. mulvihill, ''with all the modern amenities.''  the 212-unit grand cascades lodge has one-, two, and three-bedroom suites that come with hotel service, at prices from $334,900 to $899,900, and the option for owners to rent out their suites. sales, which began 18 months ago, have been strong, the developer said, and the project is more than 90 percent sold.  at crystal springs, just off route 94, there are already about 900 occupied homes of various types -- single-family, town-house condos and an existing condo hotel with a spa -- all built in the last 10 years. in the last five years, about 500 homes and the new condo hotel have been built and sold at mountain creek.  both resorts, almost 50 miles from midtown, abut thousands of acres of protected open space in the hamburg and picatinny mountains.  ''the amenities are the draw to people coming here,'' mr. mulvihill said. ''we're already providing the best options in new jersey for golf,'' including the ballyowen golf club, ranked the state's top public course by golf magazine. ''the area has fantastic snow sports, hiking, biking, tennis, horseback riding.  ''we're going to take it all up a few notches with these water parks,'' he said.  the pool area at grand cascades will have a retractable roof, through which the sun's ultraviolet rays can penetrate, permitting tropical landscaping -- and the possibility of a winter tan, mr. mulvihill said.  his architect, chris kofitsas, who is president of new world design builders and architects, based in clifton, has created more than 40 spa properties around the country, according to the developer. at the grand cascades, the reflections spa will have a water theme, with a waterfall flowing into a reflecting pool.  mr. kofitsas said he was going for a ''walk on water'' experience by putting asian steppingstones across the pool. in addition, a backlit crystalline wall will have ergonomically shaped niches, for private, ''zenlike'' steam and sauna treatments.  nearby, on property within the town of vernon that has been designated a redevelopment site, crystal springs proposes building a three-acre indoor water theme park, one of the largest in the united states.  the park will be surrounded on three sides by rock quarry walls and on the fourth by an adirondack-style hotel, all of it covered by another glass roof. mr. kofitsas says the inspiration for it was the eden project, a large-scale, climate-controlled environmental complex near the cornish town of st. austell in britain.  the water park will feature a central island in a huge pool fueled by natural spring water. it will have a ''lazy river'' section, waterfalls and rapids, where guests can raft or inner tube. there will also be slippery rock slides, a ''volcano'' with ''geysers,'' and an ''uphill stream'' that moves swimmers effortlessly into a floating pool.  in one section of the river, guests will be able to swim among trout and local game fish -- though not really, said mr. kofitsas, explaining that see-through acrylic panels will let the human swimmers think so. the park is to feature a play structure made to look like an abandoned ore-processing mill -- another nod to local history -- equipped with slides, crawls, tunnels and spraying water.  thanks to the glass roof, the temperature will be controlled precisely, mr. mulvihill said; its sliding panels can be opened to let in fresh air.  nearby, a former playboy club hotel, sold off by hugh hefner enterprises decades ago after plans to legalize gambling in the area were thwarted, is shuttered and deteriorating. it is owned by another developer, but situated within the redevelopment area, for which mr. mulvihill has applied to be ''lead developer.''  if he wins the designation from town officials, mr. mulvihill said, he will seek to buy the property, or direct its owners to follow his proposal. if the plan comes to fruition, the new paradise quarry hotel and water park will be connected by aerial tram to the site.  mr. mulvihill's plan would add ''dry activities'' like simulated skiing and snowboarding, cycling, surfing and other games to the hotel entertainment space, as well as a climbing wall, laser tag, indoor minigolf, a bowling alley, paintball arena and outdoor game courts.  in the region | new jersey  