with ousters, emi group is said to be packaging itself for sale   love is not all you need. not if you are the emi group, the british music company, whose best-selling album on the billboard chart is ''love,'' a remixed set of songs from the beatles' decades-old catalog.  analysts say that protracted weakness in the united states, the world's biggest music market, and a poor track record of developing new talent explain why emi announced the dismissal yesterday of the top two executives at its music division. alain levy, chairman and chief executive of emi music, and david munns, vice chairman of the unit, left the company. their responsibilities will be taken on by eric l. nicoli, the chief executive of the emi group.  analysts widely criticized the shift of mr. nicoli to a more operational role. although has led emi since 1999 but has no direct experience creating or marketing music. many said they viewed the ouster of mr. levy as a precursor to a radical reorganization of the company and a new drive to explore a sale or merger.  emi, a perennial subject of takeover and merger speculation, has failed in several attempts to strike a deal with a rival of similar size, the warner music group, and talks last year to sell to private investors did not work out.  emi's woes -- which were worsened by disappointing sales in the crucial holiday shopping period -- reflect the inability of the industry to hold its ground as the market moves away from its primary product, a compact disc containing a package of songs. since 1999, the year the napster file-sharing application emerged, free online file-sharing and cd burning have taken hold despite efforts to combat them. sales of albums in the united states are down about 25 percent since 2000, according to nielsen soundscan.  the slide has been worsening: last week's top-selling album, the ''dreamgirls'' sound rack, sold just 66,000 copies, the lowest sales of a no. 1 album since soundscan began tracking music sales in 1991.  while the major record companies have desperately tried to shore up revenue from individual digital songs, music videos and other new sources, the cash is coming too slowly to offset the drop in compact discs.  there is a sense among analysts and investors that executives trained in the traditional business of selling vinyl or plastic discs -- including mr. levy -- are not prepared for the digital era, and that the companies must be overhauled. one emi rival, sony bmg, on wednesday integrated its cd and digital sales units and handed the reins of the combined operation to its top digital strategist.  ''as the digital growth slows sooner than would otherwise have been expected, it's putting increased pressure on the industry,'' said richard greenfield, an analyst at pali research. ''cost-cutting and restructuring are the name of the game. i think it's going to be a very tough 2007 for the music industry.''  for its part, emi said it planned to cut £110 million ($214 million) in costs a year, and it presented the dismissals of mr. levy and mr. munns as part of a ''de-layering'' of management. the reorganization is expected to result in layoffs of almost 20 percent of the work force of emi music, which employs about 5,000.  it may also mean a consolidation of its labels in the united states, where it operates such labels as capitol records and virgin records, and an almost certain retreat from international markets where sales have dropped sharply, according to executives briefed on the plans.  in particular, emi has struggled to consistently develop new talent from the united states who can be marketed worldwide. while the jazz pop singer norah jones sold strongly during mr. levy's reign, there have been very few others, and sales of recent releases from janet jackson and keith urban fell short of expectations. while certain british acts, like coldplay, have done well in the united states in recent years, the company has barely been able to eke out a 10 percent market share.  meanwhile, its prospects have worsened elsewhere, including in britain, where emi music's share of album sales fell 2.3 percentage points last year, to 17.9 percent, according to the trade publication music week. it suffered a particular disappointment with its recent cd from the singer robbie williams.  as expected, yesterday's shake-up was accompanied by a warning that emi music's sales in the current financial year, which ends march 31, would slide by 6 to 10 percent from a year earlier. shares of emi fell by 19.25 pence, or 7 percent, to 245.75 pence, or $4.80, in london.  