mideast maps, facts and myths   to the editor:  re ''don't play with maps'' (op-ed, jan. 9):  dennis ross rightly lambastes the mythologizing that has persistently impaired the middle east peace process. but the idea that the palestinians have refused to ''accept and adjust to reality'' is itself a myth.  yasir arafat's rejection of the clinton peace plan was utterly pragmatic. he rejected it because he knew that his people would see the ''palestine'' proposed by the plan -- overcrowded, geographically fractured, occupied by foreign troops -- for what it was: a ''let's play sovereignty'' pseudo-state.  the real myth here is the notion that such a farcical imitation of a sovereign nation would have been fair or acceptable to the palestinian people.  saladin ahmed  brooklyn, jan. 9, 2007  to the editor:  dennis ross says he wants to ''set the record straight'' in his criticism of the use of maps in jimmy carter's book ''palestine peace not apartheid,'' arguing that nothing has done more to set back the cause of peace than the perpetuation of ''mythologies'' on both sides.  yet mr. ross himself perpetuates a mythology in his article through the repeated claim that yasir arafat, the palestinian leader, ''rejected'' the parameters offered by president bill clinton in december 2000.  in fact, as was widely reported at the time and repeated in two of the most authoritative histories of that period, charles enderlin's ''shattered dreams'' and clayton e. swisher's ''truth about camp david,'' both the israelis and the palestinians expressed reservations about mr. clinton's parameters, but both sides accepted them as the basis for further talks.  indeed, a white house spokesman, jake siewert, told the media in a news conference on jan. 3, 2001, ''both sides have now accepted the president's ideas with some reservations, and that represents a step forward.''  mr. ross tells us that ''for peacemaking to work, it must proceed on the basis of fact, not fiction.'' he should follow his own advice.  roane carey  new york, jan. 9, 2007  the writer, a senior editor at the nation, edited two books about the israeli-palestinian conflict.  to the editor:  how can dennis ross be so impudent as to challenge former president jimmy carter about material that mr. ross himself wrote?  or better yet, how can the former president stake his reputation on a book, ''palestine peace not apartheid,'' that he must realize is filled with untruths and partial truths?  many people have called mr. carter the ''greatest past president'' for his achievements after he left office. i can only think that his dislike for israel and its leaders is so strong that he would publish such a distortion of the truth.  thank you, mr. ross, for setting the record straight.  bernard p. dishler  elkins park, pa., jan. 9, 2007  to the editor:  dennis ross continues the criticism of former president jimmy carter's recent book without actually dealing with underlying issues raised by mr. carter.  while mr. ross correctly asserts that mythologies on both sides of the conflict do not advance peace, he avoids the central argument put forth by mr. carter: there is little chance for peace between israelis and palestinians as long as there are israeli settlements in the west bank.  further, the bush administration's tacit approval of settlement expansion, the security fence and israeli incursions into lebanon have only fueled animosity between the parties and pulled peace further from our reach.  if mr. ross wants a constructive dialogue on peace, he should address the issues driving the conflict.  david weden  dover, mass., jan. 9, 2007  