former official is said to be a focus of lobbyist inquiry   the former no. 2 official in the interior department has been notified by federal prosecutors that he will most likely be indicted for lying about his relationship with the corrupt lobbyist jack abramoff, people with knowledge of the investigation said wednesday.  a lawyer for the former official, j. steven griles, said mr. griles was recently told by the justice department that he was a target of the investigation as a result of his testimony about mr. abramoff to a senate committee in 2005.  ''we are shocked and disappointed at this turn of events,'' the lawyer, barry m. hartman, said in a statement. ''no one has suggested that mr. griles ever took anything of value from mr. abramoff or any other lobbyist, and he never did.''  mr. abramoff, once one of the most powerful republican lobbyists in washington, entered prison last year after pleading guilty to conspiring to corrupt public officials.  in his november 2005 testimony to the senate indian affairs committee, mr. griles insisted he had done no special favors for mr. abramoff while he was deputy secretary of the interior in president bush's first term. but mr. griles acknowledged that he had been approached about leaving the department to join mr. abramoff's lobbying firm. mr. griles did not take that job, and now works elsewhere as a corporate lobbyist.  mr. abramoff's internal e-mail messages show that he referred to mr. griles as ''our guy'' at the interior department, and repeatedly sought to bring pressure on mr. griles to do favors for mr. abramoff's indian tribe clients. in a report last year, the indian affairs committee said it could not ''definitively conclude what, if anything, griles did to assist mr. abramoff's clients.''  two bush administration officials who have been briefed on the case said the investigation of mr. griles and mr. abramoff had also brought scrutiny to a senior justice department official, sue ellen wooldridge, an assistant attorney general. she submitted a letter of resignation on monday and is expected to depart this month.  ms. wooldridge, who leads the department's environment and natural resources division and serves as the bush administration's chief prosecutor on environmental issues, joined the justice department from the interior department, where she had been a top aide to former interior secretary gale norton and was close to mr. griles.  a justice department spokeswoman, cynthia magnuson, declined to comment when asked if ms. wooldridge's departure was related to the abramoff investigation.  others, including the two bush administration officials, said that while ms. wooldridge's ties to mr. griles were of interest to the justice department, they did not believe she was under active investigation by the grand jury. ms. magnuson said that in her resignation letter, ms. wooldridge ''basically expressed that after six years of federal service, she wants to return to the private sector.''  in confirming an article in the washington post on wednesday reporting that mr. griles had been told he was being investigated by the grand jury, mr. hartman said his client had given the senate committee his best recollection of his communications with mr. abramoff. ''mr. griles told the committee that he knew mr. abramoff, just like he knew many other lobbyists, and in his view, mr. abramoff had no special access or relationship to him,'' mr. hartman said.  mr. griles ''takes this matter very seriously,'' mr. hartman said, ''and is optimistic that this will be resolved in an appropriate matter, based on the facts, and that neither political pressure nor news reports will undermine this hope.''  there has been no suggestion from congressional or justice department investigators that ms. norton, who resigned last year as interior secretary, has come under scrutiny in the abramoff investigation.  mr. abramoff's e-mail shows he made many of his approaches to mr. griles through a small advocacy group, the council of republicans for environmental advocacy, and its director, italia federici, who has also come under investigation by the justice department.  mr. griles would be the second former interior department official to face charges in the abramoff investigation. roger g. stillwell, who had worked in the department's insular affairs office, pleaded guilty last year to accepting sporting and concert tickets from mr. abramoff, whose lobbying clients often sought help from mr. stillwell's office.  