all together now: when the cast is the real star   to call it the ''crash'' effect might be too much, but that winner of last year's best-picture oscar had a multistranded story line with largely disconnected characters. it's hard not to notice that current contenders as different as ''bobby,'' ''the departed,'' ''babel,'' ''little miss sunshine,'' ''united 93,'' ''the dead girl'' and ''a prairie home companion'' now bulge with acting talent and interwoven story structures.  even a film like ''the queen,'' with its awards-juggernaut performance by helen mirren, also features noteworthy work by michael sheen, james cromwell, sylvia syms, alex jennings and helen mccrory. all of which raises the question: when does a cast become an ensemble?  unlike the screen actors guild, which specifically honors acting, most groups, including those that bestow the golden globes and the oscars, give no prize for best overall cast. that means awards voters and those who court them must pick out which individual performances to spotlight.  the results can sometimes seem arbitrary. ''the dead girl,'' for example, features five individually told stories, all revolving around the discovery of a young woman's corpse. for the independent spirit award nominations, from a cast that also includes toni collette, kerry washington, brittany murphy, marcia gay harden, rose byrne and others, only the veteran actress mary beth hurt was singled out for a nomination as best supporting female.  films with intersecting characters and multiple story threads go back at least as far as ''grand hotel'' (which won the best-picture oscar for 1932), ''the best years of our lives'' (winner of eight oscars for 1946, including best actor, best supporting actor and best picture), ''plaza suite'' (1971) and ''the towering inferno'' (1977), all the way up through ''traffic'' (2000, winner of four oscars). the current style of intersecting, slightly shambling ensemble filmmaking was in many ways pioneered by the director robert altman with films like ''mash'' and ''nashville.'' his final effort, ''a prairie home companion,'' is in this year's running.  a large cast, which looks impressive on a poster, can make a film easier to market. but it complicates matters at the end of the year, as promoters struggle to balance their best award shots against the delicacy of actors' egos.  ''it's tricky,'' said bob berney, president of picturehouse, which distributed ''a prairie home companion,'' with a cast that includes meryl streep, tommy lee jones, lily tomlin, kevin kline, john c. reilly, woody harrelson, virginia madsen, maya rudolph and lindsay lohan. ''i think what we've done with 'prairie home' is really make it even. we had an ad in variety which is definitely for the ensemble. we list meryl, lily, maya, virginia and lindsay all in that, and then we've got this great quote that says, 'they're all terrific.' ''  in determining eligibility for its group awards, the screen actors guild sets no minimum number of actors who must perform, though only those with top billing receive an award statue. (the rest of the cast members receive certificates.) officially the television awards go to ''outstanding ensemble,'' and the motion picture award goes to ''outstanding cast.''  ''we ended up calling it the 'cast' award,'' explained kathy connell, producer of the sag awards show and, as a former chairwoman of the awards committee, one of the people responsible for the inception of the awards.  ''we wanted to acknowledge that in some cases you would have actors that all worked together in one scene after another, like a 'sideways,' but then in an 'apollo 13' or 'crash' they would never have scenes together, but it's the chemistry of all these actors on screen that creates an incredible movie,'' ms. connell said. ''it's the acknowledgment of the actors working together as a team and the chemistry of the actors.''  this year's sag awards nominees for outstanding cast, announced on jan. 4, are ''babel,'' ''bobby,'' ''the departed,'' ''dreamgirls'' and ''little miss sunshine.''  all of these ensemble films can be divided roughly into two groups: what might be called the pinball films, in which characters bounce off one another but remain largely disconnected, and the dinner-table films, in which a broad group of characters is brought together for some purpose. it is the pinball style that has become increasingly fashionable at awards season.  ''the rise of that kind of film was, i thought, very telling,'' said michael arndt, screenwriter of ''little miss sunshine.'' that film actually leans more toward the dinner-table variety, with a protracted car trip and even multiple scenes of a family literally seated around a table eating together. ''i think it's a reflection of people's sense of the randomness of life and how our connections with each other are sort of tenuous or hidden,'' mr. arndt said. ''they reflect the atomized nature of contemporary life, where we're not so reliant on families anymore.''  though in retrospect the box-office success of that film has made his instincts seem obvious, mr. arndt said he had been constantly forced to defend the ensemble setup during the development process.  ''when people would say, 'who's the protagonist of the film?,' my answer was always, 'the family,' '' he recalled.  asked to explain the difference between a cast and an ensemble, mr. arndt answered, ''i guess how i would define it, even if all the characters are equally weighted, that they all share a common set of concerns, whether it's family, job, friendship or whatever it might be.''  mr. berney responded to the same question by saying: ''i think really part of it is the number of roles. if you look at 'crash' or 'prairie home' or some of the other ones, i think it's when the design of the film has so many multi-laid characters. they really are all supporting, there's no one lead, and all the roles are equal. it's the design of the film.''  emilio estevez, writer-director of ''bobby,'' noted that most of his successes as an actor (including ''the breakfast club,'' ''the outsiders'' and even ''young guns'') were in ensemble films. from the actor's point of view, he sees the enduring appeal of the ensemble film as a more practical thing.  ''with a picture like 'bobby' or 'the departed' or 'a prairie home companion,' '' mr. estevez said, ''the success or failure of the movie isn't riding on the shoulders of any one individual. i think what actors appreciate is if the movie tanks, no one is to blame.''  film  correction:  january 28, 2007, sunday  an article on jan. 14 about a new spate of films with ensemble casts, misstated the year ''the towering inferno,'' another ensemble film, was released. it was 1974, not 1977.  