who belongs in the hall? you make the call   to the editor:  re ''2 stars leap to hall of fame, but steroid cloud stops 3rd'' (front page, jan. 10):  as a lifelong baseball fan, i am saddened that the cloud of uncertainty surrounding the slugger mark mcgwire should overshadow the standout careers of tony gwynn and cal ripken jr.  gwynn and ripken's conduct on and off the field is an example of what baseball players and all professional athletes should strive to be: role models of character.  these are the men who saved baseball after the 1994 strike. their determination, demeanor and sportsmanship are unequaled today.  it is close to revisionist history to say mcgwire and the home-run race of 1998 saved baseball. it was a late summer night in 1995 when a soft-spoken man trotted around camden yards in baltimore that restored people's faith in this game.  to honor the years of hard work by gwynn and ripken, let's put mcgwire where he belongs: as an asterisk in the annals of the history of baseball.  michael d. stewart  red bank, n.j., jan. 10, 2007  to the editor:  the hypocrisy sent mark mcgwire's way in the hall of fame voting does little for the reputation of the voters themselves.  while of course it was right to elect tony gwynn and cal ripken to the hall, the insistent need to smear a man as yet untried in court or otherwise specifically accused of a single thing smells.  when one compares the reality that at least one blatant racist like ty cobb is enshrined in the hall based solely on his performance, the hall voters need to take a step back and think again.  add to the hypocrisy the generations of owners and others who denied legitimate baseball players even the right to play, and you have cause for some review of the process itself.  on the field and in his generosity to others, mark mcgwire qualified the same as anyone else. if there is evidence, it should be presented. it would also be useful if hall of fame voters signed documents attesting to their purity.  joseph j. honick  bainbridge island, wash.  jan. 10, 2007  to the editor:  before mark mcgwire is elected to the baseball hall of fame, perhaps it would be fair if a place in that pantheon were set aside for roger maris, who set the record that mcgwire broke.  the absence of roger maris from the hall of fame is among the most shameful omissions in the celebration of america's pastime.  phil hall  fairfield, conn., jan. 10, 2007  