arts, briefly   ballet at the barricades  simone clarke, a principal dancer of the english national ballet, was the object of a protest demonstration yesterday outside a london theater by a group called unite against fascism, reuters reported. the protest, above, came after ms. clarke, 36, who was inside the theater preparing to play the lead in a performance of ''giselle,'' was named in a newspaper as a member of the british national party, an anti-immigration party. unite against fascism said the ballerina had been used to ''promote and prettify extreme right-wing politics.'' donna guthrie, 36, a campaigner for the group, said, ''we're calling on her to resign from the party or leave the company.'' ms. clarke has said in newspaper interviews that she is not ashamed of backing the party. ''i will stay a member,'' she said.  following her father's path  bindi irwin, right, the 8-year-old daughter of the ''crocodile hunter,'' steve irwin, who is to star in a wildlife series next year on the discovery kids network, made her american television debut on thursday holding a blue-tongued lizard on ''the ellen degeneres show,'' the associated press reported. her father died in september after being stabbed by the barb of a stingray, leaving behind his wife and two children. the agency also reported that mr. irwin's widow, terri irwin, said that all film of the attack and her husband's death had been destroyed. ms. irwin told ''access hollywood'' in an interview that the tape was destroyed when it was no longer needed in the investigation of her husband's death.  an evening with an actor  the film society of lincoln center will celebrate the work of forest whitaker, who played idi amin in ''the last king of scotland.'' the program, which runs on friday and next saturday at the walter reade theater, will include an onstage conversation with mr. whitaker and screenings of three of his films: ''the last king of scotland,'' ''ghost dog'' and ''bird.'' information is available at (212) 875-5600 and filmlinc.com.  no room for humor  twenty-five leading moroccan writers issued a joint statement to condemn the ''banning of humor'' after the government cracked down on a weekly newspaper for publishing jokes about politics, religion and sex, agence france-presse reported. ''a society which doesn't laugh at itself is a society condemned to all forms of bigotry and the creep of extremism,'' the statement said. a prosecutor on monday requested jail sentences of three to five years for two journalists on charges of defaming islam and breaching public morality in jokes published in the magazine nichane, whose publication has been suspended. the trial was condemned by the vienna-based international press institute, which called it a ''severe violation of press freedom'' in an open letter to the european parliament, and by reporters without borders, which called the indictment of the two men, sanaa al aji and driss ksikes, ''insane.'' a verdict is due by monday.  a market for short films  short films have always had difficulty finding an audience, but itunes, apple's online music store, has made an agreement with the sundance film festival, which starts on thursday, to sell roughly half the 71 shorts being screened at the festival, etonline.com reported. most of the $1.99 download price will go to the filmmakers, with apple, the sundance institute and the sundance channel sharing the remainder. sales are to begin on jan. 22.  exiled from middle earth  robert shaye, a co-chairman of new line cinema, which controls the movie rights to ''the hobbit'' by j. r. r. tolkien, told sci-fi wire that he would no longer work with peter jackson, who directed the ''lord of the rings'' trilogy for his studio. in november mr. jackson said that new line was preparing to make the ''the hobbit'' without him, causing an uproar among ''lord of the rings'' fans. ''i do not want to make a movie with somebody who is suing me,'' mr. shaye said of mr. jackson, who has filed suit against new line for money he says is owed him. ''i don't want to work with that guy anymore. why would i? so the answer is he will never make any movie with new line cinema again while i'm still working for the company.''  british oscar nods  the british academy of film and television arts released its nominees for its equivalents of the oscars yesterday. ''the queen'' received 10 nominations, ''casino royale'' 9. ''pan's labyrinth'' received 8 nominations; ''babel'' took 7; and ''the departed,'' ''little miss sunshine'' and ''united 93'' had 6 each. a complete list of nominees is at bafta.org. the awards will be presented on feb. 11 in london.  