four shows in one celebrate ethnic diversity   the civic leaders of westchester communities suffering from economic decline may want to look to the bronx, where the opening of the longwood arts project in the abandoned public school 39 in 1981 drew artists to the area and paved the way, in the 1990s, for the neighborhood's renaissance.  these days, the bronx is home to a large concentration of artists, attracted by the affordable housing and a supportive cultural scene.  ''south bronx contemporary,'' at the longwood art gallery, celebrates some of this talent, past and present. it is four shows in one. three past directors of this nonprofit space -- fred wilson, betti-sue hertz and eddie torres -- have teamed up with the current director, edwin ramoran, in curating four shows for the gallery's 25th anniversary. as a community-based art center, longwood art gallery has a mission to support emerging artists from underrepresented groups. this is partly reflected in these new shows, which play up one of the borough's best-known assets: its dizzying ethnic diversity. the artists in the exhibitions are natives of more than a dozen countries.  though organized separately, the four shows, which feature works by more than 60 artists, hang together well. there is a certain uniformity of style and tone to the artworks that each of the curators have selected. much of the work is conceptually oriented, and each show contains examples dealing with cultural differences, politics and performance.  the largest exhibition is ''everyday is like sunday.'' organized by mr. ramoran, it includes work by a grab-bag, intergenerational group of artists living and working in the bronx. mr. ramoran has also tried to include not only established artists, but also other, lesser-known players, among them amateur artists chosen through an open call, studio visits and recommendations.  among the participants who didn't train formally as artists is sumathy sundarababu, who works in the medical field and was inspired to take up oil painting by the popular pbs series ''the joy of painting,'' with bob ross, a popular television host who died in 1995, a few years after the show stopped taping. like many of mr. ross's devotees, ms. sundarababu paints trite, happy landscapes with willowy trees and an aging farmhouse, among other features. she has never shown her art publicly before this exhibition.  then there are artists who blur boundaries between professionals and hobbyists. among them is ernie woo, who went to art school but decided to work outside the gallery and market systems by making art on commission. mr. ramoran saw him painting t-shirts on 161st street, by yankee stadium, and invited him to participate in the show. the t-shirt mr. woo is exhibiting here has a painted skull and bats, crossed like bones, with a yankees cap -- a reference to the yankees' proposal to take public land to build a new stadium.  other artists are working professionals, but just aren't shown much since they are not plugged into the art gallery system or are too busy working to make a living. this goes for many of the painters here, from ptah miller, diane davis, isaac garcia-lanzo and wilda gonzalez to francisco vallejo and eilis soto. most of them do portraiture, in particular, figures within nature.  mr. ramoran envisioned his exhibition as a professional development project, promoting and encouraging artists who might not ordinarily be invited to exhibit in a mainstream gallery or museum. this is largely how longwood arts project was originally conceived. mr. wilson, the gallery's first director and now a successful artist, also takes up the cause, organizing a show of the work of artists dealing with the concept of blackness and black identity.  mr. wilson's exhibition, in the back room, is titled ''black now,'' and takes its cues from discussions of black identity since the late 1990s, asking what it means to talk about ''blackness'' now. his response is joking and mystifying, for he has juxtaposed works that deal directly with the african-american experience with others that use the color black or have the word black in their titles.  the upshot is an engaging, if on occasion glib exhibition that riffs on the elusive concept of blackness. exhibits range from one of kara walker's earnest off-set prints of slaves silhouetted against a civil war-era landscape, to rashawn griffin's video performance of a figure, dressed in an outfit made of puffed-up black garbage bags, picking flowers in a field. he looks ridiculous.  the other two exhibitions are smaller, more tightly focused. one, titled ''iconoclasmic,'' features works by artists who use pop-culture images and materials like nail polish, rhinestones, comics and advertisements. the other, and the more interesting of the two, is ''street disturbance.'' organized by ms. hertz, it consists of works by an artist and those of two artist collectives, which work in the public domain and use humor and agitprop to address social and political issues. it consists mostly of videos, accompanied by photographic and text documentation.  ''street disturbance'' is the kind of exhibition one expects from a young, alternative space like longwood. it is irreverent and provocative. one of the collectives -- surveillance camera players, formed in 1996 -- draws attention to all kinds of invisible social control, most commonly by performing skits in front of security cameras at various public sites, including subways and street corners; a video of a 1998 skit is shown here.  it is great to see that a counterculture is alive and kicking.  ''south bronx contemporary,'' longwood art gallery, 450 grand concourse, the bronx, through march 10. information: (718) 518-6728 or longwood@bronxarts.org.  art review  