in london, a peek at new york playgrounds ahead   at some point in its long history, st. stephen's stopped being just another playground and, like a hospital that metamorphoses into a medical center, became st. stephen's play project.  some of the accouterments of the ordinary urban playground -- the swings and seesaws -- fell away, leaving a basketball hoop, a jungle gym and a large space for ball games and running around. when the weather is poor, a frequent occurrence, this being britain, most of the playing is indoors, under the close supervision of six grown-ups known as play workers.  the theory at st. stephen's, one of a large network of nontraditional playgrounds built across britain and europe, is that children at play can benefit from intense adult supervision, and that classic playgrounds with impersonal equipment are not enough.  a similar philosophy is taking hold in new york city, where a public-private partnership is developing a new kind of playground, with features like water, sand and ramps and trained play workers to help children use them. new york officials hope to replicate the idea at public playgrounds throughout the city.  in london, danny coombs, who runs the st. stephen's center (his title is ''play leader''), said, ''we do everything from arts and crafts, games, sports like rounders, football, hockey and basketball.''  ''we paint t-shirts, do glassmaking, make calendars,'' he continued. ''it gives the kids somewhere to go, and they've got adults to show them how to do it and also how to get along with each other.''  there are many different kinds of new playgrounds in london, varying from area to area, as well as traditional ones in parks across the city. but at st. stephen's, an oasis in the concrete of westbourne park, next to a public school and near several housing projects, the emphasis is less on alternative equipment and more on constructive interaction between children and adults, outdoors and indoors.  ''in the past, the kids would come in and play without a lot of supervision,'' said andy cracknell, the play center service manager in westminster, the borough that runs st. stephen's and 15 similar play areas. ''now there's a much more interactive relationship between staff and children, planned and resourced in advance.''  the children are free to ''come in and see their friends and kick the ball around,'' mr. cracknell said, ''but there's always at least four different activities planned in any one session.''  more than four at st. stephen's, by the looks of things after school the other day. (the center, whose indoor areas are painted in bright poster-paint colors, is open after school and during vacations. it is open to any child who registers in advance and pays a small fee per semester. in other playgrounds, children can come and go freely and, as would be the case in the new york city playgrounds that adopt this approach, no fee is required.)  jahlynne clement, a play worker, was in one room, helping a scrap of a girl named ria, 5, paste bits of paper onto a drawing. ''i showed her this drawing that i did,'' said ms. clement, holding up a picture of a flower decorated with colored shapes, ''which helps her know how to do her own.''  nearby, one little boy was doing his homework and someone else was constructing what looked like an after-the-fact christmas decoration.  in the next room, one child played pool with mr. coombs; several others chatted; one boy read the evening standard sports pages. music pounded out through a pair of speakers (''i think they call it garage, or funky house,'' mr. coombs said). the rain paused, and another play worker led a group outside for a ball game.  the project, which receives government subsidies, is clearly more than a playground. what distinguishes it from, say, a day care center is the degree to which the children interact with the adults, mr. coombs said, receiving support when they need it while being given the room to go their own way when they need that, too.  ''they've got adults to show them how to do things, and also how to get along with each other,'' mr. coombs said. ''children at play can be bullied, or can get the short end of the stick. when you know you have adults who can facilitate and step in when they're needed, it gives you confidence. it's a lot less frightening to a child, knowing we'll intervene.''  sitting on the sofa outside mr. coombs's office, rommel quintero, 10, and connor harte, 9, a five-year veteran of the center, said they actually welcomed intensive adult intervention.  they got to talking about the bullying they said goes on during school recess, when the children run wild in the playground and there are few adults on hand.  referring to a boy he described as particularly unpleasant, he said, ''i've gotten picked on by him, hurt by him, stamped on by him, pushed by him. he tries to run after me but he can't catch me.''  at st. stephen's, though, ''you can call for help,'' rommel said.  connor added: ''here you get to play more games and basically people don't tell you off. when we play on the monkey bars, they watch us.''  mr. coombs, in fact, played at st. stephen's when he was a child, as did simon peter, another play worker here. then it was called st. stephen's adventure playground, and it was much more freewheeling: there was no charge and no limit to the number of children; the children built equipment out of abandoned materials; and there was no electronic gate, so they could come and go at will.  but health and safety regulations have changed all that, mr. peter said, requiring, for instance, that every minor bump or nosebleed be documented. ''back in the day, we had a wooden slide with nails and splinters,'' he said fondly. ''now a kid gets a splinter and he's crying till christmas.''  the london play web site, which sets out the philosophy of the playgrounds, warns explicitly against keeping children ''wrapped in cotton wool.''  ''it is only by direct personal experience that children learn to assess and overcome danger and hazardous situations, and gain varied and flexible responses to the different situations they find themselves in,'' the web site reads.  mr. coombs said st. stephen's is particularly needed in an area where there are few safe places to play and where children can get lost in the urban shuffle.  ''there was always stuff to do, and we thought it was the greatest thing ever,'' he said of his time at st. stephen's. ''if it hadn't been there, we would have had to play in the streets.''  