a new focus on delta air as deal bait   delta air lines, in such dire straits a year ago that its chief financial officer called it ''a company i'm not sure we could have given away,'' is suddenly in great demand.  us airways increased its unsolicited bid for delta by more than 20 percent early yesterday, to about $10.3 billion. hours later, northwest airlines emerged as a potential suitor.  delta, according to people involved in the talks, is hoping to fend off us airways, and has been in talks with northwest for weeks. both carriers are operating in bankruptcy, with plans to emerge later this year.  a northwest bid would probably be preferable to delta managers because the two airlines' route networks overlap less than with delta and us airways. a combination with northwest is therefore likely to lead to fewer grounded planes, if any.  delta would not comment on the northwest talks, a spokeswoman, betsy talton, said. roman blahoski, a northwest spokesman, also declined to comment.  the growing interest in delta reflects the improving fortunes of the airline industry, which is starting to post rare profits, and also perhaps the start of a new wave of consolidation.  while the progress of any particular deal is a matter of conjecture, yesterday's events suggested that one or more airline mergers had become likelier than even a week ago.  airlines, recovering from half a decade of huge losses, remain highly vulnerable to the next economic downturn, and many people see consolidation as a way to reduce costs and strengthen the industry's financial condition. united airlines and continental have been engaged in preliminary merger talks. and many analysts expect that a big merger could force one or two more.  us airways, based in tempe, ariz., first offered $8 billion to buy delta, of atlanta, in mid-november. but the effort failed to gain backing from delta creditors, who will control the carrier after bankruptcy.  delta management has issued a stand-alone plan it said was superior to the offer from us airways. a slow-moving series of meetings followed between creditors and representatives of delta and us airways, which served to pick apart competing proposals. and it appeared that the proposed big merger might dissolve.  that changed on monday morning, when the delta creditors' new consultant, gordon m. bethune, the 65-year-old former chief executive who turned around continental airlines, met with us airways' chief, w. douglas parker, 45.  they met at the midtown manhattan offices of citigroup, which is advising us airways, mr. parker said. and, through a series of tough questions about the merger proposal, mr. bethune made clear that mr. parker should increase his bid to overcome creditors' doubts about the risks of the deal, according to mr. parker.  ''he uses a lot of profanity; he asked a lot of questions,'' mr. parker said of mr. bethune in an interview. ''it was clear they were still wrestling with our proposal. was there enough reward to warrant the risk? he was very direct.''  mr. bethune did not return calls seeking comment. daniel h. golden, a lawyer for the creditors' committee, declined to comment.  in the meantime, delta management has been pursuing its plan to emerge from bankruptcy as a stand-alone airline and preparing for a feb. 7 hearing on the plan. and it announced last week that it had agreed to buy 30 new regional jets, a move that flies in the face of mr. parker's plan to cut back the combined carriers under the delta name.  ''those airplanes aren't consistent with our plan,'' mr. parker said.  so, seeing delta potentially slipping away, he raised his bid, adding $1 billion in cash, for a total of $5 billion, and 11 million us airways shares, for a total of 89.5 million, valued around $5.3 billion at yesterday's closing price of $58.93 a share. delta creditors would receive 49 percent of the stock in the combined company.  the bid will expire feb. 1 unless creditors come out in support of allowing us airways to conduct due diligence on delta, support a filing with antitrust regulators to begin a review of the proposed deal, and call for postponement of the feb. 7 hearing on delta's stand-alone plan.  delta management valued the stand-alone plan at $9.4 billion to $12 billion, a range us airways and some analysts said was based on overly optimistic estimates. using delta's valuation method, us airways said its latest offer would be worth $12.7 billion to $15.4 billion. ''the revised offer eliminates any conceivable doubt,'' mr. parker said.  roger king, an analyst at creditsights, agreed, saying the delta management plan was almost certainly dead on arrival. ''the entrance of gordon bethune is a major positive for'' us airways, mr. king said.  delta has said that us airways' initial bid would not pass antitrust scrutiny because it added too much debt to the companies, and that it would further strain relations with workers. delta said that it would review the new offer but argued that it raised the same questions.  the union representing delta pilots said it was opposed to the us airways proposal. and some union officials representing other us air workers have expressed reservations about the combination because they had yet to enter into new labor contracts reflecting a merger in 2005 with america west.  lee moak, chairman of the delta chapter of the air line pilots association, said the group voted yesterday to commit $15 million more to defeat the us airways bid. ''we will do everything we can to kill this merger,'' mr. moak said.  