coughlin fires defensive coordinator   part of the deal that allowed giants coach tom coughlin to keep his job was the promise to the team's owners that he would make changes. the status quo, following an 8-8 record and a first-round playoff exit, was not good enough.  on wednesday, the giants accepted the promise by retaining coughlin for at least one more season. yesterday, coughlin made his first major off-season change: he fired his defensive coordinator, tim lewis.  coughlin will enter his fourth season with the giants without the two coordinators who started with him in 2004. coughlin removed the offensive coordinator, john hufnagel, in the final week of the regular season.  coughlin declined comment on his decision to remove lewis, who built powerful defenses with the pittsburgh steelers and was the first assistant coach to join coughlin in 2004. lewis is a frequent head-coaching candidate and was interviewed this week by the miami dolphins, who are looking to replace nick saban.  but lewis, 45, a man with an easy smile and an air of grace, could not create a fearsome defense with the giants. a below-average unit in 2005, it was overhauled in the off-season, with six new starters for the 2006 opener, but sputtered at midseason, worn thin by injuries.  the giants allowed 362 points, ranking 24th among the n.f.l.'s 32 teams. the defense ranked 25th in total defense, measured by yards allowed. it was 14th in rushing yards allowed and 28th in passing yards.  in 2005, the giants were 24th in total defense -- 12th against the run and 27th against the pass.  one logical candidate to replace lewis is dom capers, the former panthers and texans coach who spent last season as the defensive coordinator for the dolphins. capers, who has interviewed for the dolphins' head-coaching position, was coughlin's defensive coordinator with the jacksonville jaguars in 1999 and 2000.  coughlin has made no other coaching moves, but the other defensive assistants are in limbo. a new coordinator would probably create his own staff.  the firing of lewis is a clear signal that the giants of 2007, while remaining under the control of coughlin, will be markedly different than the 2006 version.  coughlin stripped hufnagel of his responsibilities just five days before the final game of the regular season, handing them to the quarterbacks coach kevin gilbride. hufnagel left the team a few days later.  coughlin has not given gilbride the title of offensive coordinator, but he will have at least one offensive assistant to hire, either a coordinator or a quarterbacks coach, as the giants try to kick-start quarterback eli manning's progress.  while hufnagel was the first to lose his job because of the disappointing season, it appears sweeping changes will be made to the defense, which struggled with injuries and consistency the past two seasons.  the giants were ranked 10th in total defense after the nov. 12 game against the chicago bears. but a quick rash of injuries near midseason seemed to unravel the unit. in particular, a promising rush defense went soft and a once-rabid pass rush turned benign.  after losing linebacker lavar arrington for the season in late october, the giants lost the seven-time pro bowl defensive end michael strahan to a foot sprain. defensive end osi umenyiora, who had 14 1/2 sacks and made the pro bowl in 2005, missed five games. cornerback sam madison missed several games, returning just as the other starting cornerback, corey webster, went down.  the giants allowed 144 points in the first eight games (an average of 18.0), and 218 in the last eight (27.3). the giants went 2-6 to finish the season and barely slid into the playoffs.  the giants ended the season ranked 24th in stopping teams on third down, 25th in first downs allowed, and 26th in sacks per pass play.  in 2005, when the giants were 11-5 and won the division, the defense faltered late in the season, largely because of a series of injuries to the linebackers.  that drove the giants to make several defensive changes, while leaving the offense's starting lineup intact. they added three starters through free agency: arrington, safety will demps and madison. they started their fourth-round draft choice, barry cofield, at defensive tackle, and elevated the reserves webster and fred robbins, a defensive tackle, to the starting lineup.  more changes are certain for next season, particularly at linebacker and cornerback. but the biggest change will be the coordinator.  lewis, a cornerback, played at the university of pittsburgh. he was chosen by the green bay packers with the 11th overall choice in the 1983 n.f.l. draft, but a neck injury in his fourth season ended his career.  lewis spent nine seasons as an assistant with the steelers, the last four -- 2000 to 2003 -- as defensive coordinator before he was dismissed by coach bill cowher. the 2001 defense was ranked first in the league, and his other units finished in the top 10.  lewis could not replicate that success with the giants. and when the giants decided that coughlin would stay, it was obvious that others would go.  pro football  