for pitchers, national league really is an easier out   the quip has become a chorus.  in debating whether barry zito will earn his $126 million from the san francisco giants after posting a combined 3.85 earned run average with the oakland athletics the last two seasons, doubters say, ''but he is going to the national league.''  roger clemens is considering a return to the yankees or the boston red sox after steamrolling opponents in houston for three seasons, and warnings sound, ''but he'll be moving back to the american league.''  randy johnson gets himself traded from the yankees back to the arizona diamondbacks, and everyone expects his e.r.a. (a vertiginous 5.00 last season) to plummet: ''he'll be much better back in the national league.''  for all its status as the senior circuit, the national league has become a shelter of sorts for pitchers, a safe haven from a.l. lineups that tend to pelt them with three-run homers and force early showers. like swinging two bats in the on-deck circle, pitching in the a.l. -- with its designated hitter and far stronger no. 9 batters -- makes moving to the n.l. feel downright liberating.  teams and fans have long understood that a pitcher can see his e.r.a. fluctuate by half a run just by switching leagues, as if stepping up to or down from a high curb. but evidence suggests that, less visibly, a pitcher's relative effectiveness -- his performance compared with that of his league peers -- is affected as well.  from 2000 through 2005, 57 starting pitchers (those with at least 20 starts that season) switched leagues the next year -- 29 to the n.l. from the a.l. and 28 in the other direction. their statistics moved with them: combined e.r.a.s for the new national leaguers decreased to 3.94 from 4.79, or 0.85 of a run, while their counterparts' increased to 4.64 from 3.94, a move of 0.70.  this flip-flop comes as no particular surprise. although the major leagues are far more homogenous than they once were -- free agency allows for easier osmosis, and umpiring procedures have helped standardize the strike zone -- the designated hitter is a designated hassle.  looking deeper, however, presents a more interesting and perhaps illuminating picture of these pitching environments.  e.r.a.s are shaped by more than a pitcher's talent: his league, home ballpark dimensions and other factors can greatly distort an e.r.a. and its interpretation.  a statistic called e.r.a.+, presented on the web site baseball-reference.com, adjusts for these influences and presents a pitcher's percentage, either above or below a league's average. for example, zito's 3.83 e.r.a. last season in oakland -- a good pitchers' environment -- translates to a figure of 116, or 16 percent better than the a.l. average.  theoretically, a pitcher's e.r.a.+ should not be affected much by a change in leagues. but switching circuits still seems to make a substantial difference in how a pitcher performs.  of the 29 pitchers moving to the n.l. from the a.l., their e.r.a.+ figures increased to 110 (10 percent above league average) from 97 (just below average). this smaller shift than in e.r.a. is nonetheless more significant: it indicates that starters of equal caliber are more successful in the less suffocating national league.  this almost certainly helped with last season's emergence of bronson arroyo, traded to cincinnati from boston; and chris young, who went to san diego from texas. it also provides fuel to the recent argument that the n.l. lags behind the a.l. in the overall level of talent. weaker competition results in better relative performance.  pitchers found moving to the a.l. from the n.l. correspondingly unpleasant -- the e.r.a.+ scores of the 28 pitchers decreased to 100 from 113, or to absolute average from healthily above. (the fact that the two groups moved 13 percentage points in opposite directions was purely coincidental.) a fair interpretation, then, is that moving to the a.l. is such a challenge that pitchers, at least temporarily, regress. take the case of boston's josh beckett, whose 5.01 e.r.a. rose faster than the homers he allowed.  what does this mean to zito, johnson and perhaps clemens? that their new teams should allow for more than cosmetic differences in their effectiveness.  in zito's case, should his e.r.a.+ increase to 131 from last year's 116 -- the same 13 percent jump that his league-hopping predecessors enjoyed -- that and the effects of san francisco's roomy at&t park could drop his e.r.a. from 3.83 to a considerably more impressive 3.30.  a similar translation helps johnson less. he is moving to a hitters' park (arizona's chase field) from a pitchers' park (yankee stadium), which mutes the switch in leagues and transforms his e.r.a. to about 4.68 from 5.00. other statistical factors suggest johnson's 2007 performance will improve even more -- he had a high strikeout rate while giving up few base runners -- but the switch in environments is not necessarily one of them.  meanwhile, relocating to boston or new york would almost certainly bloat clemens's e.r.a. to the 2.50-2.80 range from the 2.30 he posted in houston last season. then again, neither of those teams would complain. when it comes to switching leagues, some guys remain in another one altogether.  keeping score e-mail: keepingscore@nytimes.com  