out of bounds, within limits   chances are you're not good enough to ski silverton mountain -- or to ski it with grace, anyway. don't take this personally: this six-year-old, vertigo-inducing backcountry ''ski area'' in the san juan mountains of southwest colorado that scoffs at niceties like slope grooming (and running water, but we'll get to that) has a way of quickly separating, with the deftness of a croupier, the rippers from the gapers, the noobs and the one-and-done's (but we'll get to them, too). acre for acre, it's the most challenging lift-skiing in north america.  on our continent, silverton mountain is a freak. while many american ski resorts deserve their growing reputations as real estate developments with glorified elevator service, silverton stands out starkly -- a single chairlift rising in the wilderness. this ski area is a hybrid between lift-access and backcountry, and an inexpensive bridge to full-fledged wilderness skiing, with guides taking groups on avalanche-controlled but otherwise wild, steep, unmanicured slopes.  call it backcountry lite.  by whatever name, at $99 to $129 a day it's a relative bargain if you don't have ski-touring equipment and the knowledge to dive right into the wilderness on your own, or don't have $700 for a day of helicopter skiing -- or are simply weary of dropping $65 to slug it out for powder with a few thousand friends at a resort.  but could silverton mountain, i wondered, really be so mind-blowing that skiing magazine once ranked it no. 1 in north america in the categories of ''steeps'' and ''powder'' ahead of places like whistler and jackson hole and snowbird? as a two-planker who will travel anywhere in pursuit of soft, steep turns, i needed, as they say, to do some ground-truthing.  ''down to earth'' doesn't do justice to the silverton mountain aesthetic. ''scruffy'' is closer, but still too generous. i arrive on a thursday morning in late march at the ''day lodge'' -- no more than a giant tentlike structure -- to find liability forms being handed out. skiers sit on naugahyde benches pirated from an old bus, or furniture that's coughing up stuffing, and sign their lives away. someone's forgotten to stoke the wood stove that heats the tent; you can see your breath. jenny brill, who with her husband, aaron, owns the area, sits at a card table taking orders for $10 sack lunches. those who have rented the safety equipment that each skier is required to carry (avalanche beacon, shovel, avalanche probe) walk around back and retrieve their packs from a man in a school bus that's wallowing in a snowdrift. the lodge's only running water is the drip-drip from a leak in the roof -- that is, when the stove is warm enough to unfreeze the hole.  yet there's something almost comforting in this décor. some lodges scream opulence. others whisper exclusivity. silverton's says that this place is all about the skiing -- and if a few holes in the roof bother you, well, maybe this isn't the place for you.  big skiing without artifice was precisely the dream of the founder, aaron brill. by 1997 high pretense, higher rents and the daily jostling for limited powder had run mr. brill out of four ski resorts in four years. why, he wondered, couldn't he just recreate the so-called ''club fields'' of new zealand -- unvarnished ski areas where a snack shack is considered an amenity? so he zigzagged around the west until, at road's end six miles beyond a peeling mining town, he found a whaleback ridge that reaches more than 12,000 feet, gets smothered with 400 inches of snow annually and is zebra-striped with avalanche chutes. mr. brill bought up some old mining claims, purchased a two-seat chairlift retired from mammoth mountain in california and got a lease for other federal land. in early 2002 the 1,600-acre silverton mountain became colorado's first new ski area in 20 years.  the brills' timing couldn't be much better. north americans are increasingly taking up backcountry skiing, or at least dabbling beyond resorts' boundary ropes. silverton is a crossover, initiating them to the mysteries of out-of-bounds skiing while also letting them ski, and hard: instead of huffing uphill for hours to earn their turns, skiers and boarders ride the chairlift up 1,900 feet. there they find ''sickbird'' natural terrain all around. what they don't find: moguls. groomers. cut trails. it's uncollared nature, almost. the mountain's ski patrol does do extensive avalanche-control work to try to tame southwest colorado's infamously dicey snow pack, so despite the required avalanche equipment, skiers don't have to be especially avalanche savvy.  since the silverton ski area operates only thursdays through sundays, the frequent storms tend to fill in any tracks. not that there are many to begin with: on a busy midwinter day last year, silverton had only about 80 customers a day. (there were only about 50 and 35 during my visit on two weekdays last march.) the upshot? plenty of untracked snow for each skier.  at 9 a.m. the chairlift's bull wheel starts to turn, shaking off snow. it's a bluebird day. ''medium-fast on the right side of the parking lot,'' aaron calls out, doing the daily division of skiers. ''really fast on the left.'' i'm placed in a pretty fast group of six with alex hunt, a somber guide with blots of sunscreen still in his beard. this is the other big difference from pure backcountry skiing: for much of the winter, clients here must ski in groups with a guide, who makes the decisions about where to go and what slopes to ski. the brills' original dream of a ski area where guests buy a cheap lift ticket and are guided by their own wits has only partly blossomed because of safety concerns by the federal bureau of land management, which oversees the public land that the ski area leases. but starting again on april 5, guests will be able to ski, unguided, for $49 a day until season's close.  alex starts the talk. it is not pleasant. ''silverton mountain is unlike anything you've ever skied,'' he begins. ''everything we're going to ski today is some version of an avalanche path.'' the talk goes on like this. listen to my directions all the time, he says. we're 90 minutes from the nearest hospital, and probably three hours away when you figure in a rescue, so dial back your skiing accordingly. if you get caught in an avalanche, swim. alex never smiles during the talk.  silverton wastes no time showing who's boss. or maybe alex wants to make a statement by taking us, first run, down half-track, a flank of deep powder pockets and spruce so tight it leaves me brushing off bark after a high-velocity shimmy between the trunks. i've done a lot of tree skiing; i never before wished i was wearing a helmet. the others seem a little shellshocked. one telemark skier is heaving.  at the valley bottom alex pulls up short of a lip over a five-foot-wide creek. ''our normal snow bridge is gone,'' he announces, ''so you've got two options: you can jump, or you can go downstream a ways, and then cross.'' then he jumps. on his skis. this is silverton, not vail. so the rest of us jump, too, some getting more soaked than others.  back at the chairlift, there are so few skiers the attendant actually has to restart the lift for us.  the chairlift rises only about 1,900 vertical feet, which is hardly epic. but consider it a giant stepladder to a world of skiing. that means throwing skis over shoulders and tromping up the extended ridge from 10 to 40 minutes, and from anywhere from 300 to 1,200 vertical feet. reaching the pencil chutes on ragged 13,487-foot storm peak, rarely skied by customers, would take more than an hour.  ''we're going to go for a pretty long hike here, guys and girls, if you want to put your skis on your packs,'' alex says. he's still unsmiling.  we hike. sweat dribbles down sunglasses and gives aquarium views of the snaggle-toothed san juans. about seven miles away lies telluride, with its parade of ugg boots and multimillion-dollar homes. but it's a long way off -- two hours by car. there's no sign of civilization here but an old radio repeater on a peak, the wreck of the old sunnyside mine far below, a jetliner scratching south across blue sky, taking unlucky souls someplace warm.  not everyone's got his head up, though. the skiers during my two days at silverton are from all over the map: san francisco, atlanta, boulder, arizona. some aren't in their best shape. others struggle with the altitude. oxygen plays hard to get at 12,000 feet. silverton mountain's web site even suggested taking viagra to fight altitude sickness (one of the drug's less-promoted benefits). strapping powder skis to pack, i try not to notice whether anyone has taken that counsel.  bigger cracks begin to show in the group after just 10 minutes of hiking. alex stops and points out the goal, a gully across the basin. it's canted, defended on one side by chocolate chips of protruding rocks, dusky with the residue of avalanche explosives. the average run at silverton is akin to the most challenging run at an average ski resort; the most extreme runs are almost terrifying. this one's called the claw.  ''is it gonna be soft?'' whines somebody.  ''is it gonna be rocky?'' mewls another. climbers call this getting tweaked. alex suggests a route for those who want to drop in lower. the exhausted telemarker peels off. peer pressure prods the rest higher.  the claw was some of the best skiing i did all winter -- nearly knee-deep new snow, with just enough pitch to yank the adrenal glands. we keep dropping through powder, into the twisted gun barrel of an avalanche gully aimed at the valley floor. my fellow skiers swap their gutted look for grins.  once at the bottom we're too far below the lift to walk to it, so we're picked up by one of silverton's ''shuttles.'' it looks suspiciously like a bombed-out u.p.s. truck. ''actually,'' says alex, who's now warming to us -- smiling, even -- ''in its former life it was a laundry van.'' the van's hood ornament has been swapped out for a foot-high trophy of a running woman. (the truck, apparently, once placed highly in a girl's cross-country meet.) we slide and bang around the interior in our ski boots, trying to stand upright.  groups at silverton mountain usually ski only four to six runs a day. this worried me. but jenny brill says later that she almost never has people complain that they aren't tired at day's end. our group doesn't have any one-and-done's -- those who try the mountain, realize very quickly that it's above their ability  and come in to buy a gatorade and a t-shirt. still, we soon begin to lose group members who decide to rest for a run, or more. one of those is that strong but humbled telemarker who was in my ski group for two days. ''i thought i was an expert before i came here,'' the skier, bryan appleton, a san francisco residential remodeler, confides to me the next day.  that afternoon our remaining group eats turkey sandwiches on the slow lift and squeezes in five runs, skiing with leisure, and with a politeness toward one another that's almost disorienting. skiers at resorts are accustomed to the ''powder panic'' of scrambling to reach untracked snow before others do; remove that pressure and people get downright charitable at the top of a pitch of blower snow.  ''would you like to go first?''  ''no, please go ahead.''  if some lingering fear also feeds their après-vouz magnanimity, i exploit it shamelessly and drop in for first tracks whenever possible.  the day ends nearly as it begins, with a tight tree run through stooges, a collection of pillowy drops (larry, curly moe and, er, joey) through trees so dark that alex hunt flushes a snowshoe hare.  back at the tent there's still no running water, but there is flowing beer. and there's something else, too: the completely relaxed vibe that comes from knowing that tomorrow's going to be just as sweet, and uncrowded, as today.  powder by day, and a pint at night  if you go  silverton mountain, (970) 387-5706, www.silvertonmountain.com, is about 75 highway miles southeast of telluride and about 50 miles north of durango, which has the closest airport. getting there can be dicey in bad weather due to the avalanche-prone mountain passes.  silverton is open thursdays through sundays, generally thanksgiving through april. for most of the season, guests are required to ski in small groups with a guide. cost is $99 to $129 a day; the $129 rate is for february and march. unguided skiing, april 5 to 29 this year, is $49; there is also unguided skiing opening day to mid-january.  rental of mandatory avalanche beacon, shovel and probe pole (with knapsack) is an additional $35. powder skis (wider than the usual shaped ski) can be rented.  there are no dining facilities, though candy bars and chips are sold; a simple sack lunch is $10.  where to stay  don't expect a lot of the little mining town of silverton (year-round population about 500), which all but shuts down in winter, and where townspeople are known to motor their snowmobiles down the streets, except the main street, greene street. it's the paved one.  one of nicest places to stay is the inn of the rockies at the historic alma house, a 1898 guesthouse with wonderful full breakfasts (homemade smoothies, biscuits) that has nine rooms, including two with fireplaces . doubles with shared bath begin at $85; with private bath, from $110; (800) 267-5336; www.innoftherockies.com.  where to eat  if you're in a hurry to get to the slopes, grab a great coffee and breakfast burrito at mobius cycles and cafe, 1309 greene street, (970) 387-0777, www.mobiuscycles.com, run by a man named winston churchill.  for dinner, hit the  avalanche coffee house, 1067 blair street, (970) 387-5282, for a tasty artisan pizza ($11) and an organic salad (for $4 more) in the evenings.  aprÈs-ski  skiing is what you do in silverton in winter. but if you've still got some energy after hours, and a yen for local color, head over for a longneck, a game of pool and a lungful of secondhand smoke at the miner's tavern, 1069 greene sreet, (970) 387-9885, which skiing magazine a few years ago rated one of the five best dive bars in snow country. order a jagermeister here and you might still be called a hippie.  silverton brewery, 1333 greene street, (970) 387-5033, www.silvertonbrewing.com, is staying open in the winter this year. try a pint of the thick coal bank stout ($3.50). closed sunday and monday.  information  contact the silverton chamber of commerce and visitors center, 800-752-4494, www.silvertoncolorado.com.  christopher solomon's work is included in the book ''best american travel writing 2006.''  