insight or hindsight? ask saints about colston   of the 255 players selected in last year's n.f.l. draft, only three were taken after receiver marques colston of hofstra. he flirted with becoming mr. irrelevant, the dubious honor given to the last player drafted. in the local football parlance, it was a ''who dat?'' moment.  as new orleans prepares to face philadelphia here saturday in the national football conference divisional playoffs, the saints are at least honest enough to concede that colston's flowering has been more a matter of hindsight than insight.  coach sean payton acknowledged that he had no idea that colston, who is 6 feet 4 inches and 231 pounds, might eventually lead all first-year receivers with eight touchdowns and finish second to vince young in the voting for the n.f.l.'s offensive rookie of the year.  ''if we knew what we know now, if we really loved the player coming out, we would have drafted him a lot earlier than the seventh round,'' payton said.  of course, an n.f.l. draft has always been an imprecise science. jeff garcia, who started the season as the backup quarterback in philadelphia, had to play five seasons in the canadian football league before the san francisco 49ers gave him a shot in the n.f.l.  colston's trip to the n.f.l. was potholed by unrefined skills, a shoulder injury and a resulting tense relationship with hofstra coach joe gardi, who is now retired.  ''strong hands in traffic,'' payton said when asked what he liked best about colston, who finished second in the n.f.c. with 28 receptions (out of 70) on third down. ''he's smart, he's big, he's physical. he catches the ball well. receivers that don't catch well are troublesome, like linebackers that don't tackle well.''  colston's hands, so reliable now, were not always so dependable. early in his college career, he was known to ''pocket a catch,'' or cradle the ball with his chest instead of his hands, according to jaime elizondo, who coaches receivers at hofstra.  so elizondo devised two drills for colston. first, he painted the tips of a half-dozen footballs, one end red and the other yellow. he also inscribed the tips with a number or a shape, like a star or a circle. to identify these markings, colston had to focus on catching the ball in front of him with his hands, instead of letting it thump into his chest.  ''receivers need two things -- broad vision and fine vision,'' elizondo said in a telephone interview. ''they need to see the ball leave the quarterback's hand or find it in the air, and they need fine vision for the last six inches of flight.''  elizondo also tried to make colston ''short to the ball,'' or more readily prepared to make a catch. many receivers stick their arms out first, then try to bring their hands together, interlocking their thumbs as the ball approaches, elizondo said. he preached the opposite to colston, teaching him to put his hands together first, then extending them in a straight line toward the ball.  eventually, though, colston's soft hands led to a hardening of his relationship with gardi.  colston did not want to play during what would have been his senior season at hofstra in 2004, preferring to have surgery to repair an injured shoulder. gardi said the team needed him and that he believed colston was healthy enough to participate, based on reports he had received from the team doctor.  instead, colston had the surgery and sat out the 2004 season as a medical redshirt. this week, he told the times-picayune of new orleans that gardi accused him of ''giving up on my team'' and did not allow him to stand on the sideline during games that season, forcing him to watch from the stands.  a season later, colston returned to the team and caught 70 passes, averaging nearly 14 yards a reception. he and his fellow hofstra receiver devale ellis ended up in the n.f.l., colston with new orleans and ellis with the detroit lions. but colston told the times-picayune that he did not speak with gardi during his senior season.  in a brief interview thursday, colston seemed to still have strained feelings toward gardi.  ''we had issues,'' colston said. ''i'll leave it at that.''  in a telephone interview, gardi said of colston: ''he didn't get along with me. we needed him to play. he opted to go to surgery. i wasn't a happy camper. we didn't have a great year.''  gardi said he understood how colston might have bruised feelings. as a head coach, gardi said: ''you have to be the bad guy. my job wasn't to be loved.''  many suspect that the awkward relationship with gardi may have affected colston's draft status, contributing to his drift into the seventh and final round. but gardi said that he never made negative remarks about colston to n.f.l. officials. instead, gardi, a former assistant with the jets, said that he gave colston ''a great recommendation.''  saints officials and colston's agent, mark clouser, told the times-picayune that they were unaware of any bad-mouthing of colston by gardi. gardi said he planned to cheer on colston while watching saturday's game against the eagles on television.  ''i'm rooting for him,'' gardi said. ''i expected when we had that problem in his fourth year that i wouldn't be one of his favorite guys. they've got to get over that stuff. he's made it now in the big time.''  colston does maintain some ties with hofstra. he still speaks weekly with elizondo. ''i'm not surprised what he did; i'm surprised he did it as quickly as he did,'' elizondo said of colston's superb rookie season. ''anybody who told you they expected him to do this his first year would be lying. but i knew he'd be a nice catch for somebody.''  pro football  