the neediest cases; opening hearts and checkbooks to ease the woes of strangers   for each person whose life has been eased by money provided by the new york times neediest cases fund, there is a donor who has been moved to make a difference. for some, donating to the neediest cases is part of a tradition of giving. more and more often, that tradition is carried out online.  ''younger people are much more likely to make gifts online. so it's likely that an ever-increasing proportion of donors, children of the digital generation, feel the same compassion that their elders have demonstrated over the 95-year life of the neediest cases campaigns,'' said jack rosenthal, president of the new york times company foundation. ''virtually and actually, we're grateful.''  what follows are comments donors made when giving to the neediest cases, and their stories.  far-flung donors find a common cause online  ''thank you for continuing to run the neediest cases. we need reminders of this, of how lucky those of us who have jobs and health insurance and families and friends really are. i used to read this with my father, who thought what you were doing was so important. i have lost touch with it over the years, but your piece today on people with diabetes in new york was such a smart reminder of how lucky we are and how much help people need. thank you for giving me this to think about, on thanksgiving.'' kelly l. close, san francisco  ''the best thing that i've learned from my family over time is generosity,'' said kelly l. close, 38. ms. close remembers visiting omaha at christmastime with her family when she was a child, living in a smaller nebraska town. her father picked up a new york times in a city bookstore and read a neediest cases article. ''my dad was just so moved by it,'' she said, adding that he made a donation that year.  ms. close and her husband hope to pass on this tradition of giving to their daughter, coco, 2, and a second baby due in may. ''these things become even sweeter,'' she said, when one's resources are not endless. as christmas approached, she gave an example: ''we can afford three presents for coco, but it's probably better to do two and help her give one.''  ms. close, who has type 1 diabetes, was moved to donate by an article about the plight of diabetics. ''i was really touched by that one. i just thought, there but for the sake of god go i,'' she said.  the closes run a consulting company for diabetics, health care providers and others affected by the disease. they set up a matching gift program for the neediest cases, inviting their six full-time employees to donate, and have raised $600, she said.  ''it's such a good reminder: take care of the people around you and do what you can to take care of other people,'' she said.  ''i often think that americans are such believers in merit and personal responsibility that they forget that luck plays a big part in life. every year, the times neediest cases stories are a reminder of just how much bad luck there is in the world, and how much relatively small amounts of help can do for people who are fighting it.''  ruth scodel, ann arbor, mich.  ''i'm not from new york, but i have a sort of an emotional connection to new york,'' said ruth scodel, 54, who teaches greek and latin at the university of michigan. ''i think of new york as quintessentially america.''  professor scodel said she gave money to a variety of nonprofit groups, including her synagogue, local and regional cultural institutions, and humanist and environmental causes. this year, she gave $100 to the neediest cases as part of her year-end donations. although she lives far from the people she reads about in the neediest cases, she said she viewed them as part of her community.  professor scodel teaches greek tragedy, and in the daily neediest cases articles she hears echoes of greek philosophies.  ''that's sort of what these stories bring out, vicissitude,'' she said. ''things go well, and sometimes they don't; stuff just happens in the world.''  when money is just a first step  ''i read a story in the neediest cases, i think it was in january of 2003, about a little boy who had been born without arms and he needed a wheelchair. so i said to my husband, 'he needs a wheelchair. how much could a wheelchair be?' of course, it turned out he needed a big wheelchair, and a very complicated one, because he had to work it with his shoulders. it took a long time. it went on and on, and finally i said, 'i want to meet him.' ''  kathy greenberg, manhattan  for kathy and alan greenberg, donating to the neediest cases started simply. they would buy a wheelchair for a boy who needed one.  but they did not stop there.  ''it started off with a little bitty thing and turned into a mountain,'' said mr. greenberg, 79, who is chairman of the executive committee of the bear stearns companies. ms. greenberg, 60, is a lawyer who founded the new york legal assistance group, which provides legal services to poor new yorkers.  both are dedicated philanthropists, giving to hospitals and universities, the boy scouts and uja-federation of new york, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund, among other charities. and both are dedicated to roy lantigua, the boy profiled in the neediest cases article in january 2003.  ''when she first found out about the wheelchair, she went out to the house and decided that the house wasn't easily accessed by a wheelchair,'' mr. greenberg said. while at roy's house in crown heights, brooklyn, ms. greenberg came up with a plan. ''she had the construction people go out and fix the ramp,'' mr. greenberg said.  ms. greenberg also became roy's court-appointed guardian, a role that she shares with another woman. roy lives with his mother, and the court guardians oversee his financial and legal interests.  and the greenbergs' involvement even extended to roy's school, the henry viscardi school, which serves severely physically disabled students.  ''i took my husband, because he does magic, and i took him to do a magic show for the kids at the henry viscardi school,'' ms. greenberg said.  ms. greenberg also redecorated an accessible student residence at the school, where roy, 15, is in the 10th grade. and the greenbergs provide transportation for a regular friday night recreation program for the students.  amanda caccavo, who works at the school, said, ''i've been a social worker a really long time, and i've seen a lot of things come and go, but the greenbergs are the real deal.''  in the three years since he met the greenbergs, roy's life has changed. they sent him on a vacation to disney world. they paid to have his teeth straightened. and with mr. greenberg's help, roy recently had a practice interview at bear stearns, and is considering transferring to a business high school in manhattan.  ''i've been doing better in school, behaving better and stuff,'' roy said. ''it's weird; it's hard to explain.  ''she's been really nice to me,'' he continued, referring to ms. greenberg. ''i thought i might try and do something for her, do my best.''  beyond braces and a wheelchair, ms. greenberg has given roy a bigger sense of his possibilities.  ''that's the progressive kind of thinking that has been available to roy, just having kathy around,'' ms. caccavo said. ''kathy doesn't come from the framework of disability. she comes from the world's framework.''  when they give, the greenbergs follow their instincts. ''something just hits us, and we do it; that's all,'' mr. greenberg said.  his wife agreed, saying, ''all you have to do is actually connect with people who are struggling, really struggling, and it's sort of a no-brainer.''  for the greenbergs, reading the neediest cases articles is one way to make that connection. ''there are very few stories that actually showcase what happens in a home of a poverty-stricken family,'' ms. greenberg said. ''if you read a case every day, you could get involved on a daily basis.''  in november, the greenbergs read a neediest cases article about a family whose youngest child has a heart defect. in the article, as the girl's parents discussed the family's needs, a christmas wish was coaxed out of her older brother. ''the kids just wanted a computer for christmas,'' ms. greenberg said.  and so, mr. greenberg said, ''we got them a computer.''  a tradition on wall street: compassion, and a healthy dose of competition, too  ''this is like, hey, not only do we work a lot, but even at the most junior levels we're trying to give something back. we're trying to help out. it's kind of become a source of pride for citigroup, and i know goldman sachs is probably the same way, that we've been spearheading it for 15 years now. year after year the new york times comes to us, or we go to them, because there's been such a good working relationship. why not try our best to help each year?''  jason spindel, manhattan  ''it's really not all me,'' jason spindel, 23, wanted to make clear. he is a second-year analyst at citigroup and volunteered to coordinate the company's annual fund-raising drive for the new york times neediest cases fund.  raising money for the neediest cases is a wall street tradition now in its 16th year, with about 14 companies participating over the years. citigroup contributed $81,801 last year, and has already committed $40,000 to this year's campaign. as yearly bonuses are distributed to company employees in the coming weeks, mr. spindel hopes to match last year's contribution. last year's largest wall street donation was $152,830, from goldman sachs.  the campaign is a chance for junior wall street workers, analysts who are just starting out, to give something back. mr. spindel appreciates the tradition.  ''the analysts amongst themselves, year after year, decide they want to do it, and then do our best,'' he said.  the drive spurs a bit of good-natured rivalry among firms. ''competition with goldman sachs is fun and friendly,'' mr. spindel said. ''if goldman beats us by a million dollars or we beat them by a million dollars, hey, all the money's going to the same place.''  the analyst lifestyle, mr. spindel said, is a hectic one. ''we work all day, every day, nights and weekends,'' he said. ''it's not uncommon to sleep in your cube, if you're able to sleep, or to be here at midnight on a saturday night.''  part of the success of the neediest cases campaign is its convenience, mr. spindel said: collection and reminders happen right in the office. ''they don't even have to get up,'' he said.  the wall street workers also appreciate knowing that all of the money raised goes directly to those in need, mr. spindel said, ''because most of the people i'm asking for money are finance people by nature.'' he said he assured them that the neediest cases was a savvy charitable investment because ''all of your dollars are going to help somebody.''  that they are helping new yorkers gives the donors a sense of immediacy about the campaign. ''we spend every waking minute on manhattan,'' mr. spindel said. ''you can see a tangible impact if you took the time to scout it out.''  previously recorded: $6,484,079  recorded thursday: 240,690  total: $6,724,769  last year to date: $6,285,241  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  