transactions   m.l.b.  american league  baltimore orioles--traded rhp rodrigo lopez to colorado for rhp jim miller and rhp jason burch. agreed to terms with rhp todd williams on a one-year contract.  boston red sox--agreed to terms with rhp kyle snyder on a one-year contract.  kansas city royals--agreed to terms with inf alex s. gonzalez on a minor league contract.  yankees--agreed to terms with rhp jeff nelson and c todd pratt on minor league contracts, and announced nelson's retirement.  texas rangers--acquired c chris stewart from the chicago white sox for rhp johnny lujan. designated inf drew meyer for assignment.  national league  arizona diamondbacks--agreed to terms with rhp juan cruz and rhp jorge julio on one-year contracts.  chicago cubs--agreed to terms with inf tomas perez on a minor league contract.  florida marlins--agreed to terms with rhp felix rodriguez on a minor league contract.  houston astros--agreed to terms with of richard hidalgo on a minor league contract.  milwaukee brewers--agreed to terms with rhp r.a. dickey on a minor league contract.  mets--agreed to terms with lhp oliver perez on a one-year contract.  st. louis cardinals--agreed to terms with lhp randy flores on a two-year contract.  san diego padres--agreed to terms with ss khalil greene on a one-year contract.  washington nationals--agreed to terms with rhp jerome williams on a one-year contract and lhp brandon claussen on a minor league contract. named lee kuntz athletic trainer.  basketball  national basketball association  nba--suspended minnesota f-c eddie griffin for five game, without pay, for violating the terms of the nba/nbpa anti-drug program, and rodney mott, nba official, three games, without pay, for making an obscene gesture toward a fan and using inappropriate language.  women's national basketball association  minnesota lynx--announced the retirement of g tynesha lewis.  n.f.l.  cleveland browns--signed ol kelly butler to a two-year contract extension.  kansas city chiefs--agreed to terms with te tony gonzalez on a five-year contract extension.  pittsburgh steelers--signed wr rasheed marshall, db grant mason and db harrison smith to reserve-future contracts.  seattle seahawks--signed cb gerard ross from the practice squad.  tampa bay buccaneers--named casey bradley linebackers coach.  washington redskins--signed ol kili lefotu, wr steven harris, wr ryan hoag, lb anthony trucks, dt lorenzo alexander, dt vaka manapuna, ol calvin armstrong, de jamaal green, qb casey bramlet, wr cedric bonner, dt jared clauss, db jerrell pippens, db chip cox, te eric edwards, ol william whitticker and de chris wilson.  n.h.l.  anaheim ducks--recalled lw curtis glencross from portland of the ahl.  atlanta thrashers--activated f scott mellanby from injured reserve.  dallas stars--assigned rw chris conner to iowa of the ahl.  detroit red wings--assigned g joey macdonald to grand rapids of the ahl.  los angeles kings--placed g mathieu garon on injured reserve. recalled g yutaka fukufuji from manchester of the ahl.  minnesota wild--recalled d shawn belle from houston of the ahl.  rangers--claimed c jason krog off waivers from atlanta.  ottawa senators--assigned c josh hennessy to binghamton of the ahl.  phoenix coyotes--assigned c joel perrault to san antonio of the ahl.  st. louis blues--assigned d matt walker to peoria of the ahl.  san jose sharks--recalled d matt carle from worcester of the ahl.  washington capitals--re-signed g brent johnson to a two-year contract extension.  m.l.s.  colorado rapids--acquired d greg vanney and a 2008 third-round draft pick from fc dallas for 2007 and a 2008 second-round draft picks.  columbus crew--acquired f andy herron from chicago for f ryan coiner and a 2007 first-round draft pick.  new england revolution--acquired a 2007 first-round draft pick and a conditional 2008 second-round draft pick from los angeles for a portion of a replacement allocation.  