havens | kailua kona, hawaii; where you'll find a small-town feeling on the big island   like many visitors to the hawaiian islands, donna rehling was smitten right away with the lush landscape, temperate breezes, indigo ocean and, of course, the near-perfect weather year-round. she even invested in a time share on maui 14 years ago, so she and her family could revel in it all at least once a year.  but when it came time to fulfill her dream of buying a second home on the islands, she picked hawaii, better known as the big island -- and specifically kailua kona, a community on the western coast -- over more populated places on oahu or maui.  ''we found it more laid back and so much bigger to spread out in,'' said ms. rehling, 59, who lives in westerville, ohio, and is a vice president with a skin-care company. ''and the prices weren't as high.''  her three-bedroom, 2,500-square-foot house, which she bought in fall 2005 for $1.2 million, is above a cliff just minutes from the center of town, and she says her views of the pacific couldn't be more breathtaking.  a growing number of second-home buyers are being drawn to the area, known locally as the kona side of the big island, for the same reasons ms. rehling was: relatively lower prices and a small-town atmosphere. then there's the diverse topography that includes everything from tropical rainforests and breezy beaches to active volcanoes and snow-capped mountains. (at about 4,000 square miles, the big island is the largest in the archipelago, making homeowners less susceptible, perhaps, to that all-too-common island ennui.)  ''we're the new frontier still,'' said cindy griffey, an agent for century 21 all islands in kailua kona. ''we're big, and we have a lot more space to grow,''  andrew schiller, the founder and president of location inc. of woonsocket, r.i., which specializes in relocation software and runs neighborhoodscout.com, a home-search site, agreed, calling the big island and its western region a hidden gem.  ''we've long identified the area as one of the emerging markets that provides incredible value and is well positioned to go up in value in the future,'' he said, noting that buyers should not be surprised to find condominiums -- some makai, or toward the ocean -- in the $200,000 range.  an earthquake that rocked kona on oct. 15 has had little impact on buyers' interest, local real estate agents say. right now, though, as the region weathers the same market slowdown that is affecting the mainland, there is growing inventory, which, the agents say, could mean better deals for buyers than a year ago.  new developments with luxury amenities are also sprouting up or being planned, particularly along the kona-kohala coast, just north of kailua kona proper.  the scene  sunrise ushers in a flurry of outdoor activities. surfers flirt with the waves large and small, and the local fishermen plant themselves on lava-rock beaches or the kailua bay seawall. teenage boys roll to their school bus stops on skateboards, and after school, they'll trade them in for surf or boogie boards at the public beaches. (the resorts and condos are also required by the local government to offer public access to at least part of their beaches.)  by midmorning on most days, the open markets are up and running, with a wide variety of bargain-priced produce (seven papayas for $1 or extra-sweet maui gold pineapples for $5 each), along with handmade jewelry, $5 strands of pink fresh-water pearls from china and local trinkets.  kailua kona's downtown sparkles at night with lights from restaurants, shops and clubs like the hard rock cafe and the boisterous lulu's, while cruise ships in the distance help light the water.  leisure travelers can snorkel and scuba dive, especially at kahaluu beach park, where sea turtles roam, and there is tennis and golf at resorts and condos alike. the aloha theater and performing arts center, meanwhile, offers a range of performances, including indigenous music and dance and musicals like ''bye bye birdie.''  one of the busiest times for tourism is in mid- to late october, when the ironman world championship triathlon is held in kona. leading up to it, local roads and highways become training grounds for the 1,800 or so athletes who compete in the event.  pros  there is the good weather, of course, and the clean, tropical environment, along with the outdoor recreational and cultural activities. but there is also what many residents describe as a welcoming ''aloha spirit.''  ''the big island has a spiritual side; you feel like you're really part of something pretty special,'' said carole kwiat, who moved to the region five years ago from central illinois.  ms. kwiat, who is an agent for coldwell banker aloha properties in kailua kona, added, ''it's a kind of acceptance of everyone -- a melting pot.''  walter hayslett, a retired postal worker from scottsdale, ariz., who, with his wife, nancy, recently bought a three-bedroom condo in the mauna lani resort, agreed. ''we love the small-town atmosphere,'' he said. ''this was the way scottsdale used to be like when we moved there in 1975.''  ms. rehling, a self-described ''outdoorsy person,'' put it another way: ''it's paradise.''  cons  but even paradise has its shortcomings.  ''the shopping,'' ms. rehling said. ''when i was over there on vacation, the shopping was great, but when you're a homeowner and you're looking for household things like linens, dishes and silverware, it's harder to find that stuff. everything is expensive.''  she said she also faced limitations on important building supplies. ''after the earthquake hit, they ran out of cement,'' she said. ''we had to wait for it to be shipped in'' to repair cracks in her pool.  ms. kwiat finds, too, that the local infrastructure hasn't kept pace with development, sometimes creating traffic jams on the main roads that lead into town. ''we have the kona crawl,'' she said, adding that local planners are requiring some developers to build additional roads.  finding good health care can also be a challenge, ms. kwiat said, especially specialists and sophisticated procedures. ''you'd have to fly to oahu,'' she said, a 40-minute flight, to reach big-city amenities in honolulu.  and, of course, it's a long, long journey to and from the mainland, especially for those whose primary homes are on the east coast.  the real estate market  ''there's something for everyone here,'' ms. kwiat said, ''from very small condos to coffee farms.'' she estimated that the second-home market makes up a third to nearly half of all residential sales.  ms. griffey, of century 21 all islands, said the market was clearly tilted toward the buyer now because inventory more than doubled in the last year. she currently has 50 listings, contrasted with just 10 last year. ''we're seeing a lot of price reduction -- and bonuses,'' she said. ''some sellers may include cars and furniture.''  on the big island in 2006, sales of single-family houses were down 26 percent from 2005, ms. kwiat said, and condo sales were off 39 percent.  the average cost of a home is around $585,000, according to david hehman, chief executive of escapehomes.com, a web site devoted to second homes. prices are often lower, though, just outside the area: an average home in captain cook, about 20 minutes from kailua kona, with a cooler climate at a higher elevation, goes for about $400,000, said mr. schiller of location inc.  typical entry-level condos in kailua kona are priced from about $225,000, and houses start at around $350,000, with prices rising above $10 million, real estate agents say.  buyers can pick up property more cheaply through a leasehold deal, which is rare on the mainland. but beware: the buyer owns the home or structure but not the land beneath it and must pay ground rent, which is usually fixed for 10 to 30 years.  ''you can justify it as a long-term rental,'' mr. hehman said of leasehold agreements.  lay of the land  population -- 9,870 full-time residents, according to the census bureau.  size -- about 35 square miles of land.  who's buying -- baby boomers nationwide looking for both an investment and pleasure, with an eye toward retirement.  getting there -- there are several direct daily flights from the mainland to kona international airport. us airways offers them from phoenix, for example, and united airlines from los angeles. there are many more airlines with connections from honolulu international airport.  while you're looking -- rooms start at $695 a night at the ultra-luxury four seasons hualalai on the kona-kohala coast (72-100 kaupulehu drive, 808-325-8000; www.fourseasons.com/hualalai). amenities include a sports club and spa and a private jack nicklaus golf course. those on a tighter budget can stay at the king kamehameha's kona beach hotel (75-5660 palani road, 808-329-2911; www.konabeachhotel.com) for around $170 a night.  three for sale  a rain forest for any occasion, and plenty of aloha spirit  information on properties was supplied by the listing agencies.  what -- 1-bedroom condominium  how much -- $315,000  this 647-square-foot recently renovated and newly furnished unit has one bathroom, a lanai and new appliances. the complex has a pool. agent: harry pritikin, koa realty, (808) 334-1562; www.konarealestateagent.com.  what -- 3-bedroom house  how much -- $695,000  this 1,752-square-foot one-story stucco house is on just over a third of an acre in a gated community not far from downtown kailua kona. it has two bathrooms and was built in 2000. there are a concrete-tile roof, vaulted ceilings and an open floor plan. agent: susan miedema, coldwell banker aloha properties, (808) 329-3545; www.coldwellaloha.com.  what -- 3-bedroom house  how much -- $1,119,000  this 2,820-square-foot two-story house in the town of captain cook has open ocean views from a lower-level open deck and an upper-level covered lanai. it has three bathrooms and tile floors and counters. the house is on an acre and has a two-car garage. agent: cindy griffey, century 21 all islands, (808) 326-3621; www.hawaiimoves.com.  havens | kailua kona, hawaii  