hey, let's ride bikes to school (yeah, right)   school's out, and the students stream out of john l. miller-great neck north high school. upperclassmen bypass the buses and head toward the parking lot filled with well-used workaday vehicles, the type of kick-around cars that look like parent loaners or hand-me-downs from older siblings.  ah, but this is the teachers' lot. students clutching their books pass it by and head for a far different fleet, of luxury cars of recent vintage.  ''you don't want to be seen taking the bus as a senior,'' explained charles frank, 17, who on tuesday afternoon headed toward his acura rl parked down the block. ''you pretty much have to have a car.''  and what cars they are. charles strolled along the students' lot pointing out the hot cars: the blond porsche sport utility vehicle. the coveted audi rs 4. the snazzy black bmw parked next to the black hummer. the cars filled three modest parking lots and lined the nearby streets.  ''if i'm in my car and i see a teacher driving by, i feel bad,'' charles said. ''i'll think, 'wow, it's kind of sad that i have this nice car and they're driving that.' ''  other students repaired to their cars, too. joe roofeh, 17, headed to his 2007 lexus es 350. david braun, 17, walked to his 2006 black hummer. sneha dey, 17, got into her white bmw 3 series.  ''a lot of kids here are all about who has the nicer car, but for most of us, your life is not about the car you have,'' charles said. ''some kids judge you by what you drive, but usually when kids make fun of you for your car, it's just kidding around. it's not like they wouldn't hang out with you because you don't have the best car.''  he paused and added, ''when you think about it, the fact that everyone in this school has a car at all is incredible just to begin with.''  for most of these students, the cars were gifts from their parents, either for turning 17 or for getting a driver's license. for most of them, it is their first car and basically their first experience as drivers.  lawrence paul, 17, leaned on the 2006 mercedes he said he got as a gift from his parents in august. it cost around $70,000, he said.  lawrence said he appreciated being given an expensive car and had worked for meager wages in an oil change garage in queens, where he said people tended to stare at the kid with the expensive car.  ''when i drive in queens or some place not as wealthy as great neck, i feel like i'm seen as some spoiled kid,'' lawrence said. ''i got the car at a dealership in long island city, and as soon as i pulled out i felt totally stupid, because you see all these people on the street who don't even have cars.''  ''a teenager with a car like this -- in great neck people understand,'' he said. ''but other places -- like when i go to the car wash and the guys working there ask me, 'is this your car?' i tell them, 'no, it's my mom's.' ''  some students do get cloistered in local affluence, and a spiffy new luxury car can quickly become last year's undesirable model.  ''there are kids here who have been through three new cars already because they get tired of them,'' lawrence said.  tanya yaminian, 17, stood near the mercedes c350 she said she received for her 17th birthday.  ''my dad called me and said, 'go home, there's something for you in the driveway,' and i got there and the keys were in a little box,'' she said. ''at first, i sort of felt bad, like, 'do i deserve it?' but it's not like i was going to say, 'no, take it back.' ''  ''with kids here, it's not all about how much the car costs,'' she said. ''something like a jaguar is an old person's car. you want something sporty, like an audi or an infiniti. look at the parking lot: you have range rovers, hummers, bmws.''  sneha unlocked her bmw and said, ''it's not like you're judged by the car you have in great neck, but you're noticed more if you drive a nice car.''  kevin klein, 17, a senior, was pulling out in his 2006 bmw x5 s.u.v. his parents bought it for him for improving his grades, he said.  ''this car is my reward,'' he said. ''i wasn't doing well, so my parents said that if i study hard and perform well, they'd buy me a car. i know it might be a lot more expensive than other kids get, but this is a town where everyone gets what they want. so it's kind of normal.''  sadie zar, 17, a senior, walked to her 2007 bmw 328xi, parked between a black hummer and a red bmw. a girl got into the red bmw and said out the window, ''i think hers is ugly,'' and drove away laughing.  a security guard walked a reporter away from the parking lot. he said he spends his days guarding student cars that cost more than his annual salary.  ''i wouldn't spend that on a car,'' he said. ''i have a family. i'd use it to fix up my house.''  the island e-mail: theisland@nytimes.com  