fin-de-siècle admen   henri de toulouse-lautrec (1864-1901) possessed a magical talent for drawing. encouraged by his friends and family, he studied portrait and religious painting in paris in the 1880s before dedicating himself to a life of profligacy and becoming a habitué of parisian bars, cabarets, cafes and brothels. famously, this world became the subject of his most brilliant posters, drawings, lithographs and paintings.  but there was another side to toulouse-lautrec's art, one that the jane voorhees zimmerli art museum seeks to show in ''toulouse-lautrec and the french imprint: fin-de-siècle posters in paris, brussels and barcelona.'' the artist was a pioneer of modern advertising imagery. from the late 1880s on, he produced a series of innovative, monumental mass-market lithographic posters advertising more prosaic themes -- serial novels, magazines, books, products and even the ault & wiborg company, makers of fine inks, based in cincinnati.  although the inspiration for these posters was purely commercial, they nonetheless possessed lasting artistic value. successive rooms of this sprawling, eye-caressing exhibition reveal that the stylistic innovations of toulouse-lautrec's poster designs from the 1880s to 1900 influenced myriad modernist artists, first in paris, then later in other parts of europe. his embrace of lithographic printing and the mass-produced poster also helped elevate these lowly popular-art forms to the realm of high art.  the show of more than 130 french, spanish and belgian posters is arranged thematically, beginning with a small display devoted to lithography in the 19th century. lithography is the simplest of the printed arts, the artist drawing with a greasy crayon or ink onto a limestone printing stone or plate, resulting in prints that replicate the hand-drawn lines and gestures. the technique was invented by the german playwright alois senefelder in 1798, though it soon gained popularity with artists for use in book and magazine illustration and was later adapted for commercial purposes.  jules cheret was among the first artists to treat lithography as a fine art medium, incorporating attractive colors into his images beginning in the late 1870s. he also introduced a new artistry to the designs, as witnessed by several posters here. among them is a pair depicting dancing revelers, acrobats and musicians for the folies bergère, the popular parisian music hall catering to lewd and exotic tastes. it was the venue, in 1926, for josephine baker's famous ''banana dance,'' in which she performed topless wearing a skirt made of bananas.  by 1884, cheret had designed almost 1,000 commercial posters, and, according to the exhibition catalog, ''was printing nearly 200,000 impressions annually.'' following the 1881 ''revocation of censorship laws on printed materials,'' these color lithographic posters appeared on walls of buildings and kiosks throughout paris, promoting theater, dance halls and music halls, as well as a new abundance of mass-produced consumer goods. they were intended to be catchy and instantly legible to potential consumers, hence their colorful intensity and bold graphic quality.  the following section of the exhibition presents a selection of lithographic advertising posters by various artists, among them toulouse-lautrec, pierre bonnard, maurice denis, edouard vuillard, henri-gabriel ibels, alphonse mucha and jacques villon, the elder brother of marcel duchamp. there are posters for gasoline, automobiles, magazines, journals, plays, arts expositions, housewares, sardines and all kinds of beverages, from wine and aperitifs to champagne.  many of these early posters employ imagery of flirtatious young women; even the gasoline poster features imagery of floating naked nymphs. it makes sense, for the figures in these posters are the personification of the desirable young woman for male audiences, the dominant consumers of the period. even then, associating products with objects of male desire was a strategy to create desire for the product as well.  more generally, the posters are characterized by great artistic experimentation. avant-garde modern artists delighted in the new art form, introducing an array of colors and subjects and playing with all kinds of dynamic designs. a good example is a bonnard lithograph advertising champagne, in which a young, frolicsome female, perhaps tipsy, is suddenly engulfed by a wave of champagne bubbles spilling from her overfilled glass.  toulouse-lautrec was, however, the most innovative of the poster designers, with his japonisme-inspired compositions (characterized by simplified figures and forms, planes of flat pure color and jolting diagonal lines), and his emphasis on subjects that had previously fallen outside the purview of fine art. there are more than a dozen of his posters here, including many famous ones of cabaret and circus performers, in addition to his more commercial work; among them are images of the dancers jane avril, may milton and la goulue, the stage name of louise weber.  the new, dynamic aesthetic of poster design occurring in paris spread to other european cities, as the final two rooms of the exhibition seek to show. on display are several dozen examples of belgian and spanish modern posters, some from the collection of the zimmerli, the rest on loan from private collections in europe and the united states, many of them never before shown publicly. they add up to one more reason to visit this show, which is pure eye candy.  ''toulouse-lautrec and the french imprint: fin-de-siècle posters in paris, brussels and barcelona,'' jane voorhees zimmerli art museum, 71 hamilton street, new brunswick, through feb. 18. information: (732) 932-7237 or www.zimmerlimuseum.rutgers.edu.  art review  