rustic streams hiding complicated traditions   'rider on the plains': music by virgil thomson and charles fussell  emmanuel feldman, cellist; joy cline phinney, pianist; nashville chamber orchestra, conducted by paul gambill; new england string ensemble, conducted by susan davenny wyner. albany records troy883; cd.  virgil thomson's cello concerto had an auspicious premiere in 1950 by eugene ormandy and the philadelphia orchestra, with paul olefsky as soloist. there were later performances with the chicago symphony orchestra conducted by fritz reiner and the royal philharmonic orchestra conducted by thomas beecham. so mr. thomson was keenly disappointed when this work, which he was so fond of, fell from favor.  he would have been delighted by this excellent new recording of the work in a program titled ''rider on the plains,'' after the subtitle of the concerto's first movement. the cellist emmanuel feldman is soloist with the nashville chamber orchestra, conducted by paul gambill.  on the surface the concerto is genial and bumptious. the first movement is a neo-classical romp; the second, a set of quizzical variations on a hymn tune, ''death, 'tis a melancholy day.'' the finale evokes children at play through prankish musical games: at one point the theme from the spirited finale to beethoven's piano sonata no. 6 is revealed to be suspiciously similar to ''yankee doodle.''  but there is much more to this music. the bold rhythmic dislocations in the finale counter the surface humor. the quietly intense slow movement has astringent harmony and piercing inner voices. technically challenging, the concerto sounds exhilarating in this bracing and confident performance.  the album includes ''right river'': variations for cello and string orchestra, a moody, harmonically pungent recent work by charles fussell, who was a close colleague of mr. thomson. mr. feldman is joined by the new england string ensemble, conducted by susan davenny wyner. there are also appealing works for cello and piano by mr. thomson and mr. fussell.  anthony tommasini  classical recordings  