lobsterman from nicaragua could join red sox cast   devern hansack. remember the name. remember it because it is the name of a pitcher who pitched a no-hitter that most everyone probably doesn't know about.  a long rain delay preceded the game hansack pitched on the last day of last season, and rain shortened it. hansack, in his second major league start, pitched himself onto page 369 of the elias record book, ''no-hit games fewer than nine innings,'' adding his name for this year's edition after pascual pérez, montreal vs. philadelphia, 1988.  valiant though his performance was, it wasn't an official no-hitter because hansack didn't pitch nine innings, a criterion for being credited with a no-hitter. he didn't pitch nine innings because the red sox' game against baltimore was rained out after five innings.  ''it kind of got lost even in boston,'' said john blake, head of the red sox' media relations. ''we did our media thing with the manager and general manager after the game. the bigger question was what were we going to do with our coaching staff.''  devern hansack. who is he, and why was he pitching for the red sox on the last day of the season?  lest we forget, the red sox were out of the playoff chase. they had been eliminated from the american league east race on sept. 20 and the wild-card race two days later. hansack, a lobsterman from nicaragua, is a 28-year-old right-hander, only the ninth player from his country to play in the major leagues. the last-day start was his second for boston in the final weeks of the season.  in the houston system for four years, hansack was released at the end of spring training in 2004, and he was out of professional baseball for the next two years. craig shipley -- tipped off by the third-base coach for the nicaraguan national team, who scouts for the red sox -- saw hansack pitch in an international tournament in the netherlands in 2005.  shipley liked what he saw. ''he was pretty easy to like,'' shipley said. ''he was throwing 93, 94 and had a good slider, an above-average slider.'' shipley, boston's vice president for international scouting, knew he wanted to sign him, but let him go home unsigned.  after hansack returned home, shipley sent jon dipuglia, the latin american scouting cross-checker, to nicaragua to sign him.  ''we didn't make contact with him in holland,'' shipley said, explaining his strategy. ''when you make contact, the player starts talking to others on the club and they say, 'i know this guy with that team and that guy with that team,' and you could lose the chance to sign him. i also didn't want scouts who were there to see me talking to him.''  hansack pitched last season for class aa portland in maine, then was summoned by the red sox in september. he will try to win a bullpen job with boston in spring training.  ''i'm happy for devern,'' shipley said. ''he took the opportunity and made the most of it. it was a good way to end the season.  shipley said hansack left a good impression on red sox general manager theo epstein and ''the rest of the staff.''  ''so it's great for him,'' shipley said. ''now he has the opportunity to make the team out of spring training. if you had told him that a year and a half ago, he'd probably have laughed at you.''  shipley added an additional thought. ''if he keeps pitching well,'' he said, ''he won't have to fish for lobster any more.''  mets' bullpen outdid starters  twenty-three of the 30 major league teams had at least one pitcher who pitched 200 innings last season, 200 being a benchmark these days for a durable, reliable pitcher who helps the rest of the staff with his frequent, consistent work.  that leaves seven teams without a 200-inning stalwart. the american league teams, and their earned-run-average ranking in the league, were the kansas city royals (14th), the baltimore orioles (13th), the tampa bay devil rays (12th) and the seattle mariners (9th).  the national league teams were the washington nationals (16th), the philadelphia phillies (11th) and the mets (3rd).  what's that? the mets didn't have a pitcher work 200 innings -- tom glavine pitched 198 -- and they had the third-lowest earned run average in the national league? and they won the n.l. east title, too?  the mets would take a repeat performance next season if it guaranteed that they would reach game 7 of the league championship series. obviously, they want to get to the world series, but if they could get to game 7 again they would be willing to take their chances.  omar minaya, the mets' general manager, who has not had as successful an off-season as he did in his first two, has said he is not concerned about his failure to add a significant starter to the pitching staff for two reasons: he believes the mets have enough young pitchers to fill out the rotation, and he has bolstered the relief corps, which he said is what wins pennants.  last season, the mets had the best bullpen in the national league. it had the most victories (32), the best record (32-15, .681), the lowest opponents batting average (.239) and the lowest e.r.a. (3.28).  the starting pitchers were good, but not as good. they were first with 65 victories; second, only a point behind los angeles, with a .565 winning percentage; third with a .262 opponents batting average; and eighth with a 4.67 e.r.a.  pitching by numbers  last season, nine pitchers pitched 200 or more innings and gave up fewer than 200 hits, while 13 pitchers pitched fewer than 200 innings and gave up 200 or more hits. in all, 44 pitchers worked 200 or more innings and 48 pitchers allowed 200 or more hits.  zach duke of pittsburgh allowed the most hits in the majors, 255. mark buehrle and jon garland, members of the chicago white sox' rotation, tied for second with 247.  chris young -- the texas rangers made a mistake by trading him to san diego a year ago -- had the lowest opponents batting average, .206.  johan santana of minnesota, not surprisingly, led the american league at .216, just as he led the league in just about everything: e.r.a., strikeouts, innings pitched, victories (tied), starts (tied).  waiting for gossage  this doesn't come with a money-back guarantee, but congratulations to rich gossage on his election to the hall of fame. that would be his election a year from now, but it's never too early to pat a guy on the back and salute him for a landmark achievement.  before gossage breaks out the champagne, he should know his expected election is based on historic voting patterns that say he will make it next year, his ninth on the ballot.  gossage missed this year by only 21 votes. that he missed wasn't surprising because cal ripken and tony gwynn were on the ballot, and they were obvious first-time winners. the history of voting for the hall of fame demonstrates that repeat candidates usually aren't elected when obvious first-timers are on the ballot.  but as close as gossage came this time, with 71 percent of the vote (75 percent is needed for election), it's virtually certain that he'll make it next year when no dominant first-timers will appear on the ballot. shawon dunston, david justice and tim raines will be the best new names on the ballot, and none of them figure to be elected.  with bruce sutter having been elected last year and respect for relievers apparently rising, gossage would probably have made it this year had ripken and gwynn not been in the way. as it was, gossage was one of only three candidates (jim rice and dave concepción were the others) whose vote totals rose from last year, though rice's percentage slipped to 63.5 from 64.8.  rice's percentage of the vote total had climbed for three consecutive years, and he appeared to be moving inexorably toward the necessary 75 percent. now he has to wait until next year, his 14th and next-to-last on the ballot, to see if he can recover and regain momentum.  if rice doesn't make it next year, he will have to contend with rickey henderson in 2008.  on baseball  