a discordant chorus questions visions for a bush library at southern methodist   with growing faculty unease over plans to enshrine president bush's official papers and a policy institute at southern methodist university in dallas, the process of creating the nation's 13th presidential library is off to a familiar start: discord.  on thursday, 68 theologians, professors and other faculty members present and past, citing complaints about president bush's ''poor marks'' on civil liberties, the environment, gay rights and the war in iraq, sent the university president a letter questioning whether visions of the library were consistent with the school's religious and academic values.  ''according to george bush's closest associates, the half-billion-dollar endowment will be used by the institute to hire conservative scholars to agree to 'write papers and books favorable to the president's policies,' '' said the letter calling for a campuswide dialogue on the affiliation.  starting with franklin d. roosevelt, presidents have handed over their records and memorabilia for scholars and the public to study and to memorialize their administrations. but their ever more expensive, privately erected libraries, study centers and museums have been bedeviled by complex disputes over executive orders governing access to the material. mr. bush issued his own order in november 2001 that in part granted a former president the right to assert a privilege to keep certain records secret.  his legacy and southern methodist's role in preserving and advancing it is now a divisive issue at the 11,000-student university long identified with the bushes, former residents of dallas, who are methodists. laura bush graduated from southern methodist and sits on the board of trustees.  after years of considering other university partners, a site selection committee announced on dec. 21 that it was pursuing exclusive discussions with southern methodist for a library and museum, and a policy institute reporting not to the university but to a bush foundation.  the location has not been announced but a likely site is a garden apartment condominium complex bought with a $35 million gift from ray l. hunt, a trustee and son of the oil magnate h. l. hunt. the gift, though matching the largest ever given the university, was not announced at the time. some evicted tenants have sued.  at a meeting on tuesday, close to 150 faculty members raised concerns about the project and formulated what became 35 questions for the university president, r. gerald turner, on the relationship between the university and the bush library and policy center. the questions included, ''how would the institute affect the intellectual integrity of s.m.u.?''  faculty members voiced concerns that the policy center and the university could merge roles, giving administration figures like karl rove an academic forum.  others said security was an issue, a theme that the community has aired in letters to the editor and blogs.  in an e-mail message in december to mayor laura miller of dallas, sam boyd, a longtime neighbor of southern methodist, a trial lawyer and a former green beret in vietnam, wrote: ''once completed the $500 million george bush library will become the number one (#1) us edifice terrorist target in the world.''  a woman in garland, deborah lewis, wrote the fort worth star-telegram that dallas was already infamous for the assassination of president john f. kennedy: ''now it probably will be known for honoring the worst president ever.''  indeed the history of presidential libraries is replete with controversy. they are peculiarly american institutions, a vital scholarly resource, a 2004 study by the center for arts and cultural policy studies at princeton found. but it said they have also become ''the accepted way to memorialize our presidents and promote an appreciation, some would say exaggeration, of their character, performance and legacy.''  over the years, through battles over the watergate tapes and other revealing documents, presidents have issued executive orders to limit access to certain records, and to this day, scholars say, it is not clear what material is in the public domain and when.  in the case of southern methodist, dr. turner will address the faculty letter in an open spring faculty meeting next wednesday, said brad cheves, vice president for development and external affairs.  ''it's a call to dialogue,'' said mr. cheves, noting that the signatories numbered less than 10 percent of the 609 active faculty members and 137 retired members. ''we continue to believe that a strong majority of the university community is supportive of efforts to receive the museum, library and institute if we're so fortunate to be selected,'' he said.  the letter, sent by e-mail, was largely identical to an unsigned draft dated dec. 16, 2006, which mysteriously popped up in university e-mails and was picked up by news organizations.  susanne johnson, associate professor of christian education at the perkins school of theology, a mainstay of the methodist-owned university, said it had been her doing. the draft was on her computer screen, she said, when her dog climbed on the keyboard and hit ''send.'' ''i should have said my dog prematurely sent it but they wouldn't believe it,'' dr. johnson said. ''i wouldn't take that excuse from my students.''  in the signed letter resent thursday, dr. johnson and her colleagues said there were ''at least two irreconcilable visions'' of the role of the library. one held it to be ''a neutral space'' where scholars would pursue ''nonpartisan, academic inquiry into his presidency.''  ''in another vision, the library will be a partisan space,'' the letter continued. ''going by various terms, such as conservative think tank, institute or policy center, the library will hire conservative scholars to pursue a partisan agenda in favor of the president's policies and programs.''  the letter-writers argued for a nonpartisan approach but said they wondered if it could prevail given news accounts of mr. bush's affinity for a conservative policy center along the lines of the hoover institution on war, revolution and peace, which has had a rocky relationship with its liberal-leaning host, stanford university in california.  citing an article in the new york daily news quoting associates of the president calling for an institute to ''spread the gospel of a presidency that now gets poor marks,'' the letter continued:  ''the 'poor marks' come from those americans who question the wisdom of certain attitudes and actions of president bush during his term in office. among things they've so named: erosion of habeas corpus, denial of global warming, disrespect of international treaties, alienation of longtime u.s. allies, environmental predation, disregard for the rights of gay persons, a pre-emptive war based on false premises, and other perceived forms of disrespect for the created order and global community.''  she and a perkins colleague, the rev. bill mcelvaney, professor emeritus of preaching and worship and a former president of the united methodist seminary in kansas city, mo., first raised questions about the library in an op-ed article last november in the student paper, the daily campus. they asked: ''do we want s.m.u. to benefit financially from a legacy of massive violence, destruction and death brought about by the bush presidency in dismissal of broad public opinion?''  while many faculty members said they had no problem with a library, dr. mcelvaney said in an interview, ''i happen to be concerned about both; either one gives us a permanent bush presence on our campus.''  in convening tuesday's faculty meeting, rhonda blair, president of the faculty senate and a professor of theater, credited the ''thoughtful and challenging'' op-ed article of dr. johnson and dr. mcelvaney with generating the discussion.  but dr. turner in a letter to faculty, staff and students on jan. 5 made no mention of the two theologians and said that through the bush library, museum and institute ''visiting scholars and dignitaries will be available for interaction who otherwise would not be in residence and accessible to our campus community.''  with the lyndon b. johnson library at the university of texas in austin and the george h. w. bush library at texas a&m in college station, if southern methodist were chosen for a library, dr. turner said, ''it would be part of a historic triumvirate of presidential resources in texas.''  