living here | getaways with incomes; going commercial   who -- jason goldwater, 35, of las vegas, an associate creative director at an advertising agency and a co-owner of a waxing salon, shown with his wife, bree goldwater, 34, also a co-owner of the salon  what -- studio apartment with adjoining commercial space  where -- telluride, colo.  telluride is home to one of the very first hydroelectric power plants, and this building used to belong to the telluride power company. when you walk in the front door, there's a little slot. it says ''bills.'' our windows look out on the gondola station and mountains. nothing will get built there.  we live in las vegas, but i'd been coming to telluride for years. when our daughter was born, i began trying to convince bree we could move here permanently and live happily ever after. that fell on deaf ears. but when my half-brother expressed interest in starting a business, and told us his daughter, berkeley, was attending aesthetician school, bree and i got to thinking about trying it out, since berkeley could run the shop. our salon is about 300 square feet and the rest of the commercial space is a real estate office.  living in a commercial building can be funky. the bathroom, for example, has two doors, one that was designed as a public entrance for the community, and one that was for the office workers. you can have a bath in there during business hours, but you have to be very careful.  we didn't want to compromise the integrity of the building, so we didn't put in a kitchen. we have a microwave and a little fridge for necessities, but we mostly go out to eat. that's fine with us. the restaurants here are great, and berkeley's husband runs two of the nearby gyro carts, so we're about 100 feet from the best sandwiches in town.  as told to bethany lyttle  information on properties were supplied by the listing companies.  where -- mendocino, calif.  what -- office or retail building with apartment  how much -- $1,195,000  this 1,900-square-foot former house on main street in mendocino has views of the ocean from its apartment, which has two bedrooms and one bathroom. the ground floor, which has a fireplace, bay windows and one bathroom, can be used for offices or as retail space. the property includes a barn that is currently used as a retail space. headlands state park is within walking distance. mendocino is 150 miles north of san francisco. agent: scott deitz, century 21 - seascape realty, (707) 937-9220; www.scottdeitz.com.  where -- ouray, colo.  what -- store with apartment  how much -- $499,000  built in 1997, this building has a storefront, currently operating as a candy store, with a two-bedroom apartment upstairs. the apartment has custom cabinets, a bay window, one bathroom and a rear balcony. the shop space has a kitchen and could be used for a restaurant, a deli or a coffee shop. ouray is a 50-mile drive from telluride. broker: erin eddy, ouray realty & investments, (970) 325-4141; www.eerealty.biz.  where -- bar harbor, me.  what -- store with apartment  how much -- $850,000  this two-story building, which was built around 1900, has water views from its retail space and from the apartment. it is across the street from the town landing. both the store and the apartment have been fully renovated. the apartment has three bedrooms, a rear deck, one bathroom and off-street parking for two vehicles. the retail space is currently used as a gift store. at 1,500 square feet, the apartment takes up about half of the building. agent: jeff wooster, lynam real estate, (207) 288-3334; www.lynams.com.  where -- hyannis, mass.  what -- commercial space with apartment  how much -- $484,800  built in the 1930s, this three-story, 2,112-square-foot building is in the business district and within walking distance of ocean beaches, a marina and golf courses. it has two parking spaces. the main floor is currently a home décor showroom and has a fireplace, hardwood floors and large display windows. on the second floor, the apartment has two bedrooms, two bathrooms and hardwood floors. an attic could be converted into more living space. agent: cristina junqueira, seaport village realty, (508) 771-1994; www.forsalebycristina.com.  where -- hudson, n.y.  what -- commercial building with 2 apartments  how much -- $545,000  this 4,100-square-foot building was built in the 1860s and is on a street of galleries, shops and restaurants. the retail space, currently used as an antiques shop and gallery, is about 2,000 square feet and has 13-foot pressed-tin ceilings. above the store are two apartments, one with three bedrooms, one with two. each has hardwood floors, wood moldings, an updated kitchen and a bathroom with a claw-foot tub. agents: tom swope and kathy duffy, gary dimauro real estate, (518) 822-0800; www.garydimauro.com.  where -- bellingham, wash.  what -- commercial building with apartment  how much -- $820,000  in the fairhaven district of bellingham, near the alaska ferry dock and with views of puget sound, this 1970s building has a two-bedroom apartment above commercial space currently used as a beauty salon. the apartment has two bathrooms and water views from the living room and from a deck. the apartment and the shop are each about 925 square feet. there is basement parking for one car. bellingham is 90 miles north of seattle. agent: andy webster, coldwell banker - miller arnason, (360) 734-3420; www.coldwellbankermiller.com.  