conducting electricity, and idolatry   as the sixth cycle of ''american idol'' begins on tuesday, the show's producers say they expect that at some point during the season something will go wrong. indeed they are counting on it: ''there's kind of a train-crash mentality,'' an executive producer, ken warwick, said.  one source of unpredictability has to do with a little noticed but crucial change in format: the switch from prerecorded music tracks to a live band. when rickey minor took over as music director at the beginning of the fourth season of ''idol,'' his job included overseeing the tracks, which the contestants sang to. but after his first episode mr. minor persuaded the producers to abandon the karaoke approach, insisting that a live band would give the show more credibility.  this season, a new but equally unpredictable wrinkle will require mr. minor's skills too: a competition of original songs, with viewers voting for both their favorite singer and tune. it is conceivable that a song could be downloaded by cellphone and a contestant ''could have a smash before the show is even over,'' mr. minor said by phone recently from los angeles, where he was preparing music for a current concert tour of another pop culture phenomenon, disney's ''high school musical.''  on fox's ''american idol,'' mr. minor's many duties include conducting the musicians and backup vocalists as well as leading a phalanx of some 30 arrangers, orchestrators and copyists. then there's his work with the finalists. under the live format, mr. minor can accent their strengths -- or conceal their limitations -- sometimes making adjustments on the spot. another executive producer, nigel lythgoe, recalled an incident with a young singer last season: ''kellie pickler started a chorus two bars before she should have, and rickey kept it solid. the audience probably never knew.''  mr. minor's path to ''idol'' started in south central los angeles, where he moved from louisiana with his family when he was 9. ''it was a low-income, drug-infested situation,'' mr. minor, now 47, said. but a high school music program, in which he played bass, ''enabled me to move forward in life, not just career but in life.''  at 19 he abandoned studies in math and computer science at the university of california, los angeles, to tour europe with gladys knight. he had never flown before. he said: ''i sat on the plane thinking: 'they're paying for the plane and the hotel room, and they're paying me to play this piece of wood and these metal strings. i can do this.' ''  back in los angeles, he was working in the pit of the musical ''dreamgirls'' when he received a career-changing call from john simmons, then music director for the singer stephanie mills. mr. simmons asked him to put together a band to back a singer from his church who was seeking a record deal. that singer turned out to be whitney houston.  mr. minor's tenure as music director for ms. houston -- at a time when she routinely topped the pop charts -- led to more concert, recording, film and television work as a music director and co-producer. his credits include ''vh1 divas live,'' the bet awards and anniversary celebrations for motown records and the apollo theater. he received an emmy nomination for music direction in 2005 for ''genius: a night for ray charles,'' a concert tribute featuring elton john, stevie wonder and norah jones.  mr. minor has juggled the special projects with other series: besides ''idol,'' he served as music director on ''america's got talent,'' a successful entry last summer, and on the less successful ''celebrity duets,'' shows that, like ''american idol,'' were produced by simon cowell. the variety of projects calls for mr. minor to deal with a range of talent and experience, from pop luminaries to industry newcomers.  last season's ''idol'' runner-up, katharine mcphee, said mr. minor had helped unseasoned singers feel secure: ''he didn't treat us like amateurs. it was about making the artist feel comfortable.''  natalie cole, a grammy winner who has worked extensively with mr. minor, said the same was true for veteran performers. ''he treats us like we're all on the same team,'' she said.  his reputation with artists was a factor in securing a coup for ''american idol'' last spring. averaging 30 million viewers an episode, the fifth season had already attracted a number of celebrities. still, a performance by the reclusive prince would add to the show's luster. the producers told mr. minor that there was a possibility that prince would make an appearance and said a call from him could make the difference. he made the call. prince performed. so did al jarreau and mary j. blige, whom he also called.  among mr. minor's long-range plans is a recording that showcases his abilities as a producer and arranger, along the lines of ''back on the block,'' by mr. minor's idol and mentor, quincy jones. to ms. cole, the comparison is apt: ''he could be like a quincy jones. quincy is the same way. he leaves his ego outside the door and it's all about the music.''  television  