murder trial paints portrait of a family torn by strife   wearing a black velvet coat and a patterned blouse, the 86-year-old mother of the dead woman looked birdlike and frail as she walked to the witness stand.  she remembered the last time she spoke to her daughter, christine odierno, by telephone.  ''mom, i gave ben the divorce papers, and he went bananas,'' the mother, jennie kramer, told the jury in state supreme court in manhattan yesterday, quoting her daughter. ''he's going to kill me, mom. he's going to kill me. he's going to kill me.''  with that, mrs. kramer leaned forward, her head collapsing into her hands, and cried.  it was the most emotional moment in the first day of the murder trial of benjamin odierno, accused of stabbing his wife, christine, to death on april 24, 2005, in the kitchen of their upper east side town house, where she was cutting lettuce for dinner.  prosecutors say mr. odierno, 72, killed his wife, who was 57, three days after she gave him divorce papers -- purposely handing them over in a public place, they say, because she was afraid of him. they say she was a long-suffering victim of domestic abuse that always stayed hidden within the thick walls of their home on east 84th street.  when the police arrived, said the prosecutor, kerry o'connell, ''she was able to draw enough breath to say, 'my husband did this. my husband stabbed me in the heart.' ''  the defense lawyer, jack litman, agreed that mr. odierno killed his wife. but he said that it was in self-defense, and that it was she who had been tormenting him, forcing him to see a psychiatrist.  ''he never raised a hand to her,'' mr. litman said. ''he acted and reacted instinctively to save his own life after she stabbed him.''  he said mr. odierno, a landlord, had traumatic amnesia that prevented him from recalling the details of the night his wife died. the police, responding to a 911 call reporting a woman's screams, said that when they arrived they found mr. odierno stabbing himself in the abdomen.  but what emerged most clearly from the first day of the trial was a portrait of a family deeply divided, in which some members take mrs. odierno's side, and others, including the couple's two grown sons, take her husband's.  mr. litman told jurors that the sons would testify on behalf of their father. they would describe, he said, how their mother had grown increasingly unstable over the last eight or so years of her life. she became very thin, and ate only lettuce for dinner, obsessively separating the white parts from the green parts, mr. litman said in his opening statement.  he said that mrs. odierno had exiled her husband from the couple's bedroom, forcing him to sleep in a single bed in a room he shared with marcus, the younger son. she hoarded hundreds of rolls of toilet paper in the basement, mr. litman said, and screamed that her husband was abusing her loud enough for the neighbors to hear, yet nobody ever reported seeing any bruises.  mr. litman hammered on the family divisions during cross-examination of mrs. odierno's mother.  ''you have a son, right?'' he asked mrs. kramer, who had testified that she was the mother of three daughters, including christine, and a 61-year-old son, bill.  ''not anymore,'' she replied.  ''now of course, bill is still alive, isn't he?''  ''i think so,'' mrs. kramer replied.  ''the reason you're saying you don't know is because bill supports benjamin odierno, is that right?'' mr. litman asked.  ''i have no idea what you mean,'' mrs. kramer said.  ''did you see your son at the funeral?'' mr. litman asked.  ''yes,'' mrs. kramer said.  ''did you see him as a pallbearer?''  ''i think he was,'' mrs. kramer said. ''i'm not certain.''  mr. litman had no further questions.  