jordan chattman, joseph shumofsky   jordan deanna chattman, a daughter of renee l. chattman and sanders m. chattman of north caldwell, n.j., is to be married this evening to joseph bruce shumofsky, a son of linda lang shumofsky and dr. edward shumofsky of new rochelle, n.y. rabbi norman patz is to perform the ceremony at temple beth ahm in springfield, n.j.  the bride, 31, is the director of donor relations at the jewish theological seminary in manhattan. she graduated from tufts.  her father is a partner in orloff, lowenbach, stifelman & siegel, a law firm in roseland, n.j.  the bridegroom, 33, is an associate in the manhattan office of dorsey & whitney, a minneapolis law firm. he graduated from cornell and received his law degree from fordham.  his father, a general surgeon, has offices in manhattan and the bronx, which are managed by the bridegroom's mother.  mr. shumofsky met ms. chattman in december 2004 in manhattan at the matzo ball, a party for jewish singles. about a year later he planned his marriage proposal with the precision of a military operation.  to keep his intentions from ms. chattman, he told her he had in mind a january celebration of both her birthday and valentine's day, about two weeks before the events.  ''i knew i wanted drinks at the top of the tower at the beekman tower hotel first,'' mr. shumofsky said.  he scouted out four-star new york restaurants for dinner and chose daniel. for the proposal itself, he toured five hotels in search of a room with a view of central park and selected one on a high floor of the carlyle.  after dinner on the big night, they arrived at the carlyle, where champagne and candlelight awaited in the room, with a recording of andrea bocelli singing a love song in italian. then, as mr. shumofsky, recalled: ''i asked her to dance, sang the words in translation to her, got down on my knees and said: 'will you take care of my heart? i promise to take care of yours.' ''  the next morning, meredith chattman surprised her sister jordan with a knock on their door. she was carrying two dozen roses. mr. shumofsky had flown her in from her home in los angeles.  off they went to brunch at the atlantic grill, where mr. shumofsky had arranged for their families, who had never met, to join them.  one more surprise was still to come: a trip to rome and florence.  reflecting on the events, ms. chattman said: ''i cry at the drop of a hat, but i was so shocked that no tears could fall. it was so beyond anything i could imagine, the most romantic thing anyone could dream of.''  weddings/celebrations  