a position of greatness, and a hunger for victory   middle linebackers with the chicago bears have a legacy of greatness.  three are in the hall of fame: bill george, dick butkus and mike singletary. their current middle linebacker, brian urlacher, could join them.  when butkus sits down to watch sunday's playoff game between the bears and the seattle seahawks, his intense eyes will gravitate toward urlacher. as a member of the bears' storied linebacker fraternity, butkus said the lineage remained in strong hands.  ''urlacher could have played in my day,'' butkus said this week during a telephone interview from his home in malibu, calif. ''i like watching him, i liked watching singletary, and i'm glad they both played for the bears. it's really odd how lucky we've been with linebackers. maybe that's why we haven't been lucky with quarterbacks.''  while many bears fans are tormented about the inconsistency of quarterback rex grossman, few worry about urlacher. he remains the catalyst of a formidable defense that carried the bears to a 13-3 regular season, leading the team in tackles and making the pro bowl for the sixth time.  if the bears are to win the super bowl, the defense anchored by urlacher is expected to lead the way. with most n.f.l. franchises, offensive stars like quarterbacks and running backs get most of the glory. in chicago, the main star is urlacher, revered by fans who flock to soldier field wearing his no. 54 jersey and respected by his teammates.  ''brian is the face of the chicago bears, and the way he handles that makes him special,'' said alex brown, a starting defensive end. ''we've got 53 characters on this team, and he can relate to each one on a professional or personal level. that's a quality that not a lot of people have, and it's what brings us all together.  ''he could easily walk into this locker room and not talk to anybody, and nobody could say anything because he's that good of a player. instead, he's a great teammate. when he messes up, he owns up to it. when you mess up, he jumps down your throat. that's why he's our leader.''  yet the biggest blemish on urlacher's career has been his inability to lead the bears past this point. during his seven seasons, the bears have played two postseason games. both times they were beaten at home, and the defense surrendered at least 29 points in each defeat.  another home playoff flop by the bears on sunday would represent the low point of urlacher's career. he was demoralized after chicago lost its playoff opener to the carolina panthers last season, 29-21, and he has become sensitive about criticism levied at this season's team. grossman has been the most frequent target, but the defense has been questioned as well, after slumping in its last four games, yielding an average of 26.2 points.  ''people have been on our backs all year long,'' urlacher said thursday. ''they've consistently told us how bad we are. we're the worst 13-3 team of all time.  ''late in the season, we didn't play as well as we wanted to. the games didn't mean as much. through 12 games, we already had home-field advantage. but we got that chip on our shoulders, especially now with the playoffs starting. i don't need any outside help to get me ready. it's important to me. everyone wants to win a ring. i want to be remembered as a championship football player. but i don't think that if you don't do it, you've failed in your career. we've done some good things since i've been here.''  urlacher possesses a remarkable combination of speed, tackling ability, versatility and instinct. players listed at 6 feet 4 inches and 258 pounds are not supposed to move as fast as urlacher, who often covers running backs and wide receivers in pass patterns 30 yards downfield. he had 141 tackles this season, the second-highest total of his career, including a 19-tackle performance against arizona, during which he stripped the ball from edgerrin james and helped spark the bears to a comeback victory after trailing by 20 points. urlacher, 28, has been blessed to play with other talented defensive players, like tackle tommie harris and linebacker lance briggs, both of whom also made the pro bowl. ricky manning jr., a defensive back who played three seasons with carolina, acknowledged that he did not fully appreciate urlacher's talent until he became his teammate.  ''i was like, 'how good is this guy really?' '' manning said friday. ''i knew he was good, but now that i've seen him every day at practice, and in games? he's the real deal.''  at the university of new mexico, urlacher was primarily a safety and linebacker, but he was also fast enough to return punts, and to score six touchdowns his senior season as a situational wide receiver.  ''athletically, he's the most talented player i've ever coached,'' new mexico coach rocky long said by telephone thursday. ''we've had defensive backs who were great athletes, but they didn't come in a 250-pound body. every game, he did something that made you go, 'wow.' it was fun putting him at wide receiver. we used him near the goal line, just lined him up and let him go get it.''  with harris and safety mike brown sidelined with season-ending injuries, urlacher and his teammates must prove that the defense can be as dominant as it was earlier in the season. urlacher will have his sights trained sunday on shaun alexander, the key to seattle's running game. alexander was injured when the seahawks played at chicago in october, and the bears waltzed to a 37-6 victory.  answering questions, urlacher is often direct with a touch of sarcasm. asked about the bears' past playoff disappointments, he said, ''thanks for bringing that up.''  what about the sunday forecast that called for frigid temperatures and possibly snow?  ''are they going to change the game time because of the weather, make us go inside?'' urlacher said. ''it doesn't matter to me. weather's not going to win this game for us. i really don't pay attention to that stuff.''  despite off-field endorsements and his celebrity profile in chicago, urlacher does not seem to seek the spotlight.  ''it's almost as if he doesn't want it, as if he'd be more comfortable without it,'' brown said. ''what he cares about more than fame is winning.''  bears fans often compare urlacher with butkus and singletary, debating which linebacker was the best. butkus is clearly impressed with urlacher's speed, but butkus said he dished out more punishment.  ''the first thing people talk about is speed, but hitting hard can bring out a guy's yellow streak,'' butkus said. ''i did it not so much to intimidate, but to create turnovers. maybe if the guy is worried about you, he won't be as worried about protecting the ball. it's so hard to compare different eras, and we all have our own style. mine worked for me. his works for him. the city of chicago deserves another bears championship, and i hope they go all the way.''  so does urlacher. he will be the only defensive player on the field sunday who has experienced both of the bears' most recent playoff losses, in the 2001 and 2005 seasons. urlacher figures it is time to experience playoff joy instead of misery.  ''we're definitely more experienced,'' urlacher said. ''we don't want to lose. we've had home field now three times. we need to take advantage of it this time.''  pro football  