spitzer names 11 to top posts; some key spots remain open   gov. eliot spitzer named 11 members of his administration thursday, including veterans of the clinton white house, members of policy research groups, and two of the democrats who ran unsuccessfully last year to succeed him as the new york state attorney general.  the governor nominated one of the former attorney general candidates, denise e. o'donnell, the former united states attorney in buffalo, as his commissioner of the state's division of criminal justice services. ms. o'donnell and several others who were nominated to serve as commissioners are subject to confirmation by the state senate.  the other former attorney general candidate, sean patrick maloney, a former senior adviser to president bill clinton, was appointed first deputy secretary to the governor, and will advise mr. spitzer on strategy and policy. the appointment of mr. maloney leaked out earlier this week when reporters leaving a news conference bumped into him in the capitol.  mr. spitzer appointed olivia golden, a former policy director at the children's defense fund and assistant secretary for children and families under president clinton, as his state director of operations, the post that oversees the day-to-day workings of more than 60 state departments, agencies, boards and commissions.  and the governor nominated michael f. hogan, who has been the director of the ohio department of mental health since 1991, to serve as the commissioner of new york state office of mental health. his appointment was praised by the new york association of psychiatric rehabilitative services.  he nominated karen m. carpenter-palumbo, a vice president of the american cancer society who served in the cuomo and the pataki administrations, as his commissioner of the office of alcoholism and substance abuse.  but some key positions, including a new health commissioner, have yet to be filled, despite mr. spitzer's intention of overhauling the state's health care system. and the governor has yet to name leaders for the department of environmental conservation or the department of taxation and finance.  the governor made a number of other appointments yesterday. andy beers, the deputy state director of the nature conservancy, was named executive director of the office of parks, recreation and historic preservation. patrick m. hooker, the director of public policy at the new york farm bureau, was nominated commissioner of the state department of agriculture and markets.  the governor nominated mindy bockstein, who was his director of policy research when he was attorney general, as the chairwoman and executive director of the state's consumer protection board.  mr. spitzer tapped derek douglas, the associate director for economic policy at the center for american progress, a liberal policy group, as the director of the governor's office in washington.  mr. spitzer selected steve a. mitnick, a senior adviser at mckinsey & company, and the former chief executive of conjunction l.l.c., an energy transmission company, as his assistant deputy secretary of energy and telecommunications.  mr. spitzer also renominated robert m. maccarone as the director of the division of probation and correctional alternatives.  