tennessee says top defender is no longer enrolled   demetrice morley, one of more than two dozen high school athletes who exploited loopholes in national collegiate athletic association rules to qualify for a football scholarship, is no longer enrolled at the university of tennessee.  morley's improbable jump in grade point average put him at the center of a scandal at university high school, a correspondence school in miami that was found to be a diploma mill.  morley, a sophomore starting safety, played in tennessee's 20-10 loss to penn state in the outback bowl on jan. 1, but the university said in a news release friday that he was no longer enrolled.  morley was dismissed for not meeting the university's academic requirements.  ''we have university standards that have to be met, or there will be consequences,'' tennessee coach phillip fulmer said in a statement. ''our athletes have a tremendous support system at the university of tennessee. the bottom line is he was not accountable for his own actions when he had every chance to succeed.''  attempts to reach fulmer yesterday were unsuccessful.  morley was considered the top player in talent-rich south florida when he signed with the volunteers in 2005. this season, he had 51 tackles and 2 interceptions.  morley was the most highly regarded football player to graduate from university high school, a diploma mill in miami that gave fast and easy grades to at least 28 athletes so they could qualify for college scholarships.  morley was probably headed to a junior college or prep school after he received three f's during his junior year at killian high school, a public school in miami. he ended his junior year with a 2.09 grade point average.  but during his senior year, he made a remarkable academic recovery and became embroiled in a scandal that led to university high's closing after an article about the school in the new york times in november 2005. morley took a full load of courses during his senior year at killian while leading the team to a state title. he also took seven courses at university high school, scoring a's and b's in those courses.  thanks to the seven courses at university high, morley achieved a 2.75 grade point average, which, combined with his sat score, met the n.c.a.a.'s minimum standards and allowed him to graduate in december.  roberta sussman, an english teacher at killian high who taught morley during his senior year at the school, said she was saddened to learn that academic troubles had led to his dismissal at tennessee.  ''this is a kid who got robbed,'' sussman said in a telephone interview. ''literally robbed of a chance for a career. he could have been a professional ballplayer. he had the talent. he didn't feel like he needed the academic background to succeed in college. shortcuts often lead to dead ends. i'm disappointed for him, because his future is now just like nothing compared to what it could have been.''  sussman, who described morley as a smart student who was never pushed to apply himself academically because of his athletic talent, said his woes were heartbreaking.  ''he was lied to; he was misled,'' she said. ''these people who told him he didn't need to worry about the academics set him up for failure.''  midway through the 2006 season, morley was benched during the first half of the vols' game against south carolina for, fulmer said, ''not taking academics as seriously as he should, for missing class and not telling me the truth.''  tennessee had a good perspective of how university high worked. the university sent its associate athletic director for compliance, brad bertani, to miami to visit the school. bertani took his information to an admission panel that was to decide whether to admit morley. three of the four members were leery, telling the times that the transcript was ''very, very questionable'' and caused ''concerns'' and ''reservations.''  morley was still admitted, although the panel never voted.  tennessee's athletic director, mike hamilton, did not say whether the university regretted admitting morley, but he said high schools like university high were ''detrimental'' to college athletics.  he said morley was afforded many opportunities to excel academically at tennessee.  ''i don't necessarily think that it was going to be something that was going to come easy to him by any stretch of the imagination, but i think that he certainly had the ability to perform if he made the decisions to do so,'' hamilton said in a telephone interview, adding that he had met several times with morley about his academics and had offered him encouragement.  hamilton said he and fulmer had not discussed whether morley would be allowed to return to tennessee if he could raise his grade-point average.  linda bensel-meyers, a former tennessee professor who publicized instances of academic misconduct at the university, said morley's failure was a result of tennessee's sacrificing academics for athletic success.  ''i don't think there's going to be any change at tennessee,'' bensel-meyers, now an associate professor at the university of denver, said in a telephone interview. ''the teams that will prosper are those that are able to disguise the ways they bend the academic rules. as long as they want to keep their program, they're probably going to continue.''  college football  