in the company of eakins   in art, as in love, you don't always know what you've got until it has one foot out the door. thomas eakins's ''gross clinic,'' as great as any american painting of the 19th century, was about to leave philadelphia but will now stay in the city that has always been home to it.  alice l. walton, the wal-mart heiress, and the national gallery of art in washington wanted jointly to buy it for $68 million from thomas jefferson university, one of this city's medical schools. but the philadelphia museum of art and the pennsylvania academy of the fine arts, offered a chance to match the price, promised just before christmas that they could come up with the money after a fund-raising campaign stirred civic juices, angered jefferson alumni who disapproved of the sale and inspired hundreds of donors, big and small, to send checks.  the familiar battle between wal-mart and local interests this time was played out in the rarefied arena of the art market. ms. walton has been stockpiling for her future museum in arkansas, raiding the new york public library in 2005 for a civic landmark, asher b. durand's ''kindred spirits.'' having learned from that debacle for the library, thomas jefferson university insisted on offering philadelphians a way to keep the eakins. snobs who argued that arkansas was itself a travesty as the destination for great art ignored how great american museums, including philadelphia's, were put together in the first place. robber barons have always propelled the dispersion of cultural treasures. capitalism is ruthless.  but in this case it all worked out. the escape clause of matching the price imitated how nations like britain save their patrimony. philadelphians, their pride challenged, rallied, notwithstanding that they seemed to take the painting for granted for years (few people went to see it), and even though their ancestors reviled it as offensive when it was exhibited at the centennial exhibition in 1876. often it takes an outsider's interest to inspire locals.  and of course few great american artists are more inextricably linked to a particular place than eakins is with philadelphia. born here in 1844, a combustible, melancholy personality, the son of a calligrapher who passed on to him an obsession with craft, eakins spent his life in the city, save for three years as a student in paris with the academician jean-léon gérôme.  typical of eakins, at the 1867 paris exposition universelle he ignored the modernist painters and fixated on the new machinery. his first goal was to invent an empirical art, steeped in science and the study of anatomy, aided by the emerging technology of photography, an art that flouted received taste and trafficked in plain truth.  he gravitated to scientists, scholars, writers and doctors in town -- like dr. samuel d. gross, the medical school surgeon at the forefront of learning -- painting them without sentimentality, but with sympathy. a number of these portraits are scattered across philadelphia. when ''the gross clinic'' moved from jefferson to the philadelphia museum the other day (for a month's stay, before heading to the pennsylvania academy), i made the rounds to see them.  what follows is a tour, of both good art and bad. it's remarkable how many philadelphia institutions have preserved pictures that, like ''the gross clinic,'' speak to civic virtue and to eakins's role in shaping it. new yorkers might take note.  st. charles borromeo seminary  on a stately campus in wynnewood, just beyond the city limits, is st. charles borromeo, a roman catholic seminary where eakins used to bike with his friend and protégé samuel murray. eakins went there in the 1870s to paint james frederick wood, a friend of dr. gross's who became the first archbishop of philadelphia. with murray, eakins returned nearly 30 years later to paint several priests and teachers they both came to know on their visits.  eakins wasn't religious, but his father died in 1899, and it's often suggested that the clerics at st. charles became substitute authority figures, that he found solace in the monastic setting. there are six portraits in what is called the eakins room. (access by appointment only, so call ahead.) just one was done on commission, for the local knights of columbus: a catholic layman named james flaherty. it's workmanlike, which eakins could sometimes be. flaherty thought it made him look severe, as many of eakins's subjects did about their portraits. the painter's studio on mount vernon street came to be crammed with rejected commissions.  the rector of st. charles borromeo, patrick garvey, went so far as to shove the portrait that eakins did of him under a bed, but colleagues remembered garvey as a difficult man: ''not,'' as one of them put it, ''a man of transparent amiability.'' in his case eakins did to him what he did best: paint reality.  the portrait of archbishop wood was sadly wrecked years ago by restorers. that leaves as the two best paintings at st. charles a small one of the rev. james p. turner casually leaning head on hand, wearing pince-nez, looking bookish, charming and oddly modern; and the standing portrait of the right rev. james f. loughlin. stiff and anxious, father loughlin stares off into the ether. light casts onto his face from below, eerily. the colors are rich but subtle -- red, purple, black -- and eakins luxuriates in details like the row of buttons down the front of father loughlin's black cassock and the sheen on his silk cape. oscar wilde once remarked that every portrait is a self-portrait, which here suggests that eakins was projecting his own feeling of vulnerability and some of the self-pity that he came to have.  american philosophical society  from st. charles, the american philosophical society is a modest drive downtown. the society owns a portrait of daniel garrison brinton, a leading physician and a groundbreaking anthropologist. (he wrote a couple dozen books and hundreds of articles about american indians.) eakins painted a posthumous portrait of dr. brinton on commission in 1900, using a photograph, which could partly account for the picture's lifelessness. dr. brinton looks more glassy-eyed than alert. portraits by eakins often hinge on this razor's-edge difference between lifelessness and mental absorption, on the depiction of the act of thinking. you can see, a few blocks away at the pennsylvania hospital, how he gets it right in a portrait of another physician, jacob mendez da costa.  pennsylvania hospital  dr. da costa, like dr. brinton, was a man of wide interests, married, as it happened, to dr. brinton's sister. he's shown seated, slightly sideways in his chair, which makes him look restless and uneasy, against a shimmery salmon backdrop. hollow-cheeked, he stares as if into some abyss, a haunted man.  the picture hangs in the apothecary of the hospital's colonial-era pine building, where paintings by lesser artists -- more formulaic and flattering -- make eakins's portrait look all the more vital and real.  just outside the apothecary is an early-19th-century portrait of samuel coates, a hospital manager, by thomas sully; and in the hospital's main building, ''christ healing the sick in the temple,'' the famous work by benjamin west, who like eakins, was a local. it's the second version west did, the first having been so admired in britain, where west was king george's history painter, that it went to the national gallery in london.  west rejiggered the composition to include a madman, acknowledging the hospital's special attendance on mental patients. eakins was not the first great artist in philadelphia whose paintings ended up at medical institutions, where they were intended to inspire physicians and console the sick. distinct to this city's cultural history is a close association of doctors and artists, who socialized and often collaborated.  having detoured to see west, you might also want to stroll just a block or so from the american philosophical society, past independence hall, to the curtis publishing building, where tiffany's enormous ''dream garden'' decorates the lobby. a glass mosaic (made of 100,000 pieces in 260 colors), it is based on a landscape by maxfield parrish (another philadelphia son).  as with ''the gross clinic,'' philadelphia nearly lost the mosaic when, in 1998, steven a. wynn, the casino owner, bought it with the idea of carting it to las vegas. the pew charitable trusts (also one of the donors for the eakins) of philadelphia stepped in with the money needed to keep it where it was.  thomas jefferson university  next stop on the eakins tour: alumni hall at thomas jefferson university, where a pair of remarkable portraits in the eakins gallery flank the gap left by ''the gross clinic.'' in 1905 eakins painted william smith forbes, a pioneering anatomy professor, in the college amphitheater, leaning on a table before an audience of students. eakins had been forced to resign in disgrace from the pennsylvania academy in 1886 after pulling the loincloth off a male model before a class of students that included women. dr. forbes was arrested for grave robbing in 1882 as a consequence of using cadavers to train his pupils. (dr. gross, among others, helped pay legal expenses to earn an acquittal.)  so it's not surprising that eakins suggests a kindred spirit. on the table are anatomy books, a skull and a parchment copy of the ''anatomy act,'' amended in 1883 to authorize dr. forbes's teaching. eakins paints him in rumpled trousers and black frock coat, graying, unsteady on his feet, a weary warrior, frail but dignified, leaning awkwardly but pointing firmly toward the parchment sheet.  the other portrait, a tour de force from 1874, shows benjamin howard rand, a chemistry professor whom eakins knew as a teacher from his school days. he sits, reading and distractedly stroking a cat (an echo of manet's ''olympia'' perhaps) at a desk almost comically crammed with microscopes, test tubes, quills and papers. raking light picks out, like flashes of colored fireworks, the polished brass instruments, a pink rose and a woman's afghan draped over a chair before the desk. the cat stares at us. professor rand remains absorbed in his book.  at the centennial, where ''the gross clinic'' was banished to the medical tent for being too graphic, critics praised the rand painting as more than a portrait because of the still life of objects in it. now it seems brilliant but anecdotal.  pennsylvania academy  the pennsylvania academy lies several blocks north, with a vast archive of eakins's drawings and photographs for specialists to peruse by appointment only. there ''the gross clinic'' will arrive in march as part of a joint-ownership agreement with the philadelphia museum. maybe by the time it gets there the academy's curators will figure out how to improve the lighting and ambience in the galleries, which are beautiful but badly hung.  ''the gross clinic'' will join eakins's portrait of walt whitman. whitman thought eakins painted the truth, and you can discern eakins's affection in the portrait: the poet is a ruddy old man, santalike, lushly painted in the style of frans hals. it's charming, but sentimental. neither quality was eakins's strength.  college of physicians  last stop on the way to the philadelphia museum: the lobby of the college of physicians, where a full-length portrait of william thomson, an ophthalmologist, is a little hard to see behind reflective glass, and in the glare of a chandelier. but it's grand. cross-legged, an eye chart dimly visible on the wall behind him, thomson sits in a chair casually leaning an elbow on the edge of a table, pensive with a faraway expression. eakins lavished particular attention on the oriental carpet in the foreground, an excuse to show off his low-key virtuosity.  philadelphia museum  i happened to arrive at the philadelphia museum just after ''the gross clinic'' went on view in front of an early evening crowd that seemed nearly as large as the number of people that jefferson university said visited the picture in an entire year when it was there. the work looked marvelous. anne d'harnoncourt, the director, beamed.  so the picture is no longer at the school for medical students to contemplate as the alumni who donated it a century ago wished.  but at least it's now in plain sight, not far away, among its artistic peers, still in the city whose legacy it celebrates.  scalpel and palette  these are the places visited by michael kimmelman on his eakins tour. except st. charles borromeo seminary, they are all in philadelphia.  american philosophical society, philosophical hall, 104 south fifth street, (215) 440-3442; amphilsoc.org/exhibitions. portrait of daniel garrison brinton. by appointment only, monday through friday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. free.  college of physicians of philadelphia, mutter museum, 19 south 22nd street, (215) 563-3737; collphyphil.org. portrait of william thomson, in the lobby. the lobby can be entered at no charge; daily, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. museum admission, $12; $8 for students and those 65+ and ages 6 to 18; free for those under 6.  thomas jefferson university, alumni hall, eakins gallery, 1020 locust street, (215) 503-9085; jefferson.edu. portraits of william smith forbes and benjamin howard rand. by appointment only, monday through saturday, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; sunday, noon to 4 p.m. free.  pennsylvania academy of the fine arts, 118 north broad street, (215) 972-7600; pafa .org. portrait of walt whitman can be seen during regular hours, tuesday through saturday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., and sunday, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. an archive of eakins drawings and photographs is open to specialists and students by appointment. $7; $6 for students and 62+; $5 for children.  pennsylvania hospital, pine building, 800 spruce street, (215) 829-5434; pennhealth .com. portrait of jacob mendez da costa. by appointment, monday through friday, 9 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. free.  philadelphia museum of art, 2600 benjamin franklin parkway, (215) 763-8100; philamuseum.org. ''the gross clinic'' (moves to pennsylvania academy in march); ''the agnew clinic.'' monday through thursday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; friday, 10 a.m. to 8:45 p.m.; closed monday. $12, $9 for 62+; students, $8; free for children under 12.  st. charles borromeo seminary, 100 east wynnewood road, wynnewood, pa., (610) 785-6274; scs.edu. six portraits, including james flaherty, patrick garvey, the right rev. james f. loughlin, the rev. james p. turner and archbishop james frederick wood, in the eakins room. access by reservation, or at an open house on oct. 28, noon to 5 p.m.  art  