police detective in fatal shooting is questioned by prosecutors   the undercover detective who fired the first of 50 shots at a car driven by a groom-to-be, killing him and wounding two friends, was questioned yesterday by queens prosecutors investigating the shooting, the detective's lawyer said.  ''the questions were detailed and thorough,'' said philip e. karasyk, who represents the undercover detective, whose name has not been publicly disclosed. he is one of four detectives and one police officer who fired their weapons in the nov. 25 shooting, which killed an unarmed man, sean bell, 23, outside a jamaica nightclub hours before his wedding.  ''we answered each and every one accurately, and we did so without requesting or being granted any immunity'' from prosecution based on his answers, said mr. karasyk, who accompanied the detective along with his partner, james moscella. he has said his client will testify in front of a grand jury.  the office of the queens district attorney, richard a. brown, declined to comment on the interview. but according to a person involved in the case, the detective was questioned for three hours by three prosecutors and at least three investigators from the district attorney's office.  the detective was asked about his background, his training and his assignments in the police department, according to the person involved in the case. prosecutors then asked him about the club enforcement task force, the unit he worked for at the time of the shooting.  they then questioned him in detail about the night of the shooting, which began as a relatively uneventful shift for a nine-member team and ended with the shooting of the three unarmed men.  during the shooting, the undercover detective emptied his gun, a glock model 26, which holds 10 rounds in the magazine and one in the chamber. the police department's preliminary report of the shooting said that he was not wearing his bulletproof vest or carrying his gun during the undercover operation. not having them in such circumstances is routine procedure.  he retrieved his gun but did not put on his vest -- as another detective did -- and remained vulnerable as the group of officers scrambled to deal with what they said they feared was imminent violence.  he was the only undercover officer who fired in the shooting.  last thursday, prosecutors questioned officer michael carey, 26, who fired three times.  stephen c. worth, officer carey's lawyer, said that his client had been interviewed by prosecutors for about two hours. mr. worth said that he had not yet decided whether his client would testify in the grand jury. ''we're leaving our options open and watching the proceedings with interest,'' he said.  detective marc cooper, 39, who fired four times, was questioned by prosecutors on tuesday. in december, investigators interviewed paul headley, 35, a detective with nine years on the force, who fired one shot in the confrontation. one detective, michael oliver, 35, who fired 31 shots, has not yet been interviewed, several people involved in the case have said. yesterday, the state attorney general, andrew m. cuomo, met with the rev. al sharpton and nicole paultre bell, mr. bell's fiancée. afterward, mr. sharpton said that during the meeting he expressed his concern to mr. cuomo over police procedures statewide and over the length of time it is taking prosecutors to investigate the case. in the meeting, mr. cuomo expressed his condolences and vowed to closely monitor the investigation, said his spokesman, javier gomez, who added that mr. cuomo made it clear that ''justice must be done and we must learn from this tragedy.''  