he's back   the owners of the giants and the man who coaches the team had differing perspectives after their meetings on monday and tuesday.  john mara, the team president, and jonathan tisch, the treasurer -- whose families co-own the franchise -- were considering firing coach tom coughlin and spinning the giants on a different course.  coughlin, ever pragmatic and focused, viewed the meetings as typical end-of-season discussions, his annual chance to bullet-point the ways in which he planned to improve the team.  in the end, everyone saw things the same way: the 2006 season was not good enough, and coughlin provides the best chance to make the 2007 giants better.  coughlin, 60, had one year remaining on his four-year contract, but was given a one-year extension. terms were not disclosed, but it is likely in line with the $3 million-a-year deal he signed in 2004.  ''he knew that, obviously, we were not happy finishing 8-8, particularly after starting 6-2, and that there were some problems that the team had during the course of the year,'' mara said on a conference call with reporters. ''we wanted to see how he was going to address those, and whether he planned on making any changes going forward.''  coughlin, in his own conference call later in the afternoon, gave his perspective. ''everything we talked about was getting the new york giants better,'' he said.  he added: ''i really don't view time spent in that fashion, worried about my future, as time well spent.''  the team's decision to retain coughlin ended weeks of mounting speculation that he might be fired. the giants lost seven of their final nine games, including a 23-20 defeat to the division rival philadelphia eagles on sunday in the first round of the playoffs.  ''we were satisfied with how he plans to move forward,'' mara said. ''and we were convinced that he is the right man for the job, to get us to the position that we all want to be in.''  coughlin did not disclose his improvement plans to reporters, but areas of emphasis are obvious. there is no offensive coordinator; coughlin fired john hufnagel before the last regular-season game. running back tiki barber, the franchise's career leading rusher, has retired from the inconsistent offense. and the defense, ranked 25th in yards allowed among the n.f.l.'s 32 teams, is dotted with talent gaps and injury questions.  most maddening has been the slow progress of quarterback eli manning, the first choice over all in the 2004 draft, who appears to be idling among the league's average quarterbacks.  ''obviously, that was a major part of our discussions, that eli does need to play more consistently, and he'd be the first one to admit that,'' mara said.  ''it's something that i've been concerned about, his play over the second half of the season. there's nobody in this building that doubts his ability and feels like he is not the guy to lead us to where we want to get to. but you've got to play more consistently. we know the talent is there because we see him do it.''  coughlin declined to address changes to his staff, saying it will be evaluated in coming days.  with ernie accorsi retiring, the giants have a vacancy at general manager. while most teams hire a general manager, who then is involved in the hiring and firing of coaches, mara and tisch wanted to resolve the coaching situation first.  mara dismissed the possibility that the new general manager could fire coughlin.  ''no, tom coughlin is our coach for 2007 and hopefully for many years after that,'' mara said. ''that's the final decision.''  the giants entered the 2006 season as the defending division champions and boldly stated their super bowl aspirations. they reached the midpoint of the regular season with a 6-2 record and had a two-game lead in the national football conference east. beset by injuries, the giants played most of the season's second half without defensive end michael strahan, linebacker lavar arrington, left tackle luke petitgout and receiver amani toomer. several other starters, particularly on defense, missed several games.  the giants lost four games in a row, and six of seven, before finishing with a victory over the washington redskins. that lifted their regular-season record to 8-8 and allowed them to slip into the playoffs. it was the first time since 1989 and '90 that the giants made the playoffs two straight seasons.  in three seasons, coughlin's giants are 25-23 in the regular season and 0-2 in the postseason.  but the decision about coughlin's future was far more complicated than the team's record. the 2006 team largely will be remembered for its blunders, including a league-high 18 personal fouls, and the perceived chaos in the locker room.  coughlin is known for his no-nonsense militaristic ways, a reason he was hired to replace the easygoing jim fassel after a 4-12 season in 2003. coughlin was the first coach of the expansion jacksonville jaguars from 1995-2002 and led them to two conference championship games.  coughlin's stern persona and strict rules clashed with a giants roster filled with type a personality stars, including barber, tight end jeremy shockey and receiver plaxico burress.  many players grew weary of coughlin's restrictions -- including a ban on cellphones in the locker room, a mandate to be five minutes early to all functions and a requirement that both feet be on the floor at all times while in meetings.  barber has said that players are treated like schoolchildren. he and shockey each criticized the coaching after games, creating public relations problems for the giants, and burress has routinely tested the rules.  but despite the grumbling, the players showed no signs of giving up on coughlin, and criticism of him ceased in the season's final weeks.  ''i think there is substantial support for him in that locker room,'' said mara, who spoke to several players since sunday's playoff loss. ''that is the feedback that i have received, and that's what i have observed with my own eyes. there is this notion out there that he's lost the locker room, that's there's a mutiny going on down there. that is absolutely not the case.''  after the announcement was made, the giants released statements from shockey, strahan and linebacker antonio pierce, each applauding their boss.  ''you always have your challenges and you always have players that you have to try to make them understand what your thinking is and why it is,'' coughlin said.  asked if he expected to change, coughlin said: ''i think i have changed, and i will continue to do that, to be honest with you. because i think you have to grow and you have to study the circumstance and continue to improve, if you will, every year. i don't think any two teams are ever the same and i don't think your approach can be the same with any two teams, back-to-back teams. i think the players understand what is important to me, and the more that we get to experience one another, the better off we are.''  so can players expect a kinder, gentler coughlin?  ''i don't know about that,'' he said with a laugh.  extra points  dallas coach bill parcells called the giants' president, john mara, on tuesday morning to discuss reports that parcells had expressed interest in the team's vacant general manager position through an intermediary. the giants and parcells vehemently denied the reports. parcells has not said if he will return to coach the cowboys, and has until feb. 1 to decide. the giants continue their search to replace ernie accorsi, who is retiring.  pro football  