saints give city reason to cheer   it seems the more blows new orleans absorbs, the more it turns its affections toward the saints.  deanne aime, 69, sipped merlot in a parking lot across from the superdome before the saints defeated the philadelphia eagles, 27-24, on saturday in a national football conference divisional playoff game. she has lived in new orleans for 66 years. she wore a saints bandanna.  ''when you're here, and you see everybody being peaceful and loving and together, it gives you the picture of how life can be here,'' aime said.  but melancholy is never far.  ''i cry a lot,'' she said.  the struggling, half-filled city, hit a little more than 16 months ago by hurricane katrina and now in the midst of a spree of murders, has found an escape route. this time it was toward the superdome, not away from it.  the sidewalks, concrete balconies and pedestrian overpasses around the iconic building are familiar to millions, largely through the televised and photographed scenes of heartbreak in the days after katrina struck new orleans in late august 2005.  but in the mugginess of a january saturday, a broken city was festooned in black and gold and the walkways and sidewalks were jammed with saints fans. many waited outside the players' entrance, cheering each time someone recognizable stepped from a car, jeering playfully when a fan in a green eagles jersey caught their attention.  thousands filled a raised plaza between the stadium and the new orleans centre, where the top of the glass rotunda has still not been repaired. a stage was placed there, and the towering hyatt hotel served as a backdrop. many of its dark, broken windows are covered in white plastic, making parts of the skyscraper look like a vertical checkerboard.  on the stage, an m.c. thanked the band and then introduced the saints' owner, tom benson, who seemed on the verge of moving the team before the hurricane struck and is now riding the momentum that the first-year coach, sean payton, the rookie running back reggie bush and the rejuvenated quarterback drew brees brought in the form of a 10-6 regular-season record and a division title.  ''we'd really like to thank mr. tom benson,'' the m.c. said, ''who really stuck by the saints ''  the sound cut out, as if unplugged by a benson critic. a few minutes later, the problem was corrected and benson was introduced.  ''we're going to be dancing tonight,'' he said in his easy drawl. the crowd cheered.  he added, ''this day will be something for all of us to remember for a long, long time, i tell you.'' the saints arrived for saturday night's game as one of the longest-suffering franchises in professional sports. in 40 years, they had won once in the playoffs, a wild-card game in december 2000. they lost the next week.  the superdome had never played host to a divisional playoff game, and the people of new orleans rallied around the possibilities, not the expectations. saints fans have never expected much, and the city's denizens have largely learned to treat life in the recuperating city the same way.  just a few miles from the superdome, swaths of neighborhoods remain virtual ghost towns. in the lower ninth ward, below the rebuilt levee of the industrial canal, the neighborhood is a mix of crumbled houses and wiped-clean lots, usually with nothing but a concrete slab where a house once stood. every block or two found people doing work saturday to rebuild whatever was once there.  but the city's momentum is often undermined, most recently by a rash of murders in the past couple of weeks, including six in one 24-hour span, sparking a large rally at city hall on thursday. new orleans had 106 murders in the second half of 2006, and with the city's low population -- estimated at about 230,000, less than half of what it was before katrina -- it has garnered the unfortunate reputation as the nation's murder capital.  but the city still provides pockets of escapism, especially for tourists. the french quarter remains a theme park for debauchery, where bar-goers take the edge off by ordering hurricanes without irony.  and the locals, too, have found something to cheer, something else they want to share. on friday afternoon, a man outside of the famous bar pat o'brien's told another, ''everybody in the country's a saints fan. you will be, too, after tomorrow night.''  pro football  