a shuffle at paramount, and more to come   the resignation of the president of paramount pictures, gail berman, one of hollywood's highest-ranking female executives, carried a message this week for those with a stake in the success of her boss, brad grey: the turmoil is not over.  mr. grey, paramount's chairman, and ms. berman, his chief creative decision maker, agreed to part ways during a meeting tuesday, according to several people apprised of the situation.  by wednesday evening, paramount had announced the departure -- first reported in the los angeles times -- along with a reorganization of its production team, signaling another round of change at a studio that has seen its share of firings and shufflings in the two years since mr. grey, a former talent manager, began to retool it.  under the reorganization, brad weston, co-president for production, will expand his duties, while his partner, allison shearmur, will leave, the studio said. ms. berman will not be replaced, and instead mr. weston will report to mr. grey, on a par with scott aversano, president of mtv film/nickelodeon movies; john lesher, the president of paramount vantage; and stacey snider, a co-chairwoman of dreamworks.  the moves seemed aimed at streamlining the organization and setting it on a more stable path.  ''a lot of stuff has come down the pike,'' said hal vogel, a media investor and analyst based in new york. ''it's been a rocky time.''  ms. berman declined to comment on her departure. but people involved, who requested anonymity to protect their relationships, said dealings between her and mr. grey had become increasingly strained as ms. berman found her responsibilities to be less than expected when she arrived from the top job with fox's television operation in 2005.  mr. grey shifted the studio's strategy from focusing largely on paramount pictures, which ms. berman ran, to expanding other labels, including paramount vantage, the studio's independent division, as well as movies from mtv and nickelodeon.  of ms. berman's leaving, mr. grey said in a statement: ''this has been an extraordinary two years for paramount, but after the dreamworks purchase and the evolution of nick movies and mtv films into our label structure, gail's job became too small for her. she's a great talent.''  according to several friends who have talked to ms. berman, but declined to be identified citing the sensitive nature of her departure, the decision to leave is a relief from tensions that appeared never to abate from the moment she replaced her predecessor, donald de line.  ''she was in a tight spot from the moment she got there,'' said scott rudin, a producer who has projects with paramount, and who initially sparred with ms. berman but grew to respect her. ''she turned it around and got herself heavy-duty allies, even me.''  movie agents complained that ms. berman, who had no movie industry experience, was too abrupt, while executives at mtv and nickelodeon which, like paramount, are owned by viacom, were upset when she criticized their film projects.  ms. berman, though handpicked by mr. grey as his chief lieutenant, is said to have been particularly unhappy at finding that she would oversee a smaller slate of films than expected after mr. grey engineered the acquisition of the live-action business of dreamworks skg, and put another seasoned executive, the former universal chairwoman stacey snider, in charge of that unit.  mr. grey, who succeeded sherry lansing, was himself caught off guard twice in 2006, first when the chairman of viacom, sumner m. redstone, publicly severed the studio's ties with the actor tom cruise and, in september, when mr. redstone fired tom freston, viacom's chief executive, who recruited mr. grey to paramount.  those changes have made it difficult for paramount to find its footing, notwithstanding the success of several films including ''babel,'' from paramount vantage, and the commercial prospects of other films like ''dreamgirls,'' from dreamworks.  ms. berman found it difficult to gain her balance with subordinates like the co-presidents for production, ms. shearmur and mr. weston, who were sometimes at odds with methods she brought from television.  the current slate of releases include ''zodiac,'' a thriller from the director david fincher about serial killings in the san francisco bay area, and ''norbit,'' a comedy starring eddie murphy.  