off the dribble   standing tall  since yao ming went down with a fractured tibia, dikembe mutombo has filled in admirably and is a big reason why the rockets had won 8 of 10 through friday.  on wednesday, mutombo had 19 rebounds and 5 blocked shots in a 102-77 victory against the lakers. those blocks moved him to second place on the career list behind hakeem olajuwon and ahead of kareem abdul-jabbar. in houston's 90-86 victory against denver on friday, mutombo had 10 rebounds. it was his ninth consecutive game with 10 or more.  starbury to star  according to local news reports, knicks guard stephon marbury has reached an agreement to produce and to be the host for 13 episodes of ''stars on stars,'' a half-hour show that would feature him interviewing guests like kobe bryant, mark cuban and isiah thomas. the show was reportedly purchased by fox sportsnet and may begin airing by early march.  men of the people?  it may seem a bit odd for rockets guard tracy mcgrady to start in the all-star game since he has missed seven games because of injury and his scoring average is the lowest it has been since the 1999-2000 season. but gaining on him in votes for the second guard position on the western conference team is allen iverson of the nuggets, above, who has played only 11 games in the conference.  either way, the position will have plenty of all-star game experience; mcgrady has appeared in six games, and iverson has played in seven.  nothing but net  looking for a basketball blog with a truly bizarre sense of humor? searching for the whereabouts of tyrone nesby or god shammgod? then wizznutzz.com is for you. the site, which is written by a group of anonymous wizards fans, is most famous for coining the nickname agent zero for washington guard gilbert arenas -- wizznutzz's favorite player. arenas's lavish birthday party jan. 6 was blogged about extensively, as is wizards center etan thomas's poetry or anything having to do with michael jordan -- the site's least favorite player. wizznutzz was started in 2002 ''as a tribute to two decades of losing,'' and the site has a fondness for some of the more obscure wizards over the last few years like shammgod, nesby, darvin ham, ledell eackles and ike austin.  benjamin hoffman and fred bierman  spotlight: n.b.a.  