the way we eat; l.a.'s top banana . . .   those who are hungry can expect a certain number of givens in l.a. there will be good sushi, often inexpensive; hamburgers are sometimes served with thousand island dressing; and high-end restaurants that marinate in a brine of hype and buzz inevitably disappoint. but nothing prepared me for the ubiquity of banana-cream pie on the menus of upscale restaurants, diners and neighborhood bakeries alike.  has a decade of too much panna cotta and overwrought chocolate flecked with curry left you cynical about simple cream pies? do you suppose that this particular american confection is nothing but the sum of its cornstarch and bananas? how wrong you are! i, too, had considered the banana-cream pie a one-dimensional treat, until the restaurants of los angeles turned me around.  during my exhaustive banana-cream-pie investigation, i learned that some pies are made with graham-cracker crusts, while others rely on pastry dough. there are piemakers who embrace the standard whipped-cream topping, and others who meddle with meringue. some cannot stop themselves from embellishments -- pecans, chocolate shavings, drizzles of caramel -- and others feel compelled to place large chunks of unsliced bananas in their pies, forcing the involvement of a butter knife.  the popular jin patisserie in venice serves a rarefied twist on the banana-cream pie, with caramel bananas and mascarpone cream set into a gossamerlike sponge cake topped with tiny dots of dark chocolate. my friend david -- the sort of person who would cheerfully agree to be the traveling food taster for russian dignitaries if all he had to consume were sweets -- proclaimed it ''banana-cream pie in a waistcoat and ascot.''  pie lovers here debate the merits of the apple pan in west los angeles versus the pie 'n burger in pasadena with the same vigor and pertinacity brought to bear on the subject of obama versus clinton on the sunday-morning talk shows. (a pie debate i will resolve anon.)  the history of the custard pie is long and celebrated, according to the food timeline (foodtimeline.org), which traces the use of eggs as a baking binder to the ancient egyptians and the romans, who preferred their pies savory. bananas ''took the american market by storm in the 1880s,'' says lynne olver, the editor of the food timeline, ''due to improved transportation and savvy, aggressive marketers. bananas adapted well to most traditional fruit recipes.'' an early example of banana pie appeared in the 1901 ''woman's exchange cook book'' and called for sliced bananas and powdered sugar plopped into a pie shell, baked and topped with whipped cream.  so how did banana-cream pie become such a fixture in 21st-century los angeles? in large part, it seems that both the banana, a staple fruit in many parts of the world, and the cream pie, which is standard fare in the south and midwest, appeal to the heterogeneous eaters of los angeles.  ''people are sort of here from all over the country,'' says annie miler, the owner and chef at clementine, a bakery near century city, who grew up baking banana-cream pies. ''i am midwestern, and that is a dessert that i just always had.'' while miler was consuming pie, kristy choo, the owner of jin patisserie, spent her childhood in singapore eating deep-fried bananas. ''bananas go with everything,'' she said. ''it is nice to have the same ingredients, modified.''  miler's pie is a resplendent take on the graham-cracker-crust version, for which she makes her own crackers. there's plenty of custard, with a hint of vanilla, set into crust that is thick and chewy, with bananas layered between crust and cream to ensure that each bite is banana-y. a dollop of cream is the final touch. this is the potato chip of desserts -- you can't eat just one bite.  on the pastry-crust end of the spectrum is jar, a fancy chop house in west hollywood, where individual tart shells are filled with bananas and cream and drizzled with caramel. but i craved a more traditional pie and set out for the apple pan and pie 'n burger, the two most celebrated pie purveyors here. the apple pan's pie is served in a slightly tough, rather bland crust, with a custard that suggests instant-vanilla-pudding mix. pie 'n burger goes a less traveled route, with a singular crust that is flaky and complex, topped with a thick custard cream that sticks to the back of the spoon, and a spoonful of meringue.  the apple pan and pie 'n burger can fight it out over their equally delicious meat patties, but the sublimity award for pie goes to pasadena. it isn't even close. so sue me in the court of chowhound.  i would love to offer you the pie 'n burger recipe, but alas, the owner, michael osborn, refused me. ''i had to pay half a million dollars for these pie recipes,'' he said, referring somewhat sheepishly to how much he had to pay for his restaurant, ''and to be honest, i don't give them away.''  when pressed, osborn conceded that his baker uses very expensive commercial vegetable shortening and hand-kneads the dough, and that the recipe could probably be duplicated from the back of a box of cornstarch. pie 'n burger bakes nearly 60 pies a day, 20 different varieties, but i just want one. apparently i will have to brave l.a. traffic to get it.  banana-cream pie  for the graham shell:  1 1/4 cup graham-cracker crumbs, about 10 or 11 whole crackers  1 teaspoon sugar  4 tablespoons butter, melted  for the pastry cream:  1 2/3 cups milk  1/4 cup plus 3 tablespoons sugar  1/2 vanilla bean, seeds scraped out and reserved  3 tablespoons cornstarch  1 large egg  2 large egg yolks  1 1/2 tablespoons butter  for assembly:  1 1/2 cups heavy cream  1/4 cup crème fraîche  3 1/2 medium bananas, sliced into 3/8-inch-thick rounds.  1. for the graham shell: preheat oven to 325 degrees. in a bowl, combine the crumbs and sugar. add the butter and mix, first with a fork, then with your fingers, until the crumbs are moistened. pour the mixture into a 9-inch pie pan, using a flat-bottomed cup to press the crumbs evenly. the edges of the shell will be crumbly. bake until lightly browned, 9 or 10 minutes. cool completely.  2. prepare the pastry cream: in a medium saucepan over medium heat, combine the milk, cup sugar and the vanilla bean and seeds and bring to a simmer. over a small bowl, sift the remaining 3 tablespoons sugar with the cornstarch. in a large bowl, whisk together the egg and yolks.  3. when the milk comes to a simmer, discard the vanilla bean. add the cornstarch mixture to the eggs and whisk until well combined.  while whisking the egg mixture, slowly pour in about 1/4 of the milk. transfer this mixture into the saucepan, set over low heat and simmer, whisking constantly, until it reaches the consistency of thick pudding. (be careful not to curdle the eggs.) remove from the heat and stir in the butter until incorporated. pour into a shallow bowl, place plastic wrap directly on the surface and chill.  4. to assemble: using an electric mixer or a whisk, whip the heavy cream and crème fraîche into peaks. transfer the pastry cream to a large bowl and whisk until smooth. fold in 1/2 cup of the whipped cream. line the bottom of the cooled pie shell with a layer of bananas. fold the remaining bananas into the pastry cream, then spoon it evenly into the shell. mound the remaining whipped cream on top, swirling it decoratively. chill and serve within 24 hours. serves 8. adapted from clementine in los angeles.  where to enjoy banana-cream pie in los angeles  urth caffé: 8565 melrose avenue, west hollywood, (310) 659-0628. individual pies, with thick crust and light cream, in a trendy spot where you might see kate hudson or a guy with spikes in his head.  clementine: 1751 ensley avenue, los angeles, (310) 552-1080. the last word on graham-cracker crust, in a european-style lunch spot.  jar: 8225 beverly boulevard, los angeles, (323) 655-6566. bring your expense account and your appetite.  bandera: 11700 wilshire boulevard, los angeles, (310) 477-3524. a chain restaurant, but the pie passes muster and incorporates walnuts.  house of pies: 1869 north vermont avenue, los angeles, (323) 666-9961. an institution, where the pies have bananas in every bite.  pie 'n burger: 913 east california boulevard, pasadena, (626) 795-1123. their version with meringue is sui generis; expect a wait on weekends.  