loosen up. have butter pecan with bordeaux   andrew sia wanted to find a sommelier who would lecture to his wine tasting club, but was not sure he could afford it. then there was the matter of the ice cream.  in addition to enjoying wine, mr. sia, 34, fancies making his own frozen sorbets and ice creams. though it seemed to him a natural fit to pair the two, he suspected a wine consultant might not agree.  ''our first concern was that it was going to be stuffy,'' mr. sia said. ''we wanted this to be more of a party.''  hesitantly, he and his wife, evangeline, approached nancy's wines for food, a wine shop on the upper west side of manhattan. after meeting jason spingarn at nancy's wines, they quickly relaxed. mr. spingarn's easygoing demeanor was a relief, mr. sia said, and mr. spingarn immediately warmed to the challenge of a wine-ice cream matchup. better yet, it would cost only $375 for 15 people -- far less than they had thought.  they tasted some wines and mr. spingarn eventually chose nine red, white, dessert and sparkling bottles for an october tasting at their tribeca loft. mr. spingarn would bring, for example, a german gewürztraminer to pair with mr. sia's pear-ginger sorbet and a new zealand sauvignon blanc to go with his golden kiwi sorbet.  ''i thought since jason was on, we should do it,'' mr. sia said. ''how many times do you have a wine tasting with ice cream. he convinced me it was possible.''  wine tastings are not new, but they are changing drastically. twenty years ago, a tasting was typically formal and the wines were masked, with tasters challenged to identify and assess them. but as wine has gone mainstream and the thirst for knowledge has expanded beyond the snobby set, tastings have loosened up. wine is now considered a social event, something to center an evening on.  ''something weird happened and wine entered the popular culture in a very big way when 'sex and the city' showed how chic it was to drink wine,'' said sergio esposito, founder and managing partner of italian wine merchants.  the change in tastings has paralleled a rise in wine consumption. about 33 percent of americans now drink wine, up from 27 percent in 1992, according to the gallup organization.  wine drinkers have increasingly sought ways to better understand what they drink. web sites, books, classes and schools promise to transform everyday drinkers into aficionados without the fear of looking stupid. restaurants, wine shops, moonlighting sommeliers and private wine consultants are leading classes and even holding events in private homes, making wine more accessible in a less threatening environment.  at italian wine merchants, public wine tastings became so popular in 2001 that mr. esposito had trouble speaking above the din. instead of the 20 to 50 serious wine enthusiasts he usually had, his tastings were regularly drawing a mix of collectors and people who were more interested in socializing and getting a date. he finally dropped them four years ago to focus exclusively on private events.  other stores and consultants have different agendas. for wine shops, private wine tastings are a good way to bring in customers and lift their bottom line since they typically pour only their own wine, in the hope the tasters will buy what they sample. as for consultants, it is a good way to attract corporate clients through good word of mouth.  while private tastings require more commitment than dropping into your local shop for a slug of vino and a bit of chat, they can be almost anything -- a freewheeling introductory lecture at a party or a sampling of vintage barolos. prices range from $250 for a simple tasting to $5,000 for a catered sit-down dinner, and usually include the wine.  as with its retail shop, italian wine merchants limits the focus of its private events to the grapes, wines and wineries of italy. food is always included -- no surprise, seeing as the co-owner of the shop is the well-known new york chef mario batali -- with selections that go beyond humdrum cheese and crackers. the fare can include black-olive-encrusted lamb chops with string beans and roasted vegetables and linguini with clams. prices are $1,500 to $17,500 depending on the size of the party.  a wine party is easy to have because the hosts do not have to do anything, unless they want to put out crackers or bread to absorb the alcohol. at mr. sia's tasting, guests brought a selection of cheeses, cured meats and bread. mr. spingarn brought glasses, tasting notes and the wine.  ''the only thing i had to do was clean the house and make ice cream,'' mr. sia said.  even those knowledgeable about wine can learn something at a tasting. over the last two and a half years, richard d. parsons, chief of time warner, has turned to italian wine merchants to be the host of private tastings for more than 30 friends, family and work colleagues. the theme might be an exploration of new wines and regions, perhaps a range of amarones from italy's best producers in the veneto region, like giuseppe quintarelli and romano dal forno.  mr. parsons is clearly knowledgeable when it comes to wine: among his pursuits, he owns the il palazzone winery in tuscany. and his tastings often include samplings of brunello di montalcino from his own property.  at private tastings, ''one has the opportunity to learn more specifics about a wine, its terroir, its winemaker and the vintage,'' mr. parsons wrote in an e-mail message. ''the dialogue is more intimate and most importantly, the wines can be tailored to my interests at that time.''  private tastings also often offer a chance to sample wines that might otherwise be budget-breakers or impossible to find. at seastar restaurant and raw bar in bellevue, wash., erik liedholm, the wine director, pours only ''the gold standard'' of wines at his classes. he says he wants his students to learn what really good wine tastes like so they have something to compare other wines against. at a recent tasting, he poured a cabernet sauvignon from the cult winery leonetti cellar that costs up to $120 -- if you can get it.  three years ago, mr. liedholm held tastings for customers eager to learn more. he initially started with the basics, but quickly noticed that his students were becoming increasingly sophisticated and asking probing questions. he fine-tuned the program and now discusses washington state's wine regions and brings in local winemakers. the classes are $220 a quarter.  residents of washington, d.c., can even hire a tv wine personality to lead an in-home tasting. mark phillips, executive director for the wine tasting association, offers sit-down and blind tastings for as little as $15 a person. mr. phillips, who served as host last march on the pbs show ''enjoying wine with mark phillips,'' tries to break stereotypes -- perhaps throwing in a box wine to show people how good the wines have become. as with many wine consultants, he aims to show people a good time and teach them something in the process.  it is important for a tasting to match the expertise and personality of those attending. otherwise, they might grow bored or feel out of place. acknowledging that, william tisherman, the founder of wine for all in katonah, n. y., tries to make wine more understandable. he has planned his tastings to include jokes and prizes, like cork key rings and soap bubbles in plastic miniature champagne bottles. he charges $40 to $75 a person and provides the wine.  ''i usually don't like to go off on a laundry list of flavors, like at most tastings,'' said mr. tisherman, the former editor of wine enthusiast magazine. ''i'm trying to put information in bite-sized pieces and make sure they're quick.''  the most successful tastings are focused and informative, organizers say, without becoming bogged down in too much detail. for most, the event is primarily about having fun with family and friends.  ''after a while, i'm not needed anymore,'' said mr. spingarn, recalling mr. sia's event. ''i stayed till 2 a.m. until all the ice cream was eaten and wine was drunk. that was a great wine tasting.''  personal business  