no method to knicks' maddening first half   with three games left before the season's mathematical midpoint, the knicks' image remains a curious mosaic of contradictions.  after consecutive routs of three of the n.b.a.'s worst teams, coach isiah thomas declared that the knicks should now be expected to beat the n.b.a.'s worst teams. then the charlotte bobcats came to new york and routed them by 16 points.  weakened by suspensions and injuries in late december, the knicks beat three top-tier opponents -- utah, chicago and detroit. faced with a string of sub-.500 opponents -- sacramento, the clippers, portland, seattle, philadelphia and charlotte -- the knicks proceeded to go 3-3.  the knicks have been lauded this season for their resilience. but their loss friday to the bobcats left them 2-20 in games they trailed at halftime.  for all the recent flashes of promise, the knicks are 16-22 -- shaky enough to hold the 11th-best record in the eastern conference, but solid enough to be in contention for the atlantic division title and a playoff berth.  to put it more simply, the knicks are a typical rebuilding project, albeit one with a massive payroll and a lot of former lottery picks in the rotation. they are young and inconsistent, teasing their fans with surprising victories and infuriating them with unforgivable defeats.  the knicks are 11-11 since a 5-11 start, and there are certainly more wild fluctuations to come. the roster finally returned to full strength last week (minus guard steve francis, who has always been superfluous), so thomas is again retooling the rotation and fiddling with the chemistry.  quentin richardson appears to be healthy after missing 11 games because of a back injury. he averaged 18 points, 8 rebounds, 3 assists and 2.5 steals in his first two games back, making a strong case to return to the starting lineup. that would force thomas to send jamal crawford, jared jeffries or channing frye to the bench. the current lineup is 4-5, so thomas would not be breaking up any magic combinations.  nate robinson, the other key player to return last week -- after a 10-game suspension for his role in the dec. 16 brawl with denver -- is not yet himself. robinson vowed to suppress his wilder side, but he also seems to have lost his confident stride. he went scoreless in two games last week, going 0 for 4 from the field in 18 minutes. yet he still managed to draw a technical foul friday night. in the 5 minutes 48 seconds he played, robinson had extensive conversations with two of the three referees.  thomas had more options last week, but he relied primarily on eight players -- eddy curry, stephon marbury, david lee, jeffries, frye, crawford, richardson and robinson. thomas still seems to be searching for the best way to deploy jeffries and lee, in particular.  jeffries was signed last summer to bolster the knicks' defense, but his lack of scoring punch can be a drag on the offense. thomas played him just 16 minutes friday (3 in the second half), preferring to use richardson (38 minutes) and lee (27 minutes), despite the knicks' inability to contain the bobcats' shooters.  the newly crowded frontcourt rotation has seemed to affect lee the most. a linchpin of the knicks' success in the weeks after the brawl, lee lost some steam last week, averaging only 9 points and 5.5 rebounds in two games. he had been averaging a double-double.  and the knicks continue to wait for frye to become a reliable scoring threat. he had 10 points in the first quarter against charlotte, but only 2 the rest of the night. thomas continues to start frye, but often leaves him on the bench in the fourth quarter.  by feb. 1, the knicks could just as easily be division leaders or bottom dwellers. over the next 10 games, they play just four teams with winning records (washington, indiana, phoenix and the lakers). but they also have two games with the miami heat, whose losing record could be offset by the imminent return of shaquille o'neal.  pro basketball  