news summary   international a2-9  secret bush order allowed raids on iranians in iraq  a recent series of american raids against iranians in iraq were authorized under an order that president bush secretly issued several months ago to undertake a broad military offensive against iranian operatives in iraq, according to secretary of state condoleezza rice.  a1  iraq strategy is debated  president's bush's new iraq strategy apparently has won few converts across a worried world where hostility toward the american expedition has grown while support trickles away.  a9  republicans on the senate armed services committee lent support to mr. bush's plan to send more troops to iraq, hoping to head off a senate resolution criticizing the plan.  a8  blair defends war policies  prime minister tony blair of britain urged his successors to maintain his warlike foreign policy, saying that to retreat in the face of global terrorism would be ''a catastrophe.''  a6  china court upholds conviction  a chinese court upheld the conviction against a leading advocate for peasants' rights despite widespread criticism that he was unjustly made a target by corrupt local officials.  a2  somali guards kill 8  presidential guards killed at least eight men of a rival militia at the gates of the presidential palace in mogadishu, somalia's capital, plunging a new disarmament plan into uncertainty.  a6  grenade hits u.s. embassy  an antitank grenade was fired into the heavily fortified american embassy in athens just before dawn. the building was empty.  a3  national a10-13  duke prosecutor asks state to take over case  the district attorney in the duke lacrosse sexual assault case asked the state attorney general to take over the troubled prosecution, throwing new doubt on the future of a bitterly contested prosecution that has already suffered a series of dramatic setbacks.  a1  detainee defenders faulted  a senior pentagon official said in an interview that he was dismayed lawyers at many of the nation's top firms were representing prisoners at guantánamo bay, cuba. the comments have produced a torrent of anger.  a1  senate reversal on earmarks  senate democratic leaders embraced a proposal to shed more light on the practice of congressional earmarks, reversing themselves after trying to block an almost identical measure the day before.  a11  house passes drug changes  defying a veto threat, the house passed a bill to require the government to negotiate with drug manufacturers to obtain lower drug prices for medicare beneficiaries.  a13  new plan for student loans  house democrats unveiled their bill to cut interest rates on subsidized loans for middle- and low-income students by half over the next five years, saying they would pay for the $6 billion measure by increasing fees to lenders while reducing payments to them.  a10  rare shark dies in captivity  ralph, an adolescent whale shark 22 feet long, died suddenly and mysteriously on thursday, reopening questions about whether whale sharks, a species about which little is known, should be taken from the wild.  a10  new york/region b1-5  real estate market rallies in new york  real estate in new york city is showing surprising vibrancy, with market values jumping by 19 percent in 2006, double the increase from the previous year, city officials said. the steepest jump in assessed values is occurring in the bronx and brooklyn. both boroughs had increases of 27.6 percent.  b1  bruno's special investments  joseph l. bruno, the new york senate majority leader, has invested hundreds of thousands of dollars from two campaign accounts that he controls in at least four albany area firms, all of which have had personal business dealings with him, a review of state campaign finance records shows. a1  neediest cases  b5  religion journal  b5  business day c1-10  cablevision offer increased  the dolan family, the controlling shareholders of cablevision systems corp., increased their bid for the company to $30 a share from an initial bid of $27 a share.  c1  business digest c2  arts b7-19  abu dhabi to gain a louvre  the french government has finally confirmed that in exchange for a sum said to be $800 million to $1 billion, it will rent the name, art treasures and expertise of the louvre to a new museum to be built in abu dhabi, the capital of the united arab emirates. b7  obituaries a16  martin d. kruskal  a mathematician who helped describe the soliton, a unique form of wave, he was 81. a16  editorial a14-15  editorials: round up the usual lawyers; earning a bad reputation; another chance to help; catch a falling star.  columns: maureen dowd, orlando patterson.  bridge  b16  crossword  b16  tv listings  b19  weather  b20  