rangers, listless then resilient, fall short   the comeback sprang from almost nothing last night; there was no outward sign that the rangers had hit rock bottom and were plotting their way back into a game that seemed disastrous.  the ottawa senators had skated around and through them for a 5-0 lead at madison square garden, and rangers coach tom renney was running out of things to yell at his team. he had already run through much of his vocabulary after tuesday night's disheartening loss to the islanders here and through wednesday's practice.  two minutes into the third period, nothing had gotten through.  ''i think we finally said, 'enough's enough,' '' rangers forward blair betts said. ''we were embarrassed with ourselves. the fans were completely out of the game and down on us. ''  then, a flick of the puck from jaromir jagr bounced off petr prucha's chest and ottawa goalie ray emery's skate and over the senators' goal line with 16 minutes 31 seconds left, and something was afoot. the once-surly garden crowd began cheering whenever the rangers corralled the puck.  three goals later, the rangers were furious at the referees for missing a delay-of-game penalty against the senators. in the end, the rangers settled for lamenting a great comeback that fell just short.  the senators (25-19-2) scored an empty-net goal in the final minute to win, 6-4, and only then could they so much as exhale.  ''we maybe learned the most valuable lesson tonight,'' renney said. ''maybe showing the resolve in the third period, the determination and the will to get yourself back in the game and avoid being embarrassed is the answer we can conclude.''  the rangers (22-19-4) were running headlong toward total embarrassment, despite the lessons of tuesday's lackluster loss to the islanders. renney made the unfortunate decision to start kevin weekes in goal against ottawa because henrik lundqvist had started eight straight games.  patrick eaves scored for ottawa in the first period, but the senators' domination did not begin until the second, when the rangers started looking like a set of parking cones in their own zone. ottawa played keep-away for several minutes. chris kelly popped in a rebound goal, then antoine vermette slapped in another.  eaves then scored on a breakaway against a hapless defensive effort by fedor tyutin and an equally hapless weekes with 7:30 left in the second, and a grumpy garden crowd turned angry. renney called timeout to scream anew. he sent in lundqvist -- a move the crowd actually cheered. but it was not until after daniel alfredsson blasted a shot off the post and past lundqvist a minute into the third period that the rangers showed some life.  it began when jagr's shot ricocheted off prucha and emery. jason ward chopped at a rebound of a jed ortmeyer shot for another goal with 15:46 left. marcel hossa fired a rebound of a brendan shanahan shot into the net with 13:50 left. and with 9:21 left, betts deflected another ortmeyer shot past emery.  ''when you're up, 5-0, and you get it to 5-4, you've obviously made a few mistakes,'' ottawa forward dany heatley said. ''in the third period, we backed off a little too much and they took advantage of it.''  with 2:55 left, ottawa defenseman chris phillips cleared the puck from the defensive zone over the glass, which should have been an automatic penalty. but the referees ruled that phillips was over the blue line when he sent the puck out, despite a replay clearly showing they were wrong.  ''with the momentum we had at the time, a power play would have put us in a real good position,'' shanahan said. ''to have a chance to win a game when you were down, 5-0, in the third period would have been special.''  the rangers talked after the game about building on the comeback instead of dwelling on the collapse. ''it's up to us the way we look at it,'' jagr said.  renney, who had screamed himself hoarse, can only hope they respond. ''i'm not sure where rock bottom is, to be honest with you,'' he said. ''i hope we hit it.''  hockey  