head of mtv networks leaving   in another management change at viacom, michael wolf, the president and chief operating officer of mtv networks, is leaving the company.  the announcement came a day after another viacom unit, paramount pictures, announced that its president, gail berman, was departing. in neither case did the executives leave to accept other positions.  mr. wolf, a former consultant, had been at mtv networks 15 months. viacom did not announce a replacement yesterday, and there was no statement on mr. wolf's future plans.  but several media executives and investors said privately yesterday that they were not surprised by the news of mr. wolf's departure, coming as it did just four months after former chief executive tom freston was replaced by philippe p. dauman and thomas e. dooley.  in addition, there had been speculation that mr. wolf might not remain at viacom. part of the reason, one person with knowledge of the situation said, was that he lacked operational experience and had never really run a media business.  the mtv networks group includes the powerhouse mtv cable channel, as well as vh-1, comedy central and smaller channels like cmt and spike.  at the same time it announced mr. wolf's exit, mtv networks included the news that nicole browning, president for affiliate sales and marketing, would also be leaving.  mtv said both executives will be replaced.  ''viacom is cleaning up the management structure,'' said richard greenfield, a media analyst at pali research.  mr. wolf was a consultant with booz allen & hamilton for 15 years before joining mckinsey & company where he spent four years consulting to major media companies and became a managing partner. then, judy mcgrath, the chief executive of mtv networks, tapped him to join mtv networks.  at the time ms. mcgrath said mr. wolf would be part of an aggressive plan to expand into additional platforms for its video content, including the internet and cellphones.  in a telephone interview, mr. wolf said: ''i am pleased with what we have accomplished in transforming mtv networks into a multiplatform company.'' he maintained that it was his decision to leave the company.  several other executives at mtv networks also characterized the move as mr. wolf's decision.  in recent months, there have been a number of appointments at the company where the executives did not report to mr. wolf, but rather directly to division heads.  for example, earlier this month, robert m. bakish was named president of mtv networks international. but the company said that mr. bakish would report to william h. roedy, the global chairman of mtv networks who oversees mtv's international operation. and in another move viacom formed a global digital media executive team that would report to mika salmi, president of global digital media for mtv networks.  one senior mtv networks executive said yesterday's move was not connected with ms. berman's departure from paramount pictures and that the two executive changes had not been directed by the new top management of the company.  under mr. wolf the company had made a number of executive changes, including installing a new head of advertising sales at mtv, a new head of digital advertising sales, a new chief of strategy and a new chief financial officer. the company also made a number of internet acquisitions.  