kodak selling x-ray and medical image lines   eastman kodak, as part of its struggle with the digital conversion of photography, said wednesday that it would sell its x-ray film and medical-imaging equipment operations to an investment company, onex of toronto, for $2.35 billion in cash.  unlike kodak's consumer film business, which rapidly collapsed as many photographers switched to digital cameras, x-ray film sales have declined more slowly and the unit remains profitable. the medical business, which also produces digital equipment, had revenue of $2.54 billion in the year ended sept. 30.  a spokesman, christopher veronda, said kodak decided to sell the medical-imaging operations largely because of the high cost of adapting them to all-digital technology. ''the business was going to require a lot of investment,'' mr. veronda said.  in a statement, kodak said it would use some cash to pay down $1.15 billion of its long-term debt. but mr. veronda said kodak would not spell out its full plans until an investors' day next month. if the operations meet performance targets, onex will pay kodak an additional $200 million.  though the sale price was above some analysts' estimates, the uncertainty surrounding kodak's intentions prompted some negative reaction. ''while the deal strengthens kodak's balance sheet,'' chris whitmore of deutsche bank wrote in a note to investors, ''we view the substantial dilution from the deal as a negative for equity shareholders.''  moody's investors service, which estimates that kodak now has about $3.3 billion in debt, and standard & poor's, said they were continuing their reviews of the company's debt rating.  kodak entered the medical-film business in 1896, a year after wilhelm roentgen discovered what became known as x-rays.  an onex managing director, robert m. le blanc, said the unit had a promising future. ''there's nothing wrong with this business,'' he said. ''it's a very powerful business.''  until now, onex's medical investments have been in companies that buy equipment and supplies rather than make them, including the center for diagnostic imaging of minneapolis, which operates 39 outpatient clinics in the united states.  kevin j. hobert, president of the health care group at kodak, who will head the onex operation, said that over time it would replace revenue from film with fees from contracts to build and maintain digital-image capture and management systems for hospitals and other providers.  the new company, as yet unnamed, will market its products under kodak's name. about 8,100 kodak employees in the united states, mexico, germany and china will be transferred to it. kodak has agreements to supply it with some chemicals, and it will provide some film-coating services under contract.  