in lukewarm los angeles, hot spots for beckham   it is far from clear whether the soccer star david beckham will put bodies in seats here at home depot center, home to the los angeles galaxy soccer team.  his wife, though, is likely to be responsible for the employment of even more paparazzi outside spago.  the galaxy announced thursday that beckham would join the team after his contract with real madrid expires june 30. his acquisition is seen as a shot in the arm with a platinum needle for major league soccer, which has struggled since its birth nearly 12 years ago,  but as sports towns go, los angeles is hardly among the nation's most rabid. it has no professional football team, and there has been no full-throated local outcry for one. most fans cheer for the dodgers and the lakers, when they are winning.  beckham the athlete hardly picked the american equivalent of manchester, england, where he played in his prime. but beckham the brand could hardly have picked a better place to flourish.  rumored to want a career in the entertainment business, he is represented by 19 entertainment, the creators of ''american idol'' and other successful television shows. his contract was negotiated by the creative artists talent agency, with most of the $250 million salary he will reportedly earn coming from endorsements and the like.  as the singer posh spice, beckham's wife, victoria beckham, was once the darling of the tween and young teenage set. today, she has her own lines of jeans and sunglasses, and is widely thought to want to either expand her fashion brand, dvb, into an international business or perhaps star in her own television show about fashion. she is, after all, the co-author of a book on the subject.  beckham has said his main goal is to expose more americans to the sport that made him a star. despite soccer's popularity among children, it has trailed well behind other sports when it comes to adult fans -- and the merchandise they buy.  ''i didn't want to go out there at 34 years old and for people to turn around and say, 'he's only going there to get the money,' '' he said in a satellite interview released thursday by major league soccer and his management team. ''it's not what i'm going out there to do. i'm going to hopefully build a club and a team that has a lot of potential.''  between his ever-changing hairstyles, rumor-dappled personal life and a face that causes middle-age mothers to squeal embarrassingly in the middle of the supermarket check-out lane, beckham brings a lot more to soccer than a hot foot.  in the united states, the sport has lacked two central features: ''stars and money,'' said tom pollock, a film producer and former head of universal studios.  ''i think that is the context into what the beckham thing falls,'' mr. pollock said. ''if he can become a big star in the united states then you have a powerful face for the sport.''  one source of committed fans is in los angeles's large hispanic population, and beckham's pending arrival has generated much excitement among them.  outside el tepeyac restaurant in east los angeles, jorge galván, who helps coach a girls' soccer team, said he was thrilled just to see him play.  ''some people said he's going to save the league,'' mr. galván said. ''but the league doesn't need saving. i think its going to create a lot of buzz and excitement around town. it will just inject the league with more excitement.''  at his sporting-goods store in boyle heights, a largely mexican neighborhood, pedro prieto jr. said customers had already been coming in to buy beckham galaxy jerseys. ''the world likes him,'' mr. prieto said.  nearly 3,000 season tickets had sold since the announcement that beckham was coming on board, a galaxy spokesman said friday.  mrs. beckham already has a following in the american entertainment media, which chronicles her shopping exploits somewhere between lindsay lohan's underwearless antics and celebrities' emerging from private jets to tell the rest of us which car to drive if we want to save the world from choking on pollution.  ''a lot of it has to do with fashion,'' said brandy navarre, co-owner of x17 inc., one of the city's largest celebrity photo agencies, which has already assigned a ''beckham expert team'' to trail the couple once they arrive. ''with victoria, i don't think anyone can have as much money to spend on clothes as she does. i think upon arrival they will be really a lot of people's focus.''  california has had big sports stars before, and some have crossed over to other areas of entertainment. gov. arnold schwarzenegger was a bodybuilder before he became a star of action movies, and the former laker center shaquille o'neal has had some modest film roles. another ex-laker, rick fox, has a recurring part in the new fx cable network drama ''dirt.'' he plays a basketball star who cheats on his wife. wayne gretzky generated new interest in hockey when he joined the los angeles kings, and his wife, janet jones, had some movie parts while here.  ''it happens from time to time,'' mr. pollock said.'' but major movies don't get made simply because an athlete is in them. that is not the way the business works anymore.''  