the overlook: chapter 15: a red herring   bosch has found the radiation victim's toyota in an alley not far from the overlook, and inside it, many objects asociated with stanley kent's murder, particularly the cesium. in the process, however, bosch, too, has been exposed to the radiation.  the car jerked forward as walling pulled out of the alley and into southbound traffic on cahuenga.  ''i'm taking you back to queen of angels so dr. gardner can have a look at you,'' she said. ''just hang in there for me, bosch.''  he knew that the last-name endearments were probably about to come to an end. he pointed toward the left-turn lane that led onto barham boulevard.  ''never mind the hospital,'' he said. ''take me back to the kent house.''  ''what?''  ''i'll get checked out later. go to the kent house. here's the turn.''  she slipped into the left-turn lane.  ''what are you telling me, that that little fainting spell back there was -- ''  ''i had to get you away from the crime scene and away from brenner so i could check this out and talk to you.''  ''check what out? talk about what? do you realize what you just did? i thought i was saving your life. now brenner or one of those other guys will take the credit for the recovery. thanks a lot. that was my crime scene.''  he opened his jacket and pulled out the rolled and folded-over yoga poster.  ''don't worry about it,'' he said. ''you can get the credit for the arrests. you just might not want it.''  he opened the poster, letting the top half flop over his knees. he was interested in only the bottom half.  ''dhanurasana,'' he said.  walling glanced over at him and then down at the poster.  ''would you start telling me what's going on?''  ''alice kent practices yoga. i saw the mats in the workout room at the house.''  ''i saw them, too. so what?''  ''did you see the sun discoloration on the wall where a picture or a calendar or maybe a poster had been taken down?''  ''yes, i saw it.''  bosch held up the poster.  ''i'm betting that we go in there and this will be a perfect fit. this is a poster gonzalves found with the cesium.''  ''and what will that mean -- if it's a perfect fit?''  ''it will mean alice kent conspired to kill her husband, and if it hadn't been for digiberto gonzalves, it would have been a perfect crime.''  walling shook her head dismissively.  ''come on, harry. are you saying she conspired with international terrorists to kill her husband in exchange for the cesium? i can't believe i am even doing this. i need to get back to the crime scene.''  she started checking her mirrors, getting ready to make a u-turn. they were going up lake hollywood drive now and would be at the house in two minutes.  ''no, keep going. we're almost there. alice kent conspired with someone, but it wasn't a terrorist. the cesium being dumped in the trash proves that. you said it yourself, there is no way that moby and elfayed would steal this stuff to just dump it. so what does that tell you? this wasn't a heist. it actually was a murder. the cesium was just a red herring. moby and elfayed? they were part of the misdirection. and this poster will help prove it.''  ''how?''  ''dhanurasana, the rocking bow.''  he held the poster up so she could glance at the yoga pose depicted in the bottom corner. it showed a woman with her arms behind her back, holding her ankles and creating a bow with the front of her body. she looked as if she were hogtied.  walling glanced back at the curving road and then took another long look at the poster and the pose.  ''we go into the house and see if this fits that space on the wall,'' bosch said. ''if it fits, that means she and the killer took it off the wall because they didn't want to risk that we might see it and connect it with what happened to her.''  ''it's a stretch, harry. a huge one.''  ''not when you put it in context.''  ''which you, of course, can do.''  ''as soon as we get to the house.''  ''hope you still have a key.''  ''you bet i do.''  walling turned onto arrowhead drive and punched the accelerator. but after a block she took her foot off, slowed down and shook her head again.  ''this is ridiculous. she gave us the name moby. there is no way she could have known he was in this country. and then up on the overlook, your own witness said that the shooter called out to allah as he pulled the trigger. how can -- ''  ''let's try the poster on the wall. if it fits, i'll lay the whole thing out for you. i promise. if it doesn't fit, then i will quit bothering you with it.''  she relented and drove the remaining block to the kent house without another word. there was no longer a bureau car sitting out front. bosch guessed that it was all hands on deck at the cesium-recovery scene.  ''thank god i don't have to deal with maxwell again,'' he said.  walling didn't even smile.  bosch got out with the poster and his file containing the crime-scene photos. he used stanley kent's keys to open the front door, and they proceeded to the workout room. they took positions on either side of the rectangular discoloration, and bosch unrolled the poster. they each took a side and held the top corners of the poster to the top corners of the mark. bosch put his other hand on the center of the poster and flattened it against the wall. the poster was a perfect fit.  rachel immediately let go of her side and headed out of the room.  ''i'll be in the living room. i can't wait to hear you put this together.''  bosch rolled the poster up and followed. walling took a seat in the same chair bosch put maxwell in a few hours earlier. he remained standing in front of her.  ''the fear was that the poster could be a tip-off,'' he said. ''some smart agent or detective would see the rocking-bow pose and start thinking, this woman does yoga, maybe she could handle being hogtied like that. maybe it was her idea, maybe she did it to help sell the misdirection. so they couldn't take the chance. the poster had to go. it went into the dumpster with the cesium, the gun and everything else they used. if you get your people out there to check that line of dumpsters, you'll find the rest -- the coke-bottle silencer, the ski mask, the gloves, the first set of snap ties, every -- ''  ''the first set of snap ties?''  ''that's right. i'll get to that.''  walling looked unimpressed.  ''you better get to a lot of it. because there are big gaps in this thing, man. what about the name moby? what about the citing of allah by the shooter? what -- ''  bosch held up a hand.  ''just hold on,'' he said. ''i need some water. my throat is raw from all of this talking.''  he went into the kitchen, remembering that he saw bottles of chilled water in the refrigerator while searching the kitchen earlier.  ''you want anything?'' he called out.  ''no,'' she called back. ''it's not our house, remember?''  he opened the refrigerator, took out a bottle of water and drank half of it while standing in front of the open door. he then went back out to the living room, where rachel was waiting for the story. once again, he remained standing.  ''o.k., when was it that you captured the terrorist known as moby on video at the port?''  ''what does -- ''  ''please, just answer the question.''  ''aug. 12.''  ''o.k., aug. 12. then what, some sort of alert went out through the bureau and homeland security?''  she nodded.  ''not for a while, though,'' she said. ''it took almost a month of video analysis to confirm it was nassar and elfayed. i wrote the bulletin. it went out sept. 9 as a confirmed domestic sighting.''  ''out of curiosity, why didn't you go public with it?''  ''because we have -- actually, i can't tell you.''  ''you just did. you must have someone or someplace where you think these two might show up under surveillance. if you go public, they might just go underground and never show up again.''  ''can we go back to your story, please?''  ''fine. so the bulletin went out sept. 9. that was the day the plan to kill stanley kent began.''  walling folded her arms across her chest and just stared at him. bosch thought that maybe she was beginning to see where he was going with the story, and she didn't like it.  ''it works best if you start from the end and go backward,'' bosch said. ''she gave you the name moby. how could she have gotten that name?''  ''she overheard one of them calling the other one that name.''  bosch shook his head.  ''no, she told you she overheard it. but if she was lying, how would she know the name to lie about it? just coincidence that she gives the nickname of a guy who was just discovered in the country -- in l.a. county, no less? i don't think so, rachel, and neither do you.''  ''o.k., so you're saying that somebody in the bureau or another agency that received the f.b.i. bulletin gave her the name.''  ''that's right. he gave her the name so she could come out with it while being questioned by the f.b.i.'s master interrogator. that one name would then send this whole thing down the wrong road with the f.b.i. and everybody else chasing after terrorists who had nothing to do with it.''  ''he?''  ''i'm getting to that now. you are right, anybody who got a look at that bulletin would have been able to give her that name. my guess is that would be a lot of people. a lot of people just in l.a. alone. so how would we narrow it down to one?''  ''you tell me.''  bosch opened the bottle and drank the rest of the water. he held the empty bottle in his hand as he continued.  ''you narrow it down by continuing to go backward. where would alice kent's life have intersected with one of those people in the agencies who knew about moby?''  ''that could be anywhere with those kind of parameters. it could've happened when she was buying fertilizer for her roses.''  ''then narrow the parameters. where would she have intersected with someone who knew about moby but also knew that her husband had access to the sort of radioactive materials moby might be interested in?''  she shook her head in a disdainful way.  ''nowhere. it would take a monumental coincidence to -- ''  she stopped when it came to her. there was enlightenment and shock as she fully understood where bosch was going.  ''my partner and i visited the kents to warn them a year ago. i guess what you're saying is that that makes me a suspect.''  bosch shook his head.  ''i said 'he,' remember? you didn't come here alone.''  her eyes fired when she registered the implication.  ''that's ridiculous. there's no way. i can't believe you would. . . . ''  she didn't finish, as her mind snagged on something, some memory or tell that undermined her trust and loyalty to her partner.  ''what?'' bosch asked.  ''nothing.''  ''what?''  ''look,'' she insisted, ''take my advice and tell no one this theory of yours. you're lucky you told me first. because this makes you sound like some kind of crackpot with a vendetta. you have no evidence, no motive, no incriminating statements, nothing. you just have this thing you've spun out of . . . out of a yoga poster.''  ''there is no other explanation that fits with the facts. and i'm talking about the facts of the case. not the fact that the bureau and homeland security and the rest of the federal government would love this to be a terrorism event so they can justify their existence and deflect criticism from other failings. contrary to what you want to think, there is evidence and there are incriminating statements. if we put alice kent on a lie detector, you'll find out that everything she told me, you and the master interrogator downtown is a lie.''  walling leaned forward and looked down at the floor.  ''that master interrogator you love deriding happened to be me.''  bosch's mouth dropped open for a moment before he spoke.  ''oh . . . well . . . then, sorry . . . but it doesn't matter. the point is, she is a master liar. she lied about everything, and now that we know the story, it will be easy to smoke her out.''  walling got up from her seat and walked over to the front picture window. the vertical blinds were closed, but she split them with a finger and stared out into the street. bosch could see her working the story over, grinding it down.  ''what about the witness?'' she asked without turning around. ''he heard the shooter yell, 'allah.' are you saying he's part of this?''  now bosch sat down and gently tried to clear his throat. it was burning and getting difficult to talk.  ''no, on that i think it's just a lesson in hearing what you want to hear. i plead guilty to not being much of a master interrogator myself. the kid told me that he heard the shooter yell it as he pulled the trigger. he said he wasn't sure but that it sounded like 'allah,' and that, of course, worked with what i was thinking at the time.''  walling came away from the window and sat down across from him. she folded her arms again. bosch continued.  ''but how would he know it was the shooter and not the victim who yelled? he was more than 50 yards away. it was dark. how would he know that it wasn't stanley kent yelling out his last word before execution? the name of the woman he loved because he was about to die not even knowing that she'd betrayed him in the worst way.''  ''alice.''  ''exactly.''  walling relaxed her arms and leaned forward. as body language went, it was a good sign. it told bosch he was pushing through.  ''you said 'the first set of snap ties' before,'' she said. ''what were you talking about?''  bosch nodded and handed her the file containing the crime-scene photos. he had saved the best for last.  ''look at the photos,'' he said. ''what do you see?''  she opened the file and started looking at them. they depicted the master bedroom in the kent house from all angles.  ''it's the master bedroom,'' she said. ''what am i missing?''  ''exactly.''  ''what?''  ''it's what you don't see. there are no clothes in the shot. she told us they told her to take off her clothes and get on the bed. what are we supposed to believe, that they let her put the clothes away before they hogtied her? they let her put them in the hamper? look at the last shot. it's the e-mail photo stanley kent got.''  walling looked through the file until she found the printout of the photo. she stared intently at it. he saw recognition break in her eyes.  ''now what do you see?''  ''the robe,'' she said excitedly. ''when we let her get dressed, she went to the closet to get her robe. there was no robe on that lounge chair!''  bosch nodded, and they started trading the story back and forth.  ''what does that tell us?'' he asked. ''that these considerate terrorists hung the robe up in the closet for her after taking the photo?''  ''or that maybe mrs. kent was tied up twice and the robe was moved in between?''  ''and look again at the picture. the clock on the bedside table is unplugged.''  ''why?''  ''i don't know, but maybe they didn't want to worry about having any sort of time stamp on the photo. maybe the first photo wasn't even taken yesterday. maybe it came from a dry run two days ago or two weeks.''  rachel nodded, and bosch knew she was a believer.  ''she was tied up once for the photo and then once again for the rescue,'' she said.  ''exactly. and that left her free to help carry out the plan on the overlook. she didn't kill her husband, but she was up there in the other car. and once stanley was dead and the car was ditched and the cesium dumped, she and her partner came back home, and she was tied up all over again.''  ''she wasn't passed out when we got there,'' walling said. ''that was an act and part of the plan. and her wetting the bed was a nice little touch to help sell it to us.''  there was no doubt now. bosch had her. but then the shadow of concern and doubt moved across her face like a summer cloud.  ''what about motive?'' she asked. ''this is a federal agent we're talking about. to move on this we need everything, even motive. there can be nothing left open to chance.''  bosch had been ready for the question.  ''you saw the motive. alice kent is a beautiful woman. jack brenner wanted her, and stanley kent was in the way of that.''  walling's eyes widened in shock. bosch pressed on with his case.  ''that's the motive, rachel. you -- ''  ''but he -- ''  ''let me just finish. it goes like this. you and your partner show up here that day last year to give the kents the warning about his occupation. some kind of vibe is exchanged between alice and jack. he gets interested, she gets interested. they meet on the sly for coffee or drinks or whatever. one thing leads to another. an affair begins, and it lasts, and then it lasts to the point that it's time to start thinking about doing something. leaving the husband. or getting rid of him because there's insurance and half a company at stake. that's enough motive right there, rachel, and that's what this case is about. it's not about cesium or terrorism or anything else. it's sex and murder. that's all.''  she frowned and shook her head.  ''you don't know what you are talking about. jack brenner is married and has three children. that's why i wanted him as a partner. he's stable, boring and not interested. he wasn't -- ''  ''every man is interested. it doesn't matter if they're married or how many kids they have.''  she spoke quietly.  ''would you listen and let me finish now? you are wrong about brenner. he never met alice kent before today. he wasn't my partner when i came here last year, and i never told you he was.''  bosch was jolted by the news. he'd assumed that her current partner was her partner last year. he'd had brenner's image locked and loaded in his mind as he had spun the story.  ''then who was your partner?'' he asked.  ''i switched partners and hooked up with jack after the start of the year. basically, i was tired of my old partner coming on to me. i wanted to move on.''  ''who was it, rachel?''  she held his eyes for a long moment.  ''it was cliff maxwell.''  next week: the conclusion of ''the overlook''  the funny pages: iii  