for desperate souls, a last chance no more   a suicidal new yorker picks up the phone. he dials the number of the city's oldest crisis-intervention hotline, helpline, in a last-ditch effort to save himself. instead of a concerned counselor, what he hears at the other end is a recorded voice saying: ''you have reached helpline. due to extenuating circumstances, this program is no longer in operation.'' the voice then refers callers to 311 or 911.  this is not some ''saturday night live'' gag. on dec. 31, helpline shut its offices in marble collegiate church on west 29th street in manhattan after having served more than two million people over 37 years. its two staff members and 120 volunteers had received two weeks' notice and little explanation. its callers received no warning.  financial pressure faced by the jewish board of family and children's services, which administered the hot line for the past five years, led to the closing, said mindy liss, a spokeswoman. with operating costs reaching at least $350,000 a year, the board decided to eliminate helpline from its roster of 185 charitable outreach programs. calling the closure ''a very difficult decision,'' ms. liss said that the board had explored options for directing callers to another service, or at least providing them with an explanation for the shutdown, but that none seemed economically realistic.  helpline was often the only ear some new yorkers had for their problems.  ''you have the big, cold city and people who don't have a social support network, so they call,'' said jeremy sussman, a lawyer who volunteered at helpline for 25 years. mr. sussman described typical callers as ''people who can't adapt to any kind of therapy, dropouts, people who've called from halfway houses.''  ''a recurring pattern,'' he said, ''can be someone who has lost their job and is about to be evicted and has no friends and no money, and you're thinking, 'what am i going to do?' ''  james hamilton, a 17-year volunteer, remembers a night five years ago when a 9-year-old girl in the bronx was on the line. ''mommy hurts, mommy hurts,'' she repeatedly told him in spanish. mr. hamilton listened to the sounds ''of flesh hitting flesh'' and the shouts of a man and woman in the background.  frequently, the girl would drop the phone and mr. hamilton would shout: ''hey! over here! come and talk to me!'' a man eventually got on the phone, cursed at the volunteer and hung up. mr. hamilton never heard back from the little girl.  ''there are so many lonely people out there,'' mr. hamilton said. ''it's almost like a ghost that haunts them. their only source of outside contact with the outside world was often a window. and helpline.''  lauren wolfe  neighborhood report: new york up close  