in pennsylvania, president's plan draws mixed responses and hardens opinions   hunched over a beer with a crowd of other veterans at the american legion here thursday, rocco polidoro was sure of one thing: president bush's plan to send some 20,000 more troops to iraq would only make matters worse.  ''what i don't understand is who the president is listening to,'' said mr. polidoro, a lifelong republican who, like a majority in this republican district, voted for an antiwar democrat in the last election. ''if vets, military brass, the baker committee, the international community and now most voters say it's time to get out, then in my view it's time to get out.''  frustrated by mounting deaths of united states soldiers in iraq, voters in this former mill town wedged between more liberal philadelphia and more conservative rural areas, responded to the president's plan with feelings ranging from outrage and resignation to guarded skepticism and qualified support.  in warning americans of the risks of withdrawing too early, mr. bush, in his speech on wednesday night, seemed to harden opinions rather than change minds here just two months after a resounding democratic election victory was seen as a rejection of his iraq policy.  ''it's one thing to be steadfast and another to be stubborn,'' said rick lacey, another republican at the legion hall who voted for a democrat in the last election. ''a guy like mccain, i don't agree with him on this troop increase issue, but he is steadfast because he bases his decisions on experience. our president, he bases it on ideology and being stubborn.''  carlos figueroa, a chef and vietnam veteran from villanova, said he would prefer to see an even larger increase in troop numbers. ''the biggest concern i have is about morale of the troops over there,'' mr. figueroa said, ''and i think that by sending even larger numbers we would get the place under control and help boost spirits of our folks and iraqis.''  but other supporters of the president's decision said they were left with an unsettling sense that the troop increase was part of a broader approach lacking in clear goals and a concrete exit plan.  ''i do think increasing troops may make sense because if you go to war, you go to win,'' said john carson, 71, a democrat and korean war veteran who was getting a trim at the a cut barbershop in bensalem, a bucks county town in another conservative congressional district that swung to an antiwar democrat in november. were he on the front lines, mr. carson said, he, too, would hope to get all the help available. ''but the terms have to be clear,'' he added. ''what milestones? when will we get out? what is our limit?''  standing near a statue of uncle sam riding a bicycle, hugh morrow, 64, a republican who served in vietnam and who owns the barbershop, intervened.  ''now, wait a minute,'' mr. morrow said, turning off his clippers. ''the guy keeps digging us deeper and deeper into this mess -- why not start pulling us out now?''  at mary jeffery's house, also in bensalem, the conversation among 10 democrats who had gathered to watch mr. bush's speech erupted into a heated free-for-all when one asked whether democrats in congress actually had the authority and the spine to block the president's plan.  ''of course they do,'' said ms. jeffery, a democrat whose son is stationed in cyprus.  ''it's not too late for impeachment,'' someone yelled from the back of the room.  ''congressional hearings will apply pressure, we have to apply pressure,'' another person said, adding that the long-term solution was to reinstate the draft. others suggested staging street protests and encouraging soldiers to refuse to serve.  ''look,'' interrupted john daily, 46, a navy veteran. ''if the president wants to send troops, he has the constitutional power to do it.''  ''i don't know that cutting off funding is a fair thing to do to the troops,'' he added, as the room fell silent.  in washington, while senate democrats condemned mr. bush's proposal and promised a nonbinding vote on it, and house democrats threatened to limit financing for the president's plan, republican lawmakers faced either breaking with mr. bush or embracing an unpopular policy just as the 2008 race for the white house picks up.  virtually everywhere across these districts, talk of what mr. bush's plan means in relation to the last election quickly moved to speculation about the next.  ''the pressure is actually on the democrats now to prove that when given the chance to make a difference they take the opportunity,'' said bill lewis, 66, a vietnam veteran, at a shopping mall in springfield. ''we had a 70 percent turnout for the first time in years here in delaware county with a lot of independents and republicans voting democratic. but those folks won't do that again if the democrats fail to act.''  in national polling by the new york times and cbs news, the percentage of americans who say the united states did the right thing in taking military action in iraq dropped to 38 percent last week from a high of 64 percent in december 2003.  and many voters here said the war was playing an increasingly important role in how they voted, even beyond party affiliation.  ''i'm as devout a democrat as they come,'' mr. daily said. ''but if we are still in the war in two years and a republican candidate for president like hagel or brownback is more antiwar than the democrat, then i will vote republican.'' he was referring to senator sam brownback of kansas, who has formed a presidential exploratory committee, a step that allows him to raise money as he gauges support, and senator chuck hagel of nebraska, widely mentioned as a possible candidate in 2008.  some democrats said the real reason for their anger at the president's decision was that it implied a larger misunderstanding of the problem in iraq.  ''he keeps trying to solve a political problem with a military solution,'' said jim bodnar, 61, who served in the vietnam war. he said he thought the toppling of saddam hussein had inflamed ethnic, regional and religious rivalries that would not be mended by military force. but when he asked what democrats should do to better address these political problems, mr. bodnar paused.  ''i'm frustrated,'' he said, ''but i'm not saying there are any easy answers here.''  the reach of war  