from the atheneum's basement, bits of this and that   all collection shows are idiosyncratic. no random sampling of a museum's basement storage racks, with many categories of art to choose from and uneven levels of quality and significance, can be fully comprehensive.  the collection of 20th-century painting and drawing at the wadsworth atheneum museum of art in hartford is better than most, for this is america's oldest public art museum. and from its storage vaults comes ''picasso to pop: aspects of modern art,'' an exhibition mapping the museum's history of acquiring works of 20th-century art. approximately 60 rarely exhibited works are featured.  as in most collection shows, the positioning of the artworks is not strictly chronological, and it is not really arranged by themes, at least not any that might easily be determined by the casual visitor. it merely invites us to look, feel, mutter over and enjoy. no frills, no fuss.  of course, the downside of this kind of display is that the pictures are largely wrenched out of context, lacking any sense of a unified purpose. though it is wonderful to see artworks rarely put on display, context is vital when trying to determine art's meaning and significance. it enables comparisons, and the illustration of connections to supposed forebears in art.  the opening room samples different strains of modernism -- expressionism, fauvism, cubism and surrealism, among others -- but it is by no means a survey. in the space of one wall we jump from picasso to fernand léger, to wyndham lewis to egon schiele and otto dix. the idea, as i understand it, is to illustrate how cubism spawned various painterly trends in early modern art.  though the painting by mr. lewis is valuable and important, there are actually few great works of art here. the atheneum's best early moderns are already on display in the avery court, an area devoted to the permanent collection immediately outside the galleries, where you find famous paintings by dalí, miró, mondrian, tanguy, picasso and others. the nearby presence of these masterworks makes those in the exhibition look worse than they are.  what this new show does offer, however, is a chance to spend time with first-rate works by lesser artists, among them three little-known female surrealists: stella snead, kay sage and leonor fini.  born in argentina and raised in italy, ms. fini (1908-1996) has a sensuous self-portrait on display. she depicts herself as slim, with intense ''cat-like eyes,'' as a wall label notes, wearing a festive costume.  ms. snead (1910-2006), who was british, studied painting in london before moving to new york in 1939. the following year she traveled across the united states by bus. ms. snead, a vegetarian, was fascinated by the southwest, where she returned in the early 1940s and began to paint dreamy landscape scenes with animals. ''ecstatic cow'' (1943) depicts a happy cow in a farmyard scene.  the second room of the exhibition introduces us to talented, if little remembered, modern latin american painters, among them carlos mérida, jesús guerrero galván and mario carreno. the most striking work of this group is ''la vigornia'' (the little nurse) (1937) by mr. galván (1910-1973), a mexican artist, which shows a girl holding a child. this was one of two modern mexican paintings that the atheneum's former director, a. everett austin jr., bought on a visit to mexico in 1939. the other was by diego rivera.  from here the selection narrows, focusing chiefly on american postwar artists beginning with representative abstract paintings by jackson pollock, franz kline, clyfford still, barnett newman and robert motherwell. none of them are terribly good, with the exception of the pollock, ''number 9'' (1949), which was a gift to the museum in the late 1960s by the abstract sculptor tony smith, who had his first retrospective at the atheneum in 1967 and subsequently donated to the museum several works of his artist friends.  the final room is devoted to pop art, specifically by the american painters andy warhol, robert rauschenberg, roy lichtenstein and wayne thiebaud. mr. rauschenberg's ''retroactive i'' (1964) is a famous, important painting, but one that is frequently on show in the permanent collection rooms here. less known, or shown, are some of mr. lichtenstein's screenprints on a variety of plastic surfaces.  the curators have chosen to close the show with a painted aluminum silhouette by alex katz titled ''margie'' (1971), commissioned by the atheneum board of trustees in honor of margarie ellis, who worked as registrar at the museum for 54 years before retiring in 1973.  it is a touching if kitschy tribute. at one time or another, almost all the artworks in this exhibition passed through ms. ellis's hands.  ''picasso to pop: aspects of modern art,'' wadsworth atheneum museum of art, 600 main street, hartford, through nov. 18. information can be found at (860) 278-2670 or www.wadsworthatheneum.org.  art review  