defense falters and nets fade in fourth quarter   the nets thought they were finished with games like this.  it was not just the fourth-quarter collapse, which enabled the minnesota timberwolves to pull away and win, 109-98. in both the first and third quarters, the nets failed to add to modest leads that could have helped them withstand kevin garnett's big second half and the timberwolves' furious 37-point fourth quarter.  garnett finished with 32 points and 14 rebounds, with 12 points each coming in third and fourth quarters. garnett's energy sparked minnesota's remarkable fourth-quarter shooting from the field (11 for 16) and the free-throw line (15 for 15). and it left the nets losers for only the second time in seven games.  ''just because you have a lot of energy doesn't necessarily mean you're not tired,'' said garnett, who grabbed his 10,000th career rebound in a game that came one night after a 116-110 victory against memphis. ''lord knows i was. but it's part of the league, and i'm pretty used to it.''  improved defense had characterized this recent good stretch for the nets, which made the manner of the loss tougher to take. the nets had not allowed this many points in a game since dec. 23, a 115-104 loss at milwaukee.  it did not help that the nets, after shooting 53.1 percent from the field through three quarters, missed 12 of 18 attempts in the fourth quarter and committed six turnovers. or that, after leading, 67-57, with 5 minutes 46 seconds left in the third quarter, the nets never extended the lead and were outscored by 52-31 the rest of the way.  the aggressive timberwolves were 56.9 percent from the field and 32 of 35 from the free-throw line. garnett was perfect on 11 attempts. the nets took only 14 free throws and made 11. ricky davis added 17 points and randy foye had 16 for the timberwolves, who had five players in double figures.  ''defensively, we just had so many breakdowns,'' nets coach lawrence frank said. ''then what happens is, it gets magnified, and then we made some poor decisions on the offensive end. you don't give yourself any margin for error if you can't put together stops.''  forward richard jefferson said: ''in the third quarter we should have gone from 10 to 17 points, and we didn't. in the fourth quarter, we just died.''  the nets wasted an earlier chance to pull away when vince carter (24 points) sat out much of the first half because of foul trouble. the nets led by 8 in the first quarter, but were only ahead by 48-46 at halftime.  not even jason kidd, after his triple-double in thursday's comeback victory at chicago, could rescue the nets. kidd finished with 24 points, 13 assists, 6 rebounds and 6 steals, but he also committed 5 turnovers.  ''it was surprising for us,'' kidd said of the team's fourth-quarter play. ''the last six or seven games, in the fourth quarter, we buckled down. tonight, you've got to give minnesota credit. it was the other way around.''  the nets led, 81-77, early in the fourth quarter when the timberwolves ran off 10 straight points to take their first lead. garnett scored 6 of the points -- a jumper that hit the rim, bounced high and through; a fast-break dunk after a carter throwback pass to no one; and another dunk out of a halfcourt set.  a carter free throw with 6:49 left stopped the drought, but the nets could make no more headway. garnett pump-faked mikki moore airborne, drove the lane, took a hammering inside and made two free throws with 4:50 left to make the score 93-85 in favor of the timberwolves. after that, the nets never came closer than 7 points.  ''with them getting easy buckets in the paint and also getting to the free-throw line,'' frank said, ''it puts huge pressure that you have to be almost flawless on the offensive end. obviously, in the fourth quarter, we weren't that.''  rebounds  the n.b.a. suspended chicago forward andres nocioni one game for elbowing mikki moore in the head thursday. the league also rescinded the technical foul called against moore after the play, saving him the $1,000 fine.  timberwolves forward eddie griffin, whom the nets drafted no. 7 over all in 2001, served the second game of his five-game suspension for violating the league's anti-drug policy. griffin fell out of coach dwane casey's rotation early in the season and had not played for 13 games before the suspension. the nets acquired richard jefferson and jason collins from houston for griffin in a draft-day trade.  pro basketball  