just being there looks good on you   some restaurants are good places to stop on the way home from work, or to drop by on a whim with the family.  cocco-la is neither. cocco-la, whose name means ''pamper'' or ''cuddle'' in italian, is an event, a party, even when music isn't shaking the house. (there are live bands on some nights.) it's a fancy place to go wearing dress clothes and dancing shoes, to admire the chic décor and to feel more attractive just for being there.  the food at this six-month-old spot is evolving as its new big-name chef, robert trainor, learns his clients' tastes. (i visited once before his arrival in november, and once after.) ''the tag of the restaurant is 'contemporary american cuisine with an italian soul,' '' says mr. trainor, a 1983 johnson & wales university graduate and sommelier who previously served as executive chef at the dining room at the hilton short hills and executive sous-chef at the waldorf-astoria in new york, among other posts. ''we're trying to get back to that.''  that means an eventual goodbye to the odd sushi roll and most of the asian flavorings, and a continued commitment to plentiful vegetables and the exploration of culinary boundaries with nightly specials. meals are built on the italianish menu shaped by the restaurant's owners, nino and janet tamburin, who also own eccola in parsippany and had eccoqui in bernardsville until they sold it in 2004.  the restaurant isn't much to look at outside, a squat structure with a sea of parking behind it. the foyer is expansive, sleek and dark, with the main dining room glowing warmly a few steps down. at the back of the room, the busy, brightly lighted kitchen is partly visible. high-backed booths tucked along the wall create a feeling of privacy and dampen the considerable noise, making them the best seats in the house. but the middle row of tables makes the room. clothed in regal purple and sensuously curved, they echo the lines of the light shades above.  the appetizers category is strong. oysters are sparkling fresh; the seafood salad is compelling, with calamari, scungilli, shrimp and scallop in a frisky lemon-garlic-basil vinaigrette. the seafood tower, a popular choice, was equally fresh and pleasing. other standouts included grilled calamari with roasted peppers; a slyly asian-spiced crab cake with rémoulade, and a credible beef carpaccio with arugula, capers, olive oil and shaved parmesan.  on two visits, there were several winners among the house-made pastas, including silky pappardelle with sweet and tender jumbo shrimp, mushrooms, prosciutto and peas in pink vodka sauce; and eggplant ravioli with the unexpected richness of lobster, tomato-basil butter and toasted pine nuts. rigatoni bolognese, a special one night, was complex and delicious, with peas and mushrooms adding balance and texture.  less successful was the whole-wheat penne with broccoli rabe and tomatoes, which stubbornly refused to transcend its ingredients and become a dish. skip the gnocchi; on the first visit, we sent it back, because the dumplings had no real flavor and an annoyingly sticky texture. the second batch (and another, on a later visit) was no better, though the sauce was superlative -- fresh basil and pine nuts in a pesto made with romano cheese.  beyond the best dish in the house, which is a meltingly luscious pork osso bucco, entrees at cocco-la include the typical upscale offerings: duck, lamb, veal, steak, pork shank, red snapper, tuna, scallops and shrimp. they are well prepared, but it's the pampering of vegetables and the balance of them that is so endearing. order duck, and you are rewarded with a lovely grilled endive and smooth, creamy sweet potatoes. opt for lamb loin, and you get a vegetable-lentil sauce. the veal rib chop is served milanese style, with arugula and onions tempered by fresh mozzarella. the filet mignon is teamed with typical steakhouse fare of sautéed spinach and mushrooms, and the salmon gets a generous serving of wilted greens and melted leeks. then there are italian-style sides -- sautéed escarole, mushrooms and broccoli rabe.  desserts, at both visits, lacked refinement, but if you must have one, choose from the gelato and sorbet. the sugar rush will help you later, on the dance floor.  cocco-la  150 route 206 south  hillsborough  (908) 704-1160  www.coccolarestaurant.com  good  the space sophisticated and sensuous, with dramatic lighting and partial views of the kitchen. complete wheelchair access.  the crowd noisy and dressed to the nines; friendly and knowledgeable servers; very few children. there is live music wednesdays through saturdays, starting around 9 p.m., and sometimes dancing.  the bar long and lively, with a separate menu. the wine list is substantial, with bottles $25 to $350 and glasses $7 to $14.  the bill sandwiches, pastas and salads for lunch, $12 to $20. dinner entrees, $22 to $29, with specials sometimes above $30. (diners club card not accepted.)  what we like seafood salad, seafood tower, grilled calamari, crab cake, pear salad with pecans and arugula, pappardelle with shrimp, eggplant ravioli with lobster, all vegetables, pork osso bucco.  if you go lunch: monday to friday, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m., with casual dining in the bar/lounge until 5 p.m. dinner: monday to thursday, 5 to 10 p.m.; friday and saturday, 5 to 11 p.m.; sunday, 5 to 9 p.m. brunch: sunday, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. reservations recommended on weekends. plenty of parking next to the building.  reviewed jan. 14, 2007  dining/hillsborough  