2 new bids for freedom put prosecutor on defensive   kenneth mark taub stands more than six feet tall with a meaty neck and good wrestling shoulders. he has a well-disciplined goatee, a withering baritone and a law degree from st. john's university, which he puts to good use leading homicide prosecutors through the cage-fighting match known as state supreme court in brooklyn.  but last week mr. taub was on the defensive.  in unrelated cases on successive days, he dispatched deputies to court or appeared himself to answer arguments from imprisoned men seeking to prove their innocence. he said his team would review the cases, though he was not ready to open the jailhouse doors.  ''we, of course, were grateful and certainly willing to investigate,'' mr. taub said in court, quickly adding, ''that investigation is simply not complete.''  the two bids for freedom arrived amid a much publicized spate of exonerations nationwide. for prosecutors who thrive on making and proving accusations, the role reversal is unwelcome.  the two new cases in brooklyn underscored the breadth of their challenge.  in one case, mr. taub, chief of the homicide unit for the district attorney's office, has been pursuing the defendant for about a decade, trying without success to charge him in a previous shooting of the same victim. the new evidence requires great technological mastery: an accused murderer says he can demonstrate an alibi using complex records of cellphone ''chirps.''  in the other case, the defendant has been in prison since 1985, the same year mr. taub first joined the homicide bureau.  the new evidence seems almost anachronistic: a reputed mafia associate imprisoned for more than 20 years says men under federal witness protection can clear his name.  for a hearing on wednesday in the first case, mr. taub arrived in court with thomas c. ridges, one of 14 assistant district attorneys assigned to the homicide bureau.  across the aisle, the defendant, eric wright, 35, stood in handcuffs, smiling at supporters in the gallery. he was arrested on nov. 9, charged with killing a man named tyrone pope. the two men share some history. in the late 1990s, prosecutors said, a grand jury heard evidence that mr. wright had shot and paralyzed mr. pope. in that case, mr. wright testified and was not indicted.  mr. pope was shot again, this time fatally, on july 28 in east new york, brooklyn. when the police questioned mr. wright, court records show, he made a statement acknowledging the ill will.  ''i used to be with his girl,'' mr. wright told investigators, referring to the leader of a street crew that had employed mr. pope. ''he tried to rob me like five years ago. i stay in n.j. now. i didn't kill nobody.''  that last part, about living in new jersey, became the focus for mr. wright's lawyer, george a. farkas. at the hearing, mr. farkas said he had obtained cellphone records to show that mr. wright had been in newark, more than a dozen miles from the crime scene.  mr. farkas told the judge that he was skeptical at first. the man who claimed to have been on the other end of the phone call also happened to have been close enough to the crime scene to hear the gunshots, a truly intriguing coincidence to lawyers on both sides.  in fact, mr. farkas said, his first attempt to confirm the account with telephone records failed to show any calls at the time of the shooting. a second request produced records of so-called chirping, or using the phone as a walkie-talkie, to support an alibi.  ''he couldn't have been in brooklyn at the time,'' mr. farkas said. ''he is actually innocent.''  the prosecutors stood stiffly and silently as mr. farkas made his argument. then mr. taub delicately ridiculed the evidence.  ''they have proven to my satisfaction that the cellphone was in newark, new jersey, at the time of the shooting,'' mr. taub said. but as the courtroom use of cellular records has become publicized, he added, criminals ''could arrange for their phone to be used in a place other than where they're committing the crime.''  the next day, mr. taub sent anna-sigga nicolazzi, a young star of the bureau who specializes in complex cases with multiple defendants, to handle a claim of innocence in the case from the distant past.  the inmate in that case, carmine carini, has been imprisoned since 1985 for the murder of a record shop owner. his conviction was upheld on appeal. but in 2004, federal prosecutors sent an unusual letter to mr. taub.  in the letter, court records show, mr. taub was told that two cooperating witnesses had identified a deceased brother of mr. carini's as the real killer. mr. carini's supporters renewed their efforts.  ''i've known for 20 years that this guy didn't do it,'' said lawrence frost, a private investigator who worked on the case. ''it's only been in the last few years that we got these fabulous breaks.''  mr. taub forwarded the letter to mr. carini, who eventually hired the lawyer and radio host ronald l. kuby. the cooperating witnesses identified as cw1 and cw2, mr. kuby wrote, turned out to be salvatore mangiavillano, a gambino crime family soldier known as fat sal, and frank smith, a lucchese crime family associate. both men are in federal witness protection.  ''if federal witnessing were an olympic event,'' mr. kuby wrote, ''smith would bring america the gold.''  at the hearing on thursday, mr. kuby asked the judge to order the men produced from witness protection to testify. the prosecutor, ms. nicolazzi, kept her options open.  ''at this point, we're going to consent to the hearing,'' she said, later adding, ''we have not made a determination whether there is merit.''  the hearing, scheduled for feb. 27, promises the odd spectacle of prosecutors seeking to discredit cooperating witnesses while defense lawyers argue that known mafia associates should be trusted.  in both cases, prosecutors asked for time to investigate. mr. taub did not seem eager to consent to any exonerations.  ''i'm saying,'' he told the court, ''that we don't have the evidence to decide.''  