the clock is ticking for winter travelers   more than a year ago, the federal government decided it was going to require just about everyone entering the united states to present a passport -- even american citizens coming back from trips just across the border. confusion ensued -- travel companies and border cities protested, start dates were pushed back, and air and sea requirements were broken up and put on different timetables. on jan. 23, the first of the requirements is becoming reality. if you're jetting off to mexico or the caribbean, you'll need to pack a passport along with that bathing suit.  in fact, nearly anyone coming into the united states by plane -- including americans who have long returned with just a birth certificate or a driver's license from canada, mexico, panama and most caribbean islands -- will need to present a passport at the airport. those who don't, the department of homeland security says, will have to go through secondary screenings to verify their citizenship. no one has announced an estimate of how long those screenings will take, but, inevitably, that extra step will cause delays.  it's a big change for americans who were used to a warmer welcome home -- adults could get by with their usual government-issued ids; children needed just birth certificates. a 2005 study commissioned by the caribbean hotel association concluded that an estimated 80 percent of visitors from the united states to jamaica did not carry passports. nor did roughly 30 percent of americans going to antigua and barbuda, 27 percent to aruba and 15 percent to curaçao.  nearly three-quarters of all americans -- 73 percent -- don't even have passports, the state department says. some people are about to be getting them in a hurry.  one thing to keep in mind: in an effort to make sure their customers don't put off vacations just because they don't yet have passports, many hotels in the caribbean and mexico are offering rebates to guests who will have to pay fees to get them. the hotels include nine marriott and renaissance resorts (www.paradisebymarriott.com/passport), nine superclubs (www.superclubs.com/passport.asp) and 19 other hotels in nassau and paradise island in the bahamas (www.nassauparadiseisland.com).  here is a guide to help you navigate the bureaucracy and get that passport in time.  your trip is in eight weeks  if all goes well, you'll have time to get your passport in the usual way -- processing an application typically takes six to eight weeks. but as the demand for passports grows, wait times could increase. in december, one million passport applications were processed, up 57 percent from the number in december 2005. to help handle the work, the government has hired new employees and added some new locations where people can file applications, bringing the total to roughly 9,000. but no one really knows if this will be enough. to apply for the first time, go in person to one of the many passport acceptance facilities around the country, including many post offices or libraries (you can find one by zip code at www.iafdb.travel.state.gov), with two photographs of yourself; proof of united states citizenship, like a certified birth certificate; and a valid form of photo identification, like a driver's license. the fee is $97.  if you mostly travel between the united states and canada, there is a $50 alternative: the nexus card, issued to pre-screened travelers under a joint program operated by the united states and canada.  you're leaving in two weeks  you can always pay an extra $60 for expedited service, which typically cuts down waiting time to around two weeks. be sure to clearly mark ''expedited'' on the envelope if you're mailing in your application, an option for adults who are simply renewing passports. (renewals cost $67.) and consider paying for overnight delivery each way.  for faster service, make an appointment to go in person, with proof of travel plans in hand, to one of 14 passport agencies in major cities, including new york, houston and los angeles, by calling (877) 487-2778. your passport could be issued that same day.  you're leaving tomorrow  your best bet is to use a private rush service. for anywhere from $130 to $200 on top of passport fees, these companies often can obtain passports in as little as 24 hours. you'll still need appropriate documentation, and you'll have to appear at a post office or other passport acceptance location, but the service will speed up the processing time.  rush companies have their limits, too. in recent years, some of the regional passport agencies have reduced the number of daily submissions rush companies are allowed, and some companies have had to turn applicants away. but if the first one you call can't get you an appointment, there are many others to choose from. for a list go to www.napvs.org. american express vacations is working with it's easy passport and visa services in new york to get its customers passports on the day of application, if necessary. cost: $179 to $200 on top of regular fees.  you're leaving next year  sure, you have plenty of time, but you might as well apply now. as early as jan. 1 of next year, american citizens traveling between the united states and the rest of the western hemisphere by land or sea could be required to present valid passports. while recent legislative changes permit a later deadline, the state and homeland security departments are working to meet all requirements as soon as possible.  the change is expected to drive an even greater influx of passport applications. by applying now, you'll avoid any potential backlogs.  for travelers who don't want to pay $97 for a first-time passport, the state department also plans to introduce a passport card, possibly by the end of this year, good for travel by land or sea only to canada, mexico, the caribbean and bermuda. projected costs are $10 for children and $20 for adults with a $25 processing fee for each.  what about the kids?  if it's your children who need the passports, there are extra rules. to apply for a passport for a child under 14, both parents must appear together with the child to sign the application. if that's not possible, written and notarized permission from an absent parent or another documented explanation -- like proof of sole custody of a child, an adoption decree or the death certificate of a deceased parent -- must be supplied. exact procedures are set out at www.travel.state.gov/passport. older teenagers with their own government-issued ids do not need a parent to accompany them to apply, but parental consent may be requested. the fee is $82 for children under 16.  practical traveler | passports  