all about ego, showbiz and a little black dress   blondes don't come any more toxic than clea, the weapon of mass destruction accessorized with ''it'' bag and alpine heels who lays waste to a seemingly solid marriage in ''the scene,'' theresa rebeck's sharp-witted, sharp-elbowed comedy about the savage economies of sex and show business in contemporary manhattan.  as embodied by the talented young actress anna camp, the deceptively ditsy clea is both thoroughly repellent and a glistening object of male fascination, a trophy wife waiting for her inevitable acquisition and inscription. her poisonous aura permeates ms. rebeck's play much as that gaseous reek spread across the city earlier this week, causing a few swoons.  the hapless urban dweller whom clea sends into a tailspin in ''the scene,'' which opened last night at the second stage theater in a high-octane production directed by rebecca taichman, is a chronically unemployed actor named charlie. played by the endearingly grumpy tony shalhoub, star of the television series ''monk,'' charlie is idling on the terrace at a party with his friend lewis (christopher evan welch) in the play's opening scene. they are shirking the obligatory networking duties that often seem to supplant the actual having of fun at many a local gathering when planet clea enters their orbit.  a recent refugee from ohio, as she repeatedly and excitedly announces, clea employs the language and syntax of a tween exchanging breathless gossip in the hallway at junior high, appending question marks and vocal crescendos to the most unprepossessing observations. (''i just got here, what, like, six months ago?''). but her vacuities occasionally have the peculiar ring of profundities (''how can you know so much and so little at the same time?'' charlie will later observe of her), and the smirks that her nitwit effusions evoke on the faces of both men occasionally twist into leers.  the official opinion, later retailed to charlie's wife, stella (patricia heaton), over shots of tequila: clea's an idiot, a joke. (''she looks good in black and can't speak the english language,'' stella retorts. ''she'll do just fine in manhattan.'') but the restive libidinal impulses of men negotiating the encroaching (or settled) disappointments of middle age inspire lewis, at least, to modify that assessment. coining a vacuous profundity of his own, he says: ''she wasn't a moron. she's pretty.''  that kernel of masculine (il)logic is emblematic of the wit and shrewdness of ms. rebeck's comedy, which updates a film-noir, femme-fatale story for today's manhattan, where shadows and smoke have given way to the hard glare emitted by glass honeycombs of luxury condos. (derek mclane's sets capture the variously glossy and funky flavors of four different urban habitats.) ms. rebeck's dialogue bristles with biting observations about the obsessions of aspiring new yorkers who continually rub up against more successful versions of themselves. (''rich people's apartments are so strangely comforting,'' charlie forlornly observes.)  an experienced playwright who has also toiled in the television industry, ms. rebeck has intimate knowledge of the pathologies bred in smart, seemingly well-adjusted men and women by the surreal polarities of success and failure in the entertainment industries. (the word ''surreal,'' as it happens, has its own viral role in the lexicon of the play.)  charlie's and stella's career tracks have diverged rather painfully in recent years, as it happens. she works 24/7, complaining, when she's not actually at the office, about her high-stress job booking talent on a talk show; he hasn't worked in a long time. in one of the play's most explosively funny scenes, charlie barges in on lewis's date with clea after an ego-shredding lunch with an old friend, who now has the power to offer him a much-needed acting gig on his television pilot. the long monologue of rage, envy and mortification that charlie unleashes, between generous swigs of vodka, rises to a hilarious climax with this piteous assessment of his ''friend's'' possible pilot: ''it is so bad, there actually is a possibility that they're going to make it.''  mr. shalhoub, whose role as the gentle obsessive-compulsive on ''monk'' doesn't allow much in the way of actorly extroversion, clearly relishes the chance to cut loose. his captivatingly raw performance is rich in physical comedy -- a gymnastic sex scene that practically puts charlie in traction is priceless -- and in seething arias of vituperation freely expressed. in moments of anguished silence, mr. shalhoub also communicates the pathos in the character's susceptibility to the promise of escape from his thwarted life, even if self-assertion comes at the price of self-destruction.  as the bewildered stella, who is powerless to prevent the emotional car wreck careering through her living room, ms. heaton (the ''everybody loves raymond'' star) exudes an edgy intensity that rarely lets up. ms. camp, her wholesome beauty a perfect decoy for her character's sly manipulations, is a delightfully awful caricature of the night-crawling young women rampaging through bars and restaurants in little black dresses, baiting the variously bruised or bloated egos of men with the promise of some ego-stroking solace.  mr. welch has the quietest role -- lewis mostly plays consoler in chief as his friends' lives implode -- but he gives a master class in the art of the baleful glare in one memorable sequence.  ms. camp is the only member of the cast who appeared in the play's world premiere production, also directed by ms. taichman, at last year's humana festival of new american plays at the actors theater of louisville. she has raised the comic pitch of the performance a notch, possibly to match the intensity of mr. shalhoub and ms. heaton.  or have they pitched their performances to complement hers? whatever the dynamic, the result is a less humane production than the one at louisville, providing for a few narrative speed bumps.  but ''the scene'' certainly makes up in forceful comedy what it may now lack in psychological nuance, and ms. rebeck's dark-hued morality tale contains enough fresh insights into the cultural landscape to freshen what is essentially a classic boy-meets-bad-girl story. the doomed charlie is seen as both a victim of, and a symptom of, a morally corrupt culture.  ''it's like we don't even know how to have a real desire anymore,'' he observes, flaying himself for his desperation to succeed in a business he has such contempt for.  in spheres both professional and sexual, former good guys like charlie no longer aspire toward the things that bring fulfillment and satisfaction, but are seduced instead by the empty blandishments that have become the brands signifying success and worldly happiness: the hot blonde, the stratospheric paycheck, the limo and the access to the v.i.p. room. if you're walking on a red carpet, does it matter that it paves the way to hell?  the scene  by theresa rebeck; directed by rebecca taichman; sets by derek mclane; costumes by jeff mahshie; lighting by natasha katz; sound by martin desjardins; production stage manager, kelly hance; stage manager, shanna spinello; associate artistic director, christopher burney; production manager, jeff wild. presented by the second stage theater, carole rothman, artistic director; ellen richard, executive director. at the second stage theater, 307 west 43rd street, clinton; (212) 246-4422. through feb. 11. running time: 2 hours 15 minutes.  with: anna camp (clea), patricia heaton (stella), tony shalhoub (charlie) and christopher evan welch (lewis).  theater review  