are you being served?   setting the table  the transforming power  of hospitality in business.  by danny meyer.  320 pp. harpercollins publishers. $25.95.  four decades ago in the new yorker, joseph wechsberg profiled henri soulé, the impeccable host and owner of two of the last century's great society restaurants, le pavillon and la côte basque. a soft-spoken authoritarian, soulé could deploy generosity like a weapon. when he waived the bill of one fuming customer, wechsberg wrote, ''the unexpected display of noblesse oblige so upset the angry customer that he insisted on paying the bill. he was permitted to do so, but it is doubtful that he will get a desirable table in the future.''  wechsberg's profile is a relative rarity: compared with the chef, who has inspired piles of confessionals and biographies, the great restaurant host is an underexamined creature. perhaps that's because discretion is a restaurateur's asset -- to dish untowardly would be bad for business. it's too bad, though, because as much as we cooks hate to admit it, the work at the front of the house is complex, dramatic and critical to a restaurant's well-being.  danny meyer, one of the country's most successful restaurateurs, could surely write a great dining room tell-all, but he is far too prudent. instead he has delivered a memoir-cum-business-manual that mixes common-sense object lessons in hospitality (hire people who are not only skilled but inherently upbeat and thoughtful; listen and respond to feedback from customers and reviewers) with diplomatic bits of autobiography.  meyer is a new york restaurateur of a different sort from soulé -- a kinder one, to start. nevertheless, he too knows the value of comped food, using kitchen freebies, heartfelt apologies and often a follow-up note, to turn inevitable restaurant snafus like soggy onion rings or an overly long wait into customer loyalty. this kind of generosity has become meyer's core business philosophy -- the hospitality of the book's title has the power of the potlatch: largesse brings power. in meyer's world, that means devoted customers of the influential sort. ''generosity,'' he observes, ''is clearly in our self-interest.''  meyer grew up in st. louis, the well-traveled child of eurocentric parents from prominent midwestern families. at 27, with less than a year of restaurant work under his belt, he opened the union square cafe in a yet-to-be-up-and-coming quarter of lower manhattan. this neighborhood restaurant par excellence attracted loyalty for its wine list and eclectic menu (especially after meyer hired michael romano as chef) -- and, more significantly, perhaps, for its service. meyer helped define a new ethos for restaurants in new york: fine dining without the elitist formality of soulé's (or sirio maccioni's or andré soltner's) starched linen palaces. customers soon grew immensely fond of the easy-mannered professionalism and attentiveness of meyer's staff.  meyer, for example, emphasizes the importance of taking notes on guests so that he or his staff might engineer serendipitous moments for them, like remembering a favorite table or introducing them to someone in their field. his formula carried on to other establishments, including the zagat-guide-topping gramercy tavern, as well as eleven madison park, tabla, blue smoke, the upscale burger hut shake shack and -- the triumph of this book -- the modern, his alsatian-inflected restaurant at the rebuilt museum of modern art.  meyer writes vividly about characters who aren't clients -- his family members, for instance -- and restaurant aficionados will be drawn to descriptions of operational details: his impeccable decisions about where to open restaurants, and where not to (that means you, time warner center); how those who eat alone are of particular interest to him, ''hoping that today's solo diner will host tomorrow's party of four''; or how he fine-tunes the noise level in each restaurant. ''i hear noise the way a good chef tastes salt: too much is overbearing; too little can be stifling.''  but meyer is not giving advice just to would-be restaurateurs: his book aims for a broader business audience. whether his model of ''hospitalitocracy'' can expand beyond the service industry is hard to say, but meyer certainly tries hard. this book wants to be a business parable of sorts -- the kind populated by metaphorical parachutes, cheese and sharks.. meyer apparently can't resist the genre: he thinks of staff members ''not as servers, but as surfers''; he imagines businesses as moth-attracting light bulbs; and he refers to the press, somewhat predictably, as a shark. (the particular shark meyer has in mind, i suspect, is frank bruni, the times critic, whose two-star reviews of eleven madison park and the modern disappointed him.)  meyer is more persuasive and interesting, both as a storyteller and as a business adviser, when he sticks to concrete examples from his working life instead of spinning them into catchphrases that might work in a powerpoint presentation. he has built his business not on food or service alone, but on the value of a colorful story -- especially the ones that his clients tell to his future clients: the wallet lost in a cab and tracked down by tabla's manager; the personal call from meyer before a big anniversary dinner; a superb frozen custard on a sunny day in madison square park. when meyer slips into generic business-speak, that all-important narrative gets lost.  sara dickerman worked for years as a restaurant cook. she is now the food and dining editor of seattle magazine.  