passage from india   even among my manypretty female cousins in india, bright and lovely neet stood out. like most of my father's relatives, she lived in bihar, a volatile region in the northeastern part of the country, and at 23 was sheltered in ways that i, born and bred in the u.s., had trouble comprehending. neet never left the house alone; she had never even shopped for her own saris. but she had studied rigorously, earned a master's degree in computer science and was working as a software-development intern. when i asked her by phone if i'd have to start calling her ''dr. neet'' soon -- a nod to the possibility of a doctorate -- she laughed and said, in her tentative english, ''i like the sound of that!''  in truth, further educational aspirations were at odds with neet's circumstances, and when i learned last year that her parents were considering arranged-marriage options, i felt sorry for her. a connecticut-bred yale grad, i'm not really an advocate of arranged marriage. (my marriage wasn't arranged, and my husband is ukrainian.) but it occurred to me, and to my like-minded father, that we might be able to bring neet into the u.s. and broaden her opportunities if we could find a suitable indian husband for her here. with her parents' permission, we set to work.  posing as my father, who would have the authority to do so, i created an online profile for neet on an indian matchmaking web site -- outlining everything from her hobbies to her favorite foods. interest poured in at once. through e-mail exchanges, i screened men on the basis of their career objectives, where they lived, what kind of partner they wanted. then my dad conducted phone interviews with half a dozen prospects. usually one call was enough. ''this guy is looking for a maid, not a wife!'' he griped on one occasion. as the process went on, we began to lower our expectations. there were no movie stars among our top candidates. but we did find a few smart, progressive young men, u.s. citizens all. before long two of them announced that they were planning trips to india, presumably to see prospective brides, and wanted to meet neet in person. my father hurried to the phone to call our relatives.  my father and i assumed that we needed only to get the young men to neet, and that she would take care of the rest. but my normally vivacious cousin was scared witless when it came to boys. ''everything will be fine,'' i told her. ''just be yourself.''  ''be myself,'' she repeated uneasily.  according to neet, boy no. 1 was kind and smart but, as she put it, ''very healthy'' -- in other words, as large as a hippo. boy no. 2 was ill mannered and resembled ''a dried twig.'' beyond that, neet said little. ''what about the healthy one?'' i asked.  ''he's nice,'' she said.  ''so you'll e-mail him?''  ''i suppose,'' she said, hestitating. ''what do i write?''  it took neet three weeks to send that first e-mail message, a few wan lines, to the healthy boy. but there was no response. at my insistence, she e-mailed him again -- another lackluster effort. he eventually wrote back, to say how busy he was. my mother complained that the stress was getting to my father. he was rising in the middle of the night, pacing around, eating whole containers of cashews at a sitting. finding a mate for neet had become my all-engrossing avocation as well. finally my dad went ahead and called the healthy boy's father. the father admitted that his son liked her but not enough, and that was the brutal truth. though i fretted over neet's reaction, she seemed to take it in stride.  inquiries from suitors kept flooding in. we could have easily continued our search. but we couldn't understand neet's lack of enthusiasm. at one point i asked her bluntly if she really wanted to be married to someone in america. before i knew it, she had changed the subject to her favorite bollywood stars. we finally had to accept that she didn't share our sense of urgency over her situation. our decision to hold off was probably a relief to her. for my father and me, it meant coming to terms with the idea that the life we imagined for her wasn't going to happen.  for many months after my father and i gave up matchmaking, i felt guilty about our failure. recently i've begun to feel guilty about the attempt. i hear there are several suitors in india who are interested in neet, but she's still in no hurry to be married, or to otherwise sort out her future. maybe we were wrong to think that she should be, or to think that we knew what was best for her.  i suppose all i really wanted was to see my cousin in more secure circumstances. it's mere chance, after all, that she's there and i'm here; that she has one kind of life and i another; that opportunities i take for granted are beyond her reach. i'm not saying that one situation is better than the other. but i'm not denying it either.  lives chandra prasad is the editor of ''mixed: an anthology of short fiction on the multiracial experience.'' her novel, ''on borrowed wings,'' will be published in june.  