storm left new orleans ripe for violence   the storm of violence that has burst over this city since new year's day can be traced in part to dysfunctional law enforcement institutions, aggravated by a natural disaster that turned the physical and social landscape of new orleans into an ideal terrain for criminals.  eight killings have occurred in 10 days. new orleans, the united states' murder capital by many measures in 2006, is well on its way to keeping that distinction in 2007. since july 2006, there have been at least 95 murders per 100,000 residents, and possibly a higher ratio depending on how the city's depleted population is counted, said peter scharf, a criminologist at the university of new orleans.  frightened citizens now see their city as a stalking ground, roamed with impunity by teenagers with handguns -- an image that may not be far off the mark, experts here say.  there are a variety of reasons for the descent toward chaos. an automobile-bound police department is reluctant to walk the streets and interact with the city's residents. it is at war with the district attorney's office, which is prosecuting seven officers for a deadly shooting soon after hurricane katrina struck in 2005. judges in the city's courts regularly rule in favor of criminals.  completing the grim picture is an already fragile social structure in the city's poorest wards that has been all but destroyed by hurricane katrina. moving back to town, in many cases, are ''kids with guns, and without parents,'' said mr. scharf, who predicted a year ago that the city was in for a tidal wave of violence.  the police, feared and hated by the city's poor, get no cooperation from them in solving crimes. ''stop that snitchin!'' is the inscription on the t-shirt of a man waiting for a bus on canal street. in killing after killing, police officials have begged for witnesses to step up, to no avail.  the result is an unwitting carrying out of the classic maoist strategy of guerilla insurgency: criminals swim like fish in the surrounding sea, protected by a population that finds no reason to give them up, and is often afraid to.  frustrated, police officers have been known to lash out at residents. disturbing police brutality cases -- officers beating up, or even shooting, random african-american men -- are now competing for headlines with the latest killings.  infuriating the police agency he must work with, eddie jordan, the district attorney, referred to the police as ''rabid dogs'' after he indicted seven of them last month in the shooting death of two men after hurricane katrina.  in this violent city, the police department's arrests are usually not for crimes of violence at all, but for drugs. such arrests constitute 65 percent of the city's total, twice the national average, according to a study by the city's independent metropolitan crime commission. and the problems only continue once an arrest is made. in 2003-4, only 7 percent of those arrested were sentenced to prison, only 5 percent of all convictions were for violent offenses, and only 12 percent of homicide arrests resulted in jail, the study found.  in addition, new orleans judges go light on sentencing, the study found: they give felons jail time far less often than do judges in other states' courts.  the last time there was a murder conviction in new orleans was in august -- and in that case the judge later reduced the offense to manslaughter, according to the district attorney's office. the judge, charles elloie, who publicly expressed sympathy for criminal defendants, has since been suspended for returning suspects to the streets with little or no bond.  "there's a lot of factors converging here,'' said james bernazzani, the federal bureau of investigation's special agent in charge in new orleans, ''based on local institutional dysfunction, a population that wasn't educated, and a state judicial system that doesn't mete out consequence for criminal activity. and you've got a citizenry that doesn't cooperate.''  the way out of this conundrum is not easily seen by experts or by citizens weary of pledges by local officials -- there was another one tuesday --to make things right. checkpoints, sheriff's deputies, clergy intervention: all were earnestly promised, under the glare of television lights, in an open-air setting in the heart of the new orleans killing grounds, the central city neighborhood.  ''it's like casablanca, round up the usual ideas,'' said mr. scharf, the criminologist.  the surge in killings is a threat to the city's faltering repopulation campaign.  ''people i've never heard talk like this, die-hard new orleanians, are weeping, talking about leaving,'' said mary howell, a civil rights lawyer here. ''it's palpable.''  many people are looking to the federal government for help, and are hoping the united states attorney, jim letten, might prosecute a few of the murder cases normally handled by the district attorney's office. mr. bernazzani said wednesday that ''where we can find the federal hook, jim letten has agreed to take the case,'' adding that additional federal agents were being recruited for new orleans.  meanwhile, citizen advocacy, the catalyst for most post-hurricane reform here, will make itself felt again thursday with a march on city hall intended to highlight the killings.  tim seeman, who runs the kitchen at parasol's, a restaurant that recently was held up, sees some hope in this awakening.  ''this is nothing new,'' mr. seeman said. ''this has been brewing for years and years. but finally people are admitting it.''.  news analysis  