scenes from a marriage   about alice  by calvin trillin.  78 pp. random house. $14.95.  with the 21st-century profusion of first-person narrative nonfiction -- between the covers of books and in the pages of magazines and newspapers and, most recently, in the glut of blogs like so many glowworms illuminating a constellation of imacs and blackberries and treos -- the modern reader can be forgiven for approaching the first-person pronoun with trepidation, as if that skyscraping rune ''i'' were a sequoia about to come crashing down on the reader's head. (would that the groaning shelf of memoirists had realized that tom wolfe's diagnosis of the ''me decade'' was a warning, not an exhortation to go forth and multiply oneself!)  to read a first-person narrative too often involves being clamped in an embrace by a writer who means well but insists on meaning too much. the banality of ego.  and yet.  sometimes we come across a piece of first-person writing that shocks us back into a restorative innocence vis-à-vis the human heart. the secret of calvin trillin's slim but walloping book, ''about alice,'' is that its structure follows the contours of an old-fashioned piece of reportage, using a scrim of detachment to build tension and, when that is pulled aside, revealing an underlying core of enchantment. ''about alice'' is an unabashed love letter to trillin's wife, alice, who died in 2001 at the age of 63 while awaiting a heart transplant, after a battle with lung cancer 25 years previously had left her heart weakened by radiation.  this book can be seen as a worthy companion piece to other powerful accounts of spousal grief published in the last decade: joan didion's tale of john gregory dunne's fatal heart attack, john bayley's memoir of iris murdoch's decline from alzheimer's and donald hall's narration of jane kenyon's death from leukemia.  for decades, trillin has propelled himself as the bumbling leading man through books on food -- he's a prodigious eater -- travel and americana, while remaining teasingly enigmatic and out of reach, safely reclining on the dry banks of wit. it's hard to think of another writer who delivers so much pleasure, sentence for sentence. in ''travels with alice'': ''it was at that moment that i realized something essential about american travel: americans drive across the country as if someone's chasing them.'' johnny carson found him irresistible, and had him on ''the tonight show'' more than 30 times.  in ''about alice,'' rather than memorialize his own grief, he returns alice to the world before he met her -- back to the wellesley-educated, hofstra university english teacher trillin fell in love with at a party for a political satire magazine in 1963. ''when i saw alice at that monocle party, she was wearing a hat. at least, i've always remembered her as wearing a hat. she later insisted that she'd never owned a hat of the sort i described. maybe, but i can still see her in the hat -- a white hat, cocked a bit to the side.''  when ''about alice'' appeared in shorter form in the new yorker last spring, people couldn't wait to tell their friends to read it. trillin had written about a marriage in which neither partner seems to have done any grievous or even subtle harm to the other. it was as if he had traveled out beyond familiar territory and brought back a moon rock, something worthy of preserving.  and you could tell: he and alice had a ball. weeks after their first meeting, he pursued her to another party: ''at the second party, i did get to talk to her quite a lot. ... recalling that party in later years, alice would sometimes say, 'you have never again been as funny as you were that night.'  '' 'you mean i peaked in december of 1963?' i'd say, 20 or even 30 years later.  '' 'i'm afraid so.' ''  trillin leaves no doubt he was smitten with his wife, as were others. he writes: ''at parties, she often attracted what i called 'guys smoking pipes,' who wanted to impress her with their suavity or intellectual range. 'he wasn't smoking a pipe, by the way,' she'd say, knowing just which guy i was talking about when i mentioned 'that guy with a pipe' as we discussed a party on the way home.''  in 1976 alice -- who'd never smoked but grew up with a chain-smoking mother and cigar-smoking father -- coughed up a spot of blood. ten days later she had a lobe of her left lung removed. a doctor told trillin there was a 10 percent chance she'd survive beyond a year or two. but she did and she returned to her life as a wife and mother of two girls and to a career that included producing arts programming for pbs. years later, trillin writes, ''i was walking through an airport to catch a plane back to new york when, apropos of nothing, the possibility that things could have gone the other way in 1976 burst into my mind. i could see myself trying to tell my girls that their mother was dead. i think i literally staggered. i sat down in the nearest chair. i wasn't in tears. i was in a condition my father would have called poleaxed. a couple of people stopped to ask if i was all right. i must have said yes. after a while, the pictures faded from my mind. i walked to the gate and caught my flight to new york. alice was there. the girls were there. everything was all right.''  if the marriage as described seems somewhat formal, that may be because trillin, now 71, came of age at a time predating the supposition that a man will enter a relationship armed with the daggers and consolations of psychological insight. trillin grew up in kansas city, mo., the son of a grocer whose advice was ''you might as well be a mensch.'' he attended yale in the 1950s (''i remember realizing in my sophomore year that i had arrived at yale never having heard of either dostoyevsky or greenwich''). his book ''remembering denny'' (1993) unpacks that tightly laced era through the eyes of one of its casualties, roger hansen, known as denny, a yale golden boy -- life covered his graduation -- who committed suicide at 55. the story is one of class, privilege, a hidden sex life -- and yet there is nothing lurid in trillin's telling, perhaps because he trained at william shawn's new yorker. likewise in ''about alice,'' trillin chooses not to mention the uncanny date of alice's death: sept. 11, 2001.  as the condolence letters arrived, trillin realized his readers didn't know alice beyond her persona as the ''voice of reason, the sensible person who kept everything on an even keel despite the antics of her marginally goofy husband.''  ''they may not have known her,'' he writes, ''but they knew how i felt about her. it surprised me that they had managed to divine that from reading stories that were essentially sitcoms. even after i'd taken in most episodes of 'the honeymooners,' after all, it had never occurred to me to ponder the feelings ralph kramden must have had for alice kramden. yet i got a lot of letters like the one from a young woman in new york who wrote that she sometimes looked at her boyfriend and thought, 'but will he love me like calvin loves alice?' ''  peter stevenson is executive editor of the new york observer.  