competing house clocks tick at different speeds as members get down to business   how much bipartisanship is really possible if democrats and republicans can't even agree on how to tell time?  after house democrats posted a digital clock on their web site on tuesday to mark how much time had elapsed as they pushed through their first 100 hours agenda, republicans retaliated with their own online clock on wednesday. they are counting down the hours passed by ''a democrat caucus fresh out of ideas.''  all week, members of congress demonstrated a much more exacting sense of the clock than usual.  ''it has been an interesting 58 hours and 48 minutes as of this morning,'' said representative marsha blackburn, republican of tennessee, in a floor speech friday. but by the democratic clock, only 23 hours and 34 minutes had passed. ms. blackburn criticized democrats as engaging in ''creative clock-keeping.''  democrats say they are measuring only ''legislative hours,'' meaning the time spent on lawmaking activities. but like dog years and the last two minutes of an n.b.a. game, ''legislative time'' does not necessarily correspond to ''real time.''  as the clocks ticked:  monday, late afternoon -- senate democrats would have started their clock on monday, except that they did not have a clock. it's a house thing. still, the senate majority leader, harry reid of nevada, was eager to get to work and is a stickler for punctuality. he said he was committed to operating the chamber more efficiently -- meaning, on time. senator bernie sanders, independent of vermont and newly elected, missed what would have been his first vote despite a last-minute dash through the capitol hallways.  tuesday, 1:15 p.m. -- ''i have no idea what time it is,'' said representative don young, republican of alaska. and then he indulged in an elaborate metaphor to summarize the cyclical nature of things.  ''i look upon life as the wheel in the barnyard,'' mr. young said. ''politics is the rooster on the wheel saying cock-a-doodle-doo. some of the democrats on the top of the wheel think the sun's going to shine all day. they don't realize that the wheel is turning and that there's someone else coming up from the bottom of the wheel.''  behold, the clarity.  wednesday, 3 p.m. to 4 p.m. -- off the house floor, in the ornate area known as the speaker's lobby, the shift in power was on full display. members of the press swarmed to the left side of the lobby to meet democrats coming off the floor. republicans trickling off to the right were essentially left alone.  ''people seem to be paying more attention to me now that i'm in the majority,'' said representative henry cuellar, democrat of texas. standing under the official portrait of former speaker thomas p. o'neill jr., mr. cueller wore the ''look, mom!'' face of a sudden big shot, or bigger shot than before.  representative jeff flake, republican of arizona, was slumped on the other side of the lobby, complaining that he had just been kicked off the judiciary committee by members of his own party.  ''i think i was punished for speaking too freely,'' mr. flake said, specifically for his willingness to compromise with democrats on immigration overhaul.  representative ed perlmutter, a freshman democrat from colorado, had spent much of his week on the house floor. even when there was nothing doing, no votes scheduled and few members on the floor, he sat and just watched. one of his goals for the first 100 hours is simply to learn the names of his new colleagues. ''i could probably identify about 100 right now,'' mr. perlmutter said, leaving 334 to go.  thursday, noon -- for all the talk of the democrats' ''flurry of legislation'' in the first 100 hours, the war in iraq clearly dominated the day. president bush addressed the nation the night before. top administration figures appeared at congressional hearings.  representative thomas m. reynolds, republican of new york, was eating lunch in his office, lingering in a conversation about buffalo sports teams. not too long ago, he was a member of the leadership team of the majority party, head of the republican congressional campaign committee and in a tough re-election campaign. ''i just finished up '06 with two full-time jobs,'' he said, referring to his posts as congressman and head of the campaign committee. now he was sprawled out in his office eating a ham sandwich. ''washington loves survivors,'' he said.  friday, 4 p.m. -- representative joe courtney, a freshman democrat from connecticut, was walking briskly and hoping to catch a flight to hartford. earlier, he gave his first floor speech as a member of congress, a five-minute talk about medicare. he was nervous at first, but was fine once he got going.  ''i meant to say 'mr. speaker' and 'thank you, mr. stark,' '' mr. courtney said. ''but i wound up saying 'thank you, mr. spark.' oh well.''  he shrugged and headed out for the weekend, promising to do better next time.  by the end of the day friday, the democratic clock read 23 hours and 34 minutes, while the republican clock, which was counting down from 100, read 75 hours.  congressional memo  