news summary   international 3-17  logging in the amazon's heart  the government of president luiz inácio lula da silva is to begin auctioning off timber rights to large tracts of brazil's rainforest -- in a gamble that new monitoring efforts can offset any danger of increased devastation.  1  troubles for spain's leader  a car bombing last month by the militant group eta that destroyed the parking lot of madrid's new air terminal has ripped apart spain's political establishment.  6  iran's president in venezuela  president mahmoud ahmadinejad of iran arrived in venezuela for talks with president hugo chávez, on the first leg of a latin american visit to enhance iran's stature with governments where distrust of the bush administration runs deep.  12  rice meets with israelis  secretary of state condoleezza rice and her israeli counterpart declared their backing of a diplomatic strategy that would support moderate political leaders across the middle east.  14  a plot uncovered in tunisia  more than two dozen islamic extremists involved in a deadly gun battle with the tunisian police this month had blueprints of foreign embassies and documents that named foreign envoys, officials said.  9  national 18-26  intelligence role expanded  the pentagon and c.i.a. have been issuing national security letters to obtain banking and credit records of americans and others suspected of terrorism or espionage inside the united states, part of an expansion by the military and agencies into domestic intelligence gathering.  1  signs of division in g.o.p.  congressional republicans have suddenly fractured in their new role as members of the minority, with some prominently deserting the white house on iraq and others bolting on popular domestic issues. 25  candidates' stance on iraq  as the politics of the war continue to shift with president bush's call to send more troops to iraq, no prospective presidential candidates will face more intensive scrutiny than senators john mccain and hillary clinton.  1  elation at recovery of 2 boys  two boys kidnapped four years apart and found in the same suburban st. louis apartment smiled shyly but said nothing to reporters at two news conferences a day after they were rescued. 19  new york/region 29-36  pork increases state's debt  the practice of using borrowed money to pay for pork barrel projects reached its apex in 2006, with the projects approved in the last nine months exceeding the total borrowed over the previous eight years.  29  chess 36  weather 24  obituaries 27  