digital billboard up ahead: new-wave sign or hazard?   their very name once told it all: a board to post notices or advertisements. but billboards are getting a makeover.  billboard companies are adopting digital technology that rotates advertiser images every six or eight seconds -- the better to catch the eye. the new billboards look like television screens, although the images do not move.  the problem, safety experts say, is that the new billboards may work too well, adding yet another distraction for drivers.  there are currently about 400 digital signs across the country. but within 10 years, as many as a fifth of all billboards -- or about 90,000 -- may be converted, according to the outdoor advertising association of america.  the technology has excited both billboard companies, which can generate three to five times more money from the digital signs, and advertisers. clear channel outdoor and lamar advertising, which has installed the majority of such billboards, promote the digital signs as more effective at getting consumers to pay attention.  ''there's a perception in the advertising industry that you have to up the ante,'' said david zald, assistant professor of psychology at vanderbilt university. ''we see so much information coming at us that for it to actually leap out and capture our attention, one has to go at a more salient level than you used to.''  but, he added, ''there's a trade-off between the advertiser's need to grab our attention and the actual safety implications of that attention capture.''  the digital signs have also revived a debate in towns and cities that dates to 1965, when the highway beautification act was passed, limiting the number of new billboards that could be erected. billboard critics have long said the roughly 450,000 billboards in the united states scar the landscape along highways and local roads. billboard companies counter that they have a right to sell the space.  in fact, billboards are not just for roadsides anymore. advertisements have been popping up more frequently inside subways and buses, shopping malls, office buildings and airports.  over the last two years, the category, which the industry refers to as out-of-home advertising, has been second only to the internet in its growth rates. but it is still dwarfed by television and print. marketers spent about $6.7 billion on out-of-home ads in 2006, of total ad market spending of $285 billion in the united states, according to estimates by universal mccann, part of the interpublic group.  while the billboard industry says the digital signs are not dangerous, driving safety researchers say there has not been enough research to know for sure. most driving studies have focused on cellphone use. still, researchers said the digital signs may tax drivers' awareness more than old-fashioned static signs.  ''in my opinion, they're definitely distracting,'' said deanna singhal, research associate at the traffic injury research foundation, a driving safety group in ottawa. ''it's going to not only keep their eyes away from the road more, but it's also more cognitively demanding.''  a study commissioned by the federal highway administration is recommending further research into whether the signs present risks to drivers, said dale keyes, who oversaw the research. the study, by the institute for environmental conflict resolution, a federal agency in tucson, will be released in a few weeks. the federal government has also allotted $150,000 for a future study of digital signs.  meanwhile, the signs are flying up. lamar advertising is converting about 28 traditional billboards to digital signs each month, and company executives consider new locations in weekly meetings, said tommy teepell, lamar's chief marketing officer. the company does not plan to convert all of its roughly 158,000 signs to digital, focusing instead on the ones in the most heavily trafficked areas, he said.  lamar has so far heard mainly positive reaction, mr. teepell said.  ''typically, the response we get is people love it because they're very attractive,'' mr. teepell said. ''the colors are attractive and the creative looks good. you don't ever have colors faded in the sun.''  eileen furukawa, broadcasting analyst for citigroup, said profit margins on digital signs can run as high as 70 percent, while static signs have closer to 45 percent profit margins. she is recommending that investors buy lamar and clear channel outdoor stock.  digital signs are sold more like tv commercials than traditional billboard signs, ad executives said. advertisers can buy spots for a single day or for a few hours, rather than weeks at a time as on normal billboards.  ''changeable signage is very much a part of the outdoor landscape as we move forward,'' said jodi senese, executive vice president of marketing for cbs outdoor, a division of cbs, which has not yet posted digital signs along highways.  digital signs, ms. senese said, offer ''immense creativity, flexibility and targetability for different demographics, which was really never an option for out-of-home advertising.''  clear channel outdoor has created digital billboard networks in six cities, including milwaukee, tampa and albuquerque. the networks can be cued to show the same ads all over the cities at once, mimicking how people usually see the same tv commercials while watching the same shows. clear channel outdoor is also placing tv screens in mall food courts.  digital billboards are one of the main growth areas for outdoor companies, and what is more, advertisers are eager to sign up, said paul meyer, president and chief operating officer of clear channel outdoor. ''you can't avoid it,'' mr. meyer said. ''there's no mute button. there's no on-off switch.''  billboard companies generally have to obtain permits from local governments to convert their signs to digital boards.  some towns have turned them down; others are negotiating everything from a quota for conventional signs to the brightness of the digital images.  in syracuse, for example, after passers-by began complaining that a digital sign installed last year was too bright, lamar was quick to turn it down, said charles ladd, the city's zoning administrator.  omaha has not allowed digital signs, and does not plan to unless the billboard companies offer to remove multiple conventional signs for each digital sign.  ''all they have to do is push a button,'' tom blair, the city's planner said, ''and they can flash and disturb the motorists.''  bill brooks, mayor of belle isle, fla., a town of 6,000 people near walt disney world, said he negotiated with clear channel outdoor in december to allow the town's first digital sign, in part because he does not want to risk entering a protracted legal battle.  as an active member of the national league of cities, mr. brooks said he was well aware of the lawsuits other towns have faced over their billboard regulations. the american planning association and the national league of cities have publicly accused the billboard industry of aggressively suing cities and towns over their billboard regulations.  indeed, in the last seven years, there have been about 100 cases in federal courts, about three times the amount from 1993 to 2000, said eric damian kelly, professor of urban planning at ball state university. while almost all the lawsuits have involved traditional signs, the american planning association said digital billboards would probably be the next battleground.  some consumers said the digital billboards provided entertainment on the road.  ''i always read them when i drive by,'' said caitlin neary, 22, who passes a digital sign in connecticut when she drives to her parents' house in fairfield. ''i always watch to see it change. it catches your eye more.''  but others said the signs are more distracting than cellphone calls. lisa christopher said she nearly had an accident when she first saw a digital billboard in vestavia hills, ala., a suburb of birmingham. within days, ms. christopher, the former pta president at a local high school, said she was getting calls from other worried parents.  ''it was so bright, it almost jumped out at you,'' ms. christopher said.  the sign was not up for long. last month, the vestavia hills zoning board told lamar advertising to turn it off.  media: advertising  correction:  january 12, 2007, friday  the advertising column in business day yesterday, about digital technology that rotates advertiser images on highway billboards, carried incorrect estimates from the outdoor advertising association of america on the number of billboards that are expected to be converted to digital in the next 10 years. it is 4,000, not 90,000.  