school to offer classical education program to girls   the montfort academy, a catholic high school for boys in katonah, opened in 2002 with the goal of offering what it calls a classical education and, as it says on its web site, ''forming men for all seasons.''  but in september, the school -- which last year graduated its first full class of boys -- will start a similar, but separate, program for girls. the girls' program will start the way the boys' did, with a ninth-grade class and adding a ninth grade each year as the other classes move up.  ''we talk about men of excellence and virtue, i think what we want to talk about with girls is women of wisdom and virtue,'' said david petrillo, a retired air force lieutenant colonel who was headmaster of the school until becoming president on jan. 1. ''women tend to shape our culture, and they do it through a certain kind of wisdom.''  the educational philosophy for the girls will be the same as it is for the boys, he said. at montfort, teaching is rooted in the development of western civilization, with the writings of plato and aristotle serving as a starting point. grammar, logic and rhetoric are stressed as tools for developing ideas and the skills of debate.  the school, located in a former catholic grammar school, has 40 students in all four grades and charges tuition of $11,500 a year. it was founded by richard greco jr., a graduate of the bronxville public schools who until october was assistant secretary of the navy. mr. greco, who honed the idea for a private catholic high school while working for the investment firm stern stewart & company, said he opened montfort in response to what he perceived to be an environment calling for a return to the classical curriculum of traditional catholic education.  with space opening up on the lower level (a montessori school is leaving), the board initially decided against starting a girls' program. they reconsidered after being approached by eric meyer, a father of four -- the oldest an eighth-grade girl -- who offered to pay for the expansion.  ''i heard one of the courses being taught was chivalry,'' mr. meyer said. ''in this age of informality, that resonated with me.''  in search of a high school with a high ratio of teachers to students, and an education moored in classic books and basics like grammar and logic, he met with officials at montfort to see if he could be of help in getting the girls' program off the ground.  mr. meyer, the president of shariah capital, in new canaan, conn., which specializes in investments based on islamic law, declined to discuss how much money he was giving to the school, beyond saying he had offered to be a key supporting member.  ''i'm willing to do what it takes to get the girls' school up and running for september,'' mr. meyer said. ''how can you know the present if you don't know the past? i love the idea they start with the best books, the best sellers of really the beginning of civilization, and move forward from there. what a firm foundation for the future.''  