shades and windows think for themselves   for centuries, people have been manually opening and closing shades and draperies to let sunlight in or keep it out. these days it is possible for the window treatments -- and even the windows -- to do the work themselves.  keeping sunlight out of a room in the summer will help lower air-conditioning bills, and in the winter, allowing sunlight in will help reduce heating bills.  one way to do either automatically is to use a motorized retractable awning. ''these are systems that let gravity lower the awning and use a motor to retract it,'' said marcel dewinter, a manhattan architect. the awning can be extended or retracted with a simple ''on-off'' switch, a remote control or a more elaborate (and more effective) photovoltaic switch that lowers the awning when sunlight hits a sensor.  mr. dewinter said motorized awnings were most often found over patios. as with most other automatic systems, motorized retractable awnings can be expensive -- if a 20-foot-wide manual awning costs, say, $3,000, a fully automatic model could cost $10,000. ''price and quality go hand in hand,'' he said, ''and quality is always expensive.''  another way to automatically control how much sunlight gets in is to use automatic shades, blinds or curtains inside. earl franz, the director of brand development for hunter douglas in upper saddle river, n.j., said there are two basic automatic interior systems: battery operated and hard wired.  ''the most popular systems are battery operated,'' he said. ''hard-wired systems usually make the most sense in new construction.''  hunter douglas's powerrise system uses a battery-powered motor to raise and lower a fabric shade. ''the unit takes between 8 and 12 aa batteries, depending on its size,'' mr. franz said, ''and the batteries will last about a year with the shade going up and down once a day.''  the basic system is operated with a hand-held remote, he said, but the shades can also be controlled by timers set to open and close them at different hours of the day.  mr. franz said battery-powered motorized draperies typically cost a third to a half more than a manual shade or blind.  insolroll, a louisville, colo., company, can retrofit motors to existing shades or drapery rods. ''the only thing the customer has to do is get power to the motor,'' said earl cornelius, the national sales manager.  yet another way to control how much sunlight gets into a house has to do with the window itself.  jim benney, the executive director of the national fenestration rating council in silver spring, md., a group that rates windows, doors and skylights for efficiency, said one exciting development in window technology is called dynamic glazing.  ''this system uses a chemical film and a small electric current to darken or lighten the windows themselves,'' he said.  john van dine, the chief executive of sage electrochromics in faribault, minn., a manufacturer of electronically tintable glass, said that with dynamic glazing, the heat of the sun never gets into the house in the first place. ''a typical residential window would have a solar heat gain coefficient between 0.35 and 0.45,'' mr. van dine said, explaining that the lower the coefficient, the better the window is at blocking heat. so a window with a coefficient of 0.35, he said, will block 65 percent of the sun's warming rays.  with dynamic glazing, the homeowner flips a switch and the window can be adjusted so much that its coefficient drops as low as 0.09, which means that the window itself is blocking almost all of the heat.  windows that use dynamic glazing cost about two and a half times more than standard windows, mr. van dine said, ''but dynamic glazing is ideal when you want to block heat and glare but still want to have a connection with the outdoors.''  your home  