tales of the urban jungle and a forest full of music   is it blasphemous to suggest that in the world of urbane american child rearing there simply seems to be too much love between parents and teenagers? too much trading of ugg boots and playlists, too much consensus on bob dylan, david sedaris and gnocchi? when precisely did the taste for rebellion expire?  within certain demographics, young people seem to culturally distinguish themselves from their parents not by what they consume but merely by how they consume it. and for years now, television shows like ''gilmore girls'' and movies like ''what a girl wants'' have reflected this truth of shared affinity. it is hard to imagine an argument between rory gilmore and her mother, lorelai, about movies, say, that wouldn't merely turn into a debate about the merits of ''the palm beach story'' versus ''the lady eve.''  there is something vaguely lamentable about all this cross-generational uniformity, and it would seem as if certain executives at the disney channel think so too. making its debut tonight is the movie ''jump in!,'' which follows in the footsteps of the channel's wildly popular ''high school musical'' in advancing the culturally oppositional idea that children don't have to like everything their parents do.  ''high school musical'' has an athletic teenage boy defying his basketball-coach father by getting involved with, well, his school musical. ''jump in!'' offers more or less the same story. here a boy pits himself against his father for the pursuit of his interest in jumping rope competitively.  izzy, played by corbin bleu, realizes that his father is a good and decent man but doesn't see himself becoming a boxer just because he was. so he makes the bold move of giving up practice sessions in the ring of his father's gym to go join a bunch of girls out on the street to play double dutch. it is to disney's credit that both here and in ''high school musical'' not much is made of the choice to pursue more feminized pastimes. the real issue is choosing a parentally nonsanctioned one.  the conceit of izzy's taste for jumping rope is merely an excuse for mr. bleu to show off his impressively acrobatic dance skills. you know exactly how the movie is going to turn out of course, but it is no less charming for that.  for those years away from making the decision to differentiate themselves from their parents or not -- in other words, preschoolers -- the disney channel offers ''johnny and the sprites'' on saturday mornings, featuring a broadway actor (john tartaglia from ''avenue q'') and puppets. mr. tartaglia's character lives in a forest, and all of his friends are nonhuman. some of them have antennae for hair.  the broadway connection doesn't end with mr. tartaglia. the show's theme song was written by steven schwartz, the composer responsible for ''pippin'' and ''wicked,'' among other productions. ''johnny and the sprites'' is itself a musical, with each episode delivering two message vignettes (don't watch too many video games; like yourself just the way you are) that the consistently buoyant and clever songs keep from feeling preachy. parents, alas, may find something to like in it too.  jump in!  disney, tonight at 8, eastern and pacific times; 7, central time.  directed by paul hoen; john davis, executive producer; kevin lafferty, producer; troy liddell, choreographer; janice hampton, editor; doreen spicer, regina hicks and karin gist, writers; score by frank fitzpatrick. produced by davis entertainment.  with: corbin bleu (izzy daniels), keke palmer (mary thomas), david reivers (kenneth daniels), kylee russell (karin daniels), shanica knowles (shauna keaton), laivan greene (keisha ray), patrick johnson (rodney tyler) and micah williams (l'il earl jackson).  johnny and the sprites  disney, tomorrow at 10 a.m, eastern and pacific times; 9 a.m., central time.  conceived by john tartaglia, jill gluckson, louise gikow, michael shupbach and daryl watson; ms. gluckson and mr. tartaglia, executive producers; ms. gikow, head writer; rick fernandes, mark mannucci, hugh martin and jim martin, directors; deborah mayer, producer; gary adler, musical director. a happy puppet/homegirl production in association with disney channel.  with: john tartaglia (johnny and sage), heather asch (root), leslie carrara-rudolph (ginger), tim lagasse (basil), carmen osbahr (lily), natalie venetia belcon (gwen); sutton foster (tina) and the ''altar boyz'' cast (stu and the stubbles).  television review  