hard work helps nets tune out distractions   the nets did not win the road game some of the players considered their best of the season -- a 1-point loss to the detroit pistons on dec. 26 that ended on a controversial call. since then, the nets have won four of six games and appear to be playing closer to preseason expectations.  the nets (15-19) will look to add to their swagger thursday night when they visit the chicago bulls (20-15). the nets are 4-9 on the road and have only two victories against winning teams, the washington wizards and the indiana pacers.  a victory may also help keep the focus on the court. the nets' two best players are having marital problems. jason kidd filed for divorce from his wife, joumana, on tuesday, and vince carter has been living apart from his wife for a while. rod thorn, the team president, said he did not feel the marital issues would turn into a soap opera.  ''i think our coaches work hard every day,'' thorn said wednesday in a telephone interview. ''i think our players come to work every day. our players support each other. we play together.''  the nets limped out of the gate last season with a 9-12 start. then they rattled off 10 straight victories and easily won the atlantic division. this season, a long winning streak does not seem to be on the horizon, but tuesday's victory over the toronto raptors put the nets in first place in the division.  the nets have been coping with injuries all season, most notably to center nenad krstic, who will miss the rest of the season with a torn anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee. forward richard jefferson has been battling ankle problems all season.  somehow, the nets say, they are managing to tune out their problems. ''people make a big deal out of stuff that shouldn't be a big deal,'' carter said. ''it's about basketball.''  coach lawrence frank said he talked with his players about ignoring distractions.  ''we all focus on the task at hand,'' he said. ''we talk about this: just be present where you're at.''  even if their struggles are a learning experience, forward cliff robinson said, the nets would still like to be on solid ground when it counts most.  ''we don't want to squeak into the playoffs,'' he said. ''we want to go in in a comfortable position, playing well. we're capable of knocking off anybody if we're playing the way we're capable of playing.''  rebounds  nenad krstic had successful surgery wednesday. he will begin rehabilitation immediately and is expected to be ready for next season's training camp. krstic said last week that he hoped to be playing basketball again by june or july.  the rookie point guard marcus williams did not travel with the nets to chicago on wednesday night because of strep throat and is questionable for the game.  basketball  