with brooklyn on horizon, nets' brain trust considers all options   if anything else had gone wrong in december for the nets, they might as well have parked the team bus in nearby secaucus, n.j., waited for the draft lottery and made a packing list for brooklyn.  jason kidd's incendiary divorce papers became public record tuesday, the biggest distraction yet for a team already suffering from fragile chemistry.  richard jefferson's gimpy right ankle appeared headed for cleanup surgery, sooner rather than later.  vince carter was half-man but not close to half-amazing (living up to half the nickname shaquille o'neal gave him), his unpredictable play confounding nets executives trying to find value for him on the trade market.  nenad krstic, the starting center, had knee surgery wednesday, his return scheduled for next season.  amid a litany of injuries and inconsistency and a soap-opera soundtrack, nets management has quietly made inquiries to shake up the team's perimeter core by the feb. 22 trade deadline. given the few options for big men and the even fewer options for receiving commensurate value for a star like carter or kidd or jefferson, the nets may be stuck with the status quo.  considering the kidd-orchestrated turnaround in chicago on thursday -- reminiscent of his early years with the nets -- that may not be the worst thing.  fueled by a will that needed no words, kidd smothered the bulls' best player, ben gordon, and dragged his teammates back from an 18-point second-half deficit to a victory against one of the so-called top teams in the eastern conference.  carter suddenly cut with urgency; jefferson made two clutch free throws; the journeyman forward mikki moore channeled his inner rodman. kidd collected his 82nd career triple-double, and the seventh of his 13th n.b.a. season.  ''he's the pied piper,'' coach lawrence frank said, walking into the visiting locker room in the united center, where minutes earlier kidd's teammates greeted him with hearty clapping.  but how far can kidd, a 33-year-old point guard, take the nets? and who in the coming months will be around to follow?  the nets' languid march out of the swamp -- continental arena still struggles to draw fans -- and into the recently state-approved but not-yet-built arena in downtown brooklyn is a transition game that mirrors the nets themselves.  the team's president, rod thorn, does not want to be swayed by an uncertain future while the team's present -- even with a sub.-500 record -- is not yet lost.  ''my philosophy is, whether you're winning or losing, you have conversations,'' thorn said before the nets practiced in chicago on friday. ''if something can be done for the short term or long term, you do it. if it can't, you can go the other way.''  kidd's six-year, $103.5 million contract expires after the 2009 season, right before the expected move to brooklyn. never has he been more valuable -- to the nets or on the market.  ''jason is playing as well this year as any in the past three years,'' thorn said.  kidd's personal life is in turmoil, but he has not asked to be traded because of it, thorn said; rather he is thriving despite it.  carter, who can opt out of his contract to become a free agent this summer, is the most likely trade candidate because the nets do not want to be left without value for him. turning 30 this month, he is posting numbers close to his career average and is still a box-office draw.  it was the trade for carter in december 2004 that rescued the franchise, when kidd was returning from microfracture knee surgery and many were angry about how the team's new owner, bruce c. ratner, allowed kenyon martin to leave.  scoring more than 30 points in 17 games, carter lifted the nets to the 2005 playoffs in the final game of the season. last season, in the second round of the playoffs, carter made a couple of crucial turnovers against a miami heat team that surged to the championship.  now, with miami floundering , with detroit still the class of the conference but limping, and with cleveland not quite convincing behind lebron james, the nets merely have to win the hapless atlantic division to become the fourth-seeded playoff team. (they are 16-20 after last night's loss to minnesota.)  ''if we can just stay mentally and physically strong on the defensive end, we'll be fine,'' kidd said after the game in chicago.  defense is the theme of kidd's career and life now as he girds for a counterclaim of divorce from his wife, joumana. the basketball court gives him refuge from what could become an ugly legal battle; joumana has hired the high-profile manhattan divorce lawyer raoul felder.  kidd moved out of the couple's house in saddle river, n.j., to an undisclosed residence last month. on dec. 27, the nets bottomed out with a home loss to houston, plummeting to seven games below .500. that was the same game, according to kidd's divorce papers and some nets officials, when joumana was shouting insults at him from across the court.  (kidd took out a temporary restraining order against her last monday, the day before he filed for divorce, restricting her from where he works or lives.)  before last night's game at minnesota, the nets had won five out of six games, holding opponents to an average of 85.6 points. frank insisted the team's identity rested on its defense. still, even that has been consistent for less than two weeks.  the nets ranked below the league average in points scored and points allowed through friday, although they had risen to seventh in field-goal defense.  ''our identity now?'' thorn said. ''we're searching for it.''  how long kidd, whose back has stiffened on occasion this season, can carry his team on grit alone is unclear. ''jason imposes such a will and energy on the game,'' frank said thursday. ''but everyone has to be on the same page.''  instead, the nets' locker room in december housed players occupied with distinct personal issues. carter is also going through a divorce, living apart from his wife and his infant daughter. jefferson has been annoyed by anonymous speculation about his social life. but he has been more affected by chronic pain in his right ankle, compounding the physical problems he has had since spraining his left ankle in november.  ''if i was healthy and my normal self, that would change things, but i've been inconsistent, up and down, and it's been tough,'' jefferson said.  about forestalling arthroscopic surgery on his right ankle, he said, ''as long as i'm able to contribute to this team, then i'm going to do it as long as i possibly can.''  at 26, jefferson could be the lone net who played in the n.b.a. finals with the team to reach brooklyn. for now, the nets are neither there or really anywhere. all they have is the recent past, namely the glory days of 2002 and 2003. it was then when kidd led a band of high-flying acrobats and hungry defenders to back-to-back n.b.a. finals appearances.  the day kidd arrived in new jersey in 2001, he predicted the woebegone nets, who had gone 26-56 the previous season, would win 40 games. they won 52.  ''he knew,'' jefferson said. ''he knows what he's doing here.''  kidd was determined to forget his domestic-abuse arrest earlier in 2001, stemming from an argument with joumana, which helped precipitate his trade from phoenix. for a while, he changed his fortunes and the nets' as well.  has he done all he could? ''i didn't make predictions this summer,'' kidd said. ''i stopped after that first year.''  why? ''too much pressure,'' he said with a smile, his eyes fixed on that very challenge.  spotlight: n.b.a.  