f. y. i.   cabonomics  q. what's the real scoop? do taxi drivers make more money on short trips or on long rides around town? do they get a large part of the initial $2.50, or is their part of the fare based on the entire trip's cost?  a. there really is no easy answer, but the financial basics of cab driving are enlightening.  your question assumes, incorrectly, that a cabdriver has to share part of the fare with the owner of the taxicab or the medallion. in fact, drivers get 100 percent of the fare, said allan fromberg, a spokesman for the taxi and limousine commission.  of course, the driver has to make lease payments to the medallion owner and pay for gas, but he or she keeps all the fare, plus the tip.  the current fare rate, not counting rush-hour and late-night surcharges, is $2.50 for the first fifth of a mile and 40 cents for each additional fifth. so theoretically, a lot of short hops would be more lucrative, to take advantage of the initial charge. but one must consider the waiting time for longer trips in slow traffic, which was doubled on nov. 30, to 40 cents a minute. the short-trip/long-ride question, then, depends on constantly changing conditions.  according to the commission staff, the average new york cab ride is 2.8 miles, with 4 minutes 46 seconds of waiting. a typical driver's income minus expenses works out to $171.64 a day, not counting surcharges and tips.  read it: 'for people only'  q. at the lexington avenue/53rd street station on the e and v subway lines, an electronic sign announces that the station's escalators ''are for passengers only.'' whom, exactly, is new york city transit trying to keep off the escalators? subway workers? police officers who patrol the station? some other group?  a. the agency doesn't want riders to lug big boxes or other heavy items that could damage the steps or injure someone if they tumbled down an escalator.  ''the escalators should not be used for transporting freight or heavy merchandise, especially on hand trucks,'' said deirdre parker, a spokeswoman for the agency. heavily laden hand trucks, she said, can damage the escalator plates.  in addition, strollers should be folded and carried -- it's not safe to push strollers onto escalators.  a concrete landmark  q. i'm curious about a handsome building on third avenue and third street in gowanus, brooklyn. it looks as if it could have been a library, but it stands in an industrial wasteland.  a. it so happens that you're looking at a landmark. that building, on the southwest corner at 360 third avenue, was the office of the new york and long island coignet stone company. completed in 1873, it is the earliest known concrete building in the city, according to the landmarks preservation commission.  it was designed by william field & son to serve as offices and a showcase for a type of concrete called béton coignet, also known as artificial stone, produced at an adjacent five-acre factory complex along the gowanus canal. the company was one of the first to industrialize the production of concrete, which could be cast into molds faster and cheaper than stone could be worked.  in 1882, after stone production shut down, the building became home to the brooklyn improvement company, which played an important role in brooklyn's commercial development in the late 19th century.  whole foods acquired the site in 2005, and the building was designated a city landmark last june.  michael pollak  f. y. i. e-mail: fyi@nytimes.com  