in an unforgiving kingdom, the tyranny of the strong   go on, rouse yourself to watch ''the best of nature -- 25 years'' on sunday night. it's the 25th anniversary of this august and spectacular series, which since 1982 has featured some of the greatest nature cinematography on earth. you can make time for a highlight reel.  for a quarter-century, photographers for ''nature'' have been risking terminal mountain sickness, crocodile attacks and loony isolation to score glimpses, photographs and complete documentaries of astonishing natural phenomena. sunday's program is a chance to witness, in a concise anthology, chimpanzees, wild dogs, snow leopards, gazelles, elephants, cheetahs, wildebeests, baboons, chameleons and city-size waves -- all (where applicable) in gleaming high-definition.  lynn scherr, the ''20/20'' correspondent, dressed incongruously for this wildlife show in jewels and a white pantsuit, presides over this silver-anniversary celebration, bringing news value to animal antics while she's on screen, and also sapping it of rugged romance, which is too bad. the images on ''nature'' are so stirring that it often seems that they ought to appear without exposition or introduction at all.  but dialogue-free scenes of animals in the wild do require context, and the series's abundance of big symphonic surges and heartrending anthropomorphizing is part of its charm. it's a highly sentimental show, ultimately, and not a particularly scientific one, in spite of its pbs provenance and requisite tips of the hat to popular darwinism.  its palette is golden and hazy, like a follow-your-dreams poster, and chimps are not infrequently described as ''old men,'' while michael jackson's ''billie jean'' provides the soundtrack to a segment on a bird that appears to moonwalk.  fortunately, sentimentalism does not preclude adrenaline, and the opening segment -- on cheetahs and gazelles -- shows a high-speed chase in slow motion that may be one of the most pulse-quickening athletic events of the evening. (and on ''nature,'' more than yards are at stake. a spoiler: a creature dies.)  but the clip from ''cloud: wild stallion of the rockies'' is frankly terrifying. the wonderful ''cloud'' series, by ginger kathrens, appeared several years ago, and no one who saw the scene then will ever forget it. it shows a small newborn foal in a band of wild horses struggling to its feet. as hours pass, it becomes increasingly clear that it's not going to be able to get up; the band has to move on.  a rival band comes upon the foal, and mares circle it. finally, the lead stallion seems to recognize that the foal is holding everybody up, spontaneously takes it in his teeth and dashes it to the ground.  on wednesday the parents television council declared that violence on broadcast television was reaching ''epidemic proportions'' and called for government intervention if broadcasters don't take action.  i don't know what the parents television council makes of the murder of that injured foal on ''nature,'' but it's the most violent, disturbing and enlightening event i've ever seen on television.  the best of nature -- 25 years  on most pbs stations on sunday night (check local listings).  fred kaufman, bill murphy and jill clarke, producers; mr. kaufman, writer and series executive producer; william grant, executive in charge. produced by thirteen/wnet new york.  television review  