the listings: jan. 12 - jan. 18; sean noonan's brewed by noon   the drummer and composer sean noonan approaches postmodern jazz and world music from the same angle of self-discovery. on his new album, ''stories to tell'' (songlines), mr. noonan, left, attempts to braid together the celtic balladry of his ancestors with the various traditions of west african griots, southern bluesmen and downtown-scene alchemists. because it's all music that he feels, the results mostly sound unforced. of course it helps that his collaborators include a senegalese bassist (thierno camara), an irish folk singer (susan mckeown) and a prominent malian griot (abdoulaye diabaté). also in the mix are a couple of marquee avant-garde improvisers, the guitarist marc ribot and the violist mat maneri. brewed by noon -- the whole crew, and ultimately a few more players -- participated in mr. noonan's fusion quest, which he financed through a commission from the american composers forum. at times the work is unimaginable without their contributions. ''esspi'' is a vocal feature for mr. diabaté, who is also largely responsible for its discursive melody; on ''urban mbalax'' he compellingly trades verses (in his bambara) with mr. camara (in wolof). ''noonbrews'' features a more liberal approach: ms. mckeown sings its opening section in gaelic, but over a west african ostinato that gradually gives in to a gale of distorted electric guitars. mr. noonan is by no means the first jazz composer to draw these connections -- in some ways ''stories to tell'' resembles a caffeinated version of bill frisell's 2003 album ''the intercontinentals'' (nonesuch) -- but he manages to make his pieces speak coherently, and in a unified voice. with luck he'll pull off the same effect tomorrow night with an ensemble including all of the artists mentioned above, as well as the guitarist aram bajakian, his longtime musical partner, and the bassist jamaaladeen tacuma, a pioneer of electric free-funk. (tomorrow at 8:30 p.m., symphony space, 2537 broadway, at 95th street, manhattan, 212-864-5400, symphonyspace.org; $30.)  nate chinen  