where money's no object, space is no problem   eight years ago one of the few open parcels of land in downtown seattle was a desolate brownfield bordering the puget sound waterfront and ringed by the city's skyline. the eight-and-a-half acre property, a former fuel storage and transfer site for union oil of california, was in the final stages of an environmental cleanup and was sliced by a major street artery and an active railroad.  next weekend that site will open as the olympic sculpture park, a lush panoramic space for public art designed by weiss/manfredi architects that connects downtown seattle to the water's edge in a series of shifting, subtly choreographed vistas. founded by the seattle art museum, it features 21 sculptures by renowned artists, most of them recently acquired for the park. entering from the street through a sleek pavilion, visitors can walk toward an amphitheater with grassy terraces and the valley beyond, where ''wake'' (2002-3), 10 wavelike steel plates by richard serra, evokes the ripples of puget sound in the distance.  people can roam among the massive plates, which will be incorporated into future dance and theater performances. from there, visitors might stroll across elliott avenue on a bridge crowned with alexander calder's ''eagle,'' a 39-foot-tall sculpture from 1974 in bright red painted steel that echoes the industrial cranes on the water.  this $85 million park and another much-heralded project -- an $86 million expansion of the seattle art museum that is to open in may -- are byproducts of a local explosion of wealth that has seeded major private collections and a growing passion for the arts.  virginia wright, who with her husband, the financier bagley wright, has been at the forefront of collecting contemporary art in seattle and has served on the museum's board since 1959, credits the change in the art climate to locally based entrepreneurial companies. ''there wasn't much going on until the 1980s and 1990s,'' she said. ''it's companies like microsoft, amazon and starbucks in such a big way -- not just for the people directly involved but all the others who invested in them. that made us all have more money to spend on art.''  jon shirley, chairman of the museum's board, came to seattle in 1983 and worked at microsoft for seven years as president and chief operating officer. after he retired in 1990, he and his wife, mary, became museum patrons and aggressive collectors of postwar art.  as the wrights and the shirleys acquired substantial holdings in outdoor sculpture, they lamented the lack of a site where they might be displayed if bequeathed to the city. in 1996 they met with mimi gardner gates, the director of the seattle art museum, to raise the possibility of a sculpture park. (ms. gates, formerly the director of the yale university art gallery, has led the museum since 1994 and is married to william h. gates sr., father of bill gates, the founder of microsoft.)  ms. gates was already considering strategies for keeping important collections in the city by raising her museum's profile and expanding its exhibition space. ''people aren't going to give art to a museum if they think it's going to remain in the basement,'' she said.  on a fly-fishing trip in mongolia in late 1996, she ended up chatting with martha wyckoff, a board member of the trust for public land in seattle. ms. wyckoff talked of her desire for more parks in the city, and ms. gates expressed her regret that there was little space for outdoor sculpture in seattle.  after returning home, ms. gates said, ms. wyckoff asked chris rogers, a trust official, to help the museum scout for available land. when the waterfront site came to their attention, negotiations between the fuel company and developers who hoped to build condos there were well under way. ''we stepped in and said we've got a better idea for this,'' said mr. rogers, who was later named project manager for the olympic sculpture park.  turning a brownfield into a green space appealed to many constituencies in this environmentally conscious city, so the company gave the museum six months to raise $17 million to buy the property. the shirleys stepped forward with $5 million toward the purchase and said they would endow the park's operations with $20 million if the museum could raise the rest of the money for the land.  ''that meant it would be free to the public and not have a negative impact'' on the museum, ms. gates said, given that maintenance would not be a financial burden. ''it was a huge carrot, and we just started running.''  while the bulk of the money was raised through major gifts from board members, including the wrights, the museum was still short of its total as the six-month deadline neared. it widened the net by canvassing apartment buildings near the proposed park and supporters of environmental causes.  ultimately the board folded fund-raising for the park and the museum addition into one $180 million capital campaign. to date $173 million has been raised, a record for a northwest cultural institution. of the 6,500 donors, nearly half had never contributed to the museum before.  after buying the site in 1999, the museum held an international design competition in which 52 architectural teams took part before weiss/manfredi's design was selected. with its zigzagging path, the park frames shifting views of the port in one direction and of the skyline and olympic mountains in another.  ''there was an insanity to this brownfield site,'' said the architect marion weiss, noting that the environmental cleanup was incomplete at the outset, and that the property was divided by the highway and the train line.  ''but the dynamics of crossing the highway and the train tracks make it spectacular too,'' she said. ''so we started to think of how you could slow down this city. the z-shaped path brings into focus the radically different views and amazing environment.''  her partner, michael manfredi, recalls standing by the train tracks during the construction process with mr. shirley, who bought calder's ''eagle'' for the park. (the wrights also donated sculptures by mark di suvero, tony smith, ellsworth kelly, roxy paine and anthony caro.) ''the train rolled by, and it was the exact color of the calder,'' mr. manfredi said. ''we knew the trains would be part of the park, but we could not have asked for better serendipity.''  past the bridge on which the ''eagle'' is perched, visitors can stroll alongside the meadows with monumental works by claes oldenburg and mr. di suvero and an aspen grove enclosing ''stinger,'' a fortresslike black steel piece by tony smith, and five of his ''wandering rocks.''  then it's over the railroad via a bridge with a laminated glass overhang by teresita fernández that filters the skyline through a design of colored benday dots. the path ends at the beach, near a fountain with figures of a father and son commissioned from louise bourgeois. in time the sculpture acquisitions will be supplemented by temporary installations.  the park's potential effect on surrounding belltown, the city's fastest-growing residential section, was palpable even before ground was broken.  ''if you stand in the park and look around the perimeter, it's all new housing that wasn't there when we bought that property,'' ms. wright said.  peter steinbrueck, chairman of the seattle city council's urban development and planning committee, secured passage last summer of a so-called livability plan for the downtown area that promotes residential growth with a campaign to contain urban sprawl and cut down on greenhouse gas emissions.  the sculpture park ''will contribute to our goals not just for the cultural life but also the livability of our urban core,'' mr. steinbrueck said. the juvenile salmon population could also benefit. a 2001 earthquake caused damage to the seawall along the future park's edge. the damage was one of several delays in the park's completion, including a strike by concrete workers last summer.  the museum recruited engineers and aquatic scientists to buttress it with stepped terraces that also restored the habitat for migrating salmon on the shoreline. the price tag was $5.5 million, financed largely by the federal fish and wildlife service and washington state's department of transportation.  the seattle art museum's expansion, designed by allied works architecture, also involved collaborative thinking. in 2001, two years into the sculpture park project, the financial services company washington mutual, whose headquarters was across the street from the museum, approached ms. gates about building a new headquarters on the block owned by the museum and developing an additional building that could be used by both.  ''it was an opportunity that presented itself, and we seized it,'' ms. gates said.  she knew from a master plan the museum had commissioned that its existing 1991 building, designed by robert venturi and denise scott brown, would need an additional 300,000 square feet within the next 20 years. but she would not have considered embarking on an expansion for at least another decade, she said, if not for the bank's proposal. by selling part of the block to washington mutual for $18 million, the museum was able to raise cash for its expansion.  the new, jointly developed building, designed by brad cloepfil of allied works architecture, rises 12 stories, abutting both the museum and washington mutual's new headquarters. the first four floors are gallery spaces that connect seamlessly to the venturi museum building; the top eight floors are temporary offices leased by the bank that will open into the washington mutual headquarters, already completed.  in 10 years the museum will have the option to take over four more floors. (all are equipped with climate-control systems.) in 25 years it will take control of the entire building. ''we worked out a way that the museum could afford it and grow incrementally,'' ms. gates said. capitalizing on the new space, she plans an acquisition drive timed to the museum's 75th anniversary next year.  she said she likes the idea of keeping washington mutual, the largest employer in downtown seattle, close by rather than see it leave for a suburban mall. john walsh, a former director of the j. paul getty museum who lectures at yale on the architectural history of art museums, said that few museums have a building history quite as interesting as seattle's.  the museum opened in 1933 in volunteer park in a building now housing the seattle asian art museum, which is also under ms. gates's directorship. ''it was the classic american model of a pavilion in a park, up and away from the commercial metropolis and the bars'' of downtown seattle at that time, mr. walsh said.  the museum's move downtown in 1991 was considered controversial because of the area's seediness. today lusty lady, a bar just across the street from the museum, is one of the few remaining relics amid all the starbucks and art galleries.  ''the museum had to wait a while for the city to really build up around it,'' mr. walsh said. the seattle symphony built benaroya hall a block away in 2002, and in 2004, rem koolhaas's much-lauded public library opened nearby.  for some, it's hard to imagine that this bustling area was a ghost town by night 15 years ago.  ''the significance for the city of these projects exceeds anything i thought of at the outset,'' ms. gates said. she credited the museum's collaboration with environmentalists including the cascade land conservancy, whose goals include fostering northwestern cities that are compact, densely populated and, ms. gates said, ''are places where people want to live.''  in a city whose entrepreneurs profess that the survival of salmon is as important as economic revitalization or the arts, it seems natural that the park, the museum and downtown development are so closely intertwined.  art  correction:  january 21, 2007, sunday  an article last sunday about the new seattle sculpture park misstated the year another institution, benaroya hall, home to the seattle symphony, opened. it was 1998, not 2002.  correction:  january 28, 2007, sunday  the credits on jan. 14 for two pictures with an article about the new olympic sculpture park in seattle were reversed. a photograph of the park at night was by benjamin benschneider, and a photograph of alexander calder's ''eagle'' was by paul macapia.  