china's 'leninist corporatism'   when will hutton started research on his book about china, he believed the country was on its way to creating a new kind of capitalism, one that could thrive without democracy or ''european enlightenment values.''  he has changed his mind. in his new book, ''the writing is on the wall,'' excerpted this week in the guardian, he writes that ''the chinese communist party has become one of the most corrupt organizations the world has ever witnessed,'' and that china is ruled by a ''leninist corporatism'' that threatens to unravel all the economic progress the country has made (guardian.co.uk).  china's ''giddy accomplishments'' over the last quarter-century are used to buttress the arguments of those in the west who say china's success can be attributed to its embrace of capitalism, as well as those who say that china is building ''a very particular economic model around what it describes as a socialist market economy.''  both arguments are wrong, mr. hutton now asserts.  the ''leninist corporatism'' he describes is ''unstable, monumentally inefficient, dependent upon the expropriation of peasant savings on a grand scale, colossally unequal and ultimately unsustainable.''  all of which will be to china's grave peril unless things change, he argues. the current economic structures can not be sustained, but neither can china afford to allow the government to be undermined -- because there is a very real danger that an even more oppressive government would take its place. if there is any hope, he writes, it lies in the current leadership changing, that is, embracing western notions of democracy.  mr. hutton took part in a written debate with the economist meghnad desai run by britain's prospect magazine (prospect-magazine.co.uk).  mr. desai wrote that mr. hutton had it right before he did his research. capitalism ''has no unique path, nor does it require a liberal democratic infrastructure to flourish,'' he wrote. ''japan's economic rise took place without a fully liberal infrastructure, and most european states, including britain and germany, were capitalist before they were democratic.''  on the china-focused blog peking duck, ''lisa'' wrote that mr. hutton, at least in the guardian excerpts, ignores the fact that ''certain traditional chinese values might be advantageous or even virtuous in the modern world'' (pekingduck.org).  military justice -- this month, the blog defense tech reported that the addition of five words to a military-spending bill passed in october means that about 100,000 employees of american military contractors working in iraq will now be governed by the code of military justice (defensetech.org).  the change, reported by peter warren singer, a senior fellow at the brookings institution, closed a legal loophole that, critics have complained, led to military personnel being harshly punished while civilian workers who committed the same acts were not punished at all.  the loophole drew outrage in 2004, when the abu ghraib scandal came to light. military guards who abused prisoners faced criminal charges, but interrogators working for private contractors were not prosecuted. the code had previously applied to civilians only during a declared war, but the new law applies it to all personnel accompanying the military during a ''declared war or contingency operation.''  investing 101 -- morningstar, the independent service that tracks mutual funds, offers an ''investing classroom'' for individual investors. it consists of 172 short courses on trading stocks, bonds and funds, as well as managing a portfolio (morningstar.com/cover/classroom.html).  a capital idea -- got an idea for a web product? bubbleprice is a tool that will calculate how much start-up capital the idea will be able to draw, based on your choices in a series of drop-down menus. for example, using the drop-down menus to create a business called videospace, a ''roll-your-own peer-to-peer social network,'' would draw $1.2 million.  dan mitchell  what's online complete links are at nytimes.com/business. e-mail: whatsonline@nytimes.com.  