now, big-name retail chains will take the other boroughs, too   they have saturated much of manhattan so completely that their ubiquity has become fodder for jokes on television. now chain stores are rapidly spreading into parts of new york city that had long been left to local merchants.  the stretch of broadway in astoria, queens, where mike belvedere opened his second cold stone creamery ice cream franchise is a prime example. amid a jumble of greek bakeries, halal butcher shops and indian doctors' offices, national retailers and big banks are moving in and remaking the streetscape in manhattan's image.  at a glance, the junction of broadway and steinway street could be mistaken for any intersection in midtown. there are bank branches -- commerce, chase and bank of america -- on three of the corners, and the fourth is home to a rite aid drugstore. nearby are stores usually found in suburban shopping malls. a few blocks from where mr. belvedere is selling waffle cones for as much as $5 each are a children's place clothing store, a bath & body works and a victoria's secret lingerie shop.  ''the area's flourishing, and it's continuing to change,'' said mr. belvedere, who added that friends had said that not being of greek descent would be a handicap in a section of the city that historically has been a greek enclave.  but mr. belvedere said that he had encountered no resistance since he leased the space for his shop about 18 months ago. rather, he said, he detected among the young professionals who have flocked to the area a hunger for more brand-name merchants.  the rapid gentrification of certain neighborhoods outside manhattan has accelerated the spread of the chain stores and renewed fears that the pockets of flavor that define the city will dry up, said jeanne giordano, an urban planner who oversaw redevelopment of the commercial space in grand central terminal. ''the tipping point is that it's happening beyond the obvious places,'' ms. giordano said. ''the boroughs are all going down like bowling pins.''  some new yorkers are worried, she said, that ''it's getting boring around here.''  there are now 220 duane reade stores in the city, and 205 starbucks cafes, and there will soon be 217 rite aid stores if a proposed merger with eckerd pharmacy goes through.  in san francisco, such trends drove the passage in november of a proposition to require review by a planning commission of any proposal to open a new chain store outlet or restaurant within city limits. but in new york neighborhoods like astoria and the area around the metrotech center in brooklyn, sentiments among shoppers and business leaders are different.  those areas are on the opposite end of the commercial growth curve from manhattan, said robin abrams, chairwoman of the retail committee of the real estate board of new york.  they are being discovered by national retailers that previously had balked at paying urban rents that are generally higher than in suburban shopping malls, she said.  ''as most of the nationals have saturated manhattan or been priced out of manhattan, they fully understand that they can do business in the boroughs,'' said ms. abrams, who is an executive vice president of the lansco corporation. ''you see more and more tenants looking at these areas.''  chains that sell clothing at relatively low prices, like children's place and payless shoe source, led an invasion that others are now following, ms. abrams said. children's place, which has 31 stores in new york city, plans to add six this year, all of them outside of manhattan, according to a spokeswoman. payless has more than 60 stores in brooklyn and queens; limited brands has five victoria's secrets, six bath & body works and four express clothing stores in brooklyn and queens.  the chain proliferation and the sameness they have brought to so many blocks has become a pet peeve for many new yorkers, and the butt of jokes for others. on a recent episode of the nbc comedy ''30 rock,'' a character sent to pick up a prescription was stymied by the presence of ''rite drugs'' outlets on all four corners of an intersection.  to some members of the municipal art society of new york, the advance of the chain stores is no laughing matter. the society, whose stated mission is to make the city more livable, said that it was monitoring what vanessa gruen, its director of special projects, calls ''chain store creep'' and looking for ways to protect local merchants.  ms. gruen said the effort was spurred by fears that the proposed atlantic yards project would bring more ''huge chain stores'' to brooklyn and that independent merchants would not be able to afford to stay in the area. their potential disappearance is a threat to the unique character of the city's neighborhoods, ms. gruen said.  ms. giordano, who moderated a panel discussion on the topic for the art society last fall, said there was ''a lot of buzz about this, and it's not just sort of idle chatter.'' even so, there's no push yet for the sort of broad policy change that was contemplated in the mid-1980s.  back then, mayor edward i. koch appointed a commission to study the pros and cons of commercial rent control as a response to fears that chain stores and the high rents they were willing to pay would drive laundries and shoe-repair shops out of business.  the commission surveyed residents of several neighborhoods and found that consumer satisfaction was highest where rents were rising the fastest and lowest where commercial rents were most stable, said alan a. altshuler, dean of the graduate school of design at harvard university, who led the commission.  ''one of the reasons that people were happier where rents were rising most rapidly was that these shops were not going out of business; they were moving,'' he recalled. ''shops that didn't have high revenues were finding ways to survive.''  mr. altshuler said he had heard little talk lately of restricting the proliferation of chain outlets, except against very large stores like wal-mart. those companies have met resistance in many communities that feared one giant big-box store might wipe out several specialty stores. other than those battles, he said, ''clearly the passion to restrict these things is much less intense.''  san francisco may be the only big city in the united states where an antichain sentiment burns strong, urban planners said. last fall, the ballot proposition to require planning review of proposed chain stores or restaurant outlets received about 60 percent of the votes, said gerardo sandoval, the city supervisor who sponsored the proposition.  ''our position is: 'we're san francisco; you can do what you want in other cities, but here we are going to protect local neighborhood character,' '' mr. sandoval said.  the restrictions on chains, known as ''formula retail'' in san francisco, apply to everything from starbucks to individual outlets of hawaiian barbecue restaurants, said lawrence b. badiner, assistant director of that city's planning commission.  mr. badiner said that a few proposed starbucks cafes had been rejected by the commission. ''the predominant view in most parts of the city is, 'we've got enough; if we want to go to starbucks we know where to find one,' '' he said.  that sentiment may exist in some affluent areas of new york, but many other areas are still eagerly awaiting the arrival of their first chain stores, said ms. giordano, who has advised some of the city's business improvement districts on development plans. these community planners ''would consider it a success if some of these stores would come there,'' she said.  in part, that is because landlords see established retailers as less risky than independent merchants and start-ups, and in part because successful chain stores usually attract shoppers and more chain stores. local officials in other parts of queens see ''that stretch of steinway street in astoria'' as a model of what they would like, ms. giordano said.  ''i would say a good healthy street is a combination of both,'' she said. ''if it's just the chains, then it's boring. but certain chains have good basics. and it's always nice to have the small, unique shops. the question is how long that mix holds until it goes and trips over to the other side.''  