pushback   ''we were too weakened, and had too many problems, to really push back,'' said brent scowcroft, recently recalling the early days of the presidency of gerald ford.  back in 1974, that verbal phrase had a different meaning, familiar to airline passengers in the sense of ''we're waiting for clearance from traffic control to push back from the gate.'' (the aircraft didn't push; it was sometimes pushed or dragged back by a guy with big earphones sitting on a little tractor, but the odd term lingers on.)  as a single word, pushback was then an adjective describing a reclining chair; it evoked a vision of a luxurious seat in a movie theater, more expensive than the creaky seats in general admission, and was taking the place of the aristocratic french word loge. another sense was used by manufacturers of city subway cars in the 1980s who boasted of ''a pushback feature,'' enabling a pushy passenger to avert decapitation by a closing door.  today, pushback as a noun with a new sense has elbowed its way into the language. it started surfacing in business journals at the end of the second millennium: ''some are nervously raising prices,'' reported a wall street journal enterprise team in 1999, ''always watchful of pushback from consumers.'' paul wolfowitz, then deputy secretary of the defense department, picked it up in july 2004 in telling the press that an idea to create a joint national training center was set aside because ''the pushback from the military was very strong.''  in the summer of 2006, susan schwab, the u.s. trade representative, told the wall street journal that the doha round of negotiations was worrying poor countries: ''some of the pushback you get ... is a reflection of developing-country concerns about china.'' this impelled ed mcfadden of bedminster, n.j., to send me a postal communication (a pre-e-mail ''letter''): ''pushback is not found in my merriam-webster 11th edition (2005) or my oxford american dictionary.'' (nor is it in the o.e.d. online.) ''be so kind as to shed some light on this relatively simple word now used in international politics.''  first light on the latest sense of the hot noun was shed by the 2004 edition of the encarta dictionary, anne soukhanov, editor: ''opposition or other resistance to something such as an initiative, plan or strategy.'' the 2006 american heritage fourth unabridged picks up pushback, but with old senses of fighting off the subway door and shoving back troops. (to other lexies: quick, the door is closing!)  lee hamilton, realist head of the woodrow wilson center (there's an oxymoron), introduced a comment that ''since 9/11, the security folks have won all the arguments'' and observed, ''i think what you're seeing now is a pushback.''  here is a locution that conveys a colorful picture of an action. pushback is to ''resistance'' what ripoff is to ''theft.'' in the synonymy of opposition, pushback is more combative than reaction, less menacing than hostile and not fraught with the paramilitary overtones now attached to resistance. although the similarly constructed noun phrase back talk remains two words (unlike backlash), just try to shove pushback and see what happens.  on bones and heads  former president (and potential first gentleman) bill clinton has long had a fine grasp of vivid vernacular. a mystery, however, surrounds one figure of speech in his interview last september with chris wallace of fox news. after having to defend his actions or inaction on the anti-terror front during his presidency, clinton, angered, pushed back at his interviewer. when wallace replied that he always intended to also ask his guest about the clinton global initiative, the former president replied, ''no, you intended, though, to move your bones by doing this first.''  a reader, laurence shatkin, e-mailed, ''the phrase move your bones seems to mean, in context, 'to score a cheap point' or 'to advance your argument unfairly,' but i'm not sure.'' clinton's verb move is clear on the tape, but to dialect experts, the meaning is not.  one remote possibility has to do with exercise: ''move your bones regularly in weight-bearing activities you enjoy,'' advises the harvard university health services web site. another source has to do with emotional satisfaction: a 2002 justin timberlake lyric, written after his breakup with britney spears, advises, ''if you let go, the music should move your bones, baby.''  to use a locution long favored by press secretaries, it may be that ''the president misspoke.'' the phrase that better fits the context -- clinton's charge that the interviewer was establishing his credentials -- would be ''make your bones.''  that expression was coined or popularized in mario puzo's 1969 mafia novel, ''the godfather.'' the lexicographer grant barrett speculates that since a slang sense of bones is in the game of craps, perhaps making your bones is getting the dice to display a number that makes you a winner. my more sinister speculation would be to equate bones with a skeleton, and a made man would be a gangland member who has led a body in that direction.  on a less macabre note, john harris of the washington post reported how clinton in an interview last summer reached back to 1960s lingo about mind manipulation to urge democratic candidates to prepare themselves psychologically for ''withering attacks'' by the proliferating media, and ''not to allow other people to define them as either people or as political leaders.'' the former president's advice, drawn on a metaphor memorable to boomers: ''all of this is a head game, you know ... all great contests are head games.''  the way we live now: 1-14-07: on language  