a widening vista   from the time i was in high school i was writing plays and pieces of journalism. when i was at merton college, oxford, i remember writing two plays. one was a rather gloomy and tortured piece about terrorism. the other was about british soldiers in west germany walking through the aftermath of a nuclear holocaust.  we had a cast of about 20, who performed it at the burton taylor rooms, a small 50-person theater behind the oxford playhouse. we borrowed a lot of uniforms off the training corps, our equivalent of r.o.t.c. we managed to get stage weapons from the same source. we performed nightly for about 10 days.  i assumed i would be an oxford don. all my friends were applying to graduate school or for jobs. i had no idea what i wanted to do and no anxiety, either.  everyone was applying to the bbc. i thought i would do that, too. i almost applied as an afterthought.  my first job for the bbc was as a trainee researcher. we were doing a show based on academic research about religious experiences. i went knocking door to door in nottingham, asking whether the occupants had seen the virgin mary or god or the presence of good and evil and would be willing to come on television to talk about their experiences. this was decades before reality television.  the research said that 40 percent of the british population had these experiences, but it was less so in my experience as a 22-year-old trying to find them. in america everyone you met expected to be on television, compared with britain where everyone was very reticent.  i lived in new york for one year in the early 1980s. before i arrived, my picture of america was ''midnight cowboy.'' i had been a producer in london and the bbc wanted to develop me and give me a chance to work on my own.  i worked with a reporter and we were based in new york and traveled across america. i lived in a rather nice apartment on sutton place south and walked to the offices at rockefeller center. it was a plastic new york life.  the first day i arrived, it was midsummer, in the afternoon. the taxi driver took me through brooklyn into manhattan.  and on that first day i met my wife, who had just graduated from cornell and was also a trainee for the bbc. that night i went to see ''42nd street'' on broadway.  the london i left was grayer and quieter than it is now. when i returned a year later it felt small and cramped somehow. de tocqueville was right about europeans discovering the excitement and potential of america.  my wife is an american. we spend part of the summer in rangeley, me., so that my children can see their grandparents. it's in the western part of the state.  every year there is an annual logging festival and a parade with the fire brigade and the cops. there's a tiny movie theater with a basic concrete floor and ancient seats.  i've taken a few flying lessons there, and on and off i go on fire patrols looking for forest fires. we travel over hundreds of nautical miles and see one cabin in the woods. it's a remote part of the world. you can stand on the top of saddleback mountain and see mountains and valleys for miles around. nature is more controlled in england.  over 10 years ago, i commissioned a television series called ''teletubbies.'' we were looking for a preschool program that would teach small children vocalization and speech. from the beginning, the creator knew they would have televisions in their middles. their green world evokes stratford-on-avon.  at the time there was a very vicious press campaign about how the show was lowering standards. my reaction to that was that we would have to be a pretty sick organization to dumb down a program that was aimed only at 2-year-olds in the first place.  mark thompson  director general, bbc, london  birth date  july 31, 1957  favorite quotation  ''from the heart. may it go to the heart.'' (beethoven)  undergraduate thesis  essay about wittgenstein and lewis carroll  favorite teletubby  po  favorite u.s. tv program  ''dancing with the stars''  office space: the boss  