stepping up the war: will the bush plan work?   to the editor:  re ''bush adding 20,000 u.s. troops; sets goal of securing baghdad'' (front page, jan. 11):  the president, in his speech to the nation on wednesday, said, ''for the safety of our people, america must succeed in iraq.''  if the safety of the american people had been considered in advance by a competent president, we would have never mounted the unnecessary invasion of iraq.  this president has thrust this nation into a predictably disastrous entanglement from which there is no satisfactory escape, never mind the unattainable ''victory'' to which mr. bush repeatedly refers.  placing 20,000 more american troops into the caldron that iraq has become will serve only to increase the number of dead and maimed americans and iraqis, leaving the sectarian civil war to rage on with little or no restraint.  the best of the wretched alternatives this president has left us is that of immediate withdrawal of the troops he has placed in grave danger with his failed war of choice. congress must demand that this be done as expeditiously as possible.  james k. knowles  sierra madre, calif., jan. 11, 2007  to the editor:  i am so disgusted, appalled and frustrated, i don't even know where to begin. are we totally helpless against this man who seems more like an arrogant, power-hungry dictator than a president?  president bush's statement ''where mistakes have been made, the responsibility lies with me'' is meaningless because there are no consequences for him. our troops, the iraqis and the american people are paying the price of his mistakes.  this president has so clearly demonstrated his ignorance in foreign policy matters that i have no faith in his ability to judge the consequences of failure in iraq or to make decisions about how to end this war.  america is well aware that mr. bush's strategy for war in iraq was fundamentally flawed from day 1. this new plan is no exception.  the newly elected congress and senate must find a way to stop him.  misty haskett  houston, jan. 11, 2007  to the editor:  the president's speech included an internal inconsistency that rendered it impossible to believe that he was serious in his reason for sending additional troops to iraq.  if one truly believes that iraq is critical to the safety of the united states, as he said, how can the united states set standards for the iraqis to meet, and if they don't meet those standards, our troops will leave the iraqis on their own?  if one believes the president, iraqi failure to meet those standards should mandate our keeping our troops in iraq, forever if necessary, to protect america. in other words, if iraq is the key to stopping terrorism at home and the iraqis do not stand up, how can we stand down?  the illogic of this position captures the fallacy of our being in iraq from the war's inception.  samuel k. rosen  new york, jan. 11, 2007  to the editor:  bravo, president bush. at last you've got the right strategy.  we desperately need more troops in iraq, because there is no way that we could decisively defeat the terrorists and the insurgents without them. if anything, we should add even more than the proposed 20,000 or so.  this is why increasing the united states military's size is so important; it will give america the long-term flexibility to send more soldiers wherever they are needed.  jeremy kohn  evanston, ill., jan. 11, 2007  to the editor:  if the risk to the united states arising from the war in iraq is as great as described by president bush in wednesday evening's address to the nation, we should be raising hundreds of thousands or millions of troops to defend ourselves as we did in world war ii.  we should also be raising money to pay for the war as we did in world war ii so that we can meet our military objectives.  congress should either vote to withhold financing for president bush's proposed escalation, or in the alternative, renew a draft and increase taxes so that we can provide enough soldiers and money to win president bush's war without bankrupting our country.  bardyl r. tirana  south nyack, n.y., jan. 11, 2007  to the editor:  a mere 20,000 more troops in iraq hardly seems sufficient to stabilize baghdad, let alone the country.  fifty thousand or 60,000, maybe 100,000 more might do the trick.  the insurgency has had time to consolidate, plan and mature. yet the question is, even if we were to be able to bring about an imposed peace, how long would it have a chance of lasting?  in the former yugoslavia, a peace was imposed for decades, only to dissolve into genocide when the iron fist was removed. does this not suggest that the hatreds driving iraqis to civil war may be irrepressible?  if so, is iraq worth more american lives and treasure?  william youmans  new york, jan. 11, 2007  to the editor:  more than 20,000 additional troops are being put in harm's way on the say-so of one man. isn't that more characteristic of a dictatorship than a democracy?  why isn't congress mounting a more vigorous effort to block money for this ruinous war?  our senators and representatives cannot allow george w. bush to try to salvage his failed presidency over the maimed and dead bodies of our men and women in uniform.  gail garfinkel weiss  new york, jan. 11, 2007  to the editor:  re ''the real disaster'' (editorial, jan. 11):  what i found equally alarming as the ''more gauzy talk of victory in the war on terrorism'' were president bush's ''open-ended threats to iran and syria.''  congress is unlikely to deny the president the money to carry out his military escalation. what it must do is act now to prevent the president from expanding the disaster by taking precipitous action against iran and syria.  congress was complicit in the president's decision to go to war. it must not compound that mistake by not taking seriously his veiled threats against iran and syria.  john a. viteritti  southold, n.y., jan. 11, 2007  to the editor:  your editorial about president bush's speech was the most poignant and clearest message of just how disastrous this war and this president have been for this country.  the fact that america re-elected this self-absorbed, limited politician puts the blame not just on him but also on the american people. there is no glory in ''staying the course'' so that president bush can prove he was right.  my heart goes out to the parents and loved ones of those who died in iraq for nothing. i pray that the democrats have the muscle and the will to stop this madness and bring our troops home. we have no business in the middle of that civil war.  ruthann e. grey  flemington, n.j., jan. 11, 2007  to the editor:  thank you for identifying the real disaster and the real failures that cannot be reversed (editorial, jan. 11). taking some responsibility for past failures does not absolve the bush administration of the ultimate consequences of those failures.  mr. bush will continue to claim that if his plan is not accepted and an alternative involving redeployment is accepted, the resulting chaos will be the democrats' fault. wrong. all that happens as a result of his decision to go to war is his administration's fault.  robert harris  burke, va., jan. 11, 2007  to the editor:  david brooks (''the fog over iraq,'' column, jan. 11) says the democrats are ''fecund'' with complaints and have no plan. how do you have a plan when the commander in chief is out of touch with reality and the wars in iraq are civil wars and will continue to be civil wars?  the last thing mr. brooks should be doing is pointing a finger at the democrats. this production was brought to you solely by the republican party.  eileen o'leary  east lansing, mich., jan. 11, 2007  to the editor:  like david brooks, i was disheartened on wednesday night when president bush appeared to indicate that we would continue to rely primarily on iraqi forces -- particularly the militia-dominated police -- to restore security in baghdad.  but as mr. brooks notes, ''the administration could not go before the world'' and say it was overruling prime minister nuri al-maliki, who would have clearly preferred a concentration of american troops in anbar province, while sectarian shiite forces were left free to establish their own kind of security in baghdad. the fact that the overwhelming majority of new american troops will be going to baghdad speaks for itself.  your editorial the same day talismanically invokes the mantra that there is ''no military solution'' in iraq, although establishing security is a fundamental prerequisite of any acceptable outcome, and that is obviously a military task.  we can only hope that the additional troops the president is committing to this objective are enough.  howard f. jaeckel  new york, jan. 11, 2007  to the editor:  i turned 21 as a grunt in vietnam carrying a rifle and slogging through the mud of the mekong delta. i see pictures on television of soldiers killed in iraq with their names, ages and ranks. most are just kids 19, 20, 21 years old. i think that they're just like me. what a waste.  peter hayden  manchester, mo., jan. 11, 2007  