in firehouse policy dispute, the flag becomes an issue   the image still resonates in the minds of new yorkers: three city firefighters raising an american flag over the smoldering ruins of ground zero. now the flag, which has become inexorably tied to new york firefighters as symbols of courage since the 9/11 attacks, has become a wedge between the fire department and the city's largest fire union.  in separate news conferences on the steps of city hall yesterday, union and department officials bitterly wrangled over a department policy that prohibits firefighters from displaying anything but their names on their firehouse lockers, including stickers of american flags.  department officials say the policy was adopted 18 months ago after a string of incidents involving racially or sexually offensive material or remarks in city firehouses, but was never intended to apply to flags and other inoffensive material.  complaints involving sexual harassment, racial slurs, pornographic material and job discrimination investigated by the department have increased dramatically in the last few years, to 344 last year from 83 in 2002. department officials attribute the rise to an increased understanding among employees of laws guarding against a hostile workplace.  the department has been under pressure from the department of justice to comply with federal equal employment and antiharassment laws. in one incident about two weeks ago, a brooklyn firefighter was disciplined for having a sticker on his locker containing a vulgar reference to women. that was when unit commanders around the city, under orders from the fire department, began clearing locker doors of everything, union officials said.  stephen j. cassidy, president of the 9,000-member uniformed firefighters association, said that included flags, support our troops decals, family photographs and any other personal items, even mass cards of fallen firefighters.  ''the commissioner's actions are incomprehensible,'' said mr. cassidy, referring to fire commissioner nicholas scoppetta. ''we're tired of being treated like children, and it will not continue.''  the union plans to hand out 10,000 american flag stickers at its general membership meeting today with instructions to its members to stick them to their lockers if they wish.  the union has also hired ronald l. kuby, the civil rights lawyer and radio talk show host, and says it will sue if the city does not amend its policy to specifically allow unobjectionable material by the end of the month.  mylan l. denerstein, the deputy fire commissioner for legal affairs, called the union's complaint ''disingenuous.''  she said mr. cassidy was informed during contract talks last thursday that both sides had agreed that flags and mass cards would be allowed. everything else, she said, would be decided on a case-by-case basis. she demurred, however, when asked if the city would put those exceptions in writing.  ''it isn't necessary,'' she said. ''i mean, this was agreed upon at the meeting that we had.''  mr. cassidy said that no such agreement was made, and denied that the discussion even took place.  mr. kuby said the city's policy violates constitutional guarantees of free expression. he said the policy is akin to asking office workers to remove pictures of their children from their desks.  ''of course, the government, as an employer, has certain latitude to regulate the speech of its employees,'' he wrote in a letter to the department. ''however, this latitude cannot be extended to a blanket ban on all speech.''  vincent blasi, a constitutional expert at columbia university and the university of virginia, said the courts have generally recognized that public employees have less right to free expression than do ordinary citizens in public places. but the supreme court has upheld that ''speech on a matter of public concern,'' even in government offices, is protected.  what could be problematic, professor blasi said, was the department's case-by-case enforcement, which could open the door for political or prejudicial actions when deciding which material would be acceptable.  ''if you allow the american flag, you have got to allow its ideological opposite, whatever that may be,'' even if that is a picture of a burning american flag, professor blasi said.  