charismatic barber sees no limits in the land of networks   a fantasy about the future employment of the in-demand former giants running back tiki barber.  a consortium of more than a dozen television networks yesterday hired tiki barber to star in and produce sports, news, lifestyle, entertainment, documentary, children's and game show programming.  ''i felt terrible reading all those stories that i was going to this network or that,'' barber said at a news conference with regis philbin, his co-star on the new ''regis & tiki'' morning program. ''so i told my agent, 'tell them they can all have me.' ''  barber said he would be paid $75 million over five years.  ''you're worth more, teek!'' philbin shrieked. ''you're worth more!''  barber smiled.  ''the money's all guaranteed,'' he said, ''not like my football contracts.''  bob wright, the chairman of nbc universal and the consortium's lead negotiator, said he made the historic deal because ''we couldn't contain tiki's talents as a sportscaster, newsman, anchor, raconteur and mentor within the nbc family. so we're happy to share him with the world.''  wright turned his only regret into a positive.  ''while we've fired sterling sharpe, cris collinsworth, bob costas and jerome bettis to make room for tiki on 'football night in america,' '' he said, ''we're certain that tiki's unique talents as a solo performer will match johnny carson's.''  he added, ''this will not only be 'must see tiki,' but 'can't avoid tiki!' ''  barber will replace joe theismann and tony kornheiser on espn's ''monday night football,'' anchor abc's newsmagazine ''tiki/tiki'' (formerly ''20/20''), and be the host of the long-planned fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth hours of nbc's ''today.''  he will bring a cheerful face to cbs's ''c.s.i.'' as the lead crime-scene investigator, and play a plastic surgeon who gives free liposuction to obese offensive linemen on fx's ''nip/tiki.''  robert iger, the chairman of the walt disney company, which owns abc and espn, said the company would rebrand itself with the motto, ''thank god it's tiki!''  a tiki character will also join mickey mouse, donald duck, goofy and pluto at the company's theme parks.  barber will also create and write a disney channel series, ''that's so tiki,'' which will be heavily promoted on an abc reality series, with espn's stuart scott as the host, that will follow the search for a bald 6-year-old actor to play young tiki.  ''uncle walt would have loved tiki,'' iger said.  in addition to working for disney, nbc, cbs and the fox-owned networks, barber will develop projects for spike, cnn, nickelodeon, a&e, oxygen, we, discovery, lifetime, bbc america, pbs and animal planet.  barber said that when he could not meet simultaneous work commitments, his twin brother, ronde, would substitute for him.  ''ronde can count the maggots on a dead guy's body in 'c.s.i.' or suck fat out of a guy's belly as well as i can, if not better,'' tiki said.  the battle for barber's services began in the fall when he said he would retire after the 2006 season. it accelerated in recent weeks after the giants were eliminated in their wild-card playoff game and reports surfaced that he was favoring multimillion-dollar deals from nbc or abc/espn.  ''but i knew if i waited long enough, i could have them all,'' barber said, and he does, except for versus, which required that barber ride a bull.  rupert murdoch, the lord of fox, who joined the tiki talks late, much as he did to get the rights to ''american idol,'' said, ''lovely fellow, this tiki. i thought of giving him his own channel on directv and also put him up on my sky satellite in europe. didn't care what he did. he could just smile and get ratings. looks nicer than that bradshaw. i could put him on that sunday show we've got. all exclusive.  ''but tiki said i was being selfish, that i had to share him with others. then i read his children's books. and by god, i wept.''  despite barber's lack of news credentials, he said he expected to interview world leaders for ''60 minutes'' or ''tiki/tiki,'' depending on his schedule covering dog shows for animal planet and sitting in for charlie rose.  ''i've already got mahmoud ahmadinejad on my speed dial,'' he said, referring to the iranian president. ''do you think brian williams does?''  asked if any dream was unfulfilled in this deal, he said he hoped that disney would let him remake his favorite film, ''kon-tiki.''  tv sports e-mail: sportsbiz@nytimes.com  