white house is opposed to new bill on stem cells   the bush administration jumped back into the bitter debate surrounding embryonic stem cell research on wednesday, urging lawmakers to vote against house legislation to expand such research and calling for a new focus on scientific studies that would not harm embryos.  in a white house position paper, officials pressed for consideration of alternative research strategies that would be ''free of the ethical violations of embryo destruction.'' administration officials said president bush was also considering an executive order that would call for increased financing for studies that did not involve embryos.  the move came as the house prepared to pass a bill on thursday that would expand federally supported stem cell research. the legislation, sponsored by representatives diana degette, democrat of colorado, and michael n. castle, republican of delaware, would permit federal financing of studies on stem cells derived from embryos at fertility clinics that are scheduled for destruction.  the legislation is expected to pass the house with bipartisan support this week and to pass the senate in coming weeks. supporters of the house bill acknowledged, however, that they did not expect to have enough votes to override a presidential veto.  mr. bush, who vetoed stem cell legislation passed by the republican-controlled congress last year, is expected to do so again, and the white house's engagement on the issue on wednesday appeared to be aimed primarily at limiting the size of the votes in favor of the bill in congress.  a fierce social, scientific and political debate over embryonic stem cell research rose in several congressional campaigns last year and exposed deep fissures among republicans, pitting the president against members of his own party and what polls say is a majority of the public.  proponents of the studies say they may ultimately provide cures for illnesses like cancer, heart disease, alzheimer's disease and parkinson's disease. opponents say the studies violate the sanctity of human life by encouraging the destruction of embryos left over from fertilization procedures.  supporters of the measure have argued that such embryos would be destroyed anyway.  the white house position paper highlighted research suggesting that adult stem cells may be reprogrammed to function like embryonic stem cells and a new study that says stem cells present in amniotic fluid might ultimately prove to be as flexible as embryonic stem cells.  tony fratto, a spokesman for mr. bush, said administration officials were also ''reaching out'' to lawmakers in the house to press the president's position.  ''a thoughtful review of the issue would lead most reasonable people to believe this is a line that we don't need to cross,'' mr. fratto said. ''this is a vote of conscience for a lot of members. we hope they take the time to review all aspects of it before casting their vote.''  ms. degette said that although she supports all types of stem cell research, the alternatives highlighted by the white house remain at a preliminary stage.  ''they keep trying to muddle the issue,'' she said of white house officials. ''none of these other types of research are a substitute for embryonic stem cell research.''  mr. castle, the delaware republican, emphasized that the new legislation was urgently needed. ''it is time to update the federal policy to enable scientists in the united states to participate in the race for cures and treatments,'' he said.  mr. bush supports limited scientific research involving embryonic stem cells. under his policy, which he announced on aug. 9, 2001, the federal government pays for studies on stem cell colonies, or lines, created before that date, so that the government does not encourage the destruction of additional embryos. in the past six years, more than $130 million has been devoted to such research, officials say.  because the cells have the potential to grow into any tissue or organ in the body, scientists believe that they hold great promise for treatments and cures. but because human embryos are destroyed in extracting the stem cells, the studies draw intense objections from abortion opponents.  republican opponents of the proposal say the potential medical advances being promised by its backers offer false hope. ''to date, embryonic stem cell research has not produced a single medical treatment, and i believe it is morally wrong to create human life to destroy it for research,'' representative mike pence, republican of indiana, said wednesday.  the 110th congress  