a mideast pawn, and a father's agony   noam shalit takes in the view of freezing rain and wind pounding olive groves of the galilee outside his living room window and speaks of the danger of delay -- more than half a year since the warm summer day when his son, gilad, a young israeli corporal, was captured by palestinian militants in a cross-border raid and trundled into the gaza strip.  ''we keep saying, 'time works against us,' '' mr. shalit said. ''there are no life insurance policies in gaza; it's a very explosive situation. they are even killing each other. so how can we be at ease?''  asked if he dreams of his son, he replied, ''i dream he is with us.'' corporal gilad was 19 at the time of his capture on june 25, a shy teenager who was drafted within weeks of finishing high school.  mr. shalit, a 52-year-old deeply private industrial engineer, has seen his quiet life in a village in the western galilee transform in ways he never imagined.  he has reached out to the palestinian public through interviews and a visit to palestinians wounded by israeli fire. he is also in regular contact with hamas officials in gaza. he and his family wrote an open letter to his son in the palestinian newspaper al quds, urging him to remain strong and speaking of the pain of the palestinian parents whose children are in israeli jails, and whose release depends on the release of his son.  [on wednesday, he announced his latest, and perhaps most creative appeal: offering himself up as a hostage in gaza in his son's place until the conditions of a possible prisoner swap were completed.]  ''an important factor in this is that the palestinians need to pressure the kidnappers and their leadership,'' mr. shalit said. ''it has led to much suffering for their people as well,'' he added, referring to the high casualties suffered by palestinians in the israeli military raid into gaza that followed the capture.  his wife, aviva, declined to be interviewed. she has chosen to stay out of public view, saying only ''bring me back gilad,'' her husband said.  the only proof that corporal shalit is alive arrived in september in the form of a letter in his handwriting, mr. shalit said. about its contents, he was terse. he said it was clearly dictated by his son's captors and made a direct appeal to israel's leaders to release palestinian prisoners.  although hamas, one of the three organizations that took part in his capture, claims that corporal shalit is a prisoner of war, mr. shalit is bitter that hamas has not provided for visits by the red cross or any other neutral organization. nor has it provided any photographs or videotapes. ''they are toying with the family's feelings,'' he said.  egypt, which has been trying to broker a deal, has been frustrated by repeated rejections by khaled meshal, the top-ranking member of the damascus-based hamas leadership in exile.  among mr. shalit's strategies has been to call on president bashar al-assad of syria to press mr. meshal into agreeing to the terms of a prisoner exchange.  for mr. shalit, news of his son's capture immediately set off memories of the trauma of learning that his twin brother, yoel, was missing during the 1973 arab-israeli war. he himself was fighting in the suez canal at the time, and when he got word that his brother was missing in the golan heights, he made the long journey from the sinai desert back to israel.  mr. shalit's father traveled to the golan heights to search for his son.  a generation later, mr. shalit found himself coping with his own missing son.  ''it was like being thrown over 30 years backward,'' he said.  ultimately, mr. shalit's brother was identified among the dead. he was 19, the same age as corporal shalit at the time of his capture, and like him, he also served in the tank corps.  mr. shalit's parents came to israel as refugees from europe. his mother survived world war ii in vichy france. his father, born in poland, arrived before the war began. his paternal grandfather was not so fortunate. he stayed behind and was killed by the nazis.  mr. shalit has asked french officials to use their connections to help free his son who, like him, holds dual israeli and french citizenship.  he recalled the last time he saw his son, just a week before his capture during a leave from his army service. every morning, corporal shalit, a sports fan, would rise at 4 a.m. to catch the n.b.a. finals broadcast live from the united states.  disappointed in his own government and frustrated and fearful of the lawlessness in gaza, mr. shalit said he wondered how his son was making it through the long days.  ''i'm doing all i can for gilad and for the family, everything to bring him back,'' he said. ''i'm not the issue. i'm just the instrument.''  