spitzer backs a democrat from nassau for the senate   first, gov. eliot spitzer created a vacancy in the state senate, then on friday he ventured down from albany to try to fill it.  governor spitzer came to the north shore of long island to endorse the candidacy of craig johnson, a nassau county legislator, declaring that a vote for mr. johnson would be a vote for his agenda, which includes health and education reform, lower property taxes and greater government accountability.  ''this is very simply a thumbs up or a thumbs down on the reform agenda i laid out on the state of the state of the state on jan. 3,'' governor spitzer told a gathering of about 200 supporters that included the nassau county executive, thomas r. suozzi, whom he had opposed in the democratic primary for governor. ''if you support that agenda, you must vote for craig johnson.''  the governor forced the opening when he chose state senator michael a. l. balboni, a republican, as his deputy homeland security director. a special election to fill the senate vacancy will be held on feb. 6.  the governor drew a laugh when he said that he had not seen ''this many democrats in manhasset in a long time.'' later he said, ''this has nothing to do with partisan affiliation.''  that was an assertion that few republicans believe. the race for the seventh senate district, where democrats hold a slight edge, has given the democratic party a chance to gain a seat in the state senate, which is controlled by republicans with a 33 to 28 advantage.  earlier this week, the senate majority leader, joseph l. bruno, expressed his annoyance in an interview with the associated press.  ''i hope eliot remembers what he said during the campaign and after the campaign about the campaigns being over and partnering with republicans,'' mr. bruno said.  responding to a reporter's question to the effect that mr. bruno had previously implied that the governor had been intrusive, mr. spitzer said: ''i've been called many things. intrusive is not one of them.''  he said he intended to back other state senate candidates who would support his agenda, regardless of party affiliation.  ''i really view it as an extension of the reform effort,'' he said. ''we are working across party lines. anybody who cares about reform, we are working first and foremost with, because this is what the public wants. ''  governor spitzer emphasized his interest in creating a more transparent and accountable legislature and ''an end to the lobbyists, who crawl all over the capital, making the decisions that should be made for the citizens and by the citizens.''  governor spitzer said mr. johnson would be the right candidate to further that cause. ''if we're going to restore honor and integrity to the government, we need men like craig johnson,'' mr. spitzer said. ''we don't want the public looking at us, saying, 'gee, we look at you askance because we don't trust the decisions you make.' ''  in turn, mr. johnson declared his support for the governor's agenda. ''i want to be there as your partner to push that reform agenda forward,'' he said.  the republicans have chosen the nassau county clerk, maureen o'connell, to oppose mr. johnson.  