the burgeoning rebirth of a bygone literary star   somewhere on the bookshelf between forgotten and neglected, between the tragic and the strange, stands the reputation of the american writer harold l. humes.  the third man of the postwar paris expatriate crowd -- he was a co-founder of the paris review in 1953, with peter matthiessen and george plimpton -- doc humes, as he was known, went on to produce two novels in the late 1950s that placed him at the head of a new generation of writers to watch. but in the '60s he succumbed to a mental illness that left him paranoid and peripatetic. yet to those who remember him, he remained so brilliant that even in madness he dazzled, delighted, educated and touched.  now ''doc,'' a documentary by an oscar-nominated filmmaker (one of mr. humes's daughters) and fresh awareness among several publishers is raising hopes that mr. humes's long out-of-print novels will finally resurface.  with that in mind, immy humes, the director of ''doc,'' has taken an unusual tack. the film had its premiere in november, when it was the opening-night selection of the 30th anniversary margaret mead film and video festival at the american museum of natural history. although it was already slated to run as part of pbs's ''independent lens'' series, ms. humes negotiated with the network to wait a year before broadcasting it. the idea was ''to have enough time for any publication to ride in the broadcast,'' she said.  the novelist paul auster, who knew ms. humes's father, said that he thought that mr. humes's 1957 novel, ''the underground city,'' set in an intrigue-filled paris during and immediately after world war ii, and ''men die,'' published in 1959, a moody, anguished story about military disorder and race relations on a caribbean island, ''put him up there with people of his generation like mailer, styron and matthiessen.''  the film may also be shown in britain; ms. humes is in discussions with both the bbc and channel 4. mr. humes, a child science prodigy and a dropout from the massachusetts institute of technology, is remembered in britain for cutting a self-destructive swath through the swinging london of friends like rosemary harris, jonathan miller and kenneth tynan. thanks to a recent grant from the new york state council on the arts, ms. humes is working on a longer version of the documentary for submission to film festivals, and with an eye to limited theatrical release.  the renewed attention to mr. humes is no doubt aided by the growing interest in american writing of the 1940s and '50s, and a better understanding of the mental instabilities that can stall a creative career. (mr. humes suffered from some of the same sort of manias that also afflicted john nash, the math genius chronicled in ''a beautiful mind.'') mr. humes, moreover, was the campaign manager on norman mailer's mayoral run in 1969, and present at the infamous party where mr. mailer stabbed his wife adele.  but also intriguing to many is the documentary's revelation of a c.i.a. connection to the history of the paris review. in the film, mr. matthiessen, best known as a novelist, environmental activist and advocate of american indian rights, admits publicly for the first time that he was a young c.i.a. recruit at the time he helped start the magazine, and used it as his cover.  ''immy cajoled me into talking about it,'' mr. matthiessen said.  mr. humes, who tussled with mr. matthiessen and mr. plimpton about this secret after mr. matthiessen confided in him in the mid-'60s, died in 1992 in st. rose's home, the new york city cancer hospice founded by nathaniel hawthorne's daughter. ms. humes found correspondence between the three co-founders about mr. matthiessen's clandestine affiliation in a suitcase of papers sent to mr. humes's wife and four daughters in new york after he had to be institutionalized in britain for several months after a psychotic break.  ''his novels are definitely the sort of thing i'm interested in,'' says robert weil, executive editor of w. w. norton. ''i love bringing back great writers.''  ms. humes has also talked with edwin frank, who runs nyrb classics, a publishing imprint of the new york review of books, which is edited by robert b. silvers, a former paris review editor and current board member of its foundation. mr. humes ''was a remarkable writer,'' mr. frank said.  ''and the books become a kind of new way to look at that entire era,'' he added.  another contender for reviving mr. humes's work is robert loomis, executive editor of random house and the original editor on ''men die,'' who said he had made a proposal to the house's paperback division.  some critics belonging to a younger generation have discerned in mr. humes's behavior and beliefs the seeds of the '60s and '70s counterculture. one, alan cheuse, also finds in mr. humes's writing early intimations of what he has called the ''paranoiac fiction'' of thomas pynchon.  upon returning to the united states in 1969, mr. humes, a free-speech militant who had participated in early ''beatnik'' demonstrations (as a 1961 daily mirror headline blared), developed a habit of taking up unofficial residence at colleges where his daughters were enrolled, including harvard and bennington. there, he became a disheveled ''hipster visionary neo-prophet'' -- a tag coined by mr. auster, a columbia student when he befriended mr. humes in the wake of a famous incident when doc decided to hand out money to passers-by at the university.  mr. humes developed a following of self-named ''docolytes,'' undergraduates who hung on his every word about politics, life, marijuana, cloud-shaped f.b.i. monitors and how he had single-handedly prevented world war iii.  mr. auster said mr. matthiessen's statements in the film about the c.i.a. ''blew me right out of my chair.''  ''i had no idea,'' he said. ''i found it, well, startling.''  on the other hand, philip gourevitch, who came to the paris review as editor in 2005, said mr. matthiessen's past ''was certainly not treated as a secret around the magazine.''  but the writer gail lumet buckley, who worked for the review in paris in the '50s and was close to mr. humes and anna lou, then his wife, back in new york, said: ''i never knew that. wow. and i knew him for a million years. he was a hero to me, an antihero hero.''  for a long time, it turns out, mr. humes worked on a third novel, which ms. humes discovered in his papers as well. the story of a scientist named dorsey slade, it was also ''science fiction about a character who becomes another character -- and about a writer going mad,'' she said. '' 'doc' was trying to write that while being aware that the same thing was happening to him.''  ms. humes said she would like to try to finish the novel for her father, using the notebook drafts and fragments that are left.  ''he was a utopianist, after all,'' she said. ''he was a paradox, a paranoid utopianist. he instilled great values in us. the problem is how to learn to live by them.''  correction:  january 31, 2007, wednesday  an article in the arts on jan. 13 about the writer harold l. humes misstated the time frame during which he served as campaign manager for norman mailer. he was the manager for mr. mailer's aborted campaign for mayor of new york in the early 1960s, not in 1969. (joe flaherty was the manager of the campaign in that year.)  