trade deficit drops for third consecutive month   american companies sold more goods like airplanes, cars and precious metals overseas in november, helping to narrow the trade deficit for a third consecutive month.  despite the improvement, the united states is still on track to end 2006 with a record trade imbalance, eclipsing the $716.7 billion deficit in 2005.  the census bureau reported yesterday that the trade deficit -- the amount by which the value of america's imports of goods and services exceeded the value of its exports -- fell to $58.2 billion in november, the smallest it has been since july 2005. in october, the deficit was $58.8 billion.  yesterday's figures surprised many economists, most of whom expected the deficit to widen. through november, the cumulative deficit for 2006 was $701.6 billion, well within reach of the previous record.  but some economists expect the trade outlook to improve this year as a weaker dollar combined with a slower domestic economy and stronger growth overseas help narrow the disparity between imports and exports.  ''the factors that are causing the improvement are really in the case of exports and the strengths of the economies abroad,'' said peter e. kretzmer, senior economist with the bank of america. ''japan continues to grow moderately, and emerging asia is growing at a good clip, led by china. then europe also continues to at least outperform expectations. when you put all of that together, that's a boost to u.s. exports.''  in november, exports grew to $124.8 billion, from $123.7 billion in october. the increase was fairly broad-based. exports of consumer goods like jewelry and sporting goods rose, as did exports of heavy duty goods like parts for commercial aircraft.  at the same time, imports are slowing. american businesses imported $183 billion worth of goods and services in november, up $500 million from october. that brought the three-month moving average for imports down to $184.3 billion, the lowest level since june.  the gap narrowed in november in part because americans bought fewer goods from china, one of the nation's main trading partners. the net deficit with china fell to $22.9 billion in november, down from $24.4 billion in october. also, the trade gap shrank because of the third monthly decline in petroleum imports, a factor that economists expect to help improve the trade gap this year if oil prices continue falling.  the chinese government reported its full-year trade figures yesterday as well, posting a record surplus of $177.5 billion with the world as a whole in 2006. china's exports, and its surplus, continue to grow rapidly; the 2006 surplus was 75 percent greater than 2005's. imbalanced trade with china has become an issue straining relations with the united states.  top american officials, including the treasury secretary, henry m. paulson jr., and the chairman of the federal reserve, ben s. bernanke, traveled to china last month to press for a shift in the country's trade and currency policies. china accounts for a larger portion of the deficit than any other country.  a reason that washington says that trade with china remains one-sided is the exchange rate. china keeps its currency, the yuan, loosely pegged to the dollar and the euro at a level that many economists say is undervalued, making its exports affordable and imported goods more expensive.  but economists expect chinese imports to have less appeal in the united states as a slowing housing market damps consumer appetites.  ''i imagine as u.s. domestic demand growth slows,'' said paul ashworth, senior united states economist with capital economics, ''the wider trade deficit with china will probably continue to grow, but probably at a slower pace.''  also yesterday, the commerce department reported that inventories at american wholesalers accumulated in november at the fastest pace in three months, a sign that imports could slow further.  surplus widens in canada  ottawa, jan. 10 (bloomberg news) -- canada's trade surplus widened more than expected in november to the largest since march, as exports of cars and energy products rebounded.  the surplus widened to 4.67 billion canadian dollars ($3.97 billion), from a revised 3.76 billion canadian dollars in october, statistics canada said. exports rose 2.8 percent, to 38.1 billion canadian dollars ($32.4 billion).  