rights group says conditions in china worsen as olympics near   human rights conditions in china deteriorated last year even as china sought to portray itself as an increasingly open, modern society ahead of the 2008 olympics, human rights watch said in a report on friday.  the government's promise to establish an impartial legal system remains unfulfilled, while at least 100 advocates of greater openness, including lawyers, writers, academics and grass-roots organizers, have faced prosecution, house arrest, beatings or other forms of harassment, the group said.  propaganda officials have also placed restrictions on domestic news media, while investing ever greater resources in censoring online information that the leadership deems harmful to political stability.  ''several high-profile, politically motivated prosecutions of lawyers and journalists in 2006 put an end to any hopes that president hu jintao would be a progressive reformer,'' the rights group, based in new york, said. ''domestic observers believe that these constraints will remain,'' at least through the olympics here.  beijing promised in its bid for the games that it would work to improve its human rights record. it also vowed to open its doors wider, allowing a freer flow of information into and out of the country.  china has fulfilled some aspects of that commitment. it announced new rules that would let reporters for foreign news media travel freely and interview people or companies without prior approval of local government authorities. but domestic critics say the space for them to express contrarian views, including online forums and web sites, has shrunk.  the foreign ministry lashed out at the report on thursday in advance of its official release.  ''regrettably, in spite of their observations, their eyesight has always had problems,'' said a spokesman, liu jianchao. ''maybe they are wearing tinted glasses, or only squinting.''  ''their reports always have a political objective, not a good-willed one, and their contents do not conform with reality,'' he added.  