one mother's sad mission, a state's shame   the question comes up nearly every time mariann hudak displays the plastic bag containing her daughter lori's effects. the coroner's office returned $6, a bracelet and a ring lori was wearing when a drunken friend crashed their car into a pole on post road in fairfield. mrs. hudak hears the question when, as a victim advocate for mothers against drunk driving, she shows convicted drunken drivers and ashen high school students the color photographs of 21-year-old lori dead in the mangled car.  always, someone asks, ''how can you do this?''  mrs. hudak will tell you, in her gentle voice, that all's fair -- if excruciating -- in war. and war it is: drunken drivers kill and maim fellow citizens here with stunning abandon. from 2003 to 2005, connecticut has made the ''fatal fifteen,'' a list of states with the highest percentages of alcohol-related deaths compiled by a physician-led group, the coalition to end needless death on our roadways.  in 2001, the year lori was killed, the percentage of road deaths deemed alcohol-related in the state was 44 percent. in 2005, the most recent year available, the percentage was the same. clearly, we are spinning our wheels.  what is our problem here in prosperous, educated cheever country? attorney general richard blumenthal say the state's record ''is a dismal one because we've become overly complacent.''  ''we made enormous progress for a while,'' he said. ''but there remain weaknesses in our laws, loopholes that enable drunk drivers to repeat their offenses. repeat offenders do the most carnage.''  connecticut courts can now require the installation of breath-activated ignition locks for repeat offenders, but judges seldom decide to order the locks. mr. blumenthal wants to make them mandatory. but he expects the same civil libertarian resistance he encountered in the 1980s, when the legislature debated lowering blood alcohol limits. he saw it again before the enactment of the state's ''party law,'' which fines residents who serve alcohol to minors in their homes. recalling a testy public debate in westport, mr. blumenthal said: ''many parents objected, saying they should be free to do whatever they want in their own home. well, not if you enable kids to drink too much, assault one another, drive drunk and kill each other.''  inalienable rights -- a venerable connecticut yankee mantra -- is a phrase that sgt. thomas mrozek of the fairfield police department has heard often in his 26 years arresting impaired drivers. now the department's d.u.i. specialist and trainer, and a former state officer of madd, he cites a recently arrested citizen -- resoundingly drunk, according to the breath-analyzing intoxilator -- who called the station repeatedly after his arrest, insisting that piloting 3,500 pounds of steel, in whatever condition, was his absolute right.  residents issued tickets for serving minors under the party law can be just as indignant. sergeant mrozek sees a frustrating disconnect: ''this is the generation of parents that won't let their kids skateboard or bike without pads and helmets. but they'll throw a party and supply a keg.''  sergeant mrozek has his own theory on the state's stalemate with drunken driving. ''it's because of judges and lawyers,'' he says flatly, ''and inadequate, confusing laws.'' to underscore his point, sergeant mrozek had me exhale into his intoxilator. i can attest that even with a certified 0.00 blood alcohol level, comprehending the version of miranda rights that is read to drunks, a dense paragraph bristling with tormented language and serpentine caveats, is a challenge. the accompanying paperwork bumps the average arrest-and-process time to three hours.  how would sergeant mrozek get more drunks off the road? ''i'd like to have a portable breath test on scene,'' he said. ''take a sample, have the car towed, say, 'here's your ticket, call a ride.' fifteen minutes, done.''  the state now has a single breath alcohol testing mobile, or bat mobile, deployed in the casino area. but few other municipalities will be able to ante up its $250,000 price tag.  for now, sergeant mrozek and mr. blumenthal take help where they can get it, working closely with madd. they say the group's purpose-driven outrage is getting results -- in the courtroom, where volunteers help shattered families through trials; in victim impact panels mandated for first-time offenders; and in a graphic, scared-straight education program, ''the hard truth,'' which is run in partnership with waterbury hospital and has been presented to 18,000 high school students. ''i've seen kids faint more than once,'' mr. blumenthal said. ''madd's victims, their pictures and life stories, puts a face on our awful statistics.''  the friend who caused lori hudak's death did jail time but has never apologized to the family. mrs. hudak says she understands. ''the lawyers just don't allow it,'' she says. and since shame is not a viable weapon, mrs. hudak is content to go with shock. week after week, she shows other people's children her baggie, which also contains a lock of lori's hair, and tells them, ''this is all i have.''  e-mail: conn@nytimes.com  