nelson gets wish and retires as a yankee   at 3:26 p.m. yesterday, the yankees sent out a news release welcoming back jeff nelson as a non-roster invitee to spring training. at 3:53, they sent another release announcing nelson's retirement.  those 27 minutes meant a lot to nelson, the colorful reliever whose wicked slider helped the yankees win four world series titles from 1996 through 2000. nelson spent 15 seasons in the majors and had three stints in seattle, where he lives. but he wanted to retire as a yankee.  ''you have memories from all the places that you've been,'' nelson said in a telephone interview. ''but new york is pretty much where i made a name for myself. those five years, from '96 to 2000, were really important to me and really important to the team, and the setup role seemed to get more important every year. i thought it would be a good gesture if i could go out as a yankee.''  nelson, 40, did not actually sign a final contract with the yankees; too much red tape, he said. but the yankees granted his wish to announce him as a member of their spring training roster, if only for a few minutes.  nelson came to the yankees from seattle after the 1995 season in the pivotal trade that also brought first baseman tino martinez. the yankees let him sign with seattle again after the 2000 world series, and they missed him until trading for him again in august 2003.  nelson pitched three times in the world series that year and made 55 postseason appearances over all, ranking second in history to mariano rivera. he pitched 798 games in the regular season, going 48-45 with 33 saves and a 3.41 earned run average, before his elbow finally gave out last june with the chicago white sox.  the slider made nelson's career, but the stress of throwing it took a toll. he had elbow surgery in 1999, 2002 and last season.  ''if it wasn't for some of the surgeries i had, i would have probably had 1,000 games,'' nelson said. ''that's the only thing i wish would have happened. that was probably all a result of the slider. i hope nobody else comes up with a slider like that, but if they do, good for them.''  nelson, who has been outspoken, said he will do radio work for kjr-am, the all-sports station in seattle. he is also talking with fox sports northwest about a job.  ''staying in the game is something i would like to do,'' he said. ''you play the game for 22 years, including the minor leagues, and it's a part of you.''  the yankees invited 20 other players to spring training, including todd pratt, who could compete for the backup catcher job. the yankees considered signing pratt last season, but he signed with atlanta and played in 62 games, batting .207.  pratt, who turns 40 next month, has 14 years of experience as a backup catcher, a role he filled for world series teams with the phillies in 1993 and the mets in 2000. other contenders for the backup job include wil nieves, raúl chávez and ben davis.  pÉrez signs with mets -- the left-hander oliver pérez and the mets agreed yesterday to a one-year contract worth $2,325,000. pérez, 25, was 1-3 with a 6.38 e.r.a. in seven regular-season starts with the mets after being acquired july 31 in a trade with pittsburgh. he was 3-13 with a 6.55 e.r.a. in 22 starts over all. pérez won game 4 of the national league championship series against st. louis. he started game 7, allowing one run and four hits over six innings. he left with the score tied, 1-1, but the mets went on to lose, 3-1. (ap)  players file for arbitration -- the batting champions joe mauer and freddy sanchez and the american league most valuable player, justin morneau, were among 106 players who filed for salary arbitration. florida's dontrelle willis and miguel cabrera also filed, as did joe crede of the white sox.  players and teams will swap proposed arbitration figures tuesday unless they reach agreements by then. hearings will be scheduled for next month. (ap)  around the league -- the pirates' chairman of the board, robert nutting, will replace kevin mcclatchy as the controlling owner. mcclatchy will remain the chief executive and retain control of the club's day-to-day operations, the two said.  the texas rangers paid an undisclosed amount of money to a woman whose nose was broken when reliever frank francisco threw a folding chair into the stands during a fracas between players and fans at the oakland coliseum two years ago.  colorado obtained the right-hander rodrigo lópez from baltimore for two minor league right-handers, jim miller and jason burch. (ap)  baseball  