the lives they lived   your yearly commemorative issue (dec. 31) teaches us much about the human condition. these poignant essays remind us that every life holds struggle and that there is no one path to achievement or happiness. kudos to each and every essayist for these beautiful tributes. you've shown us that no matter what our course, we all share one hell of a ride.  leslie j. miller  pittsburgh  i enjoyed michael kimmelman's essay on joseph j. schildkraut; it was succinct, yet gave a good sense of what was obviously a very remarkable man (''the creative mind reader'').  to bring the brain back into psychiatry after the specialty had wasted a full half-century chasing freud's subjective maunderings was no small chore.  it's interesting that at the same time that schildkraut saw the problem as an obviously skewed brain metabolism, he saw no contradiction in appreciating positive aspects of the skew. it is now apparent that the same brain that doomed so many artists to suicide or alcoholism produced so much of what we value. it goes beyond ''art.'' apart from the seminal contributions of the remarkably many manic-depressive scientists and businessmen and journalists, one might note that a number of our cardinal politicians (churchill, lincoln) had to fight off rather desperately what churchill called ''the black dog.''  lawrence kelly  ann arbor, mich.  as sarah corbett points out, anaïs nin was a bigamist, and her capacity to maintain two highly public relationships at once is a testament not only to how disturbed she was but also to how emotionally disconnected and masochistic her two husbands were (''the lover who always stays''). corbett's depiction of nin's west coast husband, rupert pole, leaves readers with the impression that pole was simply loving and loyal, and nin dramatic and driven to maintain her deceits from the force of her passion for these two men. a truth having more to do with the pathology and suffering of these three people than with their transcendent love is obviously less interesting to those determined to idealize anaïs nin.  michael bader  san francisco  i was very pleased to see hakim taniwal profiled by barry bearak ('' 'so we will talk' ''). all too often the efforts of patriotic local leaders in places like afghanistan go unnoticed by the international media. i had the privilege of working closely with taniwal in 2005 while i was serving as the u.s. military commander in afghanistan's paktia province. during this time i came to admire him as a principled leader whose often-stated goal was to rid afghanistan of its ''kalashnikov culture.'' sadly, hakim taniwal lost his life in the pursuit of a more peaceful and prosperous afghanistan. in a statement eulogizing him, hamid karzai, the afghan president, declared that ''the enemies of afghanistan must understand that we have millions of people like mr. taniwal who will continue to serve this great nation.'' for afghanistan's sake, we can only hope this is true.  brendan j. o'shea  lieutenant colonel  united states army reserve  fort dix, n.j.  thank you for essays recalling the accomplishments of those, especially women, long absent from the public eye. as a 53-year-old would-be ''physical culturist,'' i'll be keeping the photo of abbye stockton with my weight-training logs for inspiration (''the belle of the barbell,'' elizabeth mccracken). and the tribute to marie tharp reveals as much about the need for persistence and diligence in fighting conventional wisdom as her drawings reveal about the structure of the earth (''the contrary map maker,'' stephen s. hall).  these essays have opened my eyes to the possibilities that surround us in everyday life.  rebecca kurland  oakland, calif.  the glenn ford essay by anthony giardina was woefully incomplete (''the (im)perfect 50s couple''). ford was a decorated veteran of both world war ii and the vietnam war. instead, we were offered a spurious profile of his movie career, linking his screen persona to that of june allyson. he deserved much better. but i guess the magazine has its priorities: andrew martinez, the student who strolled the berkeley campus naked for years and later committed suicide, merited a lengthy, fawning profile (''the naked guy,'' jason zengerle).  malcolm mackinnon  woodside, n.y.  your lives issue is a terrific idea and good reading, but giardina's short article on june allyson missed the mark by ignoring her broadway beginnings and musical comedies like ''good news'' in the early hollywood years.  jane hobson  new orleans  it seems curiously selective to discuss pierre vidal-naquet's writings on anti-semitism at such length without mentioning the courageous positions he took on israel and the middle east (''denying the deniers,'' paul berman). after the 1967 arab-israeli war, vidal-naquet emerged as one of the leading french critics of the israeli occupation, insisted that the jewish state would never enjoy peace unless the palestinian people had a state of their own, befriended arab progressives in paris and made no secret of his disdain for the organized french jewish community, with its growing chauvinism and its tendency to smear any criticism of israeli policy as anti-semitic. when i met him in paris, he told me, with a mixture of irony, sorrow and pride, that years after exposing the lies of the revisionists, he was now being ostracized by some french jews for his commitment to a just peace, while palestine's longstanding ambassador to paris, leila shahid, a passionate critic of anti-semitism in the arab world, was organizing a dinner in his honor.  adam shatz  literary editor  the nation  new york  shortly after steve howe's death, the dodgers held a celebration of their 1981 world championship, and howe's son and daughter wore their father's jersey as they appeared on the field with his former teammates (''saving games, losing himself,'' michael sokolove). one can only glean from that what sort of father steve howe managed to be despite his addiction.  lee ann rodgers  fairfield, conn.  thank you for the remembrance of my godmother, victoria jackson gray adams (''party crasher,'' jack hitt). i console myself with the idea that we have only truly lost her -- or any of ''the movement folk'' -- if we fail to carry on her model of activism: faith and discipline, in equal parts.  julie victoria guyot  washington  