nazi u-boat imperils norwegians decades after the war   world war ii was edging to a close as kristoffer karlsen peered from this rocky outcrop off norway's coast and saw what he took to be a huge explosion some way out to sea.  twelve years old at the time, he could hardly have realized that he had witnessed a remarkable moment revealing something of hitler's intentions toward america in the closing stages of the war and presaging a potential ecological disaster 61 years later.  ''i knew it was a submarine,'' said mr. karlsen, 73, a retired ship's pilot, gesturing across the choppy gray expanse of the north sea toward the site of the blast on feb. 9, 1945. on that day, he said in an interview, he was out gathering peat with his grandmother on fedje (pronounced fey-yeh), an island that was then, like the rest of norway, under nazi occupation.  ''it was a big explosion,'' he said, ''but soon after it was calm and there was nothing to see. but in the german garrison there was a lot of activity.''  that is hardly surprising. the plume of water and debris, rising 200 feet into the air, was a result of a torpedo fired from a prowling british submarine, the venturer, that struck the 287-foot german u-boat u-864 amidships at the very start of a clandestine voyage to japan.  as the german vessel sank in two parts in water more than 400 feet deep, it took with it not only 73 crew members and other personnel but also an estimated 65 tons of mercury for the japanese munitions industry and, according to some historical accounts, a newly developed german jet fighter engine, technology supposed to give the axis powers an edge in the closing stages of the war.  much later there were even rumors -- and they remained just that -- that the vessel was carrying fabled nazi gold, or even hitler's last will and testament.  in 2005 a study published in britain by the naval historian mark felton said there had been a longstanding submarine trade between japan and germany in aircraft, missile parts and even information related to the development of an atomic bomb.  ''the idea was to keep the americans tied down in the east'' to draw forces away from the campaign in europe, said eric grove, a british naval historian at the university of salford in northwest england. ''hitler was getting increasingly desperate.''  the long saga of u-864 is far from over. many of the canisters containing the liquid mercury are now corroding. small amounts have seeped out, and norwegian government tests around the wreck have detected slightly raised amounts of the metal in crabs and fish -- the country's second biggest export, after oil and gas.  indeed, kristian hall, an environmental consultant with a norwegian engineering firm, said the corroding canisters could produce a threat comparable to the disaster at minamata, japan, where some 27 tons of industrial mercury compounds were released into a bay between 1932 and 1968, causing nerve and brain damage to hundreds of townspeople whose diet consisted in large part of local seafood.  ''if it is not taken care of properly it could develop into a catastrophe, with corroding canisters beginning to fail one after the other,'' mr. hall said in an interview.  last month the norwegian authorities proposed entombing the submarine in a watery sarcophagus, as has been done elsewhere with underwater hazards.  but lisbeth stuberg, an environmental protection officer who is one of the 630 year-round residents here, says many islanders want the wreck removed altogether and are planning a torchlight procession on thursday to protest the government plan.  ''there are so many questions and no answers,'' mrs. stuberg said in an interview on this damp outpost north of bergen, where the local newspaper has taken to printing a front-page tally of consecutive days of rain (73 by monday). ''if you cover it you do not know the consequences. you are only postponing the problem.''  while islanders like mr. karlsen knew all along where the wreck lay, the national authorities seem to have paid it little immediate heed. only in 2003 did the norwegian navy pin down its precise coordinates.  officials say they believe that up to a third of the 1,857 flasks of mercury stowed along the keel of the submarine now lie strewn over the seabed, many of them buried in mud, their condition unknown. but cleaning up the mess is a tricky matter.  ''you can't just go down and pick up the wreck with all the mercury and deposit it safely ashore,'' said gunnar gjellan, a senior official in norway's coastal administration. ''at least 20 to 30 percent of the mercury would remain on the bottom regardless.''  in an interview at the coastal administration's headquarters in horten, in southern norway, mr. gjellan said other options, like raising the wreck or removing the mercury using a remote-controlled mini-sub, would be too risky and could simply spread the contamination.  the plan, thus, is to pour up to 300,000 tons of sand down a long vertical chute to create an irregularly shaped burial mound. the mound would rise 36 feet above the sea floor, enough to cover the highest points of the wrecked vessel. the sand would then be covered by a two-foot-thick layer of rocks to prevent erosion.  ''there is nothing temporary about such a solution,'' mr. gjellan said. ''we have been told it would last forever, with zero leakage.''  ane eide kjaeraas, another official of the coastal administration, said the authorities had some sympathy with the islanders' desire to remove the wreck completely. ''but encapsulation is actually the best way to secure those things, even if lifting the vessel might seem better from a psychological or emotional point of view.''  fedje journal  