fun with studio crafts: when the traditional gets quirky   who but the california funk ceramicist robert arneson (1930-92) could turn the mother of the 16th-century painter and printmaker albrecht dürer from a figure of pathos into a witty incarnation of worldly wisdom? his satirical take on the dour 1514 drawing by dürer is but one of the quirky, provocative, funny and sometimes gorgeous things to be found in ''one of a kind: the studio craft movement,'' at the metropolitan museum of art.  studio craft refers to the post-world war ii development of artist-craftspeople who not only conceive and design their own objects but have a direct hand in making them. ruth duckworth, wharton esherick, sheila hicks, harvey k. littleton, sam maloof, ron nagle, magdalene odundo, albert paley, ken price and peter voulkos are among those whose work appears here. the show, the first in some time of the met's periodic contemporary design exhibitions devoted to the studio crafts movement, is intended to reveal the breadth of the museum's collection in the field.  jane adlin, associate curator in the met's 19th-century, modern and contemporary art department, has chosen about 50 pieces of furniture, glass, ceramics, metalwork, jewelry and fiber from the museum's collection, which includes mr. arneson's 1979 bust of glazed earthenware, ''mother dürer.'' it presents dürer's mother as a sharp-nosed, world-weary german frau looking wryly out at life from under a decorous wimple.  mr. arneson is not the show's only humorist. john cederquist, who has his way with wood, weighs in with ''little wave'' (1990-91), an elegant cabinet concealed behind a trompe l'oeil door painted and veneered to look like a battered wooden packing case with a rowdy wave tearing through it. the wave is a sendup of the one familiar from hokusai's ''thirty-six views of mt. fuji.'' richard marquis's ''american acid capsule with cloth container'' (1969-70), a blown-up, capsule-style pill made from red, white and blue leftovers at a murano glass factory, plays sardonically off vietnam-era political issues like free speech, flag burning and antiwar protests.  while gravitating toward abstract and sculptural art, the studio craft movement has developed ways of working with nontraditional methods and materials, including some once available only for factory use. electroforming, for example, an industrial process that deposits metals on other materials by means of a solution that conducts electricity, is now used in studio settings to produce effects not always achievable by traditional means. michael glancy's ''melding impetus'' (1994), for example, uses this process to fuse copper and gold leaf with blown and industrial plate glass, creating a free-form pattern of gold and copper on an elegant vase of pinkish and colorless transparency, as well as the two pieces of plate glass it sits on.  glass is one of the most interesting and versatile materials in contemporary studio crafts. its use has been much extended since mr. littleton, a founder of the studio glass movement, began in the early 1960s to explore the possibilities of hot glassmaking in a studio rather than a factory. he is represented here by ''amber crested form'' (1976), created by placing a big blob of hot, transparent glass on an assemblage that included a hollow tube. he used gravity and the tension created by cooling glass to manipulate the piece into a dolphinlike shape.  on a quite different wavelength is ''suspended artifact'' (1993), another glass work by a younger practitioner, william morris. known for his series of glass art shaped like bones and other artifacts, mr. morris here has vertically pinioned a tusk-shaped piece of glass to a glass vessel, using a glass rod that runs through both the tusk and the vessel's handles. black silhouetted figures, presumably inspired by prehistoric wall drawings, appear on the vessel's sides. it's a studio production that almost looks like an ancient artifact.  the show also includes tapestries with new and clever variations on an ancient form. inspired by the sight of snow piled high on the roofs of houses in normandy, ms. hicks's ''linen lean-to'' (1967-68) is a wall hanging in bold relief, in which overlapping thick tassels made from bleached linen thread create the effect of a thick carpet of the white stuff.  olga de amaral's ''umbra 30'' (2003) combines linen with silver leaf and paint in a woven wall of deep blue and silver strips that evoke the rivers and waterfalls of her native colombia. and in jon eric riis's ''kiss the prince,'' a fetching bolero-style jacket woven of silk and metallic threads is patterned with circles of varying sizes made of tiny seed pearl and coral beads. against this background large green frogs appear, swimming vainly toward the neck of the garment, which may have been designed for a princess.  joan livingstone's ''spine'' (1995), another three-dimensional fiber piece, is composed of handmade felt stiffened with resin and sewn with suture thread. knotted and pulled lengthwise, the piece (it is hung horizontally) could almost be taken for a tense human backbone, albeit one on steroids.  traditionalists have their place in this show as well. esherick (1887-1970), a studio craft pioneer, is represented by ''music stand'' (1962), an elegantly simple frame of cherry wood crossbars supported on three curving legs. mr. maloof's ''settee #3/87'' (1987), in richly grained tiger maple and ebony, has a classic plain shape, with slight tweaking of the double chair as stripped down by shaker furnituremakers.  the master of metal work, mr. paley, appears here in top form with ''push plate'' (1981), a dashing belle Époque-style revolving door attachment in cast bronze, part of an elaborate design for the interior of a southern restaurant.  attention must also be paid to the seemingly old-fashioned work of bonnie seeman, whose dainty ceramic ''coffeepot and tray'' (2003), with its mock cabbage leaves and rhubarb stalks, evokes the genteel tradition of 18th-century british and continental china. its shape also suggests the head, shoulders and bodice of a neatly dressed victorian lady. but with a closer look the vegetation can be read as human tissue, with the rhubarb stalks cut to resemble spongy bone ends and seeds evoking red blood cells, giving it a modern touch of the macabre.  all told, this comes off as one of the liveliest shows of this field that the met has put up in recent years.  ''one of a kind: the studio craft movement'' continues through sept. 3 at the metropolitan museum of art, (212) 570-3949 or metmuseum.org.  art review  