group weighs rival bid for equity office reit   a consortium of investors is considering making an offer worth more than $38 billion for equity office properties trust, the real estate investment trust that is controlled by samuel zell, people involved in the discussions said last night.  the investors, which include cerberus capital management, starwood capital and walton street capital, have talked among themselves about preparing a bid, these people said. if the group bids for equity office, the nation's largest owner and manager of office buildings, it would seek to top a deal reached in november to sell the company to the blackstone group for $36 billion.  while people involved said last night that executives were interested in making a offer, it remained possible that the group could decide against such an bid.  spokesmen for cerberus and barry sternlicht of starwood capital declined to comment. a spokesman for neil bluhm of walton street capital could not be reached.  an offer by the consortium could result in a bidding war for equity office, pitting two of the most powerful financial firms in the nation against each other for a deal that would be the largest leveraged buyout in history, surpassing the $33 billion that a consortium of private equity groups paid for the health care company hca inc. in august.  a bid by the consortium would also be one of the first instances of a private equity firm's trying to top another firm's deal after an agreement had been struck.  when blackstone reached its deal with equity office, the purchase price -- $48.50 a share -- was instantly derided by some shareholders as too low. james s. corl, the chief investment officer for the real estate firm cohen & steers, the largest shareholder in equity office, criticized the deal publicly and suggested that another bidder should emerge.  under the terms of equity office's agreement with blackstone, equity office can consider offers from rival bidders. a shareholder vote on that deal is scheduled for feb. 5. if the consortium were to top blackstone's offer, blackstone would be entitled to a breakup fee of $200 million. blackstone also has the right to match any rival offer.  speculation about a rival offer has been increasing in recent weeks. yesterday, jonathan litt, an analyst at citigroup, wrote in a note to investors that he expected a ''topping bid'' of $50 to $52 a share.  shares of equity office closed at $48.75, above blackstone's offer, in anticipation of another bid.  