on middle-class streets, a mansion without the 'mc'   on a hill in little neck, queens, next to an aging split-level house the color of spicy mustard, a brand-new beige palace holds court, a major-league manor among the neighborhood's mcmansions. the seller is well known to some: he is edgardo alfonzo, onetime star of the hometown mets.  but the owner's identity is not the only notable aspect of the place. for baseball fans and nonbaseball fans alike, equally striking is the price, $6.5 million, a sum rarely encountered in this part of northeast queens.  there is certainly a lot of house on the lot, at 53-27 254th street. in the basement, in met colors of blue and orange, there is a batting cage, which is just off the home theater and down the hall from the pink marble spa and the full-service exercise room. there are five large bedrooms and six bathrooms, one in sparkling white and gold onyx. and outside there are a swimming pool, a hot tub and several expansive limestone terraces.  ''i've been telling my friends who live in brooklyn about it,'' said susan seinfeld, district manager for community board 11.  mr. alfonzo bought the property when he was still with the mets, for whom he played until 2002, but he never lived in the house. after stops with other teams, mr. alfonzo signed a minor-league contract with the mets last july; he was never called up. this winter he has been playing in venezuela, according to his real estate broker in queens.  ''some were saying another baseball player could buy it -- it's an easy trip to shea stadium,'' ms. seinfeld said, citing the reason that mr. alfonzo himself decided to live in the neighborhood. she added, ''i had said the mayor could spend the money, as his suburban retreat here.''  in terms of real estate in the neighborhoods of little neck and nearby douglaston and bayside, the house is by far a record-breaker. rod o'connell, broker and owner of bryce rea associates, a local firm, said he had not heard of so high an asking price, not even among the old mansions along little neck bay in douglaston.  ''there's a number of houses in the two-millions, but i don't know of anything more expensive than that,'' mr. o'connell said. ''i wish them luck. i mean, after all, if they succeed, we all succeed.'' the closest homes of any comparable price are on the north shore of long island, mr. o'connell said.  when the house went on the market in november, its broker, peggy moriarty of daniel gale sotheby's international realty, received 15 inquiries a week, she said. now there are fewer, ms. moriarty said, but there are some interested buyers.  they may be getting more interested; the price was reduced to $6.5 million from $8 million just last thursday.  according to ms. moriarty, all that the alfonzo family wanted to say was that ''they had such a great time building this house'' and that their designer ''introduced them to so many incredible building materials.''  whatever the sale prospects, mario ferazzoli, a local real estate lawyer whose aunt lives a block from the alfonzo estate, has warm feelings about the place. ''it's good,'' he said, ''that someone comes and invests money and improves the neighborhood.''  jeff vandam  neighborhood report: little neck  