brodeur wins battle of goalies   devils goaltender martin brodeur has seen almost everything, but the 856th game of his n.h.l. career was different. on saturday night, he could not recall allowing a game-tying goal with seven-tenths of a second left in regulation.  the devils wound up beating the islanders, 2-1, when center scott gomez knocked a shot past islanders goaltender rick dipietro with 1 minute 20 seconds remaining in overtime. the devils' captain, patrik elias, set up the play, intercepting the puck and slipping a pass to gomez.  it was a gorgeous goal, but it was not the most memorable one in a tense, thrilling duel between brodeur and dipietro. with dipietro on the bench and the devils' brian rafalski in the penalty box in the final moments of regulation, islanders right wing miroslav satan scored to force overtime.  the sellout crowd of 16,234 at nassau coliseum roared. brodeur lost what would have been his 8th shutout of the season and 88th of his career. he remembered allowing a similar goal at montreal early in his career, but that was with two or three seconds left.  ''i don't think they had tenths of a second on the clock then,'' brodeur said, smiling.  he could smile because the devils (27-14-4) rescued him. john madden, who scored what seemed to be the winning goal with 1:18 left in regulation, said the devils chose to shrug off satan's goal and play on.  ''i really like that about this team,'' he said. ''nothing was said. we were ready to play overtime.''  in overtime, each team has four skaters, instead of the usual five, allowing elias's creativity to become even more apparent. with elias and gomez forechecking fiercely, elias guessed where the puck might be going. it ended up on his stick.  ''i really had nothing to shoot at, and i didn't see anything there,'' elias said. ''scotty got open, and it worked out.''  elias tapped a short pass to gomez, who rapped in his eighth goal of the season, and his second in two nights.  the devils have won three straight against the islanders (21-19-4), all in the last two weeks. saturday's game had the feel of a playoff game, especially because the goalies stopped almost everything, sometimes acrobatically. brodeur finished with 27 saves and dipietro made 28.  ''it was just kind of playing chess,'' islanders coach ted nolan said.  late in regulation, madden took a drop pass from sergei brylin and fired a shot over dipietro's glove that hit the top left corner of the net.  ''i just don't think he saw the shot,'' madden said.  midway through the third period, brodeur tried leaping to snare a sailing puck before satan got to it, but was knocked down instead. play continued, and brodeur made a sprawling pad save to keep the islanders from scoring.  but with less than a second left, brodeur did not move his left leg fast enough to stop a shot by satan. the devils knew better than to lose faith in him. ''you got the best goaltender in the world,'' gomez said, ''so we thought, 'let's win it in overtime.' ''  hockey  