mets say mota saga is a thing of the past   an assortment of mets players and front-office officials were on hand thursday in the dominican republic, as the organization presented a $25,000 donation to esperanza international, which assists families in starting small businesses.  general manager omar minaya was present, as was the team's executive vice president, jeff wilpon. six players -- david wright, moises alou, julio franco, anderson hernández, alay soler and ambiorix burgos -- were also in attendance. not present was the reliever guillermo mota, who lives in the dominican republic, and whom the organization indicated earlier this week would be part of the event.  mota was suspended nov. 1 for the first 50 games of the coming season for testing positive for a performance-enhancing drug. he apologized in a public statement in which he said he had used ''extremely poor judgment.''  five weeks later, the mets signed mota to a two-year contract worth $5 million, with minaya issuing a statement that said mota had handled himself in a ''stand-up manner'' by taking responsibility for his actions.  under the terms of his suspension, mota is allowed to participate in spring training with the mets and to pitch in exhibition games. he is also allowed to take part in public events representing the team. wilpon said wednesday that he would have no problem with mota's serving as one of the faces of the mets while he is suspended.  ''omar and his staff made that decision a long time ago that we wouldn't have signed him if we were worried about that stuff,'' wilpon said. ''he apologized, he was sincere about his apology and we are moving on.''  wilpon said wednesday that he did not know if mota would be part of thursday's event in santo domingo, ''but if he is, that is great. if not, he is fine.''  ''if he wants to be charitable, that is terrific,'' wilpon added.  jay horwitz, a mets spokesman, said mota did not attend the event because he had another engagement and not because the team had had a change of heart.  mota was acquired from the cleveland indians at the end of august and immediately turned his season around. with the mets, he went 4-0 with a 2.39 earned run average in 25 appearances, and was used heavily in the national league playoffs. when he returns, mota is likely to play a key role in the mets' bullpen.  slow going on randolph talks -- significant differences still appear to remain over the terms of a contract extension for manager willie randolph.  randolph is going into the last year of a three-year deal worth $1.8 million -- a relatively modest sum in today's market -- and he and omar minaya have stated that they would like to get an extension worked out before spring training. still, with a little more than a month before pitchers and catchers are set to arrive here, a deal has not been worked out. on thursday, randolph said that he did not want to discuss the matter. ''we are still talking and that is it,'' he said. ''it is a private issue.''  randolph was more candid about the left-handed reliever scott schoeneweis, whom the mets are about to sign to a three-year deal.  ''i remember schoeneweis as more of a starter and i always liked his stuff,'' randolph said. ''there is a transition he has made, to being a reliever, pretty well.''  maine defends lo duca -- a day after pitcher john thomson said in a conference call that he chose to sign with toronto instead of the mets partly because of the questionable catching style of paul lo duca, john maine defended lo duca, saying that he was one of the best catchers he has ever worked with.  ''he is known as a hitter because he hits .320 every season, but he is great to throw to,'' maine said. ''he knew the hitters and knew my strengths and called to my strengths.  ''he hasn't thrown to him,'' maine said of thomson. ''i don't know why he would say that.''  maine, who was obtained from baltimore before the 2006 season, was a pleasant surprise last season, going 6-5 in the regular season with a 3.60 e.r.a. and winning game 6 of the national league championship series against st. louis. he is seen as a strong candidate for one of the openings on the starting staff this season.  baseball  