the nation: a few regrets; the goal: admitting failure, without being a failure   president bush's speech wednesday night had to strike a perfect pitch. he had to defend the war that will define his legacy while admitting to enough error to regain credibility with the public. consequently, commentators are still trying to figure out whether he conceded mistakes, showed regret or intends to change course at all.  in this respect, mr. bush's speech follows in that great american oratorical tradition: the presidential mea culpa.  figuring out how to acknowledge failure without seeming like a failure is a time-honored occupational hazard of politics. but not until the 20th century did presidents govern mainly by mobilizing public opinion through rhetoric, and only with the rise of broadcasting did the celebrated ''televised speech to the nation'' become a staple of white house damage control.  while these confessions may work in the short term, they rarely work long-term magic. that typically requires a new course of action.  ronald reagan, for example, gave a relatively tepid mea culpa in addressing a senate commission's findings that he hadn't leveled with the public in the iran-contra scandal.  ''a few months ago i told the american people i did not trade arms for hostages,'' he said in march 1987. ''my heart and my best intentions still tell me that's true, but the facts and the evidence tell me it is not.''  but president reagan won praise for taking responsibility, and, more critically, for committing to an overhaul of white house personnel and policy. he renounced the covert wrongdoings of his former aides and eventually struck a landmark arms-control treaty with the soviet union.  another buck-stops-here performance was john f. kennedy's press conference after the bay of pigs, when american-backed cuban rebels were routed in a bid to overthrow fidel castro.  ''victory has a hundred fathers, but defeat is an orphan,'' president kennedy said, concluding, ''i am the responsible officer of the government.''  his popularity soared. over time, what sealed his reputation was his later calls for a re-evaluation of the cold war and for a nuclear test-ban treaty. other presidents have failed to capitalize on their dramatic speeches. in march 1968, lyndon johnson called a halt to bombing in vietnam and ended his re-election bid, while vowing to redouble his efforts to achieve peace. but the goodwill faded as he kept the democratic presidential nominee, vice president hubert humphrey, tethered to a failed strategy until it was too late.  similarly, in 1992, president george h. w. bush gained little benefit from his 1992 apology for breaking his no-new-taxes pledge. ''i did it, and i regret it and i regret it,'' he told a newspaper, as he tried to fend off a challenge from pat buchanan in the republican primaries. but mr. bush's many reversals -- vowing no new taxes, raising them, then recanting -- only made him seem fickle and opportunistic, alienating both left and right.  most tellingly, the master of the confession, richard nixon, tried in april 1973 to stanch the hemorrhaging from the watergate scandal by unloading three of his top aides and declaring a fresh start.  ''i was determined that we should get to the bottom of the matter, and that the truth should be fully brought out -- no matter who was involved,'' he said. that turned out to be a lie, and he lost his credibility all over again.  sometimes, if the public supports a president, he doesn't need to change course at all. when president bill clinton acknowledged in august 1998 that he misrepresented his relationship with monica lewinsky, washington pundits said his speech was a disaster. but it turned out that most of the public considered mr. clinton's initial show of remorse sufficient and thought the impeachment drive should end. his administration remained popular, while displeasure with the news media rose.  of course, some presidents simply acted as if no apology were needed. dwight eisenhower refused to admit he'd erred after his administration lied about a u-2 spy plane shot down over the soviet union. he withstood sharp criticism and the unraveling of a planned soviet summit. .  ''these activities have their own rules and methods of concealment, which seek to mislead and obscure,'' president eisenhower said at a press conference on may 11, 1960. that the most prominent figure pressing for an apology was the soviet leader nikita khrushchev certainly made life easier.  throughout his presidency, mr. bush has been faulted for being too stubborn and unwilling to change, admit error or say he's sorry. but owning up to blunders is not always a ticket to forgiveness.  after president clinton apologized on his 1998 trip to africa for the american role in the slave trade and for his administration's passivity during the rwandan genocide, his habit of contrition became a running joke. so much so that at the white house correspondents' dinner that spring, he delivered deadpan apologies for disco, pineapple on pizza and the susan b. anthony dollar.  ''it did look too much like a quarter,'' mr. clinton admitted. ''and that was wrong.''  a few regrets david greenberg, a history and journalism professor at rutgers university, is the author of ''nixon's shadow: the history of an image'' and ''calvin coolidge.''  