bookshelf   moon plane. written and illustrated by peter mccarty. holt. $16.95. (ages 3 to 6) a silver plane flying overhead becomes a flight of fancy for a little boy standing in a field. ''he wonders what it would be like to be on that flight. ... to travel farther than a boat sailing on the ocean.'' mccarty's ghostly gray pencil suggests the fog of a dream, as the plane lands on the moon and the boy bounces into the sky, suddenly an astronaut. sure enough, the tale ends with the covers pulled up and a ''dream of airplanes flying high into the sky.'' a minimal story, but satisfying for those who love big machines, the moon and all things about flight.  library lion. by michelle knudsen. illustrated by kevin hawkes. candlewick. $15.99. (ages 4 to 7) when a lion shows up at her library, the head librarian, miss merriweather -- who is ''very particular about rule breaking'' -- allows him to stay for story hour, then gradually, to make himself useful, dusting encyclopedias with his tail and licking envelopes for overdue notices. as long as he doesn't roar. but after a minor accident, the lion has to use his natural talent to help, even if it gets him in trouble. fans of ''danny and the dinosaur'' should especially like this story, which proves that every now and then you have to break the rules.  if it weren't for you. by charlotte zolotow. illustrated by g. brian karas. harpercollins. $15.99. (ages 3 to 8) an uncommonly honest look at sibling rivalry, evoking just how superfluous a younger sibling can seem to the firstborn. though karas's playful drawings lighten things up, zolotow's text (originally published in 1966) is stern: ''if it weren't for you, i'd be the only child and i'd get all the presents. i could have the whole last slice of cake and the biggest piece of candy in the box. . . . if it weren't for you, i could have a room of my own.'' the older sister, an aggrieved-looking 9- or 10-year-old, can think of only one bright spot: ''i'd have to be alone with the grown-ups if it weren't for you.'' still a good book for an older brother or sister who needs an understanding ear, though it may suggest grievances he or she had never even thought of.  welcome, precious. by nikki grimes. illustrated by bryan collier. orchard/scholastic. $16.99. (ages 0 to 3) a celebration of enduring familial love with images of a rural landscape, a sky-blue room (a rainbow enters in 3-d) and two adoring parents and their new baby. grimes's text is sweet and tactile (''welcome to rain-swept earth and spiced cider on the wind''), while collier's watercolor-and-collage illustrations are almost photographic in depicting a family portrait that is as endearing as it is joyful.  ms. rubinstein's beauty. written and illustrated by pep montserrat. sterling. $14.95. (ages 5 and up) ''ms. rubinstein is a beautiful woman. but nobody knows it. ms. rubinstein has very beautiful eyes. but nobody sees them'' -- because ms. rubinstein is the bearded lady at the circus. on her day off she sits lonely on a park bench feeding the pigeons, her pretty hands moving ''harmoniously and delicately.'' only mr. pavlov, from another visiting circus -- he seems to have a striped trunk -- can see her for who she truly is, leading to a charming lesson in looking beneath surfaces. montserrat's stark black, red and white illustrations and witty text make for a simple but entertaining fable.  monday. written and illustrated by anne herbauts. enchanted lion books. $16.95. (ages 4 to 8) a picture book that makes mysterious poetry out of the days of the week and seasons of the year. ''i am spring. i am green, i abound. into the wind i put its rustling sound,'' says an animated cloud. most young readers probably won't make heads or tails of the surreal setting, in which  lester day and tom morrow wait  in vain at their grand piano for  monday to appear (he's blank with snow in the background -- the only clue being the stippled page),  but they may find the moody, beautifully composed illustrations mesmerizing.  julie just  