senator dodd may be joining democratic race for president   senator christopher j. dodd, democrat of connecticut, is to announce on thursday morning that he is running for president, some of his friends say.  he plans to outline his intentions on don imus's nationally syndicated radio and cable television shows, followed by a series of media interviews, they say.  mr. dodd was set to file paperwork with the federal election commission this week establishing a campaign committee, his friends said, which would allow him to raise money to compete in what is expected to be a crowded primary field.  beneva schulte, a spokeswoman for mr. dodd, would not comment on his plans wednesday evening.  coverage of mr. dodd's announcement would be competing with that of president bush's wednesday night speech on iraq.  mr. dodd, although well-known in washington and his home state, does not have the kind of national name recognition of some other democrats who are strongly considering entering the race, most prominently senators hillary rodham clinton of new york and barack obama of illinois.  john edwards, the former senator from north carolina and vice-presidential nominee, has spent the last two years building support for his bid and is widely viewed as a strong candidate. and senator joseph r. biden jr. of delaware, representative dennis j. kucinich of ohio and gov. tom vilsack of iowa have announced their candidacies. senator john kerry of massachusetts, the party's candidate in 2004, is also considering joining the race.  mr. dodd, 62, who is serving his fifth term in the senate, is chairman of the banking committee and has spent much of the past several months shoring up support in states with early primaries, like new hampshire, iowa and south carolina. from 1995 to 1997, he served as the general chairman of the democratic party, which could prove helpful in fund-raising.  some of the most recent presidential polls have left mr. dodd off the list, but his supporters say that his experience in the senate could be a boost and that his personality would be an asset.  mr. dodd, who is also a senior member of the senate foreign relations committee, has become a vocal critic of the war in iraq, saying that his vote to authorize military action in 2002 was a mistake.  he was one of the leading opponents of the appointment of john r. bolton as ambassador to the united nations.  the 110th congress  