what's on tonight   8 p.m. (bravo) moving image salutes will smith -- he started as a rapper before moving on to television in the ''fresh prince of bel-air,'' but it wasn't until his role as a con artist who infiltrated new york society in ''six degrees of separation'' that mr. smith really showed off his acting chops. since then he has starred in blockbusters like ''independence day,'' ''hitch,'' ''men in black,'' ''ali'' and his most recent hit, ''the pursuit of happyness.'' tonight, mr. smith follows in the footsteps of sidney poitier, robert de niro, al pacino, steven spielberg, robin williams and martin scorsese in this tribute from the american museum of the moving image. presenters include mr. smith's wife, jada pinkett smith (above, with mr. smith and their son jaden); jamie foxx, terrence howard and queen latifah. the rapper mos def closes the show.  8 p.m. (disney) jump in! -- a promising young brooklyn boxer (corbin bleu) learns some new moves when he joins a girls jumprope team, led by his neighbor mary (keke palmer, above, with mr. bleu), to compete in a citywide double-dutch tournament. but will he survive the ridicule of his peers and the disappointment of his father to follow his heart -- and his feet?  8 p.m. (cmt) cowboy u -- eight city slickers strap on their spurs for a new season of cowboy boot camp in the rocky mountains of colorado. rocco wachman and judd leffew, professional cowboys, try to break in the greenhorns in a series of contests, from putting panties on an ornery calf to bull riding. only the strongest (and presumably most lingerie-savvy) takes home a cash prize.  9:30 p.m. (disney) cory in the house -- hail to the chef! in this, the disney channel's first series spin-off, cory and victor baxter (kyle massey, far right and rondell sheridan), the son-and-father team from ''that's so raven,'' find themselves adjusting to life in washington when victor gets a job as the personal chef to the newly elected president and cory finds himself living in the staff quarters of the white house and attending a stuffy private school. and then there's the president's 8-year-old daughter.  10 p.m. (showtime) masters of horror -- beware mister softee. tom holland of ''driven'' and ''thinner'' infamy directs ''we all scream for ice scream,'' in which the spirit of an ice cream truck driver returns to exact his revenge on the children, now grown up, who tormented and accidentally killed him.  kathryn shattuck  