5th defendant pleads guilty in shelter case   a former accountant pleaded guilty yesterday to one felony count of lying to federal investigators as part of a widening criminal inquiry into questionable tax shelters.  michael grandinetti, a resident of the northern mariana islands, a united states territory in the pacific, entered his plea before judge thomas p. griesa in federal district court in manhattan. mr. grandinetti is expected to serve as a witness for the prosecution in a mammoth tax shelter case against 16 former employees of the accounting firm kpmg.  mr. grandinetti, 49, becomes the fifth person to plead guilty and agree to cooperate with prosecutors in the inquiry, which has also ensnared major accounting firms, banks, law firms and investment boutiques.  his testimony could also aid federal prosecutors in manhattan as they conduct a criminal inquiry into deutsche bank over questionable tax shelters.  a lawyer for mr. grandinetti declined to comment yesterday.  mr. grandinetti, identified in the felony information filed against him as a former partner at one of the world's largest accounting firms, admitted to lying to a federal prosecutor and to an internal revenue service agent last march, when asked about his corporation's participation in questionable tax shelters known as zens.  at the time, mr. grandinetti was a senior executive at the united micronesia development association, an investment corporation based in saipan, the capital of the northern mariana islands. the entity bought zens tax shelters in 1996 and 1997 to shield it artificially from income taxes due on its management of television, tourism, airlines and telecommunications assets.  deutsche bank marketed four zens shelters to unnamed clients in the late 1990s, according to a previously reported court filing by prosecutors in the case against the kpmg defendants. zens is the corporate version of a questionable tax shelter known as cards, which is at the center of the criminal inquiry of deutsche bank.  mr. grandinetti admitted to sharing secretly in millions of dollars in fees paid by the corporation to unnamed promoters of the zens shelters. in his plea agreement, he admitted to falsely telling federal investigators that he had told his corporation's board members about the use of the shelters, when in fact he did not. he faces a maximum of five years in prison, and will be sentenced next january.  a spokesman for deutsche bank did not return calls for comment late yesterday. mr. grandinetti also admitted to working with co-promoters of the questionable shelters, including an accountant based in denver and one in los angeles. while the felony information does not identify the two accountants by name, based on previous court filings they are two of the kpmg defendants, robert pfaff and david greenberg.  