rice, in israel, backs mideast moderates, but offers no plan   secretary of state condoleezza rice and her israeli counterpart declared their mutual backing on saturday for a bilateral diplomatic strategy that would support moderate political leaders across the middle east, but after a first evening of talks here offered little new to push ahead any agreement with the palestinians.  ms. rice played down expectations for any breakthrough during her travels.  ''i expect this trip to really be one in which we have intensive consultations,'' she said to open weeklong travels across the middle east and the persian gulf before consulting with allies in western europe. ''i'm not coming with a proposal. i'm not coming with a plan.''  the focus of her first two days is to push israeli and palestinian leaders to move forward on a number of smaller issues, and then she will speak with other regional allies to try to gather support for president bush's new strategy for iraq.  tzipi livni, the israeli foreign minister, said after a meeting with ms. rice that the two countries were joined in an ''ongoing mutual effort to empower the moderates throughout the region in the struggle against extremism and terror.''  asked to describe whether plans were being drawn to accelerate or skip portions of the long sidelined road map -- the 2002 plan backed by the united nations, russia, the united states and the european union that describes sequential measures to be carried out by israelis and palestinians to reach a full political settlement -- ms. livni defended the process as balancing the need to give palestinians ''a political horizon'' while cutting ''the process into phases.''  ms. rice sought to describe signs of optimism, especially after recent contacts between mahmoud abbas, the palestinian authority president, and ehud olmert, the israeli prime minister.  ''i think there are openings now that are there as a result of this alignment, there as a result of the obvious desire of prime minister olmert and president abbas to move forward,'' she said. ''so i think the opening is there, but i can't really judge until i've had a chance to really talk to all the interested parties how we can accelerate the road map, how quickly we can accelerate the road map and how we begin to talk about the political horizon that everybody is interested in.  in palestinian developments on saturday, the two main factions, fatah and hamas, were again stepping up efforts to form a unity government. the process has going on for months without agreement, and has frequently broken down amid street battles between the rivals.  but envoys for mr. abbas have been in contact with hamas's exiled political chief, khaled mashal, who is in damascus, syria, palestinian officials said.  ismail radwan, a hamas spokesman in the gaza strip, said this was ''one of several arab and palestinian efforts to solve the differences.''  mr. radwan also said he believed that mr. abbas and mr. mashal were likely to meet relatively soon.  in a related matter, mr. abbas traveled from the west bank city of ramallah to neighboring jordan to discuss the political developments with king abdullah ii, who has sought to mediate in the palestinian infighting. mr. abbas returned to the west bank later on saturday, and will meet with ms. rice on sunday.  a palestinian unity government would seek to end the internecine fighting and establish a leadership acceptable to western countries, which cut off financing after hamas, the radical islamic faction, came to power early last year. hamas controls the current cabinet, though mr. abbas also has substantial powers as the president.  also on saturday, some 80,000 palestinian government workers, about half of the total, agreed to end a strike that had lasted for months. most of the striking workers are from the west bank, and many are considered sympathetic to fatah. in gaza, where hamas is much stronger, government workers have not gone on prolonged strikes.  the workers were protesting the government's inability to pay wages. the hamas government has paid salaries only partly and sporadically because of the cutoff of money that previously came from the western countries and from tax revenues collected by israel on behalf of the palestinians.  the government workers are to receive one month's salary immediately, with overdue wages to be paid over the next six months, palestinian officials said.  meanwhile, prime minister ismail haniya, speaking on palestinian television, said, ''the american and israeli policies seek to push the palestinian people toward civil war and internal conflict so that the israeli-palestinian conflict becomes a palestinian-palestinian conflict.''  ''i call on the palestinian people and factions, in particular hamas and fatah, to halt internal clashes,'' mr. haniya said.  in washington, the state department said friday that the bush administration would seek congressional approval for $86 million in ''nonlethal assistance'' to strengthen branches of the palestinian security forces directly linked to mr. abbas.  