nice phone, mr. jobs, but   is there anyone who introduces products with more panache than steven p. jobs? let me rephrase that: has there ever been anybody in the history of marketing to introduce products with the sheer, dazzling showmanship of the legendary apple chief executive?  take, for instance, last tuesday. apple is holding its annual macworld conference and expo in san francisco, and mr. jobs is onstage, looking at an adoring crowd. for months, rumors have been swirling that the company may be unveiling an apple cellphone -- which will surely be the coolest, sleekest, smartest cellphone ever. the anticipation is almost unbearable.  mr. jobs is wearing his trademark jeans and mock turtleneck. from time to time, he breaks into a sly smile as he walks around the stage and whips the crowd into a frenzy. ''today,'' he says, ''we're introducing three revolutionary products,'' and then he names them: a ''widescreen ipod with touch controls,'' a ''revolutionary mobile phone'' and a ''breakthrough internet communication device.'' he repeats this mantra several times until it is clear to everyone that the three products are one device: the iphone.  ''even before it was over,'' said charles wolf, who covers apple for needham & company, ''everybody stood up and applauded steve. i've never seen that at a macworld.'' the stock quickly jumped. tech bloggers began salivating, even though the iphone won't be on the market for months. the next day, mr. jobs and his iphone made the front page of the new york times.  and mr. jobs cemented his reputation as not only a great marketer and a brilliant innovator, but perhaps the single most valuable chief executive in the land. mr. jobs is his company's touchstone, its savior, its tyrant, its guiding light. ''the guy is a genius,'' mr. wolf said. ''without steve, the stock would fall 25 percent.''  of course, the fact that mr. wolf could even be raising the possibility of an apple without mr. jobs speaks to a somewhat more sobering question surrounding mr. jobs these days. has he broken the law?  unless you've been living in the proverbial cave, you know about the other, less pleasant apple storyline that has been hovering since the summer. the company and its leader are embroiled in the options backdating scandal, which has now ensnared upwards of 200 companies, many of them in silicon valley, where the practice was commonplace during the late 1990s tech boom. mr. jobs is by far the most prominent executive to be caught up in it. which also means, inevitably, he is the most prominent subject of interest for federal investigators.  it looks as if federal prosecutors and the securities and exchange commission are serious about getting to the bottom of one particular backdated option grant that mr. jobs received in 2001. a few weeks ago, an investigation conducted by a committee of apple board members, led by al gore, cleared mr. jobs of any misconduct. but the committee report -- at least as it has been recounted in apple's recent financial documents -- has its own set of problems, about which more in a minute.  before going into the particulars of mr. jobs's situation, it is worth taking a quick detour into why options backdating is a scandal in the first place. almost every article on the subject points out that backdating -- that is, picking a date retrospectively to grant options that are already ''in the money'' when they are issued -- is not necessarily illegal. but the practice has to be disclosed, and if it's not, that's a violation of securities law. backdated options also have a different accounting treatment, and thus, they violate accounting rules when they are not disclosed. and there are tax consequences as well.  dozens of companies at this point have had to go back and restate earnings because they backdated options and, in truth, the restatements have generally not been huge numbers. apple is typical: it took an $84 million charge, which is akin to petty cash for a company its size.  but as the lehman brothers tax and accounting expert robert willens points out, the problem really isn't one of size -- it's the ethics of the thing. ''it is pretty hard to defend by any standard,'' he said. the technology consultant rob enderle said: ''executives should never have a significant advantage over every other shareholder. it is like insider trading with 100 percent hindsight.''  folks in silicon valley like to say that options backdating was a way to retain employees during the boom. and there is no question that was a lot of the motivation at a lot places, including apple. but how, then, to explain the fact that mr. jobs himself got two enormous options grants that are problematic? that's where things really start to smell.  the first grant, of 10 million shares (at the time, the largest option grant ever), was ''memorialized'' (to use the language apple now uses) on jan. 18, 2000, even though it had been ''finalized'' on jan. 12. before jan. 12, apple's stock had been sinking; by the time jan. 18 rolled around, it had jumped more than $15 a share. ''it is highly awkward that the six days would go by and it turns out the price is the trough,'' said the executive compensation consultant brian foley. ''there is no logical explanation for taking six days.''  as for the second grant, of 7.5 million shares -- this is the one that is being ''actively investigated'' -- the facts are even more squirrelly. in that case, the grant was ''finalized'' in december 2001, but it carried an october 2001 date, when it was supposedly approved during a board meeting. but the board meeting never took place. the committee report said that no member of current management -- including mr. jobs, who is on the board, of course -- knew about the ''irregularity.''  in addition, the special apple committee acknowledged that mr. jobs ''recommended the selection of some favorable grant dates.'' and yet the committee not only cleared mr. jobs of any wrongdoing but announced that the board ''has complete confidence in steve jobs and the senior management team.'' an apple spokesman told me that the special committee, after an ''exhaustive'' review, had found no misconduct by mr. jobs.  for one thing, the committee says that mr. jobs didn't understand the accounting implications of backdating. but it also says that ''he did not receive or financially benefit from these grants.'' instead, in 2003, the grants were dissolved, and replaced by five million shares of restricted stock, which today (with a stock split thrown in) are worth more than $900 million. the shares closed yesterday at $94.62. why did the apple board make the switch? could it have had anything to do with the fact that the stock had declined and the options were worthless, backdating or no?  besides, what difference does it make whether he reaped the reward or not? he got the grants, they weren't disclosed properly and the second one was a part of the apple restatement. you could just as easily argue that he did get a benefit, since they were replaced with the restricted stock grant.  what is striking is the difference between the way apple has dealt with mr. jobs's backdating problems and the way many other companies have dealt with their scandal-tainted chief executives. at plenty of companies chief executives have been forced to step down. in a number of those cases, it is unclear whether their involvement was any deeper than mr. jobs's at apple.  thus the committee report has the feel of an exercise in circling the wagons around the one man apple can't do without. there are so many questions the report doesn't answer -- what are the circumstances of the board meeting that never happened? what does it mean that mr. jobs ''recommended'' some option dates? -- that it is difficult to accept it at face value.  and because the stock market also accepts the notion that mr. jobs is indispensable, it is also circling the wagons. ''the only issue that really matters in the end is whether steve will have to give up the c.e.o. of apple,'' said mr. wolf, the analyst. he added, ''if i had to assign a probability to his staying, i would put it at 99.9 percent.''  others made the case that mr. jobs was so important to apple -- and apple was such an important company -- that it would be wrong-headed to push him out. ''steve jobs is one of the few certifiable geniuses in corporate america, and it would clearly hurt apple's shareholders if steve were unable to continue,'' said joseph a. grundfest, a stanford law professor. clearly, if the federal government decides to go after mr. jobs, there will be an outcry not unlike the outcry that surrounded the martha stewart prosecution.  but of course the federal government never stopped pursuing martha stewart until it put her in prison. and it is highly unlikely that the government is going to back off just because mr. jobs is indispensable at apple. on the contrary, prosecutors and s.e.c. lawyers can make their reputations bringing down as big a target as steve jobs --that's just how the world works. if he is truly in the clear, then great. and to be sure, these kinds of cases are difficult to bring because they require proof that someone knowingly did something wrong. but if he's done something wrong, he's unlikely to walk away simply because he's the great steve jobs.  which is also why apple's whole approach to the options backdating scandal has been so misguided. ''if you fool around with regulators, if they think you are manipulating them, you are going to pay a price,'' said harvey goldschmidt, a former s.e.c. commissioner, who now teaches law at columbia. the apple spokesman assured me that the company was cooperating fully with the government -- he described apple's cooperation as ''proactive and voluntary.'' but the disclosures made to the investing public, including the special committee report, have been too cute by half, a series of grudging admissions that don't give anything close to the whole picture. if the company is taking the same approach with the government, it is pretty much guaranteed to inflame the regulators. as a result, i think mr. jobs is in for a far rougher ride than the market now seems to think.  steve jobs may have a golden gut when it comes to cool tech products. but when it comes to dealing with regulators and prosecutors, it sure looks as if he and his company have a tin ear.  talking business  