u.s. governor brokers truce for darfur   president omar hassan al-bashir of sudan and leaders of several rebel factions in darfur, the western sudanese region, agreed wednesday to a 60-day cease-fire in separate meetings with gov. bill richardson of new mexico, a former american ambassador to the united nations, according to a statement by mr. richardson and mr. bashir.  mr. richardson went to sudan on behalf of the save darfur coalition of groups trying to stem the violence in darfur, to try to break the deadlock over who will police the region.  a peace agreement signed last may between the government and one rebel faction has foundered, and the government has repeatedly rejected a united nations peacekeeping force.  mr. bashir reiterated his opposition to such a force on wednesday, telling the associated press that non-african peacekeepers would be seen as ''colonialists.'' but the bashir-richardson statement said he had agreed to halt military operations to allow time for a political settlement to the crisis to emerge.  ''what is lacking is a political process that leads to a u.n. force,'' mr. richardson said by telephone from khartoum, the capital. ''i think this 60-day cease-fire is at least a step.''  he said the leaders of two rebel factions that did not sign the may agreement, the justice and equality movement and a splinter group of the sudan liberation army, had also agreed to the new cease-fire. but it is not clear if they represent all dissident factions, because the rebel groups have fractured and realigned several times in the past year.  the darfur crisis, a conflict over land, identity and self-determination that has killed at least 200,000 people and driven 2.5 million from their homes, has deepened in the past year despite the peace agreement. recently, escalating violence in sudan has forced aid agencies to curtail operations and has destabilized chad and the central african republic.  mr. richardson, who last year helped negotiate the release of an american journalist charged with espionage in sudan, has known mr. bashir for a decade and has international contacts made as ambassador in the clinton administration. he is expected to seek the democratic nomination for president next year.  