news summary   international a3-23  bush orders more troops and concedes errors in iraq  president bush embraced a major tactical shift in the war in iraq when he declared that the only way to quell sectarian violence there was to send more than 20,000 american troops into combat. yet in defying mounting pressure to begin troop withdrawals, the president reiterated his argument that the consequences of failure in iraq were so high that the united states could not afford to lose.  a1  the democratic leaders of congress accused president bush of ignoring a strong american sentiment against the war in iraq and said they would build a bipartisan campaign against his plan for military expansion.  a21  insurgency grows in somalia  an insurgency appears to be growing in somalia as a group of insurgents attacked a transitional government barracks in mogadishu and soldiers responded by sealing off large swaths of the city.  a21  belarus says oil dispute at end  belarus said it had reached a compromise with russia to end a dispute that had shut a russian oil pipeline to europe, but the kremlin did not confirm any agreement.  a8  call for european energy policy  european union officials challenged countries to loosen their grip on national energy sectors, calling for new competition and investment.  a5  germans debate hitler comedy  a german-made film comedy about hitler, which shows him wetting his bed and playing with a toy battleship in the bath, has caused a national debate over his use as a comical figure, suggesting that he remains an uncomfortable topic in the country.  a3  national a24-29  house approves increase in federal minimum wage  the house overwhelmingly approved a $2.10 increase in the federal minimum wage in a decisive vote that democrats hailed as an overdue raise for low-income workers and a symbol of new leadership on capitol hill.  a28  smoking banned in house  democrats banned smoking inside the house. on a day when iraq and the minimum wage dominated the news in congress, few smokers were clamoring to discuss the change.  a24  bomb test meets obstacles  a twice-postponed nonnuclear bomb test in the middle of the nevada desert may face additional legal challenges over its potential to propel dangerous radioactive particles from the soil into the air over four states.  a29  children are better off  compared with a decade ago, american children appear to be marginally better off, according to a new census bureau analysis.  a29  stem cell debate resumed  the bush administration jumped back into the bitter debate surrounding embryonic stem cell research, urging lawmakers to vote against house legislation to expand such research.  a28  former offical may be indicted  the former no. 2 official in the interior department, j. steven griles, has been notified by federal prosecutors that he will most likely be indicted on charges of lying about his relationship with the corrupt lobbyist jack abramoff, people with knowledge of the investigation said.  a27  new york/region b1-6  3 students among 4 killed in new jersey car crash  four people, including three high school students who were riding in one car, were killed in a two-vehicle crash in freehold township, n.j., about one mile away from freehold borough high school. the driver of the second vehicle also died, and the passenger in that vehicle was seriously injured. b1  raves for new playground plan  plans for a next-generation playground near the south street seaport got the thumbs up from parents, nannies, baby sitters and children. b1  sportsthursday d1-6  giants coach will stay  the giants' owners have decided to retain coach tom coughlin, ending weeks of mounting speculation that he might be fired. the giants lost seven of their final nine games. d1  obituaries b6-7  carlo ponti  the influential film producer who etched his name in popular legend by defying law and church to marry sophia loren, he was 94. b7  arts e1-12  voting to publish a winner  touchstone, an imprint of simon & schuster, has promised to publish a book by a first time author who wins a contest on gather.com, a site that might be described as myspace for grown-ups. e1  business day c1-16  back door for office e-mail  a growing number of internet-savvy workers are forwarding their office e-mail to personal accounts.  a1  business digest c2  editorial a30-31  editorials: the real catastrophe; tax cuts and consequences; body mass and the student body; eau de new york city.  columns: david brooks, bob herbert.  bridge  e8  crossword  e10  tv listings  e11  weather  d8  