a way of life, seen through coal-tinted glasses   that daily reminder of coal's dominion courses again through this small town of a city, stopping traffic, giving pause. it is a coal train, maybe 90 open cars long, creaking and groaning and coating the old brick buildings hard against the tracks with a fine, black dust.  and as a cold dusk settles like more dust on logan's tired streets, chuck gunnoe sits in an unheated launderette and explains how coal runs through veins beyond those in the surrounding hills. he is a coal miner seeking work, and he yearns to have his boots muddied, his face blackened -- to be swallowed again by the appalachian earth.  the mines received him two days after he turned 18. now 24, and between mines, he takes pride in doing the same crazy-dangerous work that his grandfather did. but the primary draw has always been the money, and with his girlfriend two months pregnant, he says he needs the $20 an hour he can earn by toiling miles removed from natural light.  ''it's the best-paying job in this state,'' says mr. gunnoe, who hours earlier filled out an application with a local mine. ''unless you're college-educated.''  and yes, he knows, the burly man says softly. he knows what happened to the two miners in the aracoma coal mine not five miles down the road. who here doesn't.  downtown logan has changed a lot, its people say, for so many reasons: the mechanization of mining, leading to fewer jobs; many young people seeking opportunity elsewhere; a wal-mart replacing a nearby mountaintop. a walk down once-bustling stratton street, past the closed capitol movie theater, the closed city florist, the closed g. c. murphy dime store, can be a walk through stillness.  but in certain profound ways, logan has not changed at all, and not just because warm apple pies sell for $5.99 at the nu-era bakery, or because the waitress at yesterday's diner refills coffee cups with maternal affection (''are we ready yet, children?'').  for one, the city of 1,600 remains the west virginia template for public corruption, with election fraud a local specialty. not long ago, investigators caught the former mayor in some wrongdoing, and soon he was wearing a wire; down went the police chief, the county sheriff and the county clerk, among others. now the former mayor sits behind the large glass window of his law office on stratton street, disbarred, on probation, on display.  for another, logan remains the coal-field capital. this means that a figurine made of coal in a pawn shop window depicts jesus comforting a miner. it means that schoolchildren learn about the 1921 armed uprising called the battle of blair mountain, when more than 10,000 miners wanting to unionize squared off against state and federal troops. that you are a friend of coal, or you are not. that miners die.  almost exactly a year ago, a fire broke out in that nonunion mine down the road, the aracoma alma mine no. 1, owned by the state's dominant coal company, massey energy. every employee escaped, save two: don israel bragg, 33, and elvis hatfield, 46.  months later, two reports -- one by the state's mining-regulatory office, the other by j. davitt mcateer, a veteran mine-safety consultant -- shed light on what had happened in the aracoma darkness. in mr. mcateer's words, the evidence suggested that the fire had ''erupted at the lethal intersection of human error and negligent mining practices.''  a misaligned conveyor belt ignited and spilled coal that should not have been there. a fire hose contained no water. a missing ventilation wall allowed smoke to seep into a primary escapeway meant to provide fresh air to miners.  a crew of a dozen escaping miners hit that smoke and began to panic. in blinding, nauseating clouds of black, they grabbed one another's shirts and tried to feel their way to a door leading to fresh air. ten made it to the other side; two did not.  one more thing, the reports said: the maps of the mazelike mine given to the would-be rescuers were inaccurate -- a cardinal sin in the land of coal.  the deaths of mr. bragg and mr. hatfield provided an unnecessary reminder of how dangerous coal mining can be. in all, 24 miners died on the job in west virginia last year, with this year's first fatalities coming on saturday, when two miners died in a partial tunnel collapse inside a mine about 75 miles south of here.  massey energy, which employs more than 4,000 in west virginia, has declined detailed comment about the two reports, other than to say that some conditions in the mine had not met its standards, and that ''deficiencies were not fully recognized by mine personnel or by state or federal inspectors.''  few in logan criticize massey publicly. the closest they come is to say that the widows have sued, and to smile when recalling how the company's president, don l. blankenship, spent more than $3 million trying to wrest control of the legislature from democrats last year. he called it his ''and for the sake of the kids'' campaign, and he lost.  instead, people like the mayor, claude ellis, known as big daddy, point out that massey gives a big employee party in the center of the city every summer, attracting tens of thousands. last year people had to wear a company-issued t-shirt to hear hank williams jr. and other entertainers sing. mr. ellis says the company gave him 100 or so of those shirts.  ''without coal, we'd be in a bad state,'' mr. ellis explains, as if to concede that coal is the true big daddy.  back in the cold of that launderette, mr. gunnoe proudly displays photographs of himself in the mines: on his knees, unable to stand, soot-covered, one with coal. in one photo, he and other miners are hunched around pizza boxes. christmas present from the boss, he explains.  this land dan barry's column about the nation will appear every sunday. more photos and audio from logan: nytimes.com/danbarry.  