steroids inquiry could widen   no matter which way baseball turns, it continues to be confronted by the issue of performance-enhancing substances.  ten days ago, mark mcgwire was repudiated by the voters in his first attempt to gain entrance to the hall of fame, his candidacy damaged by his supposed link to steroid use. later last week, it was reported that barry bonds had tested positive for amphetamines in 2006, a disclosure that further damaged his now-tenuous status in baseball.  yesterday, george j. mitchell weighed in. a former federal prosecutor and majority leader of the united states senate, mitchell now heads a commission conducting baseball's own steroids investigation, and he is doing so without the power to compel testimony. with that in mind, mitchell warned baseball's owners during their quarterly meeting in phoenix that a failure by people in baseball to cooperate with his investigation would ''increase the possibility of action by others.''  in a briefing that took place behind closed doors and was later released by major league baseball, mitchell said: ''unlike the congress, or other federal and state authorities, i cannot compel cooperation. they can, and if they get involved, they will.''  mitchell said if the report he ultimately produces is not viewed as credible and thorough, ''it will significantly increase the possibility of action by others.''  the issue of cooperation has existed since mitchell agreed to head the commission last march. months ago, mitchell asked commissioner bud selig to consider disciplining anyone in baseball who did not cooperate with his investigators. mitchell told the owners yesterday that ''we've reviewed tens of thousands of documents and conducted hundreds of interviews'' with people inside and outside baseball, and that many witnesses had been helpful.  ''we will talk with many more,'' mitchell said, adding that interviews of active players would begin soon. mitchell did not talk with reporters after addressing the owners.  baseball  