brooklyn artist, held hostage, is beaten to death   a brooklyn artist was found fatally beaten in his apartment on tuesday after his son held him and others hostage for more than six hours, the police said yesterday.  the man, carlton ingleton, 66, was found lying on his living room floor, with blood pooling beneath his head, when the police broke down the door to the crown heights apartment after being called by relatives who had been held hostage.  mr. ingleton's son, assawa ingleton, 30, had held his mother, his pregnant wife, their two children and a friend hostage in the apartment, according to the police. he was charged with murder and weapons possession last night, the police said.  when the police arrived, assawa ingleton was hiding in a closet. he was taken in a straitjacket to kings county hospital center for psychiatric evaluation, the police said. he was taken briefly to a precinct station for questioning yesterday, then was returned to the hospital for further evaluation.  ellen borakove, a spokeswoman for the medical examiner, said carlton ingleton had blunt impact injuries on the head and torso, a fractured rib, cuts of his liver and a brain hemorrhage.  carlton ingleton, a sculptor and painter with a small gallery and studio on east new york avenue, was mourned yesterday by artists and neighbors.  they said he had worked with stone and wood and metal in his storefront studio in the building where he lived. he attended classes at the art students league in manhattan, taught at medgar evers college and exhibited at museums and cultural centers around brooklyn.  constantly sketching, he drew people on subway trains, as well as neighbors who posed for him. he often had a knapsack to carry scraps he picked up around the city for sculptures.  gary l. sussman, an artist and longtime friend, said carlton ingleton's work was ''full of color and full of humanity.'' he added that he was an immigrant from jamaica.  ''when he walked into a room and smiled, it was like anybody's woes just disappeared,'' mr. sussman said.  