irvington man arrested in fatal shooting of off-duty officer   after an intense 10-day manhunt, the paterson police arrested an irvington man on tuesday morning and charged him with fatally shooting an off-duty rookie police officer here.  the paterson police received more than 150 tips -- many based on a suspect sketch released last week -- about the jan. 7 killing of officer tyron d. franklin, 23. after a tip over the past weekend, the police arrested teddy charlemagne, 23, as he left a friend's apartment in irvington about 8 a.m., a paterson police spokesman, lt. anthony traina, said on tuesday.  mr. charlemagne, who was on parole after having been convicted of four narcotics and weapons felonies, was held on tuesday on first-degree murder and weapons charges, said the passaic county prosecutor, james f. avigliano. he said his office would seek the death penalty for mr. charlemagne.  officer franklin, 23, was in the broadway fried chicken restaurant on broadway near madison avenue, in paterson, ordering food about 1 a.m. on jan. 7 when a man entered and demanded money, the authorities said. after a brief scuffle, the man shot officer franklin, who was not armed, and fled in a light-colored minivan, according to the police and witnesses.  ''the motive was robbery,'' lieutenant traina said. ''it was a botched robbery that led to his demise.''  twice the police said they believed that they had captured officer franklin's killer, once after a car chase in east orange, and again on friday after surrounding an apartment building in jersey city. both times proved to be cases of mistaken identity, lieutenant traina said.  the person who called in the tip to the police that led to the arrest could receive a $60,000 reward if mr. charlemagne is convicted. mr. charlemagne is being held at the passaic county jail in $2 million bail and is to be arraigned on thursday morning.  the paterson police chief, james wittig, said that many officers had volunteered their time in the search for officer franklin's killer and that there was a sense of some closure when the suspect ''was apprehended and will be brought to justice.''  officer franklin, the father of a 16-month-old boy, tyron jr., was buried on saturday and was remembered as a dedicated officer who came from a family steeped in public service. his father, larry franklin, is a retired captain with the paterson fire department.  standing near a shrine in front of the police administration building on tuesday, the rev. michael burton, a spokesman for the family, said relatives were still coming to grips with officer franklin's death.  mr. burton said relatives were somewhat relieved by the arrest. ''what this does is to help to deal with the situation, but it doesn't take the pain away,'' he said.  