at these golden globes, everyone is a little special   the golden globes, an awards dance that takes great care to make sure everybody has a place at the table, finessed an almost perfect result on monday night. at nearly all the various after-parties here studio chieftains had something to cheer about, which is just the way the hollywood foreign press association, which administers the ceremony, likes it.  this is less about guile or calculation than about the imperatives of fandom. the 84 or so members of the association are, first and foremost, cheerleaders for the movie industry and the stars that give it light. they spend the year going to private screenings and intimate dinners, bumping knees with the likes of meryl streep and jack nicholson. it is possible that they begin to think of these movie titans as friends: friends they don't want to disappoint.  remember that preschool graduation at which everyone got an award for something and parents left feeling validated that their pride and joy was in some way special? monday night felt a bit like that. the people behind ''dreamgirls,'' in need of a win if only to quiet the chattering class of oscar watchers who were suggesting that the film had broken stride on the way to the podium, had much to be happy about.  ''this movie still has plenty of gas,'' said laurence mark, a producer of the film.  with victories in the supporting actor categories for jennifer hudson and eddie murphy, and the award for best comedy/musical, ''dreamgirls,'' a film that seemed conceived and executed with an embedded oscar strategy, is still very much alive and in the hunt for best picture at the academy awards. having not been tested by ''babel'' or ''the departed,'' which were in a separate dramatic category, ''dreamgirls'' is perhaps not the favorite, but its backers can work from their new position.  '' 'dreamgirls' will win tonight because it has to,'' said a former studio head as he walked up the red carpet on monday night, asking not to be identified because, he said, he worried he would upset other competitors.  upset them? when all was said and done, they didn't have much to be upset about. ''the departed'' might have missed the big prize, but the best directing award brought martin scorsese to the podium and gave warner brothers a good story to tell on the way to the oscars.  the backers of ''babel,'' with seven nominations, spent the night practicing their wan, frozen smiles as they missed out on category after category. but at the very end of the ceremony, a nice, big lifesaver appeared: the award for best dramatic picture.  ''i was just jumping,'' said rinko kikuchi, the young japanese star of ''babel,'' speaking for many people at paramount vantage, which produced the film. alejandro gonzález iñárritu, a director who happens to look like a movie star, got a big full-on kiss from john lesher, the young and fairly new president of vantage, who bet early and hard that audiences, and awards, would show up for this triptych of a movie that spans borders and languages.  ''the queen'' might not have taken home gold for best picture, but its star, helen mirren, had enough hardware at the end of the night that she looked as if she'd spent time at home depot. her regal march to an oscar for best actress will apparently crush (daintily, perhaps) everything in its path.  on the red carpet, penélope cruz, who was dealt what she said she felt was the role of a lifetime in ''volver,'' said she didn't mind. ''i don't think it's going to happen this year, and i am really o.k. with that,'' she said of her own chances. ''i am still very much hoping for pedro.''  ms. cruz had a letter in her pocket from the director of ''volver,'' pedro almodóvar, who was home sick with the flu, but the letter remained folded because the prize for best foreign language film went to clint eastwood, a longtime crush of the hollywood foreign press association, who had been nominated for best director -- twice -- and seemed plenty pleased by the recognition he received for ''letters from iwo jima,'' the companion film in japanese he made after putting together the much larger ''flags of our fathers.''  ''i guess i better learn some languages,'' he joked in the press room after the show.  that's the golden globes. oscar hopes for all -- and no one gets hurt in the process.  news analysis  