political opinions complicate screening for libby jurors   the difficulties of seating a jury for the perjury trial of vice president dick cheney's former chief of staff were evident on wednesday as more prospective jurors expressed criticism of the bush administration.  other potential jurors demonstrated the complications thrown up by the number of journalists, lawyers and officials here.  in the second day of juror screening in the case of the former aide, i. lewis libby jr., a prospective juror testified that he once worked for bob woodward of the washington post, lived across an alley from tim russert of nbc news and went to school with maureen dowd of the new york times.  mr. woodward and mr. russert are expected to be witnesses at the trial. the prospective juror remained in the pool.  mr. libby is charged with lying to a grand jury and f.b.i. agents in an investigation of who leaked to journalists the name of valerie wilson, a central intelligence agency operative, in july 2003.  judge reggie m. walton has voiced hope that opening arguments can be given on monday. but by the end of wednesday, only 24 jurors had qualified for what is supposed to be a panel of 36 that will then be whittled down to 12 jurors and 4 alternates.  one woman was asked whether she had formed any opinion of the bush administration that might affect her ability to judge mr. libby.  ''i certainly have an opinion that i can't believe any statement by the bush administration,'' she replied.  did that extend to mr. libby?  ''yes,'' she said. she was excused.  a woman said she hoped that her belief in the presumption of innocence would overcome her distaste for the administration. but she eventually acknowledged that she might not believe administration witnesses who testified for mr. libby. two people were dismissed on tuesday after saying they did not trust mr. cheney, who will testify for mr. libby.  on the other hand, a woman who worked for lockheed martin, the military contractor, expressed admiration for the administration on wednesday and for mr. cheney in particular. she stayed in the pool.  a prospective juror who produced reports from iraq for national public radio was excused after testifying that he held judith miller, a former reporter for the new york times, in low esteem for her prewar reports that iraq had unconventional weapons. he said would not be able to credit her testimony at the trial.  ms. miller is expected to testify for the prosecution that mr. libby spoke with her about ms. wilson. the indictment charges that mr. libby falsely said he did not discuss ms. wilson with ms. miller.  a candidate testified that he regarded ms. miller as courageous for going to jail for 85 days for refusing initially to disclose ms. libby as a source. that juror, a retired math teacher, also produced laughter when questioned about whether he had problems with mr. cheney's credibility. no problems, he said, but he ''wouldn't go hunting with him,'' a reference to mr. cheney's accidental shooting of a hunting partner last year. he stayed in the pool.  