reganbooks to shut down after firing of its creator   harpercollins, the publishing company, announced yesterday that it planned to close reganbooks, the imprint created by judith regan, the editor who was fired last month after public outcry over a book and television deal with o. j. simpson. the imprint will close march 1.  the publisher also laid off 10 employees in the los angeles office of reganbooks. five senior staff members, including cal morgan, editorial director of the imprint, will move to the new york office of harpercollins, while the publicity director, suzanne wickham, will remain in los angeles, along with her assistant.  the 10 employees were notified yesterday that they would be laid off, said michael morrison, the president and group publisher of harpermorrow, a division of harpercollins, in a telephone interview.  the announcement came about a month after ms. regan was fired. the publishing house hinted then that the reganbooks imprint's days were numbered, saying in a statement that ''future decisions relating to the imprint name or the publication of unpublished books will be addressed at the appropriate time.''  ''from day 1, we knew we could not be continuing with that name,'' mr. morrison said. ''we didn't want to, nor could we.''  books scheduled for publication through august under the reganbooks imprint will carry an interim logo, hc. according to the reganbooks spring catalog, titles include ''outrage,'' by the political commentator dick morris and his wife, eileen mcgann; ''making war to keep peace,'' by jeane j. kirkpatrick, former ambassador to the united nations; and ''when in rome,'' a memoir by debra friedland.  beginning in september, other harpercollins imprints will publish books that were signed under reganbooks. about 100 books will be affected, mr. morrison said. one title that drew criticism, ''7: the mickey mantle novel,'' a fictionalized version of mickey mantle's life by peter golenbock, has been canceled.  in a statement yesterday, ms. regan said that she had been ''blessed to have the opportunity to work with hundreds of fascinating authors over the years and honored to have published them under my name,'' going on to cite wally lamb, the novelist; gen. tommy r. franks, former head of the united states central command; robert h. bork, the rejected supreme court nominee; and susan estrich, the law professor and commentator.  she said that she was also grateful to rupert murdoch, the head of the news corporation, ''for the opportunity and to the reganbooks staff who worked by my side to build a great publishing list.''  reganbooks moved to los angeles from new york last year to satisfy ms. regan's desire to integrate book publishing with television and movie projects. the move was also viewed as an effort by ms. regan to distance herself from jane friedman, president and chief executive of harpercollins, with whom she had a testy relationship.  the plan went awry when a book, ''if i did it,'' by mr. simpson, was canceled in late november. a television interview with mr. simpson that was to be broadcast on the fox network was also canceled. both harpercollins and fox are part of the news corporation.  yesterday afternoon, a copy of mr. simpson's contract with reganbooks surfaced on the web site of court tv, revealing that harpercollins had agreed to pay mr. simpson a $1.1 million advance for a television interview and his book, billed as a hypothetical account of the 1994 murders of his former wife, nicole brown simpson, and her friend ronald l. goldman. the document was in a court filing that added harpercollins to a lawsuit brought last month by fred goldman, mr. goldman's father, against mr. simpson.  the document, dated may 8, 2006, also stipulated that pablo fenjves, the book's ghostwriter, would earn $125,000. the contract is signed by ms. regan and ms. friedman.  through a spokeswoman, ms. friedman declined to comment on the contract or the closing of reganbooks; she has been noticeably silent throughout the controversy.  reganbooks made its mark by publishing a string of splashy, lucrative best sellers by authors including jenna jameson, the star of sex movies, and jose canseco, the former professional baseball player. but it also published serious biography and fiction, most recently ''the zero,'' by jess walter, which was nominated for a national book award in 2006.  mr. morrison of harpercollins said none of the reganbooks authors had yet been notified of the imprint's closing. the day after ms. regan was fired, reganbooks' editors immediately tried to soothe its soon-to-be-published authors, assuring them projects would continue as planned.  