an italian spot, larded with drive   be it belly or chop, from niman ranch or meadowbrook farms, as an accessory to seafood or a wellspring of salumi, pork has been staking such a piggy claim to prominence of late that its appearance in a cocktail feels less shocking than inevitable. what took the little oinker so long?  to be accurate, pork isn't really in, but rather around, the signature drink at the relatively new italian restaurant porchetta, which is in the carroll gardens section of brooklyn. the drink itself is a mostly straightforward margarita, made with añejo tequila, cointreau and tangerine and lime juices. along the rim, though, crushed pork cracklings mingle with salt.  they're pretty much undetectable in some sips. in others they register as a vaguely smoky, lardy aftertaste. either way, they aren't so much improvements on a winning, sturdy formula as they are cheeky curiosities, meant to prompt stares and chatter.  and the cocktail to some extent sets the stage for the rest of the meal. porchetta is a restaurant that's determined -- sometimes too determined -- to snap you to attention, to take you by surprise.  its name refers to a traditional italian pork roast, often rolled, boneless and heavily spiced.  but porchetta isn't at all traditional. it chases an edginess that other italian restaurants in its area don't have in their sights. it's not doing a tame, by-the-numbers number and asking to be graded on an outer-borough curve.  its 30-year-old chef, jason neroni, is a restless sort, brimming with ideas, bursting with ambition. that quality is at once the engine of his success so far and a threat to its development. in his desire to be noticed, he can be overly insistent and careless, as some embarrassing recent adventures in self-promotion suggested.  mr. neroni circulated an e-mail message that beseeched friends and fans to vote for him as best up-and-coming chef in the james beard foundation awards, and the web site grub street, owned by new york magazine, got a hold of it. neither the quoted portions of the e-mail nor the reports of it specified how his supporters were supposed to flex their wills or what effect that flexing might have.  but his yearning -- understandable, given the intense competition among today's starry-eyed young chefs -- was established by a forest of exclamation points after the phrase, ''i need your help!'' i counted at least 10 of them before all those lines and dots began to blur.  that yearning was also evident in the bowls and on the plates at porchetta.  take the gnocchi. mr. neroni aced the potato dumplings themselves, which couldn't have been softer or lighter on the tongue. and they were elevated as high as need be by a sauce of cream, butter, crushed black truffles and truffle oil.  but mr. neroni couldn't and didn't stop there. in a flourish too far and too abundant, he added candied lemon zest. the way it interacted with other ingredients made the dish taste as if someone in the kitchen had inadvertently sprayed it with a bit of pledge furniture polish.  a combination of pumpkin, gorgonzola and soppressata in a dish of orecchiette was arresting, but these players didn't team up in a harmonious way. the sweet notes were too assertive, and there was a redundant mushiness in many ingredients that the soppressata was neither plentiful nor chewy enough to redress.  in other dishes, though, mr. neroni's sense of enterprise and thoughtfulness served him brilliantly.  with apologies to gray kunz, whose short ribs at café gray set the gold standard, mr. neroni may well be the architect of an even dreamier preparation. i tried it twice and was swept away each time.  the ribs had been roasted and braised, a process that wasn't revolutionary but that, under mr. neroni's watch, yielded impeccably moist meat. then things got considerably more interesting.  the meat was placed over puréed mustard greens, red pepper, just a touch of cream and just a touch of gorgonzola. this mint-colored backdrop had a divinely calibrated consistency and richness: not too heavy, not too wispy.  it could have been a special creamed spinach from a steakhouse for the gods. and some of its pleasures were echoed by the braising liquid, candied olives and gorgonzola drizzled over the meat.  mr. neroni can cook, a fact already established at 71 clinton fresh food, where he took charge of the kitchen from march 2004 until the restaurant's closing early last year.  perhaps because that restaurant was already established when he arrived, he didn't seem to allow himself quite as much license as he does at porchetta. his ratio of successful to unsuccessful dishes was better there.  before 71 clinton fresh food he worked for colin alevras at the tasting room and for alain ducasse. but the chef who came to mind when i tasted a few of mr. neroni's pasta dishes at porchetta was mario batali.  the bevy of fat chicken livers around which bucatini sprawled and swirled: that was babbo-style heartiness and decadence. the cross-sectioned green chilies that inflamed the tomato sauce in a dish of strozzapreti: that was a babbo kind of touch.  the best pasta selection by far was a raviolo filled with a poached egg, puréed greens and sheep's milk ricotta. what could easily have been a clumpy, leaden wreck was kept light and fluffy by the degree of care in its preparation.  but such care hadn't been mustered for several other dishes. has mr. neroni figured out how to run a kitchen with reliable efficiency? at 71 clinton fresh food, sluggish pacing was a problem, and that problem recurs at porchetta.  and in contrast to the short ribs and to a flawlessly tender entree of boneless chicken with cannelloni beans and butternut squash, a turkey entree verged on rawness, while sections of a stuffed leg of lamb were overdone to the point of rubbery toughness.  porchetta's short wine list isn't impressive. its desserts are appealing but unexceptional. that description also applies to the rectangular space, with about 55 seats and shimmering sheets of copper along the base of the bar and the lower halves of some walls.  if you're smart or lucky you'll grab a table up front, where windows overlook smith street. and you'll start your meal with the smoked sunchoke soup, a creamy sea embracing sheep's milk ricotta, golden raisins and something else, invisible but discernible. ah, yes, pancetta.  the soup offers yet another paean to the pig, yet more proof that while mr. neroni may not have his act fully together, he's definitely got the goods. if my copy editors allowed such exuberance, i'd add at least a small thicket of affirming exclamation points to that sentence.  porchetta  * [rating: one star]  241 smith street (douglass street), carroll gardens, brooklyn; (718) 237-9100.  atmosphere -- on a corner lot, a rectangular room with about 55 seats has been spruced up modestly with some black-and-white swirled wallpaper and some shimmering copper sheets along the bottoms of walls.  sound level -- robust.  recommended dishes -- smoked sunchoke soup; pork belly with brussels sprouts; raviolo with egg and puréed greens; short ribs; chicken with cannelloni beans and squash; banana gelato with hazelnut cream.  wine list -- a few dozen bottles, most under $50, with an italian focus.  price range -- appetizers, $8 to $11. pastas and entrees, $10 to $22. desserts, $6 to $7.  hours -- from 5:30 to 11 p.m. seven days a week. brunch from noon to 3 p.m. saturday and sunday.  reservations -- call about a week ahead for prime times.  credit cards -- all major cards.  wheelchair access -- entire restaurant on street level; accessible restroom.  what the stars mean: ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. menu listings and prices are subject to change.  past reviews from the times, with additional capsule reviews by times critics:  nytimes.com/dining  restaurants  correction:  january 24, 2007, wednesday  a review last wednesday of the restaurant porchetta in brooklyn misstated an ingredient in a chicken dish. they are cannellini beans, not cannelloni beans.  