supermodel pleads guilty to hurling phone at maid   naomi campbell apologized yesterday for hitting her maid in the head with a cellphone, but said it was an accident.  before making her apology in manhattan criminal court, ms. campbell, 36, pleaded guilty to reckless assault, a misdemeanor, putting an end to nine months in which she seemed to attract as much attention for being a defendant as for being a supermodel.  she agreed to a sentence of five days of community service, anger management classes and payment of $363.32 in hospital bills for ana scolavino, now her former maid.  ''you admit that you threw that cellphone recklessly?'' the judge, robert mandelbaum, asked ms. campbell.  ''yeah,'' ms. campbell replied, looking chic with short bobbed hair and wearing a black pencil skirt, cowl-neck gray sweater and high heels.  judge mandelbaum asked if she was pleading guilty of her ''own free will.''  ''yeah,'' ms. campbell said again.  prompted by her lawyer, she read a six-sentence statement -- revealing a mellifluous british accent -- to a courtroom packed with international news people.  her statement in its entirety: ''i had an apartment at 500 park avenue. ana scolavino was an employee of mine. during the morning of march 30, 2006, i threw a cellphone in the apartment. the cellphone hit ana. that was an accident because i did not intend to hit her. i am advised that ana was hurt, and i am sorry about that.''  although ms. campbell indicated in her statement that she did not realize ms. scolavino was hurt, the maid was treated at lenox hill hospital, where she received four staples for a gash to her head.  ms. campbell's lawyer, david breitbart, said that she was due to model for fashion week in california, brazil, london, paris and milan over the next few weeks, and asked the judge to give her a little longer than usual -- 120 days -- to complete her community service. the judge agreed.  mr. breitbart also said that ms. campbell had been stalked, and that he would prefer her community service to be indoors because he feared for her security.  neither the judge nor the prosecutor objected, though it is up to the probation department to make the final decision.  forcing ms. campbell to miss her modeling appointments, mr. breitbart said later, would have been like imposing a de facto fine on his client. ''if she were not allowed to work in fashion week, there would be a fine of inordinate, extraordinary proportions,'' he said.  ms. campbell is being sued for money damages by two other former employees who claim mistreatment, and mr. breitbart said he would not be surprised if ms. scolavino followed suit. ''i think that's the design, the design to embarrass, to call her names, and to intimidate her into giving them money,'' he said.  outside the court, mr. breitbart said that his client might be an angry person, but that she was not a bad person. ''she's been called a bigot, she's been called terrible things,'' he said. ''if there's an anger management problem, that doesn't mean she's not a nice person; it doesn't mean she's not a good person; it doesn't mean she's not a charitable person.''  