the night of the iguanas, not to mention the dinosaurs and whales   these days ''a night at the museum'' is one of the hottest tickets in new york. but don't be misled. this is not the hit movie in which ben stiller plays a security guard at a fictionalized american museum of natural history, only to discover that the fossils and specimens come to life at dusk, racing and rampaging through the galleries. this is a real overnight at the actual museum, and the racers and rampagers are not tyrannosaurus rex skeletons and bloodthirsty barbarians, but kids.  on saturday the museum began its ''night at the museum'' for children 8 to 12 (and their required accompanying adults), a camping experience well suited to urbanites: you get a cot for your sleeping bag, the snoozing is indoors -- in the milstein hall of ocean life -- and the wild creatures, while plentiful, are mostly stuffed.  the sleepover, said ellen v. futter, the museum's president, is a longed-for revival of a program abandoned years ago. (she isn't sure why.) ''it's really a coincidence with the movie,'' she said. ''of course the movie made it eminently ripe.''  in a nod to the film, which features exterior shots of the museum but none of its interiors, the goodie bag for campers has a sheet describing which objects seen in the movie can actually be found in the galleries (an easter island head and a cross-section of a giant sequoia, for example) and which cannot (sacagawea and attila the hun, for starters).  but as a visit on saturday proved, the ''night at the museum'' sleepover isn't really about the movie. the experience starts with a 5:45 check-in and a brief orientation. lights go out at 12:15 a.m.  in between is a mix of activities and ''free exploration.'' one of the favorite scheduled stops is the butterfly conservatory, where some of the 500 or so residents often alight on guests.  at 9:30 campers go on the ''flashlight fossil exploration,'' investigating the darkened dinosaur galleries. a few strobe lights give the place a bit of a dino-disco atmosphere. something like a scavenger hunt, this activity includes booklets with clues and questions. a typical entry: ''just past the t. rex is an allosaurus. what skeleton is this large meat-eater standing over?''  ''it's cool,'' said sophia berenato, 9, of manhattan, even though she hadn't found any of the species described. but she and her newfound 8-year-old friends, raina shoen thomas and ashley beere, made their own adventures. ''we started playing this time game where we pretended we were going back millions of years ago,'' sophia said.  the exploratory phase of the sleepover ends with a bang, a big one: a visit to the rose center for earth and space to watch ''cosmic collisions,'' a multimedia show about the formation of the universe. the museum counters the astral chaos with bedtime stories and its own version of the late show back at milstein hall: a film about dolphins.  just one promised commodity may prove elusive: sleep.  lights-out science  the museum of natural history isn't the only museum to offer sleepover programs. all are popular; campers are advised to book early.  american museum of natural history -- the ''night at the museum'' program, for ages 8 to 12, is monthly (occasionally semimonthly), from 5:45 p.m. to 9 a.m., 79th street and central park west, (212) 769-5200, amnh.org/sleepovers; $79 a person; $75 for groups; $70 for members (includes an evening snack and breakfast). accommodates about 350; the program is currently sold out through may.  new york hall of science -- ''science sleepovers'' include science demonstrations and a ''make it and take it'' activity. for boy and girl scout troops, community organizations and private groups (minimum of 200); monthly or semimonthly, most often in the winter and spring; 6 p.m. to 9 a.m. at 47-01 111th street, flushing meadows-corona park, queens, (718) 699-0005, ext. 343, nyscience.org/nyhs-education/ed-scout--program.html. $35 a person (includes an evening snack and breakfast). accommodates about 500 (one adult required for every five children).  rubin museum of art -- ''expedition rma: a peak experience,'' for ages 11 to 14, featuring a mountaineer and an overnight simulated climb of mount everest (up the museum's spiral staircase), was held for the first time last year. program runs from 7:30 p.m. to 8 a.m., at 150 west 17th street, flatiron district, (212) 620-5000, rmanyc.org; $108 (includes dinner, snacks and breakfast). children are dropped off. accommodates 40; a similar event is planned for this summer and annually thereafter.  