atop tv sets, basic black boxes face competition; as consumers stray, traditional device gets high-tech overhaul   adam gillitt does not hate what is on his tv as much as he dislikes what is attached to it.  mr. gillitt, a graphic designer from alameda, calif., is exasperated by his high-definition cable box, made by the technology giant motorola and leased to him by his local cable provider, comcast. the $10-a-month device, he says, has a poorly designed electronic program guide and responds slowly, or not at all, to commands from the remote control.  ''paying for something this awful hurts,'' mr. gillitt said.  for many americans, the cable box -- still commonly called the set-top box, though it is now too big to balance on top of increasingly thin tvs -- may be the most disappointing piece of technology in their homes. as inventions like tivo and youtube alter the way people watch and control video, the traditional box has largely failed to keep up.  now that is beginning to change.  at the consumer electronics show in las vegas last week, makers of set-top boxes exhibited devices with a host of new features: more hard-disk space for storing digitally recorded tv shows, easier-to-navigate program guides, connections to web sites, dvd burners and video games.  the box manufacturers and the cable operators like comcast, cox and time warner cable that they sell to, have an age-old motivation for improving their products: fear. new competitors are flooding into the tv business, including the industry's rivals in the telephone business, and the computer kingpins microsoft and apple.  consumers can buy those alternatives at regular retail outlets, including the newest high-definition version of tivo. it sells for $800 (with a $20 monthly fee) and can replace the box that cable and satellite providers lease to customers, instead of merely sitting on top of it and adding to living room clutter.  cable operators are being forced to play nice with these new entrants. the federal communications commission has set a deadline of july 1 for all cable operators to make their services work with boxes from all third-party manufacturers, and last week it rejected a request from comcast to extend the deadline.  ''set-top boxes are becoming the central piece of equipment in the home for accessing entertainment and information,'' said joshua goldman, chief executive of akimbo, a silicon valley start-up trying to bring programming to the tv over the internet. ''consumers will buy their own device if they feel like they are not getting the services they want from their television operators.''  for decades, the cable industry did not worry much about introducing new features into their typically black set-top boxes. they faced little competition in their local markets and bought their equipment from one of two companies: general instruments, which was purchased by motorola in 2000, and scientific atlanta, acquired by cisco systems in 2005.  both companies build tv boxes according to the specifications of cable companies, who lease them to customers and then make their money on monthly subscriptions. because they are essentially giving the boxes away, the industry's focus, not surprisingly, is on keeping the cost of the equipment low.  but now new players are offering more sophisticated alternatives to cable boxes. over the last two years, 30 million personal computers have been sold with media center software from microsoft, which enhances video viewing on the pc, making it more like a television. the computers come with a remote control and can pause and fast-forward through video.  many of those pcs can now replace set-top boxes, thanks to a federal law passed over a decade ago that requires cable operators to sell credit-card-size devices called cablecards. these cards can plug into a media center pc, or other consumer electronics appliances like dvd players, allowing them to receive regular cable channels.  last week, apple also joined the fray with apple tv, a slick silver box that connects to the television and displays programs and movies that have been downloaded from itunes. it goes on sale next month for $299.  the message to cable companies and their equipment vendors is clear: if they want to keep up, they must build a better cable box.  they appear to be listening. at the las vegas show, just as many visitors swarmed around motorola's new set-top boxes as its latest mobile phones. the company showed a line of new boxes compatible with high-definition tv, with one-third more hard-disk space than its previous models, like the clumsy device mr. gillitt has under his tv.  the new boxes are designed to offer greater control over the television. for example, one new feature motorola is promoting is called ''program restart.'' if cable customers miss a show by a few minutes and do not record it, they can click a button and get the cable company to retransmit it directly to them, instantly. time warner cable is currently testing the service in san antonio.  padmasree warrior, the chief technology officer of motorola, said consumers now demand more from their televisions, largely thanks to tivo, which has forced the cable companies to ask suppliers for more innovative set-top boxes. ''enough people are experienced with time-shifting that there's a demand that the industry dynamics change,'' ms. warrior said.  across the showroom floor, scientific atlanta executives agreed that the old featureless tv tuner was quickly becoming a relic. among its new boxes, the company showed off one called the mcp-100: a silver set-top box with a digital video recorder and one surprising new feature: a slot for dvds. in addition to getting live tv, the device can play movies and burn programs and movies onto discs. it is now being tested by cable companies.  scientific atlanta is also building internet connections into all its boxes, so consumers can get programming from the web in addition to the traditional ways, by cable or satellite.  ''there's a growing need for high-quality video that goes right to where it's supposed to, the television, and not to the pc, where only college kids are looking at it,'' said robert c. mcintryre, scientific atlanta's chief technology officer.  the cable companies and their equipment vendors must adapt to the internet age quickly, because soon customers will have more choices than ever. telephone companies like at&t and verizon are investing heavily to bury fiber optic cables in most major cities and roll out their own tv offerings.  because the telephone companies deliver television using internet standards and typically package it with telephone and internet service, they say they can offer consumers more choices and control over the viewing experience. at&t, for example, showed off a set-top box at the las vegas show that received four different streams of programming (compared with most new digital cable boxes, which receive only two). that allows a customer to watch a program live while simultaneously recording three others.  one new feature that at&t was showing, called picture-in-picture browsing, or pip, lets a tv viewer channel surf on a small screen while continuing to watch another program on the rest of the screen.  at&t hopes to have its tv service, called uverse, accessible to 19 million homes by the end of next year. if it can pull it off, it would position at&t as a serious rival to cable and satellite television providers.  all of these established companies also have to watch out for smaller rivals with their own set-top box innovations. tivo's series3 hd digital media recorder, which went on sale last fall at electronics stores like best buy, is cablecard-ready, which means buyers can plug in a card from their local cable operator and use it as a substitute for a cable box.  another technology start-up at the show, digeo, exhibited its new moxi service, a set-top box with digital video recorder that it plans to start selling in the latter half of this year. the moxi also works with a cablecard and comes with smaller optional ''moxi mates,'' which buyers can connect to the other tvs in their homes. those televisions will then have access to the programming received by and recorded on the primary set-top box.  digeo's chief executive, mike fidler, said increased competition was ushering in a renaissance in set-top-box design. ''companies can now come in with innovative products that change the consumer experience and bring a whole new level of enjoyment to television,'' mr. fidler said.  