with eggs, the scent of a shellfish   of all the dishes i ate for the first time in 2006, this one stands out. it's amazing how good it is, how simple it is, how easy and fast it is. it's also amazing how puzzled you must be hearing me say these things about scrambled eggs with shrimp. have faith.  it's a chinese restaurant dish, one that i encountered in many forms on a recent trip to los angeles, including the hard-to-handle but perhaps even more delicious scrambled eggs with dungeness crab, in which the crab remained in its shell. that was something of a mess, as were scrambled eggs with lobster and scrambled eggs with head-on-shrimp. the version here, in which the shrimp are peeled, is in fact quite tidy.  what all of these preparations have in common is the wonderful way in which the flavors of the shellfish leach into the eggs. this does not become a bunch of shrimp sitting in a bunch of eggs; it becomes shrimp-flavored eggs. this transfer of flavor explains why it makes some sense to leave the shells on the shrimp, or crab, or lobster; but not enough sense to bother doing it that way.  scrambling eggs the right way is not difficult, but it's a technique that isn't known by everyone. you want to start the eggs in a not-too-hot pan, then turn the heat up high. stir them almost constantly and, when curds begin to form, stir them more. if the eggs begin to stick, or the curds become large, take the pan off the heat immediately and stir. when the cooking slows down again, put them back on the heat.  if you want this dish at its best, stop cooking when the eggs are creamy and even a little bit of liquid remains. (if you like your eggs dry, cook them as you usually do.)  eat this immediately, really hot. i made a batch as an appetizer for a party, using 24 eggs and about two pounds of shrimp. it was gone in a minute, and my feeling is that it was the high point of the meal.  scrambled eggs with shrimp  time: 20 minutes  3/4 pound raw shrimp, peeled  salt and freshly ground black pepper  3 tablespoons peanut oil, butter or neutral oil, like grapeseed or corn  8 eggs  2 tablespoons soy sauce  1 tablespoon sesame oil  1/2 cup chopped scallions  chopped fresh cilantro leaves for garnish, optional.  1. devein shrimp if you like; if large, cut into bite-size pieces. sprinkle with salt and pepper.  2. put oil or butter in a large skillet, preferably nonstick or cast iron, and turn heat to medium. when hot, add shrimp. cook, stirring, until shrimp is somewhat pink. beat eggs in a bowl with soy sauce and sesame oil.  3. turn heat to medium high and add eggs and scallions. cook, scraping pan with a rubber spatula. fold eggs over themselves, breaking up curds. if mixture clumps, remove it from heat and stir, then return to heat.  4. when eggs are creamy, adjust seasoning, garnish if you like and serve immediately.  yield: 4 servings.  the minimalist  