u.n. says global aids effort for children falls far short   some countries are making progress in treating children with aids and preventing others from becoming infected, but the overall global response is ''tragically insufficient,'' unicef said yesterday.  ''children affected by aids are now more visible and are taken more seriously in global, regional and national forums where they had received little consideration before,'' the united nations agency said in a report. better testing to find children with h.i.v., the virus that causes aids, and simpler formulations of the antiretroviral drugs that combat the infection have increased the number of children under treatment, unicef said. additional factors were lower prices for the drugs and improved skills among health workers.  but the overall statistics for children are grim, unicef found. it took stock of changes in 2005 and 2006, when the agency began a program to put what it called the ''missing face'' of children at the center of the world effort to halt and reverse the spread of h.i.v. by 2015.  central to that effort is testing pregnant women, providing short-term drug therapy to prevent them from transmitting the virus to their newborns, testing children and treating those infected.  about two years ago, unicef was concerned that a number of factors stopped children from getting treatment. one was the ability to detect infected children. two others were whether the available drugs were safe for children and affordable for poor countries.  the progress since then, though small, has exceeded unicef's expectations, peter mcdermott, who runs unicef's aids program, told reporters by telephone. ''children do very well on treatment,'' he said.  still, about 10 percent of pregnant women in capital cities in sub-saharan africa are infected with h.i.v. but the vast majority of pregnant african women do not have access to drugs that would prevent transmitting the virus to their infants. so about one-third of their children will become infected at or shortly after birth, unicef said.  progress in providing drugs to infected pregnant women to prevent transmission to their infants was small. the 9 percent of such women in low- and middle-income countries worldwide who received antiretroviral drugs in 2005 rose from 3 percent in 2003.  the data available for 2005 shows that only seven countries cited in the report provided drugs to at least 40 percent of infected pregnant women to prevent h.i.v. among newborns: argentina (87 percent), brazil (48 percent), botswana (54 percent), jamaica (86 percent), russia (84 percent), thailand (46 percent) and ukraine (90 percent).  of the estimated 2.3 million children under 15 who had h.i.v. in 2005, 780,000 needed antiretroviral therapy, unicef said, and only 10 percent of them received it.  untreated, about one-third of infected infants die in their first year, and half die by their second birthday. that translated into 380,000 children dying from aids last year, unicef said.  only seven countries identified in the report provided antiretroviral therapy to at least 20 percent of children needing it. they were botswana (84 percent), cape verde (47 percent), the dominican republic (23 percent), jamaica (47 percent), namibia (52 percent), rwanda (20 percent) and thailand (95 percent).  lack of prevention and treatment has left an estimated 15.2 million children as orphans. the number is expected to grow to 20 million by 2010.  the actual problem is worse, the report said, because ''many more children live with parents who are chronically ill, live in households that have taken in orphans due to aids or have lost teachers and other adult members of the community to aids.''  in issuing the report, unicef said it was trying to establish a baseline for future monitoring. because data from 2005 was the latest available, the agency said it could not provide statistical comparisons for changes in the year since it began its effort. even so, it said it could make some determinations about progress, of the lack thereof, based on the work it has been doing in the field.  an additional problem is that national data on pediatric care and treatment is limited in most countries.  