grimy old soul prepares for a scrubbing   once upon a time, the 30-foot-wide mural shone brilliantly, and its fairytale king stood forth colorfully, flanked by knights, musicians and assorted minions. now, the painting suffers from cracking and from a scattering of dents, even splashes of alcohol.  worse, it is coated with a decades-old layer of brownish grime and nicotine residue that has not only hid the artist's technical mastery, but has also obscured a century-old joke embedded within the image.  and so, yesterday, old king cole descended from his storied perch at the st. regis hotel along with his pipe and his bowl and his fiddlers three. and he seemed none the less merry for the experience.  the 1906 oil painting by maxfield parrish, from which the hotel's king cole bar took its name, was removed from its esteemed location on the barroom wall for its first extensive restoration since the 1950's, when its cleaning and repair were overseen by the artist himself.  after a six-person crew toiled for hours to remove the 8-foot-high painting -- rendered on three 10-foot-wide panels -- a full-size temporary reproduction was hoisted into place, and the bar -- where the bloody mary was first introduced to new york in the 1920's -- was able to take drink orders by the stroke of noon.  ''the painting has had a place in new york history for a hundred years, and people tell us they had their first legal drink before it, or that it was where they first proposed,'' said scott geraghty, the hotel's general manager. ''now, without cigar and cigarette smoking, we thought it was just the time for a good cleaning.''  the $100,000 restoration of the painting is part of a nearly completed $400,000 makeover of the bar, a backdrop for scenes in ''the devil wears prada'' and ''the first wives club.''  the upgrade is part of a grander 18-month, $35 million refurbishment of the hotel.  the mural's dents will be mended and the grime removed along with ''some accidental bartender splashes through the years,'' said the restorer, harriet irgang of rustin levenson art conservation associates.  the king was trucked to a studio in chelsea, where he will be ministered to for the next six weeks or so before his grand restitution.  ''this is a painting of civic significance for new york, and needs to be preserved for future generations,'' said eric p. widing, head of the american paintings department at christie's auction house, which advised the hotel on the mural's worth ($12 million) and its conservation issues. ''it's always been a touchstone object, and has been almost public furniture for new yorkers.''  the painting was commissioned for john jacob astor as an adornment for the hotel he financed, the knickerbocker, at the southeast corner of broadway and 42d street. parrish's quaker upbringing made him reluctant to paint a mural for a bar, mr. geraghty said, but the artist was offered a kingly sum for 1906, $5,000, to complete it.  however, he added, astor felt that for that amount of money he should be portrayed as the king himself, and parrish acquiesced. after the knickerbocker was converted to an office building, the painting was moved to the st. regis, at 2 east 55th street, in the mid-1930's, mr. widing said. it became the centerpiece of the bar, which already had a claim to fame: the bloody mary, with its basic mélange of vodka, tomato juice and pepper, is believed to have been brought to the st. regis by fernand petiot, who invented it in paris.  the painting became a signature feature of the hotel that would later be inhabited by ernest hemingway and marlene dietrich, and where salvador dalí stayed for a decade. marilyn monroe and joe dimaggio lived there, mr. geraghty said, and john lennon and yoko ono took up residence in 1971 before moving to the dakota.  ''this painting launched his career,'' mr. widing said of parrish (1870-1966), an artist and illustrator whose position, thanks to the painting, ''became assured as america's most popular illustrator up to that time.'' mr. widing said he believed king cole's face was that of astor.  parrish's works have been newly appreciated during the last decade, he said, when some of his paintings have sold for millions.  through decades of mixed-drink conviviality, bartenders have shared with their regulars a secret of the painting that is considerably less elegant than the hotel, the bar or indeed the mural itself. the legend, repeated by generations of bar patrons, is that the king's sheepish grin, and the startled reactions of his knights, were occasioned by the flatulence of the monarch.  some versions of the this tale, passed on through the decades, hold that there was a satirical competition among the well-known artists of parrish's era to find a way to depict this condition in a painting, a contest that parrish is reputed to have won. whatever the truth of that version, ''it's a good story, and part of the legend of the painting,'' mr. widing said.  the full-color reproduction that has replaced the painting -- applied to canvas using a digital photographic process, and stretched over wood -- faithfully depicts the original's brownish tinge, its cracks and even its dents. ''after all,'' mr. geraghty said, ''we could not leave the wall blank.''  correction:  january 19, 2007, friday  an article on wednesday about a 1906 maxfield parrish painting of old king cole, which was removed from the st. regis hotel in manhattan for its first extensive cleaning since the 1950s, misidentified the man who commissioned it and whose face is believed to have been the model for the king's. he is john jacob astor iv -- not john jacob astor, his great-grandfather.  