a father and a son tell their own tales of love and loss   azazel jacobs's unexpectedly beguiling romantic comedy, ''the goodtimeskid,'' opening today at the anthology film archives, boasts a 77-minute running time that's maybe 10 percent dialogue. the remainder is spent watching alienated characters -- a young woman named diaz; her boyfriend, rodolfo; and another man who's also named rodolfo -- drift through a deadpan-surreal city while remaining lost in their own heads.  the wisp of a plot finds the first rodolfo (a spiritually battered bohemian played by mr. jacobs) mistakenly receiving a letter ordering him to report for military induction. report he does, partly to escape his sweet but suffocating girlfriend, diaz (the daffy knockout sara diaz), and partly because he's afflicted by the same comic paralysis as the rest of the characters and is desperate to make a big decision (or any decision).  at the same induction, the even more existentially shellshocked second rodolfo (played by the actor and filmmaker gerardo naranjo, who has hector elizondo's gentle eyes and 1970s warren beatty hair) hears his own named called, sees the first rodolfo stand up, keeps his trap shut, follows the first rodolfo home, observes his exit from the relationship and then walks right into diaz's life.  diaz is o.k. with this; within minutes of meeting the second rodolfo, she nicknames him ''depresso'' and dances in the kitchen like a max fleischer cartoon character to a vinyl recording of ''i can't give you anything but love.''  shot in ripe color on 35-millimeter film stock reportedly stolen from a hollywood production, and featuring a mandy hoffman score that suggests nino rota music performed by an orchestra that's being gradually digested by a boa constrictor, ''the goodtimeskid'' finds poetry in wordless scenes of observation: diaz destroying her ex's records, pausing to glance at the liner notes; the first rodolfo drunk in a pub, baiting a gang of toughs while clad in a leather helmet, boxing gloves and a cape made from an american flag; diaz and the second rodolfo gazing frankly at each other in a coffeeshop while an off-screen television plays a soap opera.  mr. jacobs's approach is descended from a long line of minimalist filmmakers, from jacques tati (''monsieur hulot's holiday'') up through jim jarmusch (''mystery train''), but ''the goodtimeskid'' dances, like diaz, in its own sweet style. it doesn't get to the point because getting there is the point.  also having its premiere at the anthology film archives is ''two wrenching departures,'' a video version of a 1989 experimental feature by mr. jacobs's father, the filmmaker ken jacobs.  designed as an elegy for two of ken jacobs's friends, the cameraman and co-director bob fleischner (''blonde cobra'') and the performer jack smith (''flaming creatures''), it dices up black-and-white footage taken when the men attended night school at the city university of new york in the late 1950s, reprinting and repeating individual frames and breaking them up with stretches of blackness. the resultant stutter-step effect suggests an attempt to seize time and live forever in the moment.  two wrenching departures  opens today in manhattan.  directed and edited by ken jacobs; director of photography, mr. jacobs. at the anthology film archives, 32 second avenue, at second street, east village. running time: 90 minutes. this film is not rated.  the goodtimeskid  opens today in manhattan.  directed and edited by azazel jacobs; written by gerardo naranjo and mr. jacobs; directors of photography, mr. jacobs, eric curtis and mr. naranjo; music by mandy hoffman; produced by sara diaz, georgina garcia riedel and ernesto garabito. at the anthology film archives, 32 second avenue, at second street, east village. running time: 77 minutes. this film is not rated.  film review  