a top chef's kitchen is far too hot, some workers say   daniel boulud can't stand to see a detail out of place. as pans slam around him during dinner service in the upper east side restaurant that bears his first name, he will pause to request that a spoon be polished. how best to marry braised endive to seared beef can absorb him as utterly as the lilies in the dining room that haven't opened on schedule.  he's also a man who has cultivated the news media over his 23 years in new york. he is quick to get on the phone with a writer and can engineer a smart publicity move, like creating the world's most expensive hamburger, which won him worldwide attention in 2003.  outside the restaurant, mr. boulud is known for his generosity. last year he helped raise nearly $2 million, much of it for citymeals-on-wheels, on whose board he sits.  on top of all that, mr. boulud is a social animal. his fellow four-star chefs would vote him the guy most likely to lead the conga line.  in short, he is a perfectionist who is accustomed to being liked. all of which helps explain why mr. boulud, 51, cannot grasp why a group of restaurant-worker advocates keep showing up outside daniel with a 12-foot inflatable cockroach, singing ''we shall overcome'' and chanting that he is a racist.  ''racism is a vicious charge,'' mr. boulud said in an interview. ''it is too easy to accuse someone of that, and it is very hard to defend yourself.''  and yet mr. boulud is being forced to do just that. in december, seven current and former employees filed suit in federal district court in manhattan accusing him of discrimination. similar charges against mr. boulud are before the federal equal employment opportunity commission.  according to the lawsuit, dining room workers at daniel have been denied promotion because they were latino or bangladeshi. the employees also say that mr. boulud and other managers yelled racial slurs. at one point, they say, spanish was banned among employees; only english and french were allowed. those are examples, they say, of how the working culture at daniel favors white europeans at the expense of other groups.  until recently mr. boulud has chosen not to speak publicly about the charges. he concedes that he could just settle out of court and make his headaches go away, but he said that would imply that he is guilty.  mr. boulud, a native of lyon, france, holds up his own immigrant experience as a defense. he said he likes nothing more than to help young people who love the restaurant business move up the same way his mentors helped him.  ''it is a question of trust and evolution,'' he said.  but he has had enough of inflatable cockroaches and accusations. ''i want a judge to show me if i was wrong,'' he said.  to that end, he filed a suit in state supreme court in manhattan accusing the group leading the protest, the restaurant opportunities center of new york, or roc, of defamation, nuisance and harassment, and of causing damage to his business.  the organization has shown up outside daniel and a couple of his public events more than a dozen times, most recently thursday night in observance of martin luther king's birthday. managers have escorted customers into the restaurant with the sort of care that might be afforded women wearing furs near an animal-rights convention, and waiters have walked outside and staged impromptu counterdemonstrations, matching the protesters chant for chant.  mr. boulud first came in contact with the restaurant opportunities center one evening in the fall of 2005, at the height of dinner service. about 40 members marched in and handed managers a letter demanding that he discuss their accusations or face a lawsuit and as much as $1.2 million in liabilities.  both sides initially found common ground, but negotiations soon fell apart. it has been downhill since.  given their role in an industry where very few workers are represented by unions, new york restaurant owners are watching the fight closely, with some offering off-the-record support as they worry that the organization will next turn its attention to them.  whatever the outcome, mr. boulud's headaches bring to light a common problem in high-end restaurants around the country. in an industry that relies largely on immigrants, just how difficult is it for workers who don't speak english as a first language to get ahead? and at what point does hiring someone to achieve a certain look or style in a restaurant turn into racism?  ''this is not a new issue,'' said gerald a. fernandez, the president of the multicultural foodservice and hospitality alliance and a director of the national restaurant association.  ''sometimes the europeans have been given a free pass,'' mr. fernandez said. ''they're in this high-end restaurant doing very sophisticated food, and they've kind of been under the covers on these issues. people haven't held them to the same standard like a t.g.i. friday's or some other national chain that has had to take a hard look at this stuff.''  the restaurant opportunities center, a nonprofit group, sprang to life as a way to help windows on the world restaurant workers who had a difficult time getting fair treatment after the attacks of sept. 11, 2001. since then the group has dedicated itself to helping immigrants who face discrimination and poor working conditions in new york's restaurant business. along with running colors, a cooperative restaurant on lafayette street in manhattan, it produces reports on working conditions and helped put together a restaurant training manual distributed by the city.  but it also uses the threat of lawsuits and bad publicity to make social change, a tactic it hopes to employ on top restaurants elsewhere in the country.  ''if people aren't going to see the value of change, they will see the consequences of not changing,'' said saru jayaraman, the yale-educated lawyer who is the group's executive director.  the approach has worked before. in 2005, ms. jayaraman's organization got the smith & wollensky restaurant group, which runs cité and park avenue cafe, to pay $164,000 to 23 workers who claimed that they were discriminated against because they were mexican and that they were forced to work as many as 15 hours a week extra, without pay.  whether mr. boulud discriminates against workers because of their national origin is something the courts may have to decide. interviews with more than a dozen former and present employees, some connected with the restaurant opportunities center and others not, revealed a collection of stories that could support either side.  some workers offered what appeared to be clear examples of discrimination. others said that workers who went to roc were simply looking for a quick payout and didn't have the skills or motivation to be waiters at daniel, one of the finest french restaurants in the country.  josé arenas, an immigrant from mexico, is a plaintiff in the discrimination suit. he got a job in 2003 busing tables at daniel, happy to have found a way finally to support his wife and two young children. his manager, he recalls, told him there would be opportunities for promotion, but mr. arenas said he was passed over for three jobs by french busers with less experience whom he had trained.  ''some nights i could not sleep, and i don't want other people to experience that same discrimination,'' said mr. arenas, who now works as a waiter at a midtown restaurant he did not want to name.  people who have left the restaurant voluntarily and are not connected with the restaurant opportunities center offer two versions of life as an immigrant at daniel. miguel albarado, an ecuadorean who most recently worked at le bernardin, startedas a buser at daniel in 1999 and in four years worked his way up to a position as a waiter, when he left to start a chinese buffet in jersey city. he got back into fine dining with a job waiting tables at le bernardin and is now starting a restaurant in the bronx.  mr. albarado said the suit was a misunderstanding.  ''there are people who are really motivated, and they get promoted,'' he said. ''they build trust with the owners. others are not motivated, and they don't get the trust.''  others say that verbal abuse and bias in the promotion system were so bad they had to get out.  johnny parra was a waiter making about $70,000 a year until 2004, when she left to work at alain ducasse. she stopped working when that restaurant closed and she took time off for a sex change operation. ms. parra said she was spared the harassment that other latinos complained of and was promoted ahead of workers who were perhaps better qualified, mainly because she was light-skinned. but she said she witnessed the problems, particularly in the kitchen.  ''you cannot even go in when daniel was in there,'' she said. ''french guys would say to me: ''don't go in the kitchen. he's cursing the mexicans.' ''  mr. boulud acknowledged that, like many of the country's best chefs, he has screamed in the kitchen, but he said he had not targeted any one group in his remarks.  ''people change with time, and i think i have changed with time,'' he said. ''if i burst out it will last 10 seconds, and it is over. but i am fair. i have made an effort in the past few years to keep the kitchen serene.''  a manager did tell workers they shouldn't speak spanish at the restaurant, but that was a mistake and was corrected the same week, said brett traussi, director of operations at the dinex group, which oversees mr. boulud's five restaurants and his catering company.  that's not to say daniel is an easy place to work. it can be a tough and exacting environment.  ''this is not nursery school,'' said michael lawrence, assistant director of operations at dinex, who is named as a defendant in the federal lawsuit. ''it's equal-opportunity bite-your-head-off.''  still, mr. boulud's operation offers great rewards to those who meet the challenge, he said. and mr. boulud himself can be very generous: he has lent money to employees who need it, including one of the plaintiffs in the suit.  even a buser can make more than $40,000 a year with benefits. not everyone who starts as a buser or a runner can succeed at daniel as a waiter, mr. lawrence said. the restaurant is about theater, about creating an environment in which diners will scramble for a reservation and the chance to pay $96 for three courses of food prepared by mr. boulud, who is in the kitchen almost every night.  on the floor, a waiter must dance a careful ballet of precise french-style service and be well versed in wine, cheese and french cuisine. he (and most often it is ''he'') has to be able to carve a chicken effortlessly at tableside while describing the differences between a pouilly-fuissé and a pouilly-fumé.  and because it is a french restaurant, mr. boulud wants to have plenty of french-speaking and french-trained waiters on the floor, some of whom he brings in from france, trains for a short time at lower-paying jobs and then promotes.  (one night this month, four hispanic men were waiting tables at daniel. three had been promoted from lounge waiter to dining room waiter after the onset of the protests, but mr. lawrence said there was no connection. ''it was because they were ready,'' he said, adding that normally five hispanic waiters are on duty.)  like many chefs, suzanne goin, the principal owner of lucques and aoc in los angeles, handpicks waiters to achieve a certain feel in a restaurant, but she said she believed that any style of service could be learned no matter what a person's culture. and like many chefs, she has made it a point to have a staff that reflects the demographic makeup of the surrounding city.  but it wasn't always that way for her. when ms. goin worked at campanile in los angeles some years ago, she worried how customers would react to the restaurant's first mexican-born waiter. managers worked to help him learn the wine and improve his pronunciation. she now makes that kind of training available to anyone who has the desire and intelligence to do the job.  ''i think we should promote people worthy of being promoted, but you also can't get people of color on the floor who don't have skills or the language,'' she said.  phoebe damrosch, a former waiter at per se who has just finished a book on the restaurant business called ''service included,'' to be issued in the fall by william morrow, said there is a thick glass ceiling in fine-dining rooms, both for women and for people who aren't white.  ''they always say, 'they're not ready,' '' ms. damrosch said. ''that's always the phrase: 'she's not quite ready.' they always hide under wine knowledge.''  her husband, andré mack, understands the problem managers face when trying to give customers what they want from service staff members. an african-american, he worked as a sommelier at per se before he left to start a wine business.  diners used to ask their waiter if they could see the sommelier, and when mr. mack showed up, would say, ''yeah, we're waiting for the sommelier to come by.'' or they would confuse him with the other black man on the floor.  but he doesn't think that most fine restaurants discriminate.  ''some people might use it as an excuse to not promote people,'' he said. ''but in my experience if you had the right attitude and were willing to learn, it didn't matter what you looked like.''  tom colicchio, whose restaurant craft has been cited by the restaurant opportunities center as exemplary in promoting people of color, offers english classes for his staff, but said he doesn't spend a lot of extra time worrying about diversity.  ''we feel that if someone is ready for promotion, they get promoted,'' he said. ''simple as that.''  sometimes it does take extra effort, though. many bangladeshi staff members at gramercy tavern, where mr. colicchio used to be the chef, had the potential to be excellent waiters, but were not familiar with wine because, as observant muslims, they didn't drink it.  without extensive wine knowledge, they couldn't be sent onto the floor. for one particularly promising person, though, mr. colicchio found a solution. he made him a captain in the private dining room, where all the wine is ordered in advance.  as for mr. boulud's problem, mr. colicchio suggested more talking. he didn't condone the tactics of the restaurant opportunities center, but he said that mr. boulud needed to sit down and talk with its representatives again.  ''there is no right or wrong here,'' he said. ''daniel has a right to run his business the way he wants to run it. but sometimes we get so busy running our restaurants we don't listen to people.  ''what's the alternative? having a 12-foot cockroach in front of your restaurant?''  