no leap off 86th floor, but success in court   if you have parachute training and an urge to jump off the empire state building -- or the brooklyn bridge -- there may be nothing wrong with it, a new york city judge ruled yesterday.  the judge threw out an indictment against jeb corliss, a professional parachute jumper who tried to leap from the observation deck of the empire state building last april, before being stopped by building security officers and the police.  but justice michael r. ambrecht of state supreme court in manhattan said that as a professional base (bridge, antenna, span, earth) jumper, mr. corliss, who has parachuted from the eiffel tower, the golden gate bridge and the petronas towers in kuala lumpur, malaysia, was experienced and careful enough to jump off a building without endangering his own life or anyone else's.  ''to hold that defendant's conduct rises to this level of blameworthiness is manifestly unjust and contrary to prevailing law,'' justice ambrecht wrote in his eight-page decision.  legal experts expressed amazement at the decision yesterday.  ''well, as a new yorker, i think i won't walk near the empire state building for a while,'' said stephen gillers, a law professor at new york university. ''if you're as skilled as corliss and you get a judge like ambrecht, you may have a license to do this.''  mr. corliss, 30, who lives in malibu, calif., was in court for the decision. his lawyer, mark jay heller, hailed that decision as a huge victory for would-be jumpers everywhere. he was coy about whether his client would try to jump again, but said ''i wouldn't be at all surprised.''.  paul browne, a spokesman for the police department, said that if mr. corliss did try the stunt again, he would be arrested. ''it's a surprising decision, considering the grave risk posed to the public on the streets below, not to mention the police officers and empire state security personnel who risked their own lives to stop him,'' mr. browne said.  ''does the court really want the empire state and other city landmarks to become magnets for base jumpers?'' he asked.  what the decision shows, mr. heller says, is that while many things are manifestly illegal in new york -- like murder, shoplifting and passing a bad check -- jumping off a tall edifice may not be.  he predicted that the state legislature would be forced to close this apparent legal loophole and pass a law against jumping off tall buildings and bridges.  ''i mean, it's shocking,'' mr. heller said. ''i would assume that somebody is now going to go to the legislature and say, 'hey, we have a little hole in our book here; we've got to plug it up.' ''  mr. corliss was charged with reckless endangerment with depraved indifference to life. justice ambrecht ruled that mr. corliss had not shown depraved indifference because he had studied traffic patterns on fifth avenue and 34th street, and timed his jump to land when the light was red to avoid hitting vehicles on the avenue.  but mr. gillers disagreed and suggested that the district attorney, robert m. morgenthau appeal. ''it doesn't make sense to me that in a city like new york with its population density on a busy shopping street that somebody, no matter how skilled, can safely be allowed to jump from the 86th floor of the empire state building,'' mr. gillers said.  as for the absence of a law prohibiting people from jumping off tall edifices, mr. gillers said mr. heller was taking things too literally.  ''the law works in generalities,'' he said. ''there's no separate statute for the empire state building, the chrysler building and the g.m. building, or even buildings per se. the law talks about creating risk, and whether you do it by jumping off the empire state building or driving through a commercial zone during the business day at high speeds, they both fall within the same prohibition.''  barbara thompson, a spokeswoman for mr. morgenthau, said prosecutors stood by the charge and were studying the decision ''to see what remedies we have.'' she added, ''we believe that jumping from the empire state building remains a reckless act.''  