room to improve   q. when shopping online, i often see newsletters or blogs with design advice. are any worth reading?  a. that depends. we've all noticed how print magazines and catalogs have come to look similar; in some cases they seem almost indistinguishable. the same convergence is taking place on the internet as design stores have begun offering commentary that you would expect from a design blog.  ''all the retailers are trying to create a brand by building a community,'' said maxwell gillingham-ryan, the founder of apartmenttherapy.com, a home-design blog.  many retail blogs have a slightly disingenuous feeling: they offer what appears to be a discursive commentary written by some friendly correspondent until -- oomph -- along comes the product plug.  here's an example: hatch, a blog produced by design public (designpublic.com), an online furnishings store based in san francisco, offers standard fare, like chatty book reviews and listings for museum shows. mixed in, and offered in the same tone, are pitches for the company's products. on dec. 24, for example, the blog featured four design public products made from sustainable wood, and the next entry, on christmas day, urged readers to give design public gift certificates. bah, humbug.  design public and other online stores are no doubt mindful of the popularity of sites like treehugger.com and design*sponge (designsponge.blogspot.com), and are ginning up their own versions. retailers are looking at blogs like moco loco (mocoloco.com) ''and salivating at the possibilities, but it's hard to translate that voice to a retail site,'' said john tusher, an owner of velocity art and design, an online store with a showroom in seattle. ''people don't like blogs with a hidden agenda,'' he said. ''people want blogs to be honest.''  mr. tusher said velocity had its own online newsletter, a ''style report'' that featured its products, but discontinued it two years ago because it rang false. ''our web site already sells products,'' he said. ''we don't need another guise in which to sell products.'' mr. tusher said velocity is planning to begin a newsletter that will resemble the editor's letter found at the beginning of many magazines.  if so, it may be something like the ''design notes'' published by design within reach (dwr.com), the granddaddy of contemporary furnishings sites. in 1999, the store began e-mailing its newsletter, also available on the web, to subscribers, who the company says now number 425,000. presented as a letter from rob forbes, the company's founder, and sent at least once a month, the newsletter is a dispatch on relatively substantive topics, like the impact of the new guthrie theater, designed by jean nouvel, on the cultural landscape of minneapolis. it often feels like a lengthy e-mail from a cool, well-traveled uncle, with reports from zurich, milan, buenos aires and other stops on the international design circuit, complete with tips on where to stay.  of course, for those of us who won't be staying at a boutique hotel in barcelona any time soon, design notes can seem like a newsletter from a club we don't belong to.  ''retailers want a voice, and they want to say more than 'buy our product,' '' mr. tusher said. ''but i don't think anyone has quite hit on it yet.''  the best way to stay informed -- and to find help furnishing your home -- may be to stay with unaffiliated design blogs. what confuses matters is that some blogs, including design*sponge and apartmenttherapy.com, are now selling merchandise. pretty soon they may all look alike, just like magazines and catalogs.  