giants hope gilbride can animate manning   the power structure of the giants, from the team president, john mara, to the new general manager, jerry reese, to coach tom coughlin, took turns recently expressing a general disappointment in the development of quarterback eli manning. each stated an urgent goal of making him better.  so it may seem strange that the giants promoted the quarterbacks coach, the man who has worked most closely with manning during his three-year career. the team announced yesterday that it had elevated kevin gilbride to offensive coordinator.  gilbride replaces john hufnagel, who left the team after he was stripped of his duties before the final regular-season game.  according to coughlin, placing gilbride in a different role -- one overseeing the entire offense, not only a single position -- will kick-start manning's stalled progress. it has less to do with manning specifically than how the pieces of the offense fit together and play to manning's strengths.  gilbride, 55, built his reputation with a wide range of offensive systems and quarterback styles, helping several players -- including warren moon, mark brunell, kordell stewart and drew bledsoe -- to some of their best seasons.  he has far more n.f.l. experience as an offensive coordinator (11 seasons) than as a quarterbacks coach (four seasons), and says he hopes a broader role will give him more influence over manning's improvement.  ''it's something that i feel like i've been very good at and hopefully will continue to be good at,'' gilbride said during a conference call with reporters. ''it's certainly a challenge, but that opportunity, to serve kind of as a catalyst by giving him play selections that maybe have a higher percentage of success, i think certainly gives him a better opportunity to be the best quarterback that he can be.''  what might have most helped gilbride secure the job was his comfort as a coordinator and coughlin's comfort with gilbride at his side.  gilbride was coughlin's offensive coordinator with the jacksonville jaguars in 1995 and 1996, the franchise's first two seasons. in 1995, the jaguars ranked 28th in the league in offense. in 1996, they were third, and gilbride was hired as the coach of the san diego chargers. he was fired six games into his second season, as the rookie quarterback ryan leaf struggled.  gilbride spent two seasons as the offensive coordinator for the pittsburgh steelers, then two with the buffalo bills. coughlin hired him as the quarterbacks coach in 2004, three months before the team traded for manning during the n.f.l. draft.  manning helped the giants to an 11-5 record and a division title in 2005, throwing 24 touchdown passes and 17 interceptions. his 2006 statistics were similar. he had 24 touchdowns and 18 interceptions, with a higher completion percentage but fewer yards. the giants remain alternately tantalized and frustrated by his play.  last month, the giants were 7-8 and desperate for a victory to make the playoffs. coughlin handed gilbride the coordinator's duties, including play calling, but not the job title.  the giants defeated the redskins, 34-28, to make the playoffs, where they lost to the eagles, 23-20, on a last-second field goal.  ''i would like to think that they saw the response of the team in the last two games and they had studied the success that we've had at other places,'' gilbride said, explaining why he believed he was promoted. ''combining those two things, and knowing that eli was always well prepared, and knowledgeable in what he needed to do in terms of adjusting the protections, directing the running game, throwing the ball where it should be, i think they appreciated all those things.''  coughlin now needs to hire a quarterbacks coach. gilbride expects the other offensive assistants to return. gilbride's wish list includes more deep-threat receivers, a young tackle and reinforcements at running back, where a void was created by tiki barber's retirement.  all that, he hopes, will make manning better.  ''we're only going to go as far as he takes us,'' gilbride said.  and the giants hope gilbride is in the right position to guide him.  pro football  