russia warns citizens of possible security threat   russian intelligence officials placed the country on an unusual high alert on tuesday night, appealing to citizens for vigilance and saying that the government had been informed by ''foreign partners'' of a possible terrorist act.  the warning was at once detailed and vague. issued at the end of a 9 p.m. national news broadcast, it said that the national antiterrorist committee was checking information about a possible attack on public ground transportation or subway systems, but it did not specify in what city an attack was feared, or when.  it also did not identify the ''foreign partners'' who had provided the information.  the national antiterrorist committee is led by nikolai p. patrushev, the director of the federal security service, or f.s.b., russia's domestic successor to the k.g.b.  the broadcast said mr. patrushev had ordered ''antiterrorist forces and resources to a state of increased readiness and to carry out preventive measures.''  an unidentified antiterrorist official also urged that ''the population take this information seriously, raise their degree of vigilance, render necessary assistance to law enforcement structures and, in the event of coming across what appear to be suspicious signs, to notify security and law enforcement agencies immediately,'' according to interfax.  russia has suffered severe and widely varied terrorist attacks since the 1990s, including truck, subway and suicide bombings, the in-flight destruction of civilian passenger jets and mass hostage-takings in a hospital, a theater and a school. chechen separatists have claimed responsibility for most of the most lethal attacks.  but the attacks have slowed markedly since the seizure of a public school in beslan in 2004 ended with more than 300 civilian deaths, and as russia and pro-kremlin chechen forces have gained the upper hand over separatists in the lingering war in chechnya. moreover, shamil basayev, the terrorist leader who often claimed responsibility for ordering or organizing previous attacks, was killed in an explosion last summer near chechnya, and no similar figure has emerged.  a spokeswoman for the national electricity monopoly said the guard had been increased at its facilities around the country, but there were no immediate reports of disruptions from mr. patrushev's warning. worries about the safety of public transportation in 2004 after a bombing on a subway car led to huge traffic jams on moscow's already clogged roads.  