what's in a name? $400 million.   when the nets were a goofball franchise, it was impossible to imagine their owners consorting with a global financial power like barclays. but the nets aren't laughable anymore, and yesterday, their principal owner, bruce c. ratner; some of his investors, like the rapper jay-z; and a few of their players were at the brooklyn museum to announce that barclays will pay a record $400 million over 20 years to put its name on the team's new arena. ''barclays is saying brooklyn is the place to be,'' ratner said at a luncheon in the elegant beaux-arts court, accompanied on a platform by jason kidd, vince carter, mayor michael r. bloomberg and n.b.a. commissioner david stern. (ratner's company is the development partner on the new headquarters for the new york times.)  given the nets' history, it is also difficult to comprehend that barclays is paying exactly what citicorp committed in november for the right for 20 years to name the mets' new stadium, citi field, which is expected to open in 2009, a few months before the planned opening of barclays center. the arena, designed by frank gehry, is part of the $4 billion atlantic yards development near downtown brooklyn. it still faces a series of lawsuits before it can be built.  several demonstrators protested outside the museum, accusing barclays of participating in the state's attempt to use eminent domain to condemn property for the project. they also said barclays profited from the slave trade yet is aligned with ratner, who is marketing his team to african-american fans. a company spokesman said barclays had not been involved in slavery.  the mayor turned away any criticism of barclays and said with a darryl dawkins-sized dollop of civic hyperbole, ''people will be talking about the barclays center all the time, all year, for decades to come.''  it is possible that the london-based barclays overpaid, but it can afford to, as the price it deemed necessary to accelerate its exposure in the united states as an investment banker and asset manager. barclays appears to be paying a premium to be a part of the return of major league sports to brooklyn more than a half-century after the dodgers left.  ''this goes across many areas,'' said robert e. diamond jr., the president of barclays plc. ''you look at barclays center, the frank gehry design, the impact it will have on brooklyn, the things we'll do in our not-for-profit; there are many aspects beside the naming rights.'' its charitable works will include rebuilding basketball courts and staging amateur tournaments, similar to its activities in england as the title sponsor of the premier league.  brett yormark, the president of nets sports & entertainment, focused on barclays as a possible naming rights buyer, with a new york-based fashion company, a bank and two telecommunciations corporations.  ''we said: 'who needs a game changer here? who's got a footprint here, but isn't big enough?' and barclays was on the list,'' he said. ''as we scoured financial institutions we saw barclays needed a game changer, that they don't have as big a presence or brand recognition here as in the u.k. and we saw that it got involved with the barclays classic in westchester.'' barclays took over for buick in 2005 as the sponsor of the pga tour event.  the size of the nets' and the mets' deals should make the jets and the giants salivate as they look over the next year to sell the naming rights to their $1.2 billion stadium in the meadowlands. they hired the wasserman media group last year to handle the transaction, and yesterday, jeff knapple, the president of wmg marketing said: ''we've watched with a keen eye toward what the mets and the nets have done. it's an indication of the power of the new york marketplace and its position in the nation and the world.''  knapple negotiated the most expensive arena naming-rights deal before the barclays center, the 20-year, $182 million philips arena deal in atlanta.  ''philips was a massive leap above staples center, and it's held for seven, nearly eight years,'' he said.  the new york market had, until 1996, barely entered the naming-rights world except for the continental airlines, 12-year, $29-million deal to rename brendan byrne arena in the meadowlands. now, a combined $800 million is going to the nets and the mets. and in a deal announced earlier this month, prudential financial will spend $105.3 million to name the devils' new arena in newark for 20 years.  the yankees, who would probably reap the most from a hot local naming-rights market, will not seek a corporate name when the new yankee stadium opens. ''the yankee brand is very significant and extremely in demand,'' randy levine, the team's president said, ''and we expect to do many types of unique and creative sponsorships. but we will retain the dignity of the yankee stadium name.''  fans will veer from the sober dignity of barclays center for a nickname. they could shorten the name to canine speech (''we're going to the bark'') or ally with a famous homonym, charles barkley. the chuck?  ''absolutely not,'' yormark said. ''the barclays center flows so well.''  sports business  