where there's a plant, she has an answer   in the long-ago new york of edith wharton, during the golden age of estate gardens, big men wanted big things, including big plants. the horticultural society of new york, founded in 1900, was the gaudy instrument of their will.  in 1912, adolph lewisohn, the mining millionaire, used a horticultural society show to display three chrysanthemums, whose cultivation he had personally overseen. the diameter of each flower's head was about 11 feet, or nearly the height of a one-story building.  the flowers were wheeled to the show, at the american museum of natural history, in huge wagons accompanied by police officers on horseback. ''they were carried in great cases fourteen feet square,'' the new york times reported on nov. 2, 1912, ''the police escort being needed because they were so large they obstructed traffic.''  today, the horticultural society is still cultured, but in a different way. it is mainly known for community outreach programs, like its project to teach rikers island inmates the virtues of gardening.  one beneficiary of the society's glory days is katherine powis, 56, its librarian.  the society's library, one of hundreds of special libraries in the city, contains nearly 12,000 titles focused on horticulture, or the cultivation of gardens. with works dating from the 18th century, the society has one of the largest horticulture collections in the country.  ''you are not,'' as ms. powis, the daughter of a queens bank clerk, puts it, ''going to find these books at barnes & noble.''  the society library is newly housed in an office building on west 37th street, having moved there last summer from dusty warrens on west 58th street. like other privately financed libraries in the city, it is eager for patrons, but its new location presents a challenge.  now on the 13th floor, it no longer has walk-in traffic, as it did in its old location, which had a window onto the street. and the society's listing in the new building's directory under ''t'' -- for ''the'' -- is something of a marketing obstacle.  when asked about the listing, ms. powis, who has been the librarian since 1989, holds up her hand, as if she were diana ross fronting the supremes. ''stop,'' she said. ''i am actually aware of that. i won't go there.''  then she turns missionary. ''we want people to use us,'' ms. powis said. ''we believe gardens change lives. elementally, gardens connect us to nature, and that's a connection that is increasingly lost.''  ms. powis encourages questions about anything horticultural at (212) 757-0915, extension 109, or kpowis@hsny.org.  over the years, the questions have changed. few turn on robber baron-size flowers.  one of ms. powis's favorites was from a brooklyn woman who called to ask about the tree made famous in the novel ''a tree grows in brooklyn'' by betty smith.  ''ailanthus altissima?'' ms. powis replied.  ''yes, that one,'' the caller confirmed. her voice dropped to a whisper. ''how do i kill it?''  it turned out that a neighbor's ailanthus tree was blocking her view. ms. powis's answer was meant to discourage both trespassing and arborcide.  karen gray ruelle's question also concerned a book. she was writing a children's nonfiction book about a tree in madison square park that dates from colonial times. was the tree, an english elm, planted whole or grown from seed?  after unsuccessfully consulting many sources, including old municipal waterworks maps, for clues, she turned to ms. powis, who pointed her to more than a dozen reference books. yes, ms. ruelle discovered, an english elm could grow from seed. ''the tree'' is scheduled to be published next year by holiday house.  other people want to know how to care for certain plants. penny james, a sculptor in shohola, pa., who uses live plants in art installations, makes four-poster beds out of trees. she needed to know what kind of vining plants would continue to grow indoors.  still other patrons just want something good to drink. david arnold, an artist who lives on long island, had heard that the vietnamese use pandanus amaryllifolius, a tropical plant in the screw pine genus, to flavor soy milk. where could he obtain pandanus? ms. powis pointed him to some sources.  ms. powis fell in love with plants as a little girl accompanying her father on long walks in forest park, queens. ''the smell of the pine trees was intoxicating,'' recalled ms. powis, who has a small garden at a house in chatham center, n.y.  as for science-fiction-size plants, like giant chrysanthemums, she is less sure.  ''i saw the original version of 'invasion of the body snatchers,' '' where pods replicate people, she said. ''i just can't get into that.''  