'mermaid' approaches, so 'beauty' will close   beauty was no problem; 'twas actually fish that killed the beast.  to make room for the dec. 6 opening of ''the little mermaid,'' disney theatrical has announced the closing dates for ''beauty and the beast,'' the gold and purple warhorse that marked disney's debut on broadway and has put in nearly 13 years on the boards. ''beauty,'' now playing at the lunt-fontanne theater will close on july 29, when it will have played 46 previews and 5,464 regular performances, making it the sixth-longest-running show in broadway history.  ''mermaid,'' after its out-of-town tryout at the ellie caulkins opera house of the denver center for the performing arts, will begin previews at the lunt-fontanne on nov. 3.  thomas schumacher, the president of disney theatrical, said the decision to close ''beauty'' to make way for ''mermaid'' came down to a lack of theaters, a limited market for similarly themed shows and the feeling that the broadway production of ''beauty'' had more or less run its course, floating along at a break-even pace. disney currently has four shows on broadway: ''mary poppins,'' ''the lion king,'' ''tarzan'' and ''beauty.''  ''the shows right now don't really cannibalize each other,'' mr. schumacher said. ''but two fairy tales in the kind princess-y realm, that's a lot. i think it's reasonable to think one thing comes to its natural conclusion.''  as previously announced, ''mermaid'' will play in denver from july 26 to sept. 9. doug wright (''grey gardens'') is writing the book for the show, which is based on the 1989 movie; the movie's music and lyrics were by alan menken and howard ashman, also the composer and lyricist of the ''beauty'' score. mr. ashman died in 1991; the lyricist glenn slater will work with mr. menken on nine new songs for this production.  francesca zambello, a director known for her opera productions, will direct; stephen mear, who worked on ''mary poppins,'' will be the choreographer; and george tsypin, another opera veteran, will be the scenic designer.  ''beauty'' opened at the palace theater on broadway in 1994 to the despair of culture guardians, a wave of bad reviews and record-breaking sales. ''beauty'' has since played in 13 countries, produced two north american tours and become a hot title for high schools and small theater groups. according to mr. schumacher, it has grossed $1.4 billion.  though tickets for ''beauty'' have been heavily discounted for some time (the production transferred to the lunt-fontanne in 1999), industry professionals around broadway have wondered if ''beauty'' would really be the next disney show to go. ''lion king'' is the crown jewel, and ''mary poppins'' just opened, but ''tarzan'' has had a less than beautiful first year.  like ''beauty,'' ''tarzan'' was savaged by critics, but while ''beauty'' went on to play to almost packed houses for years, attendance figures for ''tarzan'' have waned, the advance has shrunk and, except for holiday weeks, the grosses have hardly been soaring. so why not call it quits on ''tarzan'' and let ''beauty'' keep, well, floating along?  mr. schumacher, who said ''tarzan'' is covering its costs, said the richard rodgers theater, where ''tarzan'' is playing, was too small for ''mermaid'' and too small for ''beauty.'' he added that two productions of ''tarzan'' were being planned for europe. keeping ''tarzan'' going on broadway is good for the non-broadway ''tarzan'' franchise.  the early closing announcement for ''beauty'' is likely to give it a boost in sales until its demise. and those who miss out altogether should not necessarily despair. after all, mr. schumacher added, apparently joking, based on the example of ''les misérables,'' which came back to broadway less than four years after it left, shows can return before you know it.  