parents believe abducted son was abused   appearing yesterday on ''the oprah winfrey show,'' craig and pam akers said they believed that their son, shawn hornbeck, had been sexually abused during the four years he was allegedly held captive in a suburban st. louis apartment by michael devlin.  ''o.k., i'm going to go there, and ask you what do you think happened,'' said ms. winfrey, who was granted the first interview with the reunited family. ''do you think that he was sexually abused?''  seated on a couch across from ms. winfrey, the akerses both nodded yes.  ''do you think that he was tortured?'' ms. winfrey continued.  ''that i do not know yet,'' ms. akers replied.  the comments came on the same day that the franklin county authorities arraigned mr. devlin by video on charges of kidnapping another boy, william ownby, known as ben.  unshackled, wearing orange scrubs and flanked by two sheriff's deputies, mr. devlin, 41, showed little emotion as judge david tobben read the charge against him. when the judge asked mr. devlin how he chose to plead, mr. devlin paused, then said, ''i'm not guilty.''  judge tobben scheduled a preliminary hearing for march 15.  the authorities found the boys last friday in a search of mr. devlin's ground floor apartment. rescuers had been scouring the region since jan. 8, when ben, 13, disappeared after stepping off a school bus in rural franklin county.  stepping into mr. devlin's apartment, the authorities were surprised when they also discovered shawn, who had been missing for more than four years after disappearing on his bike in washington county.  the two jurisdictions are prosecuting the cases separately. on wednesday, the washington county prosecutor, john rupp, charged mr. devlin with one count of kidnapping and one count of armed criminal action. mr. rupp, who said mr. devlin flourished a handgun when he abducted shawn, said he had no firm date for mr. devlin's arraignment in that county.  the franklin county prosecuting attorney, robert parks, said mr. devlin confessed to kidnapping ben soon after his capture. the prosecutor added that more charges may be filed in the case.mr. devlin's lawyer, michael kielty, would not comment on the reported confession. mr. kielty added that the dense news media coverage of the case made it ''next to impossible to have a fair jury in this county.''  mr. kielty also declined to comment on the akerses' claim that mr. devlin sexually abused their son.  holding his stepfather's hand, shawn, 15, told the talk show host that he spent his days in captivity sleeping, watching television and playing video games. shawn, sporting a fresh haircut and absent the many piercings he displayed the day of his rescue, said he was allowed ''some freedoms,'' including access to the internet, the television and the telephone.  shawn said that he told people he was home schooled. ''we just made a story and kept the story the same,'' he said. ''it was always home schooled.''  ''you were home schooled?'' ms. winfrey asked.  ''no,'' replied shawn. ''that was the story.''  shawn's grandmother, anna quinn of st. louis, later told the associated press that shawn told his family that his captor would at times wake him every 45 minutes. ''think to yourself when you don't get enough sleep,'' ms. quinn said. ''he had to do something to get his cooperation.''  the authorities said mr. devlin, who worked for more than 20 years as a manager of a pizzeria, is also being investigated in three other unsolved kidnappings, including the 1991 disappearance of charles a. henderson, who was last seen riding his bike in rural lincoln county, mo.  