news summary   international  a3-12  iraqi government arrests members of sadr militia  iraqi officials said they had arrested several dozen senior members of the mahdi army, the powerful shiite militia led by the cleric moktada al-sadr, marking the first time the government of prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki had claimed significant action against it.  a1  two senate democrats and a republican introduced a symbolic measure to declare the bush administration's plan to send more troops to iraq counter to the national interest, setting the stage for a direct clash with mr. bush over the war.  a10  senator hillary rodham clinton called mr. bush's plan to send more troops to iraq ''a losing strategy'' and proposed placing new limits on his conduct of the war.  a10  troops wanted in afghanistan  defense secretary robert m. gates said that american and nato military commanders in afghanistan, worried about a resurgent taliban insurgency, had asked for more troops and that he was sympathetic to the request.  a12  u.s. talks with north korea  the united states held two days of talks with north korean diplomats in berlin in unusual one-on-one sessions, restarting negotiations to end north korea's nuclear weapons program.  a3  new push for european charter  chancellor angela merkel of germany said she wanted to revive global trade talks and save the european union constitution in her new role as the union president.  a3  national  a14-24  white house to allow eavesdropping oversight  the bush administration, in a surprise reversal, said it had agreed to give a secret court jurisdiction over the national security agency's wiretapping program and would end its practice of eavesdropping without warrants on americans suspected of ties to terrorists.  a1  climate bills move to spotlight  congressional democrats are increasingly determined to wrest control of global warming legislation from the white house and impose the kind of mandatory controls on carbon-dioxide emissions that most smokestack industries have long opposed.  a24  costs imperil disaster fund  the federal government's biggest program to help people rebuild after natural disasters is on the verge of running out of operating money because of budgeting problems at the agency that runs it.  a1  education  house votes to cut loan costs  house democrats pushed through legislation cutting the interest rate on federally subsidized loans to college students, drawing on large bipartisan support.  a24  science/health  decrease in cancer deaths  the number of cancer deaths in the united states has dropped for the second year in a row, the american cancer society reported.  a14  new york/region  b1-6  bloomberg unveils overhaul of schools  mayor bloomberg laid out a new plan to overhaul the school system by giving principals more power and autonomy, requiring teachers to undergo rigorous review to gain tenure, and revising an inequitable school financing formula that has allowed more experienced teachers to cluster in affluent areas.  a1  utility criticized in blackout  new york state regulators have concluded that consolidated edison's failure to adequately maintain, operate and oversee its electrical network was ''the overriding cause'' of a nine-day blackout in queens that plunged 174,000 people into sweltering darkness last summer.  a1  neediest cases  b5  business day  c1-28  apple sets revenue record  apple inc., brushing by even optimistic analyst expectations, delivered $1 billion in profit for its first quarter, largely on the christmas performance of its ipod music player business.  c1  sportsthursday  d1-8  investigating a player's suicide  since andre waters, a former national football league player, killed himself last fall, an explanation for his suicide has remained a mystery. now, a neuropathologist is claiming that waters had suffered brain damage from playing football that led to his depression and death.  a1  editorial  a26-27  editorials: a spy program in from the cold; politics and the corruption fighter; the mayor and his tax cuts; verlyn klinkenborg on traveling west in the company of a young historian.  columns: david brooks, bob herbert.  bridge  e10  tv listings  e11  crossword  e6  weather  b8  