two brothers in a gumbo of bayou and west africa   tarell alvin mccraney, a third-year student at the yale school of drama, is one of the few playwrights in the under the radar festival who is actually under the radar -- but not for long.  ''the brothers size,'' his absorbing and emotionally resonant drama set in the bayou country of louisiana and loosely based on west african myths, is decidedly the work of a young writer. but there is evidence in his richly drawn characters and colloquial poetry, which manages to sound both epic and rooted in a specific place, to suggest that he has a long career ahead of him.  ogun size (gilbert owuor) and his younger brother, oshoosi size (brian tyree henry), have taken very different paths. ogun dedicated his life to a single-minded pursuit of his career running an auto-repair shop, while his sibling, a wandering soul who has just returned from prison, is happily aimless. as different as they are, the sizes remain, like it or not, rigidly locked in tandem, defined in large part by their relationship.  the easygoing oshoosi suffers from the expectations of his brother, who hectors him to go to work. ''death killed the lazy last,'' oshoosi responds, before going back to sleep. ogun shoots him a cold stare, his melancholy portrait of a life weighted down by worry and heartache over a brother always in trouble.  oshoosi has little interest in putting down roots. he dreams of buying a car and driving somewhere far away. in prison he became hypnotized by a photography book about madagascar; like august wilson, mr. mccraney uses africa as a liberating symbol of connection to the past.  the elusive possibility of freedom is the central theme here, and it plays out in the depiction of a racist justice system as well as in the more universal struggle to break away from the limits of family.  the richly realized relationship between the brothers is complicated by the appearance of elegba, who served time with oshoosi. as loose as ogun is hard, elegba, played by elliot villar with a wonderful feline presence, brings oshoosi a free car, but this gift is, at best, an illusion, and at worst, a trap.  there's a taut tension between these three handsome, athletic actors, who all have yale drama on their résumés. with the help of the director, tea alagic, they create a vivid, very recognizable world, using almost no set and simple, almost ritualized movements. mr. henry is the standout, alternating between aggrieved anger, delicate vulnerability and gleeful playfulness. it's the kind of performance that sweeps you away.  this is not a flawless work, by any means. the ending builds to an emotional climax, but then finishes abruptly with a whimper. and some of the self-conscious theatrical conceits, including the actors' warming up onstage as the audience files in, can come off as cliché. but such quibbles are forgotten every time mr. mccraney surprises you with a sudden burst of poetry or, as is often the case, song.  african drums propel the action, providing a driving backbeat that reaches a climax during the brothers' joyful rendition of otis redding's ''try a little tenderness.'' but it's mr. mccraney's soulful monologues that provide the real harmony. listen closely, and you might hear that thrilling sound that is one of the main reasons we go to the theater, that beautiful music of a new voice.  ''the brothers size'' continues through jan. 28 at the public theater, 425 lafayette street, at astor place, east village; (212) 967-7555.  theater review  