ausleses put sweetness on the table   all right, people, take a deep breath, relax, and gather around. are you ready? today we're going to talk about riesling. not just any riesling, but german riesling -- auslese riesling, to be specific, quite simply the most perplexing great wine around.  perplexing? absolutely. ausleses are beloved by wine critics, who praise them but almost never tell you what to do with them. even some confirmed lovers of german rieslings are befuddled by ausleses. are they dessert? can they be enjoyed with food? are they best ignored? they are sweet, right?  unraveling arcane german wine lingo requires time, incentive and a taste for banging your head against stone walls. nonetheless, cracking the code will pay off with the opportunity to enjoy wines that not only are absolutely delicious and sometimes profound, but are among the most reasonably priced great wines in the world.  the most important thing about auslese is not how it's pronounced (ows-lay-zuh), nor what it means (we'll get to that). no, the first crucial thing to know about auslese wines is how good they are with food.  a spicy indian vindaloo or thai curry? a young, balanced auslese will surround the heat and envelop it in a gentle cushion of apricot, peach and mineral flavors. duck breast with a sweet fruit sauce? ah, young auslese to the rescue again. how about sichuan smoked duck, or an earthy venison medallion? a 10-year-old auslese riesling is a wonderful match. and finally, in the realm of the sublime, a perfectly ripe vacherin mont d'or, oozing with funky fruit aromas, is just the extraordinary thing to eat with a 15- to 20-year-old auslese, which by then has developed a singular smoky aroma actually reminiscent of kerosene. it makes me sigh to think about it.  the wines are light, often 7.5 to 8.5 percent alcohol, with an intensity that seemingly belies their delicacy.  so what's the problem?  ''people are scared because they think they're going to be super-duper sweet wines,'' said paul grieco, a true riesling believer who is an owner and general manager of hearth in the east village, which always has ausleses on its wine list. ''it's not a sweet wine, it's a balanced wine.''  mr. grieco is right. even though an auslese riesling may come with a lot of residual sugar, it will not necessarily taste sweet, at least most of the time. why? because of great acidity, the glowing signature of the riesling grape. sweetness in a wine is like a couture gown, and acidity is like exquisite bone structure. put the equivalent sweetness in a wine with little acidity, like a viognier, for example, and you have a frumpy, clumsy wine. but in a good auslese riesling the combination of sweetness and acidity gives you heidi klum.  ''the auslese category was historically considered the masterpiece of riesling,'' said ernst loosen, whose winery, dr. loosen, is one of the top producers in the mosel-saar-ruwer region. ''it showed the most terroir, the best ripeness and the best expression.''  now, what makes a german riesling auslese instead of, say, kabinett or spätlese? these terms correspond to levels of ripeness in grapes harvested for the best german wines. kabinett grapes are picked at the normal time, while spätlese refers to late-picked grapes. the literal translation of auslese is special selection, meaning specially selected bunches of ripe grapes. generally, auslese grapes have the potential for more richness and intensity than kabinett or spätlese grapes.  notice, though, that these terms refer only to the ripeness level at which the grapes are picked. they say nothing about how a wine will taste, and styles can vary considerably. winemakers can stop fermentation early on, leaving quite a bit of residual sugar in the wine, or they can allow the wine to ferment until completely dry. in fact, dry ausleses, known as auslese trocken, were very fashionable in germany in the 1980s. while sometimes extraordinary, those wines were often forbiddingly austere, and thankfully the demand for auslese trockens has slackened.  a young auslese, bursting with sweet fruit flavors, is not necessarily the traditional german style. it is a relatively recent phenomenon. ''a hundred years ago, they didn't drink ausleses young,'' mr. loosen said. ''these wines were the ones to lay down and mature. they drank them 10, 15, 20 years after harvest.''  by then, the sweet fruit flavors had dried out, and the wine was perfectly suitable to typical european styles of food. ''but then, my grandfather certainly didn't know about asian foods, either,'' mr. loosen said.  indeed, grandfather loosen might not have recognized the 2005 mönchhof auslese, from the Ürzig würzgarten vineyard on the mosel, a light, taut, balanced wine with aromas of apricot and river slate, which i found for $35 among the superb selection of ausleses at crush wine and spirits on east 57th street.  but he would have known well the steely, stony 1989 bert simon serrig würzberg auslese, also from the mosel, which i found for just $38, and the $50 1995 wehlener sonnenuhr auslese from j.j. prüm, year-in and year-out one of the great mosel producers.  though we're talking exclusively of riesling, it's not the only german grape that can be designated auslese. rieslaner (a cross between riesling and silvaner), scheurebe and müller-thurgau may all have their good points, but none has the potential of riesling.  each vintage can have its own character. wines from the hot 2003 vintage will be fatter and less focused than the sharper 2004s. regional differences are important, too. ausleses from the mosel-saar-ruwer for me strike the ideal balance between intensity and delicacy. rheingau ausleses tend to be a little richer, while those from districts to the south, like rheinhessen and the pfalz, will generally be less acidic.  you would think all this would be confusing enough, but there's more. some bottles are designated with special cask numbers, others with gold capsules around the cork, and even some with long gold capsules to set them apart from the ordinary gold capsules. often these wines are made from grapes afflicted with botrytis, the noble rot, which gives the wines a wonderful, honeyed sweetness that indeed differs from the ordinary ausleses.  i have sometimes been surprised by botrytis in an ordinary bottle. you can curse the unpredictable nature of german wines, or you can chalk it up as one of life's pleasant surprises.  the pour  