at the globes, tears are fine, but fast and mean is much better   it's o.k. to be teary and sincere if you're new, like jennifer hudson of ''dreamgirls,'' but at the golden globe awards, it's better to be fast and mean.  when prince, the artist still known for being short, didn't show up in time to accept his award for best original song in a motion picture, the presenter, justin timberlake, accepted for him by crouching down below the microphone.  jeremy irons thanked the director of ''elizabeth i'' for not ''getting in the way.''  and after opening the envelope for best supporting actress in a movie, george clooney announced, ''leonardo dicaprio.''  awards shows can seem very long, but the golden globe awards is a speedy compendium of short bursts: abbreviated clips of the nominated works, condensed acceptance speeches and peekaboo camera pans of the audience. the awards show shares that quality with reality series like ''grease'' or ''american idol,'' where contestants sing a part of a song that is woven into snippets of backstage moments and edited into a kind of ''best of/worst of '' anthology.  it's attention-deficit entertainment, but youtube isn't the catalyst, just the enabler: internet users merely download for themselves what shows like ''extra'' and ''the insider'' have done for years -- and the golden globes is the ideal source material, especially the red-carpet warm-up shows. ''you have great teeth,'' joan rivers said to sheryl crow on the tv guide channel. ''are they yours?''  and yet paradoxically, the nominated films this year are almost prohibitively long; all but ''the queen'' are close to two hours or even longer. martin scorsese's ''departed'' is a half-hour longer than ''taxi driver.'' ''babel'' is almost as long at two hours and 22 minutes.  it's even sometimes true on television. serialized shows like ''24'' and ''heroes'' are the endurance tests of the small screen -- the denouement is stretched out over an entire season. (or more, in the case of ''lost.'') that polarization was all too obvious last night: while nbc showed the golden globe awards, fox was showing part 2 of the four-hour premiere of ''24.''  it's not the rule of the marketplace: studios have no stake in making longer films. it's director-driven defiance and proof of newton's third law of show business: every action has an equal and opposite reaction. (that's olivia newton-john, of course.)  the first law is that every winner must thank the hollywood foreign press association, and the second is that reaction shots must pan as often as possible to jack nicholson in the audience, preferably when he is wearing sunglasses and has his head thrown back and mouth open. (the actor is to american awards shows what pretty girls in soccer stadium stands are to italian cameramen.)  losers trying to look happy as someone else's name is called are always a good camera bet, though botox has ruined some of the fun by freezing most of the facial expressions in the room.  the night is a forced march for on-screen talent, and actors are corralled under lights and behind bottles of champagne and chardonnay. they use body language, sometimes subtle (angelina jolie, a greek goddess in gray, clung to brad pitt as if she were a perplexed member of a foreign royal family), sometimes less so. one of the most daring décolletés of the evening was worn by the middle-aged actress helen mirren.  a reality contest gives ordinary people a chance to act like stars; the wine-fueled golden globe awards give viewers a peek at stars acting like ordinary people. both are platforms for extreme displays: triumph and humiliation, glamour and career-stunting glitch. though some people aim for the unexciting middle.  eddie murphy was supposed to be making a comeback, but he mostly seemed underwhelmed and ready to leave. he accepted his best supporting award by thanking one of the makers of ''dreamgirls,'' the entertainment mogul david geffen, for ''convincing me to work for free.'' mr. murphy summed up the winning of the award as ''a nice moment.''  when america ferrera won for best actress in a television comedy, she was more animated, tearfully saying that the abc series ''ugly betty'' was ''truly bringing a new face to television.'' and that brought tears to the eyes of even some of the oldest, best-preserved faces in the business.  the tv watch  