con ed may face millions in penalties after panel's finding that it bungled blackout   consolidated edison now faces the prospect of $9.3 million in penalties and tens of millions of dollars in additional sanctions as the result of a scathing state report into its handling of the nine-day blackout in queens that left 174,000 people without power last summer.  the fallout over the blackout continued yesterday as officials digested a highly critical draft report in which the staff of the state public service commission accused con edison's top managers of three key mistakes: inadequate maintenance of unreliable equipment, an inability to correctly estimate the number of people affected and, especially, a decision not to shut down the entire network at the height of the crisis to avert further damage.  ''the decision to shut down a network must be a calculated and rational decision, not one that is made by the 'seat of the pants,' which is the approach that appeared to be used in this instance,'' the report found.  as a host of elected officials called for sanctions against the utility, mayor michael r. bloomberg once again rose to its defense, saying that penalizing con edison would be self-defeating, because consumers would ultimately bear the cost through higher rates or poorer service.  ''you want to fine con ed?'' the mayor asked during a news conference at columbia university. ''just go to your electricity bill, and the next time you get it, you're going to have a higher cost. you're going to pay the fines, if you want to fine yourself.''  as he did last summer, mr. bloomberg rejected calls for the resignation or dismissal of kevin m. burke, con edison's chairman and chief executive.  ''my personal experience with kevin burke is he's very competent, he is very hard-working, he cares and he's done everything you can possibly ask of him,'' the mayor said. ''you want lousy electrical service? you keep trying to drive burke out of the office, and then you won't have as good a people and they won't do as good a job.''  the draft report, released wednesday night, is a litany of critiques of con edison. deep within its 185 pages were new findings like these:  at the height of the crisis, con edison struggled to respond to reports of smoke, fire or gas leaks from dozens of manholes. network operators monitoring the situation ''stated that the number of manhole events was cascading out of control and, in effect, that the managers didn't have the fortitude to shut the network down,'' the report found, citing audiotapes provided by con edison.  con edison's efforts to reach out to customers about the crisis ''were inadequate, untimely or, in some cases, nonexistent,'' the report said. the absence of information provoked ''confusion, anger and a distrust of the company'' and prevented customers from making appropriate plans for their families, pets and businesses.  annual training drills in 2004, 2005 and 2006 revealed shortcomings in con edison's ability to quickly identify the number of customers and the boundaries of areas affected by power failures, but the drills did not result in needed improvements. the report said that could have been a factor in the failure to recognize the extent of the blackout.  con edison put total costs related to the blackout at $119.9 million as of december, but the costs will almost certainly rise over time as damage to electrical equipment is discovered.  yesterday, several officials called for the public service commission to convene a formal proceeding that could result in hefty fines against the utility.  assemblyman richard l. brodsky, a westchester democrat and chairman of a committee that oversees the public service commission, yesterday wrote a letter to the commission's chairwoman, patricia l. acampora, asking that it convene such a proceeding immediately instead of waiting until its next scheduled meeting, on feb. 14. a commission spokesman, james a. denn, said that ms. acampora was considering the request.  if it holds such a proceeding -- to determine whether con edison was ''prudent'' in fulfilling its responsibilities under state law -- the commission could decide to restrict the utility from recovering tens of millions of dollars in capital expenses from customers. such an outcome would be felt by con edison's shareholders, but over a period of years.  ''what's missing here is any short-term consequence to the utility for a major mistake,'' said gerald a. norlander, executive director of the public utility law project, an albany advocacy group that represents low-income energy customers and is a party in the commission's investigation of the blackout.  mr. norlander, who called the existing penalties insufficient, said, ''the law should be changed to allow the commission to provide administrative penalties.''  con edison does face some penalties, known as rate adjustments, recommended in the report: $5 million for an excessive number of interruptions; $4 million for the duration of the interruptions; and $300,000 for failing to correctly estimate the number of people without power. but that $9.3 million in penalties, if approved by the commission, would not start taking effect until next year.  the commission can also go to court to begin what is known as a penalty proceeding. it threatened to do so after a 19-hour blackout in upper manhattan in 1999 and subsequently won a financial settlement from con edison.  alice l. tufel, a member of western queens power for the people, a coalition of residents who have called for greater compensation to cover losses caused by the blackout, said the group felt ''not so much surprised as vindicated and gratified'' by the report. she noted that the report contradicted con edison's own 600-page report in october, which attributed the blackout to events beyond its control.  ''it absolutely skirted every issue and failed to accept any responsibility,'' she said. ''it definitely was a whitewash.''  ms. tufel, 50, who rents an apartment in sunnyside, said of mr. burke, ''replacing the leadership is necessary, but it's not enough. fundamental change is needed.''  in his public defense of con edison, mr. bloomberg appeared to be alone. a host of elected officials -- among them united states representatives joseph crowley and carolyn b. maloney; the state attorney general, andrew m. cuomo; and city councilmen eric n. gioia and peter f. vallone jr. -- all said yesterday that the report had exposed fundamental problems at con edison.  the new scrutiny of con edison is likely to affect negotiations, scheduled to begin this year, over a new electric rate plan for the utility, which serves new york city and westchester county. its current three-year plan expires on march 31, 2008.  nonetheless, paul b. fremont, an electrical utility analyst with jefferies & company, said he did not expect the negative findings of the new report to endanger mr. burke's position or hurt investor confidence.  ''i think new york is a very sort of loud state when it comes to angry political reactions,'' mr. fremont said.  