transactions   major league baseball  american league  chicago white sox--agreed to terms with 3b joe crede on a one-year contract.  cleveland indians--agreed to terms with rhp rafael betancourt on a one-year contract.  detroit tigers--agreed to terms with rhp fernando rodney, lhp nate robertson, inf omar infante and of craig monroe on one-year contracts.  kansas city royals--agreed to terms with of emil brown on a one-year contract.  los angeles angels--agreed to terms with rhp scot shields, rhp francisco rodriguez on one-year contracts and 1b robb quinlan on a two-year contract.  yankees--agreed to terms with rhp luis vizcaino on a one-year contract and inf chris basak on a minor league contract.  oakland athletics--agreed to terms with of milton bradley, inf marco scutaro and rhp kiko calero on one-year contracts.  seattle mariners--agreed to terms with 1b ben broussard and lhp horacio ramirez on one-year contracts.  tampa bay devil rays--agreed to terms with inf ty wigginton and rhp seth mcclung on one-year contracts.  texas rangers--agreed to terms with rhp rick bauer, rhp akinori otsuka and of brad wilkerson on one-year contracts. named bobby jones manager and randy whisler coach for oklahoma of the pcl; dave anderson manager and scott coolbaugh coach for frisco of the texas league; mike anderson pitching coach and brant brown coach for bakersfield of the california league; mike micucci manager and danny clark pitching coach for clinton of the midwest league; andy fox manager for spokane of the northwest league; and pedro lopez manager, keith comstock pitching coach and paul herfurth coach for arizona of the arizona league.  national league  arizona diamondbacks--agreed to terms with rhp jose valverde, 2b orlando hudson and rhp brandon lyon on one-year contracts.  atlanta braves--agreed to terms with rhp rafael soriano on a one-year contract.  chicago cubs--agreed to terms with lhp will ohman on a two-year contract.  cincinnati reds--agreed to terms with rhp kyle lohse on a one-year contract.  colorado rockies--agreed to terms with lhp jeremy affeldt, rhp rodrigo lopez, of matt holliday and of cory sullivan on one-year contracts.  florida marlins--agreed to terms with c miguel olivo on a one-year contract.  houston astros--agreed to terms with rhp brad lidge on a one-year contract.  milwaukee brewers--agreed to terms with of kevin mench on a one-year contract.  mets--agreed to terms with lhp scott schoeneweis on a three-year contract and rhp jorge sosa, of endy chavez and c ramon castro on one-year contracts.  philadelphia phillies--agreed to terms with of aaron rowand on a one-year contract. claimed inf greg dobbs off waivers from seattle.  pittsburgh pirates--agreed to terms with lhp mike gonzalez and of xavier nady on one-year contracts.  st. louis cardinals--agreed to terms with of so taguchi on a one-year contract.  washington nationals--agreed to terms with of chris snelling, of tony blanco, of frank diaz, inf larry broadway, inf bernie castro, c jesus flores, rhp brett campbell, rhp shawn hill, rhp beltran perez, rhp levale speigner, rhp jermaine van buren, lhp matt chico and lhp mike o'connor on one-year contracts.  n.b.a.  detroit pistons--signed f chris webber.  golden state warriors--recalled c patrick o'bryant from bakersfield of the nbadl.  new orleans hornets--recalled f marcus vinicius from tulsa of the nbadl.  n.f.l.  atlanta falcons--named paul petrino receivers coach, brian vangorder linebackers coach, mike summers offensive line coach, keith rowan tight ends coach, derrick nix offensive assistant, andy sugarman offensive quality control coach, kevin wolthausen defensive line coach, joe whitt jr. assistant defensive backs coach, jon gannon defensive quality control coach, tom mcmahon assistant special teams coach and evan marcus strength and conditioning coach.  cincinnati bengals--named mike sheppard receivers coach.  san francisco 49ers--named jim tomsula defensive line coach. re-signed fb zak keasey.  washington redskins--fired dale lindsey, linebackers coach.  n.h.l.  boston bruins--called up d bobby allen from providence of the ahl. sent d matt lashoff to providence.  columbus blue jackets--activated c sergei fedorov from injured reserve. assigned f alexandre picard to syracuse of the ahl.  dallas stars--recalled up d nicklas grossman from iowa of the ahl.  minnesota wild--reassigned rw joel ward to houston of the ahl.  philadelphia flyers--recalled d nate guenin from philadelphia of the ahl. assigned d david printz to philadelphia.  phoenix coyotes--assigned c patrick fischer to san antonio of the ahl.  st. louis blues--acquired c yan stastny from the boston bruins for a 2007 fifth-round draft pick.  