consumer magazine retracts article faulting infant car seats   consumer reports magazine on thursday retracted an article on infant car seats, published two weeks ago, that said most of them had failed side-impact crash tests.  the tests were supposed to simulate an impact at 38 miles an hour, but actually simulated more than 70 m.p.h., according to the national highway traffic safety administration, which was so startled by the article that it tried to duplicate the magazine's results at a government laboratory last weekend. the agency does not have a standard for side impacts but said that at 38 m.p.h., the seats all appeared to do well.  the magazine said it had decided to retract the article after receiving data from the highway traffic agency. the magazine's tests were performed under contract at an outside laboratory, said a spokesman, ken weine, and an internal investigation was under way to determine what went wrong. consumer reports did not name the laboratory.  the car seat article was flagged on the cover of the current issue with a headline that said, in red letters, ''safety alert.'' consumers union, the nonprofit group that publishes the magazine, distributed the article in advance to newspapers and television stations.  the article said that of a dozen models tested, some fell apart in side-impact tests, and that one model should be recalled by the government because it did not meet the standard for front-impact tests.  the article followed a recent pattern in the magazine of taking on a more journalistic tone, with photos of one baby who was killed in a side crash when he was ejected from his car seat and another who was bruised when his seat separated from its base in a collision.  the seats are rear-facing models for children under a year old, and each has a base that stays in the car. in some tests, the magazine said, the seat part fell off and skittered across the laboratory floor.  the federal government requires that the seats protect babies in front impacts of 30 m.p.h. the highway traffic safety agency said it was trying to develop a side-impact standard. it rates cars under a new car assessment program, which it uses to award ''stars'' to each model, and those are done at 38 m.p.h. for side impact.  consumer reports used seats attached to a sled, rather than to an entire car, in its simulations.  the administrator of the highway safety agency, nicole r. nason, said in a statement that ''it is absolutely essential for every parent to understand that the safest place in an automobile for an infant is in a car seat.''  consumer reports on thursday affirmed a point made in its original article, that any seat is better than no seat, but told its readers ''to suspend judgment on the merits of individual products until the new testing has been completed and the report republished.''  consumer reports, an authoritative source on thousands of products, has occasionally made errors. in 1998, it said that some dog foods were deficient in some minerals and should not be used, but after re-testing, it said that they were all nutritionally complete.  in 2006, it published an article that said that six hybrid cars were unlikely to save their owners money, but then said that it had miscalculated depreciation and that two of them would save money.  