surprisingly, colts thrive in spite of their offense   the indianapolis colts noticed the difference last week, when the highlights of their playoff victory against the kansas city chiefs were buried behind a field-goal attempt that was botched by a boy wonder quarterback and when few reporters showed up to ask about how they would play the baltimore ravens.  the colts have long been one of the darlings of the n.f.l., nearly as ubiquitous as peyton manning's commercials. last season was supposed to be their year, when the defense would finally be good enough to support the offense and manning would at last fulfill his legacy after a 13-0 start in the regular season. but as soon as the pittsburgh steelers beat the colts in their second-round playoff game, the colts sank out of sight and were written off as chokers. this season, when their rushing defense was remarkably bad and after they closed the regular season by losing three of their last five, the colts' window appeared to be nearly closed.  the spotlight shifted west to san diego to the newest explosive offense. for the first time in several years, the colts' playoff matchup was not the biggest draw of the second round -- that was yesterday's patriots-chargers game -- and the colts were left to wrestle with their hopes in private, well under the radar of the n.f.l.'s hottest teams.  ''our expectations were the same as last year, even when no one else thought so,'' coach tony dungy said. ''the advantage we have is we haven't had all the media around. but i don't think baltimore took us lightly.''  even if nearly everyone else did. that will not happen again, because the n.f.l. radar just found indianapolis again. after the colts stunned the ravens on saturday, 15-6, they defied the odds and became the least expected of the four remaining teams to reach the american football conference championship game.  the colts have so thoroughly turned everything upside down that when the attention returns to them this week, even the questions will not make sense. what is wrong with manning, who has thrown five interceptions and only one touchdown pass in two playoff games? and how did a run defense that gave up 173 yards a game in the regular season turn into the 1985 bears? the defense is carrying the offense? who are these guys?  the colts have a few days to come up with answers. after their victory, the colts were giddy but also at a loss to explain how they would be one of the most balanced teams left in the playoffs if only -- no, really -- manning would straighten himself out. dungy is as even-keeled in victory as he is in defeat, so he insists he is not worried about manning, particularly because the ravens' defense was so good.  but the failures of the colts' defense bothered dungy during the season, if only because he thought he knew what it was capable of. dungy is a defensive specialist, and through the barrage of injuries and the cloud of dust created by opponents' running backs, he was sure he could see a good defense.  the transformation has coincided with the return of safety bob sanders, who missed most of the regular season but has played in the two playoff victories. dungy was not sure if sanders would be able to play back-to-back games, but he said sanders's presence was like getting back a starting quarterback.  in the days leading up to last week's game against the chiefs, dungy closed practice to reporters, a rare move for a famously friendly coach. he did not make drastic changes, but he said saturday night that the emphasis had been on defensive players being absolutely sure they knew where everyone was supposed to be and when, to minimize hesitation and to take advantage of the colts' defensive speed.  sanders said: ''nothing has changed. in the playoffs, the energy is definitely up a little bit and guys want to make plays.''  it worked against the ravens. the colts' pass rushers were in steve mcnair's face all game and sacked him twice. the run defense was smothering, limiting the ravens to 83 yards.  ''this is more of what we should be doing,'' dungy said of the defense. ''the frustration for us was why we weren't getting it more consistently. getting this win is gratifying for me and for the defensive players.''  after the game, manning marveled that the colts were underdogs against the ravens and were even expected by many to lose in the first round against the chiefs. against the patriots next sunday, the colts will undoubtedly be decided underdogs again. in an odd postseason for the colts, that may be the oddest thing of all: one of the n.f.l.'s most talented teams will be an afterthought while it is one victory from the super bowl. the colts lost the a.f.c. championship game to the patriots in the 2003 season and that loss, as much as any, has defined manning's career.  manning said saturday that he did not think about the need to validate his career by getting to a super bowl. even in the jubilation of the victory, dungy was careful to maintain perspective. he said he did not think a run to the super bowl ''is going to be the be-all and end-all,'' but he already knew what he would tell his players this week.  ''these opportunities don't come along every day,'' dungy said. ''we had one three years ago. i think our time will come.''  maybe then, people will notice.  pro football  