with boy's return, kin hope normal life returns soon, too   for a family that has every reason not to be receptive to strangers, the ownbys' home exudes hospitality, nestled among trees on an unpaved road near this town southwest of st. louis.  in the front yard, there is a sign. it does not say ''keep out'' or ''no trespassing.'' instead, it says ''welcome to our pad'' and is illustrated by the cartoonlike image of a happy frog.  inside, william ownby, 13, known as ben, is showering, an everyday sort of activity that under the present circumstances almost rises to the level of something to be celebrated around here. it was just over a week ago that ben disappeared, abducted by a stranger just moments after stepping off a school bus about 500 feet from his front door on a typical monday afternoon.  four days later, the police found not only ben but also another missouri teenager, shawn hornbeck, 15, who had been missing for four years, in an apartment in a st. louis suburb, kirkwood. michael devlin, 41, has been in custody since then, charged with ben's kidnapping and awaiting arraignment.  to say the boys' lives have been changed forever is an understatement. but their families want nothing more than a return to normal, however hard that is when network news producers are calling and representatives of ''the oprah winfrey show'' are waiting outside.  on the porch, ben's father, william ownby, known as don, is reflecting on the last few days. ''now it's the beginning of all new things,'' he said tuesday. ''we're very happy, just thrilled that this had a happy ending. it's all so overwhelming.''  between seeking counseling for the family and accommodating the news media, mr. ownby, who handles inventory for a local company, said his head was spinning. above all, he said, he just wants to make the right decisions for ben: when should he go back to school? should he take the bus? how much should they expect him to talk about his days in captivity? will he ever heal?  ''we're trying to get the best possible advice we can and listen to the experts,'' mr. ownby said. ''he was only gone four days, but they were four very long days. he's taking it as well as can be expected.''  ben has been playing video games and cards, seeing relatives and enjoying quiet time with his sister and parents. the ownbys said he had not talked about his abduction.  mr. ownby would not allow a reporter to speak with ben and did not take him to a news conference later in the day. but ben did tell the associated press that he was tired of seeing himself on television and that ''it feels like i'm getting bruises from too many hugs.''  shawn hornbeck's parents did not attend the news conference and did not return calls for comment.  at the news conference, mr. ownby and his wife, doris, expressed their appreciation for all the support they had received since ben disappeared. they also asked for space. they said they would not be giving any more interviews after this week.  ''we have to stop somewhere to let him settle down and let him -- '' mrs. ownby said, her voice trailing off. mr. ownby continued for her, ''be a boy, be a kid.'' she added, ''we're just extremely fortunate that ben came back to us as fast as he did.'' and she joked that she might not let him out of her sight again. ''he's already decided what college he wants to go to, out in california,'' she said. ''i said: 'oh, no you're not! you're not going that far.' ''  