success of an amnesty program for chechen rebels is contested   an amnesty program sponsored by russia that was intended to entice chechen militants into civilian life ended monday with official claims that hundreds of militants had accepted the offer and that the program had further weakened the separatist insurgency.  the amnesty program, announced by the kremlin last summer after the death of shamil basayev, the chechen terrorist leader, offered militants who had not committed grave crimes the chance to put down arms and live free from prosecution.  russia has promoted the program aggressively, insisting that it was part of a counterinsurgency effort that has contributed to the ebb of guerrilla and terrorist activity in chechnya since late in 2004.  the remaining separatists have derided it as a sham and said the men presented as former militants in the russian news media often were not militants at all, but prisoners and kidnapped relatives of militants who had been forced into role-playing by ramzan a. kadyrov, the pro-kremlin chechen premier.  the dueling statements highlighted the difficulties of precisely assessing the state of the insurgency in chechnya and neighboring regions in southwestern russia.  militant activity has slowed since chechen terrorists seized a public school in beslan in 2004, an act that ended with more than 300 civilian deaths and undermined support among westerners for the separatists. it also came as russia and chechen forces aligned with mr. kadyrov were tightening their hold on the war-ravaged republic.  since then, government reconstruction efforts have begun and several of the best-known separatists have been killed.  the separatists, while still conducting ambushes and occasional small raids, have had far less visible success on the ground than in years past. but they have maintained a defiant posture on the internet, and often challenge official government statements.  as the program's deadline passed on monday, nikolai v. kalugin, the deputy prosecutor of chechnya, said in a telephone interview that 467 former militants had registered for amnesty, including a rush of fresh applicants over the past four weeks as the deadline neared.  of those, he said, 305 former militants had been granted amnesty and 19 were under criminal investigation because they were suspected of committing crimes too serious to waive prosecution. the remainder of cases were still under review, he said.  he said the total number of applicants might grow as up-to-date tallies are included from neighboring republics, where chechen militants and supporters from other muslim ethnic groups also operate.  the interfax news agency said 546 people had applied for amnesty, citing an unidentified official from the national counterterrorist committee. it said the applicants ranged in age from 16 to 75, although most were between 20 and 45. among them were three women who had prepared to become suicide bombers, interfax reported.  but mr. kalugin said that most of those who sought amnesty were low-level militants or commanders leading formations of no more than six or seven fighters, and that no prominent separatists had come forward.  he also said the program had suffered problems, including death threats from active militants against the families of militants who were contemplating surrender.  kavkaz center, a separatist web site that posts militant islamic content, disputed the official accounts. it said in an internet posting that most of the supposed militants given amnesty were ''kidnapped relatives of mujahedeen or ordinary people or disguised kadyrovites or even prisoners who were promised freedom if they play the role of militants.''  the site, which at times had carried the messages of mr. basayev, the slain terrorist leader, also disputed official statements that a former driver and two former bodyguards of zelimkhan yandarbiyev, another of the slain leaders of the separatist government, were among the militants who surrendered.  instead, it said that no active fighters had laid down arms and that the numbers of militants was actually growing, an assertion the separatists often make on the internet.  