news summary   international a3-12  china downs satellite in test of new weapon  china successfully carried out its first test of an antisatellite weapon last week, signaling its resolve to play a major role in military space activities and bringing expressions of concern from washington and other capitals, the bush administration said.  a1  iran's president losing support  president mahmoud ahmadinejad of iran appears to be under pressure from his country's highest authorities to end his involvement in iran's nuclear program, a sign that his political capital is declining as his country comes under increasing international pressure.  a1  iraq to review ties with iran  iraq is carrying out a review of its diplomatic protocols with iran and may place new restrictions on them, the foreign minister said, after a series of embarrassing detentions of iranian military officials and diplomats by american forces.  a8  an american killed in baghdad had just left the headquarters of a prominent sunni arab political party, where she had been teaching a class on democracy.  a6  mexico caps tortilla prices  facing public outrage over the soaring price of tortillas, president felipe calderón of mexico abandoned his free-trade principles and forced producers to sign an agreement fixing prices for corn products.  a12  south american trade talks  south american leaders gathered to debate whether the mercosur trade group should continue to emphasize economic integration or transform itself into a political alliance with an ''anti-imperialist'' tint, the path president hugo chávez of venezuela favors.  a12  national a14-21  senate votes to make changes to ethics rules  the senate overwhelmingly passed sweeping changes to ethics and lobbying rules, overcoming bipartisan resistance to ban many of the favors that lobbyists do for lawmakers and to illuminate the shadowy legislative practice of earmarking money for special projects. a1  reviewing surveillance rules  lawmakers demanded more information on new rules governing a domestic surveillance program, a day after the bush administration announced that it had placed national security agency eavesdropping under court supervision.  a18  city bans smoking in cars  bangor, maine's second-largest city, is banning smoking in cars if children are present.the ordinance has delighted some and angered others, leading to complaints about invasion of privacy and even threats to boycott the city.  a16  expanding health programs  a broad coalition of business and consumer groups, doctors, hospitals and drug companies laid out a major proposal to provide health insurance coverage to more than half of the 47 million uninsured americans by expanding federal benefit programs and offering new federal tax credits to individuals and families.  a21  science/health  tobacco industry under fire  a harvard study concluding that cigarette makers have for years deliberately increased nicotine levels in cigarettes to make them more addictive led to renewed calls for greater federal oversight of the industry.  a16  new york/region b1-6  parents of 9/11 victims torn from grandchildren  some aging parents of victims of the 9/11 terrorist attacks, desperate to remain connected to the children of their lost offspring, have found themselves in bitter struggles with a surviving spouse who would rather they did not.  a1  final list of closing parishes  the roman catholic archdiocese of new york is set to announce today the final list of its parishes that will close as part of a far-reaching reorganization plan, bringing to an end a process that has dragged on for more than five years.  b1  con ed faces big fines  consolidated edison faces the prospect of $9.3 million in penalties and tens of millions of dollars in additional sanctions as the result of a state report into its handling of the nine-day blackout in queens that left 174,000 people without power last summer. b1  neediest cases b6  business day c1-11  fed warning on deficits  warning against complacency over the federal deficit, the federal reserve chairman said recent positive trends on the budget were a ''calm before the storm,'' masking a danger posed by looming deficits in social security and medicare.  c1  industry push on emissions  ten major companies have banded together with leading environmental groups to call for a firm nationwide cap on carbon dioxide emissions that would lead to reductions of 10 to 30 percent over the next 15 years.  c1  business digest c2  obituaries b6-7  art buchwald  the syndicated columnist who satirized the follies of the rich, the famous and the powerful for half a century as the most widely read newspaper humorist of his time, he was 81. a1  editorial a22-23  editorials: nowhere to turn for shelter; apology not accepted; tell the troops; reforms for movie ratings.  columns: paul krugman, thomas l. friedman.  crossword e36  public lives b2  tv listings e29  weather a20  