showbiz exporter scores goal   simon fuller has achieved remarkable success in britain as an entertainment executive and manager, chiefly in the recording industry. but clearly he has finally found the area of his true business acumen: export.  in recent history, at least, it is hard to imagine anyone who has directed a more lucrative shift of british entertainment product to the american market than mr. fuller. not only is he the man behind the transport of a british television show called ''pop idol'' to this country, where, as ''american idol,'' it has become the show business phenomenon of the decade, but in the past month he has also engineered the transfer of david beckham, the biggest athletic star in britain, to a team in los angeles, with the intent of inspiring no less than a revolution of interest in the sport in the one big country where it so far has failed to flourish.  that may seem a grandiose expectation, but who is going to doubt mr. fuller right now, with ''american idol'' once again towering over american television and squashing its home-grown competition?  reached by telephone this week in the brazilian region of bahia, where he was vacationing, mr. fuller said it was difficult to determine what was the more impressive recent development for his export portfolio: the improbably awe-inspiring ratings for the new season of ''idol,'' or the five-year deal, worth an estimated $250 million in salary and ancillary income, he landed for mr. beckham to join the los angeles galaxy soccer team next season.  on the one hand, he called this week's ''idol'' ratings results ''utterly amazing and just ridiculous.'' on the other hand, he declared himself ''totally excited by this very audacious, entrepreneurial deal'' for mr. beckham to finish his career by igniting an american passion for soccer.  ''soccer is coming in the u.s.,'' mr. fuller, 46, said. ''you can smell it and feel it. it's such a great sport, the dominant sport on the planet. and america is more than ever opening up to it.'' mr. beckham, he predicted, will be the final spark the sport needs to captivate the united states.  sports writers, talk show hosts and fans of football, baseball and basketball are likely to dismiss this idea as a fantasy of soccer addicts who don't get the idea that their game is too technical, too low on action and too low-scoring to ever stir the passions of sports enthusiasts here.  but mr. fuller can simply counter the naysayers by pointing to the initial expectations for a show about people trying out for a singing competition. memorably, mr. fuller, along with the show's now-central celebrity, simon cowell, tried to tell american networks they had a hit series back in 2001, only to be dismissed by every network they visited as delusional britons.  cut to this week and the first two installments of the sixth season of ''american idol'' on fox. defying almost every law of programming, the show managed to eclipse even its own spectacular previous results, bringing in more people in its first two nights -- about 37 million viewers each -- than it ever had before.  peter liguori, president of entertainment for the fox network, said, ''he's changing american culture as we speak.'' referring to mr. fuller's delivery of ''idol'' and beckham to the states, he added, ''it's a testament to his being smart and recognizing what's in the zeitgeist.''  fox's competitors could only shake their heads at the ''idol'' season premiere, undone anew by the dashing of their hopes that this might be the year when the ''idol'' phenomenon gave evidence of cracking.  mr. fuller, who still maintains an executive producer credit on the show, said he had several theories as to why more people turned up to watch. first, he said, ''you have to remember that america is a big country,'' with plenty of people left to reach even when the biggest shows accumulate audiences.  new viewers were drawn to the show this year, mr. fuller speculated, because events underscored how much impact the show had had on the music business.  among the events he cited were grammy award victories for kelly clarkson, the first ''idol'' winner; soaring sales for new albums by other ''idol'' contestants, including carrie underwood, who was a winner, and chris daughtry, who wasn't; and the recent attention around the movie ''dreamgirls'' and the critically praised performance by jennifer hudson, another ''idol'' loser.  ''it doesn't matter anymore if you win on the show,'' mr. fuller said, noting that mr. daughtry's new album has been outselling the album released by last year's winner, taylor hicks. he predicted the album would soon pass justin timberlake's as the nation's top-seller, reaching at least three million in total sales.  ''you can finish fourth, like chris did, or fifth or sixth, like jennifer did, and you can still make hits,'' he said.  mr. fuller pointed out that music fans from many genres were now being exposed to ''idol'' performers. ''you have carrie, who is selling millions of albums to country fans,'' he said. ''you have kelly, who is a mainstream pop artist. and you have chris, who is the first real rock artist we've broken on the show. there there's jennifer, who's winning every award for 'dreamgirls.' i just think the music is getting out everywhere, and subliminally that has helped.''  mr. fuller, the chief executive of 19 entertainment, who is based in britain, has management deals with the ''idol'' performers through his company. he said he was ''both a partner and a manager'' to mr. beckham, whom he first met through his management of mr. beckham's wife, victoria, one of the spice girls, the singing group mr. fuller managed.  always a big fan of soccer, mr. fuller was involved in the deal in 1999 that took mr. beckham to real madrid, perhaps europe's most famous soccer team. he said that with mr. beckham's real deal ending, and the player now 31, it was time to contemplate the last big move of his athletic career.  ''we were looking for a move that would take david beyond soccer,'' mr. fuller said. ''david has been a phenomenal figure since he was 17. we knew he would still have value after soccer.''  the options included a new big financial deal with real madrid, or perhaps an even bigger financial deal to move him to a team in italy. ''i just thought: big deal -- what's the point?'' mr. fuller said. but when the opportunity to make the move to the united states came up, enthusiasm was immediate for both mr. beckham and mr. fuller.  ''it was the challenge,'' mr. fuller said. ''just imagine if he was part of something that made soccer truly a legitimate sport in america.'' he said mr. beckham, who he said has always been smart about his career, got the idea at once.  ''if you are at the top of your profession,'' mr. fuller said, ''you can make the easy choice or you can say, 'i'm going to go for it.' ''  tv  