still looking for a way out of iraq   to the editor:  ''picking up the pieces'' (editorial, jan. 14) might have reminded the world that we are witnessing the consequences of a bumbling, misguided presidency wielding immense power to do harm.  nearly half a trillion dollars is down the drain and billions more in a pipeline to nowhere. thousands of americans and iraqis have met violent deaths, not to mention thousands more on both sides maimed for life.  millions have been displaced or set against one another in sectarian wars. only more of the same can be expected in the next two years.  republican defeat at the polls and congressional opposition are unable to restrain or redirect an unreflective man without rational moorings.  president bush is staying the course with a change in rhetoric. our national future is more earnest criticism of the obvious and de facto impotence to undo or even mitigate damage from his spectacular mistakes.  kenneth r. stunkel  neptune, n.j., jan. 14, 2007  to the editor:  how many more years must pass before your editorial board abandons one of the prime myths put forth by the bush administration: that the united states cannot withdraw its troops from iraq and the middle east because then things would really fall apart?  we can and in fact will eventually withdraw from iraq. when we do, the slaughter of civilians is unlikely to be any worse than it is now.  nor is an influx of armed, displaced iranians into neighboring countries going to create a domino effect of violence throughout the region. instead, blessed by the departure of united states -- the region's prime troublemaker -- countries in the middle east will address and solve their own problems.  kenneth perry  boulder, wyo., jan. 14, 2007  to the editor:  your editorial deplores president bush's ''disconnected'' plans for an ''unwinnable'' war in iraq, where ''all of the remaining options are bad.'' you then devote your following paragraphs to outlining the steps that must be taken to avoid (complete) chaos in the region.  if these steps are taken and brought to a successful conclusion, it seems to me that the war could be reasonably deemed to have been ''won.'' do i sense a ''disconnect'' in your thinking?  ian  lamberton  wilmington, n.c., jan. 14, 2007  to the editor:  unless iraq's sunnis and shiites stop killing one another -- and why should we expect them to? -- we have two options in that country: quagmire or defeat. and quagmire merely means delayed defeat.  the reason no national leader, republican or democrat, will call for an immediate pullout is that no prospective president wants to be the one to tell the american people that we have lost a war.  david s. frankel  south dennis, mass., jan. 14, 2007  to the editor:  re ''the texas strategy,'' by paul krugman (column, jan. 15):  in the business world, chief executives must know when their strategies aren't working and react, or they go out of business.  america's involvement in the iraqi civil war clearly isn't working, so there's no reason to believe that more of the same is likely to yield a different outcome.  president bush's board of directors, the american people, by their votes in november and overwhelming public opinion today, have signaled the president that he needs to develop a different business plan for iraq.  warren langley  san francisco, jan. 16, 2007  the writer is chairman of business leaders for sensible priorities.  to the editor:  unlike our politicians who favor a ''phased withdrawal'' as some kind of specious strategy, i admire paul krugman's honesty when he characterizes it as simply a reflection of our defeat and cutting of losses.  but this admirable frankness of defeatism will be of no help in the future when we suffer horribly from the terrorism that will inevitably flourish in iranian-sponsored camps there, regardless of one's opinion of the wisdom of the war.  we must find a strategy of victory in iraq.  ari weitzner  new york, jan. 15, 2007  to the editor:  re ''bush authorized iranians' arrest in iraq, rice says'' (front page, jan. 13):  the united states occupies iraq with 140,000 troops, talks of ''replacing'' prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki if he does not meet american ''benchmarks,'' and determines who may or may not enter the country.  yet president bush accuses iran of ''meddling'' in iraq.  in new york, we call this chutzpah.  bruce cronin  new york, jan. 13, 2007  