quarrel stalls movement of ethics bill in the senate   it is an open secret that many members of congress from both parties would be relieved to scuttle proposed changes in ethics rules. after all, the changes tend to limit the personal perks and political advantages of their positions.  in the senate, that wish appeared to come true on wednesday. a proposed ethics overhaul collapsed when a procedural question turned into a feud between the democratic and republican leaders, each accusing the other of failing to address a major theme of the fall elections.  by about 10 p.m., the proposals appeared dead for now after 46 senate republicans blocked a vote on a broad ethics and lobbying bill. fifty democrats and one republican, senator gordon h. smith of oregon, supported going ahead with the vote, but under senate rules, 65 votes were needed to prevail.  in an interview after the vote, senator harry reid, democrat of nevada and majority leader, said, ''the republicans killed ethics reform, period. there is no way to put frosting on this. this is as sour as any piece of legislation.''  mr. reid said he would give the republicans another chance to vote for the bill thursday afternoon, but then would set the measure aside if they did not come around. the 21 republican senators who will be up for re-election in 2008 ''for the next two years are going to have to go home and explain what they did to try to destroy the most significant ethics and lobbying reform since watergate,'' mr. reid said.  senator mitch mcconnell of kentucky, the republican leader, called mr. reid's accusations spin. he said the issue was mr. reid's refusal to hold a vote on a republican proposal to include in the ethics bill a version of a presidential line-item veto, a provision that mr. reid said was irrelevant to ethics.  mr. mcconnell argued that such a veto power would help eliminate waste or corruption from the pet spending projects known as earmarks, which lawmakers tuck into complicated legislation.  although mr. reid publicly vowed to hold another vote on a presidential line-item veto, mr. mcconnell said the republicans would block passage of the ethics-and-lobbying rules package unless mr. reid allowed a vote on the proposal as an amendment.  ''no amount of spin is going to convince anyone that republicans don't want to pass this bill,'' mr. mcconnell said in a speech on the floor.  the senate ethics and lobbying reform bill under debate was introduced by the leaders of both parties and closely resembles a bill passed under republican control last year. it is considerably weaker than a counterpart bill that the house recently passed. but roll calls on a series of proposed amendments are forcing lawmakers to choose between casting embarrassing no votes or accepting more sweeping changes.  the new house rules, for example, includes a prohibition on house members' accepting gifts, meals or trips paid for by lobbyists; a ban on accepting discounted use of corporate jets; and a requirement of public disclosure of the sponsor, cost and purpose of each earmark.  the original senate ethics bill included looser restrictions and major loopholes. mr. reid, one of the biggest users of discounted corporate jet trips, introduced an amendment to roughly match the house rules on gifts, meals or jet use.  but when a republican introduced a proposed amendment to match the house requirement on earmarks, mr. reid tried unsuccessfully to block it. then he embraced it with small modifications.  senator trent lott, republican of mississippi and a former party leader, said he was ''amused'' by the fracas. ''i guess there is a little bit of a manhood thing here where one side is going to show the other,'' mr. lott said.  still, mr. lott, who oversaw the weaker bill that was introduced last year, also acknowledged some impatience with the zeal for new rules.  ''it's gotten out of control,'' mr. lott said. ''we're involved in a long process of self-flagellation.''  senator ben nelson, democrat of nebraska, agreed. ''i think this whole process has gotten out of control,'' he said. ''only in washington, when somebody like jack abramoff and duke cunningham breaks the law, you suddenly have to change the law.''  the 110th congress  