temporary redemption for beleaguered grossman   shortly after the chicago bears eliminated seattle in overtime yesterday, a reporter asked bears quarterback rex grossman, ''how long have the last two weeks been?''  grossman, the bears' beleaguered quarterback, has been eviscerated the past two weeks by the local and national news media, called everything from the worst quarterback in the n.f.l. to the worst in the bears' recent history.  there have been calls for coach lovie smith to bench grossman, criticism of smith for not giving brian griese meaningful playing time. the past two weeks have been especially brutal after a 26-7 loss to green bay in the regular-season finale. grossman had two of his three interceptions returned for touchdowns, lost a fumble and compiled a passer rating of 0 in one half of play.  those of us who rarely have our lives examined in such a public way can barely imagine what it's like to undergo weeks of scrutiny. hence the reporter's question: ''how long have the last two weeks been?''  grossman smiled and said, ''it was 14 days.''  the pen may be mightier than the sword, but we in the news media do not have a jarring, defining impact on the athletes we criticize. grossman said as much when he was asked the question about the past 14 days. he was not holed up in his home, did not slink around the city.  ''i think you give yourself too much credit for how you affect me,'' he said. ''it affects my family more than it affects me. i'm just excited that we're going to the n.f.c. championship game. that's the bottom line.''  along those same lines, someone else asked grossman if yesterday's victory validated him.  ''i'm not sure i even want to answer that question,'' grossman said.  that being the last question, he left the podium.  grossman is not the worst quarterback in the n.f.l. fans in at least six other cities could argue that distinction belongs to their quarterback. grossman may be the worst quarterback left in the playoffs when you consider peyton manning, drew brees and tom brady.  and what does it matter? chicago is playing host to the n.f.c. championship game next week.  as smith said yesterday, and n.f.l. coaches repeat throughout the season, the only thing that really matters is finishing, and preferably finishing on top.  ''last night i talked to the team about finishing,'' smith said. ''last year we were in this position, and we weren't able to finish the season the way we wanted. we talked about all we've gone through this year, how it would be a shame not to finish the game on a high note.''  last year, the bears lost right here to carolina, 29-21, in the conference semifinals. in the 2001 season, before smith arrived, they lost to the eagles at home, 33-19, also in the second round.  the bears will play host to the new orleans saints on sunday in what i call a contest between miracle teams. the saints finished 3-13 in a nightmare of a 2005 season that saw them displaced and nomadic in the aftermath of hurricane katrina.  the bears, in some way, are an even greater miracle; it's amazing that a team can get this far with consistently mediocre play from its quarterback.  i grew up in chicago with teams very much like this, heavy on defense with no quarterback to speak of: bill wade, rudy bukich, bobby douglass. vince evans was promising and jim mcmahon was the best in 1985 largely because the bears had one of the greatest defenses in n.f.l. history.  i'm not sure that there has been a team in the past 10 years that went to the super bowl with such erratic play from the quarterback. baltimore won a super bowl with trent dilfer, but he was efficient. he never hurt the ravens.  many times this season, the bears have had to dig out from deep, dark holes that grossman put them in. yesterday was a good day for most, a great day for grossman: 21 of 38 with a touchdown and an interception that wasn't really his fault. he was sacked three times and fumbled.  bottom line: when the bears needed a spot performance, grossman produced. he hit bernard berrian with a 68-yard touchdown pass in the second quarter, and in overtime he hit rashied davis with a 30-yard pass to set up robbie gould's winning field goal.  the bears escaped. rex grossman, love him or hate him, is playing for the n.f.c. championship.  each team has a cross to bear and a tale to tell. the saints represent the hopes and aspirations of a devastated city; the colts have to contend with the irsay hex. the bears have rex.  during a conference call with reporters last week, dick butkus, the hall of fame linebacker, spoke about how fortunate the bears had been with middle linebackers.  ''it's really odd how lucky we've been with linebackers,'' he said. ''maybe that's why we haven't been lucky with quarterbacks.''  maybe the bears will get lucky with grossman.  yesterday he justified the faith his coach has shown in him.  asked what he learned about grossman, smith said: ''i've learned that he knows how to bounce back from tough situations. he has been roasted the past couple of weeks over all different kinds of things. he is our quarterback. when you push him up against a wall, he knows how to come out fighting.''  the victory against seattle was not flashy, hardly pretty. the bears are not a machine like the patriots, they don't have a silver-bullet player like san diego's ladainian tomlinson.  but they win. these bears are a bottom-line team in a bottom-line business.  sports of the times e-mail: wcr@nytimes.com  