gay lawyer's suit accuses firm of bias   an associate at one of the country's most prestigious law firms, sullivan & cromwell, filed a state lawsuit in manhattan yesterday accusing the firm of a systematic campaign of discrimination and retaliation against him because of his sexual orientation.  aaron b. charney, 28, who is a fourth-year associate, asserts in the lawsuit, filed in new york state supreme court in manhattan, that several partners in sullivan & cromwell's highly regarded mergers and acquisitions practice subjected him to ''lewd and illegal conduct,'' beginning in the fall of 2005. he is seeking a jury trial and unspecified compensatory and punitive damages.  in his lawsuit, mr. charney accuses members of the firm of demanding he be terminated for carrying on an ''unnatural'' gay relationship with another sullivan & cromwell associate; mr. charney denies the relationship. the suit also contends that after he filed a formal internal complaint, members of the firm suggested that he move to a foreign office and then fabricated reviews to accuse him of overbilling clients, among other things.  while mr. charney has not been terminated, he says he was told he should not come to the office while an internal investigation is continuing.  in an e-mailed statement, the firm's chairman, h. rodgin cohen, said the firm ''categorically denies mr. charney's allegations of discrimination and retaliation.''  another of the firm's partners, david h. braff, said that the firm had a strong culture of acceptance and that it had handled several landmark cases over the years that protected gay and lesbian rights.  ''i've been openly gay since i arrived at this firm in 1984,'' mr. braff added. ''there's absolutely no atmosphere of hostility toward gay people here.''  a handful of suits against law firms asserting discrimination or harassment have been filed by assistants or secretaries, including one filed against baker & mckenzie by a secretary who contended she had been sexually harassed by one of its partners. that suit resulted in $3 million in damages.  yet it is virtually unheard-of for associates, who typically work long hours in their quest to become partners, to file such suits, which can stall or even end their legal careers.  ''the day i derailed my career was the day i complained about the discrimination,'' said mr. charney, who said he was representing himself in the case because no other lawyers wanted to take on the law firm.  mr. charney, who joined the firm in the fall of 2003 after graduating from columbia university law school, contends that hostility toward him because of his sexual orientation began in the fall of 2005.  in his complaint, mr. charney claims that a partner in the mergers practice, eric m. krautheimer, began to make lewd sexual remarks to him based on his sexual orientation.  the next month, he said, james c. morphy, the managing partner of the merger group, gave mr. charney his semiannual review, in which he conveyed outstanding work evaluations that had been written by several partners and clients on mr. charney's behalf.  at the conclusion of the evaluation, however, mr. charney asserts that mr. morphy said that several partners had complained about seeing mr. charney and another male associate in the group ''walking the halls together'' and ''eating lunch together'' and that this ''needs to stop.'' in his complaint, mr. charney said it was a thinly veiled and false accusation that the two were engaged in a gay relationship.  in may 2006, mr. charney lodged a formal complaint with david b. harms, a co-managing partner of the firm's general practice. a few days later, mr. harms said that mr. krauthemier and another partner whom mr. charney asserted had made inappropriate remarks denied doing so.  mr. harms assured mr. charney that making the complaint would not result in any change to his employment status at the firm.  but a few hours later, mr. charney said he learned he was not included on a mentoring list for the 2006 summer associate program. messages left with mr. krautheimer, mr. morphy and mr. harms were not immediately answered.  