small plane crashes and burns in driveway of new jersey house   a single-engine plane crashed and exploded in the driveway of a house in wayne, n.j., last night, killing the pilot, the police said. it was unclear if there were any passengers on board, they said. no one was in the house when the crash occurred, and no one on the ground seemed to be injured, the police and witnesses said.  the beechcraft plane crashed shortly before 8 p.m. in the driveway of 115 nellis drive, a two-story house on a gently curving road.  ''i heard two booms,'' said dennis loy, who lives next door. ''the second one literally rocked the house. that is when we came out the front and looked out the window, and it was just a ball of fire.  ''i thought it was a car that had flipped over because i saw the fire in the street, and then when i came out, my wife yelled at me that it's not a car, it's an airplane,'' mr. loy said.  mitch margolies, who lives across the street, said he also heard a large boom, ''like two mack trucks going 80 miles an hour colliding head-on.''  the plane touched ground in the middle of the street about 25 feet from the driveway, said john babitz, the wayne township fire commissioner. he said that the plane probably skidded, and came to rest upside down in the driveway.  the pilot had filed a flight plan from charlotte, n.c., to the essex county airport in fairfield, n.j., about five miles from the crash scene, said john reardon, deputy chief of the wayne police department. the pilot was identified, but his name was being withheld until his family could be notified.  neighbors said they had little warning before the crash. tahira bokhari, who lives on the street, said she did not hear the sound of an engine, and became aware of the plane's presence only when it hit some trees, showering twigs and branches into her driveway and yard. seconds later, she heard the crash, she said.  charred chunks of the plane were still on nellis drive late last night.  the only part of the house that appeared to have been damaged was the mailbox.  