news summary   international a3-11  hanging of hussein kin results in decapitation  the execution of saddam hussein's half brother ended with the hangman's noose decapitating him after he fell through the gallows trapdoor. an official video was played to a small group of iraqi and western reporters more than 13 hours after the hanging. a1  with the first wave of additional soldiers already arriving in iraq, the top american military commander warned that it could take months before there are any real signs of progress.  a8  chechen amnesty plan  a russian-sponsored amnesty program, intended to entice chechen militants into civilian life ended with official assertions that hundreds had accepted the offer and that the program had further weakened the separatist insurgency.  a8  6 in london bomb plot on trial  in a courthouse in london, close to the high-security belmarsh prison, six men appeared on trial, charged with conspiracy to murder and cause explosions on july 21, 2005.  a3  somalia shuts 3 radio stations  somalia's transitional government shut three of the country's biggest radio stations, accusing them of broadcasting incendiary propaganda.  a3  rice calls meeting on mideast  secretary of state condoleezza rice announced that she would call together israeli and palestinian leaders for what she described as a high-level, yet informal, meeting in hopes of pushing along moribund peace efforts.  a10  national a14-19  more women now living without spouse at home  for what experts say is probably the first time, more american women are living without a husband than with one, according to a new york times analysis of census results.  a1  condo market reversal  since the middle of 2006, the frenzied condominium market in big cities like washington, miami and boston has collapsed. once roaring sales have slowed to a trickle.  a1  surprise in kidnapping case  in minutes, a missouri man went from unassuming and good-natured pizza cook to accused mastermind child abductor, and the people who were most surprised were among those who knew him best.  a19  celebrating without mrs. king  politicians, religious leaders and relatives of the rev. dr. martin luther king jr. gathered in the tiny chapel in atlanta that was his spiritual home to celebrate his birthday, but for the first time without the presence of his widow.  a16  storm kills dozens in 6 states  an icy storm has caused the deaths of at least 41 people in six states, including seven mexicans in a van in oklahoma apparently traveling in search of jobs. the storm has now expanded its reach from texas to the northeast.  a14  shantytown emerges in miami  umoja, a shantytown in the shadow of the biggest construction boom in miami, is part social protest and part social experiment based on a court ruling that miami could not criminalize homeless people for conducting ''life-sustaining acts'' on public land if shelters were filled.  a14  new york/region b1-7  buffalo police arrest man linked to series of attacks  the buffalo police said that genetic testing showed a match between a factory worker and evidence from three murders and several rapes that occurred around the university of buffalo over a quarter century.  b1  a jump in organ donations  organ donation across downstate new york has risen sharply, from 199 donors in 2001, to 319 last year. the main reason for the success are family services coordinators. b1  neediest cases  b6  business day c1-8  g.e. buys smiths aerospace  general electric said that it would purchase smiths aerospace. the companies said they would pool their technologies for detecting bombs, chemicals and other dangerous items into a joint venture.  c1  netflix's new venture  the death of netflix, an online system for renting dvds, was predicted late in 2002, but today the company has nearly $1 billion in revenue. now, netflix is attempting to deliver movies directly to users' pcs.  c1  business digest c2  arts e1-12  golden globes honors  at the golden globes, ''babel'' won the award for best dramatic movie. martin scorsese won for directing ''the departed,'' while ''dreamgirls'' scooped up awards for a pair of its actors. e1  obituaries b8  bradford washburn  an explorer who led a mapping of the grand canyon, he was 96.  b8  editorial a20-21  editorials: energy time; tracking outsourced bonanzas; fix the dysfunctional family court; serge schmemann on the fall of a polish bishop.  columns: nicholas d. kristof, stacy schiff.  crossword e8  tv listings e11  weather d8  