the long lens of obsession and mad love   fiendishly assured yet ultimately less than the sum of its parts, the writer and director eric nicholas's latest film, ''alone with her,'' is a voyeuristic thriller about a young man named doug (colin hanks of ''roswell'') who becomes smitten with a woman named amy (ana claudia talancón of ''the crime of father amaro'') and tries to insinuate himself into her life through high-tech means. he videotapes her routines from afar, then plants hidden cameras and microphones in her apartment.  the movie's unsettling first section is viewed through the virtual eyes of doug's spying equipment. an early scene in a men's room frames doug from the chest down as he balances a duffel bag atop a sink, stuffs a camera inside, and then hides the lens, which is positioned at crotch height, by selectively closing the bag's zipper. this image transforms the argument of laura mulvey's landmark essay, ''visual pleasure and the narrative cinema'' -- that cinema's gaze is inherently male -- into a rude sight gag.  doug then uses his secretly acquired knowledge of amy's personality, musical taste and recent breakup to arrange a meeting with her, encourages an uneasy platonic friendship, then contrives a series of increasingly nasty misfortunes that will enable him to ride to her rescue.  for the most part, the spycam angles are convincingly realistic, though the sheer number of them suggests that doug's real frustration is artistic. like the hero of michael powell's ''peeping tom,'' which mr. nicholas explicitly invokes, doug is equal parts milquetoast monster and budding filmmaker.  the performers are convincing, sometimes heartbreakingly vulnerable. mr. nicholas never loses sight of the invasive nature of doug's obsession. he's sincerely interested in amy's collapsing self-esteem, and shows glimmers of empathy for doug, an alienated loner whose propensity for icy chivalry suggests travis bickle (of ''taxi driver'') in khakis. as unpleasantness inevitably builds toward violence, doug and amy seem to complete each other unhealthily.  in the end, though, the characters seem less archetypal than vague, and aside from its sophisticated presentation, ''alone with her'' doesn't differ all that much from its template: the late-'80s and early-'90s fill-in-the-blanks-from-hell movies that followed in the wake of ''fatal attraction,'' many of whose elements (including the heroine's inquisitive, doomed best friend) mr. nicholas revives almost verbatim.  alone with her  opens today in manhattan and on video on demand.  written and directed by eric nicholas; director of photography, nathan wilson; edited by cari coughlin; music by david russo; production designer, john mott; produced by tom engelman and robert engelman; released by ifc first take and the weinstein company. at the ifc center, 323 avenue of the americas, at third street, greenwich village. running time: 79 minutes. this film is not rated.  with: colin hanks (doug), ana claudia talancón (amy), jordana spiro (jen) and jonathon trent (matt).  film review  