partial demolition planned for a reminder of sept. 11   the only architectural vestige of the world trade center complex still standing aboveground, the ''survivors' stairway,'' would be largely demolished under a proposal by the lower manhattan development corporation.  six to nine granite stair treads would be left in their original location near vesey street. other elements of the staircase might be embedded in the trade center memorial plaza and displayed in the memorial museum.  the 21-foot-high staircase, which led to the elevated plaza around the twin towers, offered an escape route for an untold number of people on sept. 11, 2001. it is seen by some, including the w.t.c. survivors' network, as a symbolic and authentic remnant of survival in the face of a devastating attack.  but it is in the way of the future tower 2, whose lobby would cover much of the 17-by-64-foot site now occupied by the badly battered staircase. the staircase will have to be moved to permit excavation and construction on the tower 2 site.  what is at issue is whether the structure should be partly demolished or salvaged in its entirety, and, if salvaged, whether it should be returned to its original site or moved elsewhere.  in a meeting on jan. 11 that was closed to the public, the development corporation put forward its preference: to disassemble the staircase structure and salvage only the surface of the two flights of stairs and what was once the plaza paving. the proposal was reported in the daily news on tuesday.  a comment period, required under a federal historic preservation review known as the section 106 process, runs until feb. 12.  ''l.m.d.c. will make the decision, but will not do that until after they have reviewed the public comments,'' said christine anderson, press secretary to gov. eliot spitzer. ''the governor and his staff are absolutely committed to reviewing all options once all of the comments are in.''  under the plan proposed last week, six to nine granite stair treads would be installed in the steps leading up to the lobby of tower 2, in the same location they occupy now, but reoriented. both in and outside the tower 2 lobby, the outline of the whole staircase would be marked with metal channels.  the bottom-most granite tread from the staircase might be set into the memorial plaza, said alice m. greenwald, an executive vice president of the world trade center memorial foundation and the director of the memorial museum.  the granite stair treads that are not incorporated into the tower 2 steps might be set into the broad flight of stairs leading from the future visitors' center at ground zero down to the subterranean memorial hall, she said. or they might be made part of the exhibit planned within the footprint of the north tower at a level near bedrock.  ''it would be our honor to include this material,'' ms. greenwald said.  preservationists have urged for months that the whole staircase be kept at its original location. ''it's ultimately bound to be less meaningful not to have a remnant there that survived the attack and the cleanup,'' said frank e. sanchis iii, the senior vice president of the municipal art society.  richard zimbler, the vice president of the survivors' network, said the proposal ''cannibalizes the stairway,'' although he added that the museum's plans ''are more respectful of the symbolism of the stairway, which is ultimately its most important value.''  community board 1 in lower manhattan passed a resolution last year saying that it ''does not believe that it is necessary for the vesey street stair remnant to remain in place or that its symbolic and historical value is ultimately site specific.''  