paid notice: deaths   sederbaum, art   sederbaum--art. we mourn the passing of our friend and colleague art sederbaum. his good nature, quick wit and sharp intellect will be missed by us and by the entire estate planning community. the 40s discussion group  sederbaum--arthur. the bankers and lawyers advisory committee of the new york philharmonic notes with profound sorrow the death of its member, art sederbaum, whose inspiration for classical music dates back to leonard bernstein's young peoples concerts.  sederbaum--arthur d. died peacefully at his home in new york city on january 19, surrounded by his beloved wife, jayne m. kurzman, daughters, rebecca and elizabeth, son david and his wife, phoenix, sister caroline sederbaum and stepchildren, anthony and pamela rykowski. he is also survived by his father, william sederbaum, of jacksonville, florida. a nationally respected trusts and estates attorney, an avid patron of the arts and devoted father and husband, his wisdom, generosity and sense of humor will be greatly missed. visitation at frank e. campbell funeral chapel, 81st street and madison avenue, monday, january 22, 2-5pm and 7-9pm. funeral at st. paul's chapel at columbia university, 118th street and amsterdam avenue, tuesday, january 23, 10:30 am. in lieu of flowers, the family asks that donations be made to the rockefeller university or memorial sloan-kettering cancer center.  sederbaum--arthur. with affection and profound sadness, we mourn the loss of our partner, arthur sederbaum, one of the leaders of our personal planning practice and a pillar of the new york trusts and estates bar for decades. art was nationally renowned for his expertise and his ability to communicate complicated ideas in easily understandable language in writings and lectures delivered at educational organizations and cultural institutions throughout the country. he was also highly respected for his selfless contributions to professional and philanthropic organizations. a graduate of columbia university and columbia law school, with an l.l.m. from new york university, art had a true passion for the law he practiced. his engaging personality and down to earth intellect were the gifts he shared with his colleagues. his gregarious personality, combined with boundless energy, wit and humor, made him a sought after caring friend and mentor, as he helped so many reach their fullest potential. we were lucky to have art with us, and he will be sorely missed. we honor his memory by remembering him as a shining example of a true professional blessed with the wisdom of humanity. we extend our most heartfelt sympathy to his wife jayne and the sederbaum family. the partners of patterson belknap webb &tyler llp  