newly released   this month's new releases include novels by two writers better known for nonfiction, richard a. clarke and anthony swofford. there's also a novel set in the icy climate of lapland, and, in nonfiction, a look at the hartford public schools and the legal battle to end segregation there.  breakpoint  by richard a. clarke  309 pages. g. p. putnam's sons. $25.95.  richard clarke, the former national security council staff member whose 2004 book, ''against all enemies,'' chastised the bush and clinton administrations for not doing enough to prevent terrorism before sept. 11 (and became a best seller in the process), is continuing his career as a novelist. in ''breakpoint,'' his second thriller, jimmy foley, an n.y.p.d. detective on loan to the feds, and susan connor, head of the special projects branch of the intelligence analysis center, try to uncover who is behind a series of attacks on america's scientific elite and cyber infrastructure. they discover that a lot of surprising science, from babies being given an extra set of chromosomes to something called ''human brain reverse-engineering,'' is being carried out far from the public eye -- and that more than one group might have reason to be upset. though the book is set in the near future, mr. clarke ends with an author's note pointing out that much of his science is not entirely fictional. ''sometimes you can tell more truth through fiction,'' he writes.  paula spencer  by roddy doyle  281 pages. viking. $24.95.  at the beginning of this novel set in dublin, paula (who last appeared in roddy doyle's 1996 book, ''the woman who walked into doors'') is a few weeks shy of her 48th birthday, and four months and five days -- ''a third of a year. half a pregnancy, nearly.'' -- into life without drinking. over the course of the next year she'll worry about her four children (especially leanne, who seems to have inherited paula's weakness for drink), discover the white stripes (''it had reminded her of the old stuff. deep purple, led zeppelin, rory gallagher'' ) and takes her first steps toward, perhaps, romance. dealing with the ups and downs of her new life, paula keeps reminding herself, ''it's grand; it's fine. she's not complaining.'' besides, ''who'd listen?''  exit a  by anthony swofford  287 pages. scribner. $25.  in 2003 anthony swofford published ''jarhead,'' a nonfiction account of his marine corps service during the first gulf war. reviewing it for the new york times, michiko kakutani said the book combined ''the black humor of 'catch-22' with the savagery of 'full metal jacket' and the visceral detail of 'the things they carried.' '' mr. swofford is back, this time with a novel. in the first half of ''exit a,'' severin boxx and virginia sachiko kindwall are teenagers on yokota air base in tokyo. he's a football player; she is the thrill-seeking half-japanese daughter of the base's general, oliver kindwall. she is caught up in a kidnapping scheme that lands her in a japanese prison and severin back in the states finishing high school. in the second half they find their way back to each other. but given mr. swofford's sketchy plotting and narcissistic characters, readers may not make it that far.  about alice  by calvin trillin  78 pages. random house. $14.95.  last year in the new yorker, calvin trillin published a love letter to his wife, alice, who died of heart failure on sept. 11, 2001. a slightly longer version of mr. trillin's essay has now been published in this slim volume. it is a paean to alice, their marriage and their family life, which seems to have been exceptionally happy. ''mom,'' one of the trillin daughters said at her mother's memorial service, ''you were the coolest girl i ever knew.''  the children in room e4  american education on trial  by susan eaton  395 pages. algonquin books. $24.95.  on a field trip to a school in a nearby suburb, one of the children in room e4 -- lois luddy's classroom at the simpson-waverly elementary school in the north end of hartford -- nervously asks her teacher, ''is this a white school?'' after ms. luddy answers the child, she turns to susan eaton and asks: ''did you hear what she asked me? maybe i should have said, 'yes, it is a white school, honey. and you go to a black school. don't you think that's crazy?' but where do you begin?''  ms. eaton begins with sheff v. o'neill, originally filed in state court in 1989, in which the plaintiffs argued that the black and hispanic children of hartford were being denied an equal education because of the de facto segregation of the state's public schools. in the 2001-2 school year, 94 percent of hartford's schoolchildren were members of racial minority groups, ms. eaton reports; schools in the surrounding suburbs were white in similar proportions. she recounts sheff's slog through the courts -- the plaintiffs originally lost, then won on appeal, then reached a settlement -- in parallel with the story of ms. luddy's class and its progress through third and fourth grades.  let the northern lights erase your name  by vendela vida  226 pages. ecco. $23.95.  within the first 10 pages of vendela vida's new novel, clarissa iverton's father dies, she discovers that he wasn't actually her father, and then she learns that her fiancé has known this fact for 15 years. all of which sends clarissa on a journey to lapland, where her mother, who abandoned the family when clarissa was 14, had lived among the sami people before her marriage. in prose as flat as arctic light, ms. vida narrates clarissa's expedition in search of her father, which inevitably leads back to her mother. at one point clarissa sits in the house of a sami healer, watching ''fanny and alexander'' on tv. ''i wanted, i wanted, i wanted,'' she thinks. ''i wanted so much that what i wanted most was not to want. i wanted to talk and talk until there was nothing left to tell.''  