library decides not to close to thwart rowdiness   the township's libraries will remain open during after-school hours, now that local officials have come up with ideas on how to help keep unruly students from disrupting other patrons.  the library board of trustees on sunday reversed its decision, announced last month, to close its two libraries between 2:45 and 5 p.m. because up to 50 middle school students at a time were gathering in and around the main library. the library closing was to have started tuesday.  after receiving numerous complaints about the closings, local government officials in this essex county township of 23,000 called several meetings and worked with school officials and other agencies to expand after-school programs for middle-school students.  a once-a-week program at a church has been expanded to three days, and plans are being made to open up the middle school gym or cafeteria for another two days.  family connections, a state-supported nonprofit organization, will be passing out information to students on tuesday encouraging them to participate in its forthcoming recreational and life-skills program.  and on jan. 23, a consulting firm, global pact, will be meeting with middle-school students to discuss their interests and help them develop alternative after-school activities.  mayor fred r. profeta jr. has also offered to provide security guards at the libraries, calling the disruptive behavior a public safety issue.  the library has wrestled with the behavior problems for at least 10 years, and summoned the police 18 times last year. but in the past, library staff members did not want to lodge official complaints against the offending students, leaving the police with no way to press charges, chief robert cimino said at the meeting on sunday.  marianna s. noto, the president of the library board, said the decision to close had been made ''very reluctantly and with great sadness.''  ''the squeaky wheel gets the grease,'' she said. ''we squeaked a lot and got the grease.''  