early-morning defeat leaves qualifier upset about officials' decision   it was shortly after 2 p.m., and bobby reynolds was hunched forward on a plush chair in the australian open players lounge. he was talking on the phone and yawning, and then yawning some more.  it felt like the day after even though it really wasn't for reynolds, an american qualifier whose tournament had come to an end with a five-set loss to the italian andreas seppi.  tennis players have to deal with five-set disappointments on a daily basis in grand slam events, but what will make reynolds's defeat a conversation piece for many grand slams to come was that it ended at 3:34 in the morning: a time when the only beings usually active in this part of melbourne are the possums roaming in fitzroy gardens.  ''it felt like one of those late-nighters you have in college when you've got a paper to write and you need to drink a couple cokes and get it done,'' reynolds said.  though tennis matches have certainly finished at that hour or later in some all-night, full-moon strain of the recreational game, there is no record of one having finished that late in a grand slam event or, for that matter, a regular tour event.  the latest match at the united states open was mats wilander's victory against his fellow swede mikael pernfors in the second round in 1993. that finished at 2:26 a.m., which still made the swedes look like early birds in comparison.  reynolds and seppi were originally scheduled to go on court 14 on tuesday afternoon, but temperatures exceeding 100 degrees caused organizers to implement the tournament's extreme heat policy early in the day. the policy keeps matches from being put on outside courts until conditions cool, and though the more high-profile players on the two main show courts played on under closed roofs, the rank and file had to wait and wait.  reynolds killed time for nearly 14 hours. he said he arrived at melbourne park at about 10 in the morning and did not start his match against seppi until 11:45 p.m.  ''obviously, i would have rather not played,'' reynolds said. ''it's such a big event to put guys out there at that time of night. i don't understand why they cancelled some matches for the night and played others. i just don't feel it's right to put someone out at 12 at night. we work so hard to get into this tournament.''  twelve first-round women's matches were postponed on tuesday, but the men all managed to finish, including the american qualifier alex kuznetsov, who defeated peter luczak of australia in a five-set match that finished shortly after 1 a.m. kuznetsov, 19, was considered one of the most promising juniors in the world until he broke his right femur during a car accident in may 2005. but he will now have the chance to play the no. 5 seed, james blake, in the second round.  craig tiley, the new australian open tournament director, said the decision to put the men out so late was made because organizers wanted to avoid having them play best-of-five-set matches on consecutive days, whereas women play best of three. there was also concern about heat delaying play again on wednesday. ''we thought it would be better for bob to have a full day off instead of playing back to back,'' tiley said, referring to reynolds.  court 14 is one of the most far-flung at melbourne park, lying near the railway tracks and containing limited seating, which was no concern, because there were only about 30 people watching when reynolds and seppi started to play.  three hours and 59 minutes later, when seppi finally closed out the match with a forehand winner, there were closer to 100: not all of whom were parents of the ball chasers staying up long past their bedtimes.  ''nobody keeled over, which was good,'' said reynolds, who could have sent everyone to bed 45 minutes earlier if he would have converted on a match point with seppi serving at 5-6, 30-40 in the fourth set. instead, he missed a backhand down the line.  at least he made history, and at least it was relatively cool by the time seppi finished off his 6-1, 6-7 (4), 6-7 (5), 7-6 (3), 6-3 victory. it was cooler when play resumed on wednesday with top-seeded roger federer advancing to the third round with a 6-2, 6-3, 6-2 victory against the veteran jonas bjorkman, the same man he overwhelmed in the semifinals of wimbledon last year. andy roddick followed with a 7-3, 7-6 (4), 6-4 victory against marc gicquel. and serena williams continued her comeback with a 7-6 (4), 6-2 victory against anne kremer.  lleyton hewitt, seeded 19th, advanced to the second round tuesday with a 3-6, 2-6, 6-3, 6-3, 6-3 victory against yet another american qualifier, michael russell. it has been a rough stretch by hewitt's standards. once no. 1 in the world, he is seeded 19th at this australian open. though he remains the intense focus of local attention, there has been more negative than positive in focus over the last few weeks, between a nagging calf injury and the unexpected resignation of his longtime coach roger rasheed. rasheed was the well-muscled man in hewitt's corner when hewitt clawed his way into the final here in 2005.  but all hewitt's troubles did not seem much like trouble at all when compared to the career path of russell, who nearly spoiled hewitt's tournament in the first round.  russell has spent much of the last five years unable to play the game that can still send hewitt into a fist-clenching frenzy.  he has had to absorb the multiple blows of three knee operations linked to a rare degenerative condition that causes bone to break off the femur. he has had to recover from badly torn hamstrings and hip muscles and even clotting in his lungs after an extremely negative reaction to a marathon flight to australia last year.  ''i couldn't last more than 10 minutes on the court,'' he said.  but the love of the game and the life that goes with it have burned brightly enough to keep russell from quitting. he is 28 now, past middle age for an elite tennis player. he is ranked 114th in the world, and yet there he was walking back onto one of the courts that matter most in tennis. who cared if nearly everyone would be cheering for hewitt, the home-country favorite?  ''i got reflective a couple hours before the match,'' russell said. ''almost had tears in my eyes. because it's so nice to be back playing in a big atmosphere after everything i've been through. once i got out there, i felt great.''  tennis  