when the people make a case that a man deserves to die   there is no reason for you to recognize the name gerhard arthur puff, but it looms rather large right now in new york jurisprudence.  mr. puff, to grant him an honorific he doesn't deserve, was an unrepentant criminal who robbed a kansas bank and then, while trying to escape in new york, shot and killed a federal agent named joseph j. brock. for that, he went to the electric chair at sing sing prison.  his last words were hardly memorable. ''goodbye, marshal,'' the 40-year-old mr. puff said, according to f.b.i. records. but you have to say this of him: he had some appetite for a man about to die. his last meal was fried chicken, sweet potatoes, asparagus tips, brussels sprouts, cranberry sauce and salad -- topped off with strawberry shortcake. thus, on a hot and sticky august night in 1954, gerhard puff became the last federal inmate executed in a new york case.  the government now wants to strip him of that distinction. it proposes to do so by taking the life of ronell wilson.  mr. wilson, to grant him as well an unearned honorific, is the staten island man convicted of capital murder last month for shooting two undercover police detectives in the back of the head. the same anonymous jurors who found him guilty gathered once more this week in a federal courtroom in brooklyn, there to decide whether he deserves to die for his crime.  for the last three days, they have listened to testimony from prosecution witnesses, to the effect that mr. wilson, 24, is nothing but an irredeemably violence-prone thug. in short, his is a life not worth saving.  into next week, the jurors are expected to hear from the other side, including perhaps from the defendant himself, about the rough life he has lived since boyhood. in short, his is the officer krupke defense: he's depraved on account of he's deprived, to borrow from the street punks in ''west side story.''  to reinforce what is at stake, the prosecutors keep two large photographs on their table, propped up directly in front of the jury box. they are head shots of the murdered detectives, james v. nemorin and rodney j. andrews. the dead men are a constant presence in the room.  behind the prosecution team, at a separate table, sit the defense lawyers and their young client, a man bearing a facial expression as vacant as an abandoned house.  predicting how a jury will decide is risky, even foolish. but history would seem to favor mr. wilson. winning a verdict of death is an uphill climb for new york prosecutors. ''so far, juries have been saying that life without parole is sufficient,'' said richard c. dieter, executive director of the death penalty information center, a research group in washington.  the death penalty has long been more abstraction than reality in new york. leaving federal cases aside, no state inmate has been executed since a murderer named eddie lee mays went to the electric chair in 1963. (for the curious, he declined a last meal, preferring a pack of pall malls.)  for all their tough talk on crime, the legislature and the former governor, george e. pataki, enacted a capital punishment law so flawed that it could not pass constitutional muster. that law sits in judicial limbo, and there is no sign that lawmakers and the new governor, eliot spitzer, are in a rush to resurrect it.  throughout the country, state executions have been on a steady decline since 1998. meanwhile, the federal government has gone the other way. under president bush, ''you have a more aggressive approach to the death penalty,'' mr. dieter said.  starting in 2001, there have been three federal executions, including that of timothy j. mcveigh for the oklahoma city bombing. for 38 years before that, there were none. federal death rows now house 46 inmates compared with 19 in 2000, mr. dieter said.  in the brooklyn federal courthouse alone, three capital trials were under way this month; one ended last week with the jury giving a convicted killer a life sentence. a fourth trial, involving torture and a triple murder, has begun in federal court in manhattan.  so it is possible that capital punishment will not endure as an abstract concept here. ''it's a matter of time before there's a death penalty sentence out of new york,'' mr. dieter said.  soon enough, we will learn if time is on mr. wilson's side, or if it has run out for this cop killer with the vacant look.  nyc e-mail: haberman@nytimes.com  