after falling behind early, blake quickly regains place   the mentoring program in american tennis has its limits, as alex kuznetsov discovered soon after breaking james blake's serve twice at the beginning of their second-round match at the australian open.  kuznetsov's 3-0 lead quickly became a 6-4, 6-1, 6-2 defeat thursday as blake, his occasional counselor, raised his game and then raised it some more, packing a high percentage of spectacular shots into 1 hour 21 minutes of indoor tennis at rod laver arena.  blake's pate remains bald and shiny, but his beard gets thicker and he has no intention of shaving it until he loses. ''superstition,'' blake said sheepishly. ''it starts to look silly.''  blake is 6-0 in 2007 after sweeping to the title in sydney. judging from his form in his first two matches here, it could be a while before he has to reach for a razor.  after handling carlos moyá in an intense straight-set match tuesday, he manhandled kuznetsov, a 19-year-old american who was one of the world's brightest prospects until he crashed a rented sports car borrowed from a friend into a tree in may 2005 in tampa, fla., and broke his right leg.  ''being stupid, trying to drive too fast,'' said kuznetsov, who has a titanium rod in his leg. ''i am very lucky, very lucky to be playing tennis.''  it was four months before he could resume hitting, but kuznetsov has shown encouraging signs of revival here, making it through qualifying and winning his first tour-level match in the first round of the main draw against peter luczak of australia in five late-night sets.  but the fifth-seeded blake, the highest-ranked american player, was too big a step up. blake appears to have lifted his game a level in the off-season and is returning serve particularly well in melbourne. moyá won just 31 percent of the points on his second serve and kuznetsov won fewer than 20 percent.  there was little chance that blake was going to take kuznetsov lightly. he knows him well after training with him frequently in florida at blake's invitation.  ''it's not like him playing somebody he doesn't know,'' blake said. ''he knows the pace, he knows how well i can move, he knows kind of the things i can do. it's almost a little frustrating.''  consider that the price of giving back to the next generation, which is something that blake and andy roddick have done regularly, just as andre agassi, todd martin and pete sampras did it for them.  ''i don't feel ancient, but i guess in tennis years i am,'' the 27-year-old blake said. ''when i can help out, whether it's hitting with them, whether it's taking them out to a meal and trying to teach them about being a little bit more professional on tour, anything, it's my pleasure. that's a role that i take seriously.''  kuznetsov also used blake for a role model as he tried to come back from his injury. blake had his own annus horribilis in 2004 when he broke his neck during an on-court tumble, lost his father to cancer, then contracted shingles.  but he is seeing the ball clearly now, and there were moments when kuznetsov had to wonder what it would take to win a point when he was not giving one away with an overeager unforced error. there were fine approach shots from kuznetsov that blake transformed into lunging, full-swinging forehand winners. there was an excellent drop shot that blake turned into an angle winner, and there was even a good overhead early in the third set that blake trumped with a leaping reflex forehand well above his head that got over kuznetsov and ended up giving blake the point.  there is still much to improve in a grand slam setting, however. next, blake will face the german qualifier mischa zverev or another good american friend, robby ginepri.  but the most anticipated match of the round will not involve blake. it will involve andy roddick and the former australian open champion marat safin. roddick, seeded sixth this year, advanced with a straight-set defeat wednesday of marc gicquel of france. safin defeated the israeli qualifier dudi sela with much more difficulty, 6-3, 5-7, 4-6, 7-5 (4), 6-0, taking control of the match only after the roof on vodafone arena was closed because of light rain.  roddick and safin have split their six previous matches, and though safin is seeded 26th, roddick has no illusions about what sort of threat he poses, particularly after safin led russia to the davis cup title in moscow in december.  ''you're asking someone who are their top six or seven favorites for this event, you know, i feel like his name is in there still,'' roddick said. ''if marat is match tough, i don't think there's any question of his standard.''  roddick's protégé is also in the third round. sam querrey, a 19-year-old californian, continued to enjoy his first australian open by defeating florent serra of france, 6-3, 6-4, 6-3, on wednesday night.  it was a poised and convincing performance, and it earned querrey a match with seventh-seeded tommy robredo.  ''just going to go out there and hit winners; that's the game plan right there; there's no secret,'' said the 6-foot-6 querrey, who has trained frequently with roddick, most recently in kona, hawaii, before this tournament.  there were no shortage of winners on wednesday night as gaël monfils of france knocked out marcos baghdatis, last year's surprise finalist and sentimental favorite, in four sets in the second round.  but as the twisting, turning match reached its unexpected conclusion under a closed roof, it appeared that the australians had found another emotive, unpredictable 20-year-old to embrace.  with his elastic limbs, mind-blowing defense and leaping shot-making, monfils, like baghdatis, is about as self-contained as an n.f.l. cheerleader. but unlike baghdatis, monfils did not have a small legion of friends, relatives and fellow cypriots and greeks in attendance to provide positive reinforcement. he did not even have a coach, having fired his second coach in five months, pier gauthier, after arriving in melbourne for the tournament.  ''i was thinking this was like the film 'troy,' '' monfils said before the match. ''the story of a guy all alone against an army. i'm going to have to put the few australians there are in the crowd in my pocket.''  mission accomplished. as for the women, no. 2-seeded amélie mauresmo played a fine, up-tempo night match to defeat olga poutchkova, a young russian who is based in new york, 6-2, 6-2. serena williams also continued to address her rust problem and beat the luxembourg veteran ann kremer, 7-6 (4), 6-2, which earned her a date with fifth-seeded nadia petrova.  williams, overweight and short on matches, will not be the favorite. neither will monfils against richard gasquet, his fellow frenchman and longtime measuring stick, but it is hard to believe after that serve and all that verve on wednesday night that monfils will not be the crowd favorite.  baghdatis is gone, after all.  tennis  