archdiocese set to announce church closings   the roman catholic archdiocese of new york is set to announce today its final list of parishes that will close as part of a far-reaching reorganization plan, bringing to an end a decision-making process that has dragged on for more than five years and trapped many parishioners in uncertainty.  st. vincent de paul in manhattan and st. mary in the bronx, among a number of other parishes, are slated to be closed, said a senior priest, who spoke on condition of anonymity because clerics were asked not to discuss the plans before they were announced. but he said that other parishes, including guardian angel in manhattan, that were cited last march in a preliminary list of 31 parishes recommended for closing, appear to have been spared.  in some cases, the parishes will be closed completely and parishioners obliged to go elsewhere, but in other cases smaller churches may be built as chapels for the community, or congregations may be able to keep their buildings and become missions attached to other parishes. but that would mean they would lose many services, like having a priest on site.  the priest characterized the final list as much less draconian than had been feared by many across the archdiocese, which stretches from staten island to the catskills. he said that cardinal edward m. egan appeared to have backed away from taking drastic steps to address the problems that spurred the reorganization, including a shrinking corps of priests and demographic changes that had left many parishes struggling to fill pews while others overflowed.  the pastors of the affected parishes were notified during a meeting on wednesday with bishop dennis j. sullivan, the archdiocese's vicar general, who has been overseeing the reorganization process since early 2005.  the pastors were asked to keep the decisions secret, however, until an official announcement that is expected at 10 a.m. today during a news conference at cathedral girls high school in manhattan.  msgr. gerald murray, the pastor of st. vincent de paul, declined to comment yesterday on the fate of his church but said he was grateful that the announcement was finally coming.  ''we welcome the announcement because january marks five years since our parish was first contacted about being subject to possible closure,'' he said. ''it's been five years that we've been waiting.''  several parishioners appeared surprised yesterday that the process was actually coming to an end.  ''i thought it was a long-drawn-out process that was never going to conclude,'' said chuck van buren, a parishioner at nativity church in manhattan, which was on the preliminary list.  the reorganization, which will include the creation of several new parishes and the construction of new church buildings in some areas, has long been a delicate task for archdiocesan officials.  churchgoers are fiercely protective of their parishes, often forming attachments that endure for generations. many of these churches have also been stalwarts in their neighborhoods for decades. similar overhauls in other dioceses around the country have resulted in ugly public battles between parishioners and church officials, something archdiocesan officials hope to avoid in new york.  cardinal egan originally intended to plunge into the redrawing of parish lines soon after he became archbishop in 2000, but the scandal over sexual abuse by priests made him put it off.  bishop timothy a. mcdonnell was initially put in charge of ''realignment,'' as it came to be called by archdiocesan officials, but he left to become the bishop of springfield, mass., in april 2004, leading to another long delay.  the process got started again in earnest in early 2005, when bishop sullivan took over. cardinal egan indicated then that the reorganization would be completed by september 2005. but a preliminary list of recommendations for 31 parishes and 14 schools to be closed was not released until march 2006.  after hearing appeals from school officials and parents, archdiocesan officials reduced the list of school closings in april to nine, and then turned to the parishes.  many endangered parishes were vocal in fighting back, holding vigils and enlisting the help of politicians and the surrounding community. the parish appeal meetings, often emotional, were wrapped up by midsummer.  in august, bishop sullivan presented his recommendations to the archdiocese priests' council, and an announcement appeared imminent at that point. but cardinal egan's knee operation in the fall further delayed the process.  meanwhile, parishioners did their best to divine their future. at st. augustine's in the bronx, parishioners were heartened in recent weeks when scaffolding went up for repairs to the interior of their church, suggesting that the archdiocese would not take the time to fix up their building if it was going to be closed.  ''some people said, 'wow, that's really good,' '' said claire harris, a parishioner.  they expect to hear today if it really was.  