the races will go on (with imported snow)   the international ski federation yesterday gave a green light to the coming world cup ski races in kitzbühel, austria, where organizers used a fleet of helicopters this week to import more than 100,000 cubic feet of snow from higher elevations.  among the three races confirmed for jan. 26-28 is the hahnenkamm downhill, the most famous ski race in the world. but the dangerous course will be heavily modified, redirecting the racers through the woods and onto a solitary strip of imported snow.  pilots made hundreds of trips between low-lying kitzbühel and a high mountain pass nearby, collecting snow and carrying it back to the downhill course in large nets suspended under the helicopters by cables.  the weeklong helicopter effort cost organizers an estimated $389,000.  ''it is a lot of money for something that would normally come from heaven, not from helicopters,'' the f.i.s. president, gian franco kasper, said in a telephone interview.  kasper said high-profile competitions could afford to take such extreme measures, but that grass-roots ski racing was suffering from the extraordinarily warm temperatures in europe this winter.  ''this is extremely catastrophic for tourism, and the worst, of course, for the junior athletes,'' said kasper, who said it seemed like springtime in his native switzerland.  dozens of major competitions have been disrupted this winter in the alps. the freestyle skiing world championships, originally scheduled for next week in italy, have been postponed until march.  the high swiss village of wengen managed to hold the lauberhorn downhill last week, even though birds were chirping in town on the morning of the race. the thinness of the snow cover exaggerated the terrain, causing many racers to crash or collapse from exhaustion.  the alpine skiing world championships, scheduled for feb. 3-18 in are, sweden, are not threatened, officials said, because temperatures there have dropped low enough for snowmaking systems to be used on the host mountain.  there has been no such luck for kitzbühel, an upscale resort town southeast of innsbruck, at a relatively low altitude of 2,500 feet above sea level.  safety officials from the f.i.s., who customarily inspect world cup courses 10 days before the first training run, extended kitzbühel's deadline earlier this week to accommodate the unprecedented helicopter effort.  the helicopters took 105,000 cubic feet of snow from the nearby glockner pass, near some of the highest peaks in the alps, and deposited it on the muddy slopes of kitzbühel, where troops from the austrian army worked alongside volunteers to patch together a race surface.  the course will not include the treacherous final slope, where safety netting now stands in fields of grass and mud. instead, racers will be funneled through the woods and onto the slalom course, allowing organizers to get double the use out of what snow they have available.  the historic hahnenkamm races, now in their 67th year, are crucial to the region's economy and sense of pride. about 80,000 people visit the town of 9,000 people, and the downhill race receives daylong television coverage from austria's national broadcaster.  only the most experienced downhillers win at kitzbühel, and many consider a victory there more prestigious than an olympic gold medal. but whenever the course is shortened -- as it often is for blizzards or fog -- the race winner has a figurative asterisk by his name.  many top skiers decline to speak publicly about climate change, for fear that their comments will damage the tourist industry that is often so important to the ski towns they come from, not to mention their equipment sponsors.  kasper echoed many of the prominent skiers in the sport when he expressed skepticism about long-term global warming. he prefers to call this season's problems a cyclical phenomenon.  benjamin raich, last year's overall world cup champion, said last week that he was not worried about his sport, even though he comes from pitztal, austria, where in recent summers townspeople have wrapped parts of a glacier in protective foil to slow its rapid demise.  one world cup skier who has been particularly vocal about his fear for his sport is steven nyman, a young american who won his first world cup race in december.  ''i'm going to be out of a job in a few years if this persists,'' he wrote in a recent posting on his blog.  skiing  