after inquiries, ford official decides to skip company jet   it's goodbye gulfstream, hello airbus for mark fields at the ford motor company.  mr. fields said thursday that he would give up the use of the company's private jets for his weekend trips home to visit his family in florida. instead, mr. fields, who is president of the americas region for the auto company, will fly commercial.  his decision was announced to employees via ford's internal web site, said a ford spokesman, oscar suris. ''he doesn't want any distractions for the team, so he made the decision on his own to forgo this,'' mr. suris said.  the action comes amid media scrutiny over his flights, a common perk among executives but an expense that raised eyebrows because of billions of dollars in losses last year at ford.  mr. fields is the architect of a turnaround plan, the way forward, that calls for the elimination of 44,000 jobs through 2008, along with a series of plant closings. ford does not expect to be profitable in north america until 2009.  mr. fields, who has told employees that they had to be prepared to share in sacrifices at the auto company, became president in october 2005. his employment agreement, which included a $1 million bonus, entitled him to use the company jets for personal trips.  he has primarily traveled to visit his family in delray beach, fla., where they settled when mr. fields returned to the united states from his previous job running ford's luxury car operations in europe. at the time, mr. fields said he did not want his children to be in the spotlight.  but his family's location has led to some comments in detroit, where wives of senior executives often play important roles in local charities and civic events. mr. suris said ford supported the family's decision not to move.  documents showed the flights by mr. fields cost the company nearly $215,000 during the final three months of 2005, or the equivalent of about $15,000 a weekend round-trip flight to west palm beach, an airport near his florida home. figures for 2006 were not available.  in november, a local television station, wxyz-tv, ran a three-part series about travel by executives that featured mr. fields. since then, mr. fields has received e-mail messages from employees questioning the practice, mr. suris said.  ford will pay for the cost of commercial air travel for mr. fields, he added. that should generate significant savings for ford: a round-trip coach seat on northwest airlines from detroit to west palm beach next weekend was quoted at $449.50, according to the airline's web site. a first-class ticket cost $1,138.  mr. fields could save even more by flying spirit airlines, a low-fare carrier that also offers nonstop flights to west palm beach. a round-trip economy-class ticket for next weekend was quoted at $223, according to the airline's web site. but business-class seats were already sold out.  both airlines operate airbus jets on the route.  ford's new chief executive, alan r. mulally, recently moved here from seattle, where he ran the commercial airplane division of the boeing company. his wife, jane, has visited the area on house-hunting trips and is expected to move soon, mr. suris said.  mr. mulally is required by ford directors to use the company's planes, mr. suris said.  