real madrid club president says a mouthful   there is no fury like a club president scorned.  the war of words over david beckham's decision to leave real madrid for the los angeles galaxy continued yesterday in spain, when the club's president, raúl calderón, said that beckham was going to hollywood to be ''half a film star.''  calderón was speaking to students at the villanueva university center in madrid. his speech was recorded without his knowledge, then leaked to a national radio station. he also excoriated other real madrid stars, the so-called galácticos, for their ''vanity and egoism'' and criticized the club's past president for building a team of incompatible stars.  ''real madrid players never pay for anything,'' he said to the students. ''you have education and culture, and that's something that they in general don't possess.''  speaking about beckham, calderón said: ''he's going to hollywood to be half a film star. our technical staff were right not to extend his contract, and that has been proved by the fact that no other technical staff in the world wanted him except los angeles.''  he also took a swipe at the club's notoriously difficult-to-please fans at the bernabéu stadium when he said: ''it's a stadium where people go as if they were going to the theater. the people don't support the team, not like in italy and england.''  in a statement on its web site, the club said it was taken aback when calderón's comments ended up on the radio.  ''the president was only trying to help students understand the importance of management in a business as big as that of real madrid,'' the club said on realmadrid.com.  major league soccer  claudio reyna's picture and details are still on the web site of manchester city of the english premier league, mcfc.co.uk, even though it is nearly certain that reyna will return to the new york/new jersey area to play this season for the red bulls.  reyna, 33, is from springfield, n.j., and played for red bulls coach bruce arena at the university of virginia and on the united states national team. he has played in europe (germany, scotland and england) since 1994. reyna remains under contract for the next six months, which means m.l.s., which negotiates all player contracts, would have to pay a transfer fee. he would take one of the team's two designated player slots, which enable m.l.s. clubs to pay players more than the league maximum of about $280,000.  clint dempsey, a former midfielder for the new england revolution, is not expected to make his debut for fulham in england this saturday against tottenham. ''clint dempsey has to go back to america to sign a few more documents, which will take a few days,'' manager chris coleman said on the club's web site, fulhamfc.com. ''he hasn't played for over a month, so when he gets back, we need to get him match fit as quickly as possible.''  dempsey was transferred to fulham for a league-record $4 million; the revolution will receive two-thirds, or about $2.5 million, according to a new formula. in recent years, many clubs had been reluctant to allow the league to sell their top players because it often happened during the season and the clubs did not receive sufficient compensation.  say hello to the superliga. four teams from m.l.s. and four teams from the mexican first division will be divided into two groups (group a: guadalajara, pachuca, f.c. dallas and los angeles galaxy; group b: club américa, monarcas morelia, d.c. united and houston dynamo) in a tournament that is modeled after the european champions league. the games will be played in the united states between july 24 and aug. 29, with $1 million going to the winner. the first round will be a round-robin, with the top two teams in each group advancing to the semifinals.  lost amid the tumult that was david beckham last week was the annual m.l.s. draft in indianapolis. the league's 13 teams rolled the dice hoping to find the next jonathan bornstein or clint dempsey. with the first pick, toronto f.c., the league's new team, selected midfielder maurice edu, who decided to pass up his final year at the university of maryland. chivas usa dipped into division ii when it picked the english striker john cunliffe, who scored 75 goals in four years at fort lewis college in durango, colo.  notes  greg ryan, coach of the united states women's national team, named his 20-player roster for the four nations tournament this month in china. among the 20 are three players who have not made an appearance for the senior national team: yael averbuch and casey nogueira, members of north carolina's n.c.a.a. division i champions, and lauren cheney, a freshman at u.c.l.a. who scored 19 goals last season. kate markgraf, who has played 153 times for the national team, was named the team's captain in place of kristine lilly, who is skipping the tournament to rest.  the united states under-20 men's national team will be attempting to qualify for its sixth straight world championship when it opens play against haiti today in its first qualifying match in panama. the american team plays guatemala on friday and panama on sunday.  the senior men's national team will play its first game since last summer's world cup on saturday when it faces denmark in carson, calif.  mexico's national team, led by its new coach, hugo sánchez, will play five games in the united states this year, in addition to next month's match against the united states on feb. 7 in glendale, ariz. mexico will play venezuela on feb. 28 in san diego and ecuador on march 28 in oakland, calif. opponents and sites for the other three games (aug. 22, sept. 12 and oct. 17) are to be determined.  necaxa has advanced to the main draw of the copa libertadores, the 32-team south american club championship, after winning their groups in the interliga tournament. toluca, the league champion, is the other mexican team in the copa. club américa can advance if it wins a playoff with sporting cristal of peru.  haiti has qualified for the 2007 concacaf gold cup, which will be played in the united states in june.  soccer: extra time  correction:  january 24, 2007, wednesday  a report in the extra time soccer roundup last wednesday about reaction to the star player david beckham's decision to leave real madrid for the los angeles galaxy misstated the given name of real madrid's president. he is ramón calderón, not raúl.  