at king events, politicians mount new calls for justice   as new yorkers gathered yesterday to pay tribute to the legacy of the rev. dr. martin luther king jr., it was the memory of another man that asserted itself throughout the day, with political leaders demanding justice for sean bell, who was killed in a hail of police bullets last november.  gov. eliot spitzer met with members of mr. bell's family before speaking at the rev. al sharpton's annual celebration of dr. king in harlem, where a string of politicians followed mr. sharpton's cue and addressed the shooting. mr. bell, an unarmed black man, was killed by undercover officers outside a queens nightclub. the case is being investigated by prosecutors.  mr. spitzer said the bell family ''stressed to me with great eloquence their concern that it not happen again.''  ''i can tell you as the former attorney general and as the governor of the state,'' he said, ''we will do everything we can to make sure that justice is done and to make sure that fairness will begin in the street. it's what we owe you. it is what is right.''  mr. sharpton said he talked to mr. spitzer about holding a statewide forum of political and community leaders to discuss the bell case and ''deal with permanent, legal changes, including the discussion of a permanent special prosecutor on cases, and testing of police officers.''  the governor stopped short of endorsing a forum, but pledged to ''continue a dialogue and have communication to figure out what we can do better.''  mr. sharpton, a veteran of police controversies, has emerged as an adviser to the fiancée and relatives of mr. bell, whose death on his wedding day has galvanized critics of police department policies on use of force and its training of officers. the king day event at mr. sharpton's crowded storefront headquarters, always suffused with political theater, regularly serves as a reminder of his influence over public opinion, and votes, among african-americans.  the subject of mr. bell's death was also raised by officials and pastors who spoke at black churches and at the brooklyn academy of music's annual king day commemoration, where mayor michael r. bloomberg and city council speaker christine quinn each invoked mr. bell's memory.  among the other elected officials at mr. sharpton's event was the state attorney general, andrew m. cuomo, who told the audience that he recently met with mr. bell's family. in a speech punctuated by frequent bursts of applause, he placed mr. bell in a litany of previous victims of police abuse and decried systemic faults in the criminal justice system.  ''minorities and poor people are disproportionately victims of criminal justice,'' mr. cuomo said. ''criminal justice is supposed to protect everyone, everywhere. and that includes abner louima and amadou diallo and sean bell.''  mr. bloomberg, though introduced with warm remarks by mr. sharpton, faced a chilly reception from some members of the audience, who occasionally interrupted his remarks with loud comments or questions, particularly on the topic of mr. bell. the mayor called mr. bell's death ''a terrible moment for new york,'' which demonstrated that ''despite all the progress we have made in this city, we really do have a long ways to go.''  mr. bloomberg, who made several public appearances yesterday, had more success connecting with audiences when he reminisced about enjoying the music of the late james brown and suggested that representative charles b. rangel, a favorite son of harlem, should run for president. the mayor, a republican who has deflected speculation about his own possible candidacy in 2008, made his comments about mr. rangel at the convent avenue baptist church in harlem.  ''you should know that congressman rangel was one of the first people that urged me to run for mayor,'' mr. bloomberg said. ''and i'll never forget the time i called him and said, 'charlie, i've got some good news and some bad news for you. the good news is i'm going to listen to you and run for mayor. the bad news is i'm not doing it as a democrat.' ''  