pillow fight league   hot on the wheeled heels of the roller derby girls comes another unlikely women-only sport: pillow fighting. since last spring, the two dozen members of the toronto-based pillow fight league (slogan: ''fight like a girl'') have met regularly to whack, sack and (briefly) pin each other in five-minute bouts. their matches at home have drawn hundreds of fans and curious spectators; this weekend the league makes its first journey across the border for a competition in brooklyn as part of a planned expansion tour. though the fighters will have to shop here for their regulation pillows -- queen-size, extra-stuffed, man-made fibers (''with down or natural fibers you can pack it too hard and knock somebody out with one swing,'' explained matt harsant, a league official) -- they do travel with their own pillowcases, and their own costumes. À la professional wrestling, each woman has adopted an alter ego, like eiffel power or betty clock'er, who competes in a housedress and apron, a look rarely seen in world wrestling entertainment. panache counts: these fighters are judged on style, stamina and ''eye of the tiger.'' (above, sister resistor, at left, vs. kilkelly in toronto last friday.) the appeal, said ms. clock'er, a k a tara zachariah, a 26-year-old financial journalist, is twofold: for league members, many of whom have martial-arts training, it's a good way to release aggression. ''not very much fighting goes on in my day-to-day life,'' lamented ms. zachariah, who will be competing in the main event, a championship bout with the reigning queen and resident bad girl, champain. (fair warning: there will also be amateur matches.) and it subverts the very notion of girl-on-girl action. ''we're not being all fluffy with ribbons and nighties,'' ms. zachariah said. she added: ''a lot of these fights are really brutal. fighters have gotten nosebleeds. boozy suzy wrenched her elbow, and she was out for two months.'' (tonight at 8, tomorrow night at 6:30, galapagos, 70 north sixth street, williamsburg, brooklyn, 718-782-5188; smarttix.com or 212-868-4444; sold out tonight, $15 in advance or $20 at the door for tomorrow's match.)  melena ryzik  spare times | jan,. 19 - jan. 25  