top u.s. general in iraq says new plan to pacify baghdad may take months to show results   with the first wave of additional soldiers already arriving to bolster a new campaign to secure this beleaguered capital, the top american military commander in iraq warned that it could take months before there were any real signs of progress.  ''as with any plan, there are no guarantees of success, and it's not going to happen overnight,'' said the commander, gen. george w. casey jr. ''but with sustained political support and the concentrated efforts on all sides, i believe that this plan can work.''  he made his remarks on monday at a news conference here, where he was joined by the united states ambassador to iraq, zalmay khalilzad. president bush recently announced that both men would soon be replaced.  general casey and mr. khalilzad played down reports of tension between the american military command and the iraqi government, saying that any period of transition would have some friction.  as sectarian violence between sunnis and shiites has intensified in the last year, american military officers have complained that the shiitedominated government led by prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki has repeatedly hampered their efforts to restore order in baghdad. they said that americans had been kept out of shiite militia strongholds, and that suspected militia members had been given protection.  mr. maliki has offered only tepid public support for the new security plan, and waited until 48 hours after president bush announced the new strategy before commenting on it.  at the news conference on monday, general casey and ambassador khalilzad said repeatedly that they believed that the iraqi government was committed to working toward an evenhanded policy that would treat sunni and shiite neighborhoods the same. but they cautioned that only time would tell.  ''i've discussed these issues with the prime minister, and he's said they need to move, not because of what we say or what's said in washington, but he has said, 'we have to move to secure the capital city because of iraqi interests,' '' mr. khalilzad said.  he and general casey said repeatedly that the new plan had been conceived by the iraqis and that american and iraqi officials had huddled for days trying to iron out the details.  until recently, mr. maliki was reported to have staunchly opposed having more american troops sent to baghdad, voicing his opposition to mr. bush as recently as november at a meeting in jordan.  the assertion that the new strategy was an iraqi plan was met with skepticism, and general casey later added that american forces would remain completely under american control. the plan for baghdad, as outlined by american military officials familiar with the details, is very similar to the american-conceived approach taken in the much smaller northwestern city of tal afar in 2005.  as in tal afar, american soldiers will establish a strong physical presence in neighborhoods across baghdad, operating hand in hand with the iraqi army and the iraqi police. joint security sites are to be set up. americans and iraqis are to be closely paired at every level of command.  general casey acknowledged systemic problems with the iraqi security forces, which he said were part of the reason that the effort would take time to succeed.  ''i think you'll see a gradual evolution over the next two to three months, and then you'll see things continue to get better up through the summer and fall,'' he said. ''it'll take some time.''  american military officers say that for the plan to have any chance of succeeding, it must be viewed as treating sunni neighborhoods and shiite neighborhoods the same way. cooperation of the prime minister's office will be critical. according to military officers familiar with the planning, it has not been decided whether american troops will operate within the shiite stronghold of sadr city.  asked about the plan for sadr city, general casey gave no specifics, but repeated his pledge that all areas would be treated equally.  mr. khalilzad concurred. ''no militia will be a replacement for the state or control local security,'' the ambassador said. ''the military commanders will have freedom of action and the ability to do what's needed without political interference or micromanagement. they won't be told: 'don't do this. don't go into this or that neighborhood.' therefore it will be fair.''  in addition to the increase in the number of american troops, iraqi army brigades from around the country are expected to join the effort, including soldiers from the kurdish north.  but iraqi security forces across the country have been repeatedly made targets.  on monday evening, a suicide bomber in the northern city of mosul attacked the headquarters for the kurdish militia forces, killing at least four people, including a woman, and wounding 24, according to a local health official.  abdullah museeb 25, a student, said that ''the explosion was so huge that some houses were destroyed,'' collapsing right on top of the residents. ''operations to rescue the civilians and search for survivors are still going on,'' he said.  the struggle for iraq  