israeli and syrian citizens wrote plan for returning golan heights   prominent private citizens from israel and syria drafted a document in secret, unofficial talks that calls for returning the golan heights to syria and offers a possible outline for peace negotiations, one of the participants said tuesday.  however, the israeli and syrian governments dismissed the document, which was first described tuesday in the israeli daily haaretz. they said they were not involved in the talks, which included sessions from september 2004 to july 2006 at undisclosed sites in europe.  ''no one in the government was involved in this matter,'' prime minister ehud olmert of israel said. ''it was a private initiative.''  in syria, bushra kanafani, a spokeswoman for the foreign ministry, told the arab satellite network al jazeera that the israeli report was ''mere fabrication and a test balloon.''  israel and syria last held formal peace talks in 2000, when they appeared close to a deal to return most or all of the golan heights to syria. but the negotiations broke down, and the two countries routinely trade recriminations.  israel captured the territory in the 1967 arab-israeli war and later annexed it. today, about 20,000 israelis live in the golan heights, a sparsely populated region that includes farms, vineyards and tourist sites. it is considered to have strategic military value, rising far above both northern israel and southern syria.  with formal diplomatic efforts stalled in 2004, alon liel, a former director general of israel's foreign ministry, quietly began unofficial talks with ibrahim suleiman, a well-connected syrian businessman who has been living near washington.  turkey helped to arrange the initial contacts, and an unidentified european mediator was involved in the talks throughout, haaretz reported.  the document, written last summer, calls for syria to regain the golan heights based on the border that existed before the 1967 war. while no timetable was set for an israeli withdrawal, haaretz reported that the two sides discussed 5 to 15 years.  the heights, which overlook much of northern israel, would be demilitarized except for a limited police presence, the document says. a park would be established in the golan heights, and israelis would be allowed to visit, without a visa, in daylight hours, the document says.  it says israel would maintain water rights on the upper jordan river and the sea of galilee.  the two countries would also establish normal diplomatic relations.  the talks and the document they produced resemble the geneva initiative of 2003, in which former israeli and palestinian government officials, acting on their own, wrote a symbolic political agreement. neither the israeli nor the palestinian government accepted it. mr. liel emphasized that he had acted entirely in a private capacity. ''there was no government involvement from the israeli side,'' he said by telephone.  