knicks at the turn   a half-season of diligent progress cannot be undone in 2.2 seconds, but isiah thomas's grim expression and grave tone made it seem so wednesday night.  caron butler's late dunk had just turned an uplifting knicks victory into a crushing 99-98 loss to the washington wizards. thomas, standing in a dull hallway at the verizon center, sounded like a coach who had just lost the championship, rather than a mid-january game. he took only three questions. his answers were brief, his voice lifeless.  he offered no satisfaction at having held gilbert arenas, the league's second-leading scorer, 14 points below his average, or having nearly beaten the wizards, who own the best home record in the eastern conference.  sixteen hours later, at the knicks' training center, thomas's mood still leaned toward glum. ''we fought hard, and you don't want to lose,'' he said.  perhaps it was the way the defeat came that made it sting more than the 22 that preceded it. or perhaps the figure that mattered most was not the 2.2 seconds left on the clock when butler dunked, but the number of games left after the final buzzer sounded.  the knicks (17-23) play their 41st game -- the season's midpoint -- friday night against the nets at madison square garden. regardless of the outcome, they will reach that milestone well below .500 and probably well short of the ''significant progress'' needed to save thomas's job.  a victory wednesday night would have pushed the knicks to 18-22, with a chance to forge a virtual tie with the nets (18-20) and -- if utah beats toronto (19-21) on friday -- force a three-way tie for first place in the atlantic division.  a trivial, possibly fleeting achievement? perhaps, but the knicks now measure themselves in baby steps. winning a weak division, beating the rival nets and making the playoffs (even with a losing record), may persuade james l. dolan, the garden chairman, to keep thomas, who is the team's president.  as it stands, the knicks reach the halfway mark with a nebulous self-image -- not nearly as terrible as last season, not nearly good enough to warrant effusive praise. they are six victories shy of last season's total, but just beating larry brown's shameful record would be a hollow achievement.  not even thomas, who is prone to overstatement and rose-colored vision, would make any sweeping assessments about his first half-season as the coach.  ''i think our team has definitely improved from week to week and from month to month,'' he said. ''i like the way we're playing, i like the way we're competing.''  asked to reflect on his job so far, thomas said, ''i'll let you know at the end of it. right now, i'm too much in the middle of it to kind of take a breath and assess. i'm just grinding right now.''  forty games into his coaching tenure -- a job forced upon him by dolan -- thomas is producing solid enough results to make some of his moves as team president look good.  eddy curry, acquired in a controversial trade in october 2005, is playing like an all-star. he is on pace for career highs in scoring (19.1 points a game) and rebounds a game (7.3), and he leads all eastern conference centers in scoring (shaquille o'neal, who has played only four games, was averaging 14 points).  stephon marbury, thomas's first acquisition as the president, warred with brown and resisted attempts to reform his game. but he has willingly deferred to curry and lately become the knicks' defensive stopper. after some early struggles, marbury has thrived, averaging 21.1 points and 6.6 assists in january.  quentin richardson, who had a miserable first season here after thomas acquired him from phoenix, has become a force -- averaging 14.1 points and 7.1 rebounds. david lee, the 30th pick in the 2005 draft, is one of only 11 players in the league averaging a double-double in points and rebounds (10.7 points, 10.4 rebounds).  the knicks stumbled in november, losing 11 of their first 16 games. they have gone 12-12 since, with victories against cleveland, utah, chicago and detroit. they remain prone to inexplicable pratfalls, like their recent 126-110 home loss to charlotte. they have yet to win more than three games in a row, nor have they lost three games in a row.  they are a picture of mediocrity, which is an improvement over last season's portrait of dysfunction.  the most important performance remains that of thomas. it is just as mixed. in the months since dolan handed down his one-year ultimatum, thomas has rarely addressed his precarious position.  but between sunny public evaluations of his players, thomas has shown flashes of frustration and anger, revealing the pressure he is under. he was accused of instigating the dec. 16 brawl between the knicks and the nuggets. on nov. 11 , he was heard urging his players to hurt san antonio's bruce bowen and got into a screaming match with coach gregg popovich. a week later, he was ejected from a loss to boston.  in the preseason, thomas said he wanted his players to avoid technical fouls because they could ill afford to give away points. thomas is now among the league leaders, with seven technical fouls -- including one in wednesday's loss to washington, a game the knicks lost by a point.  the source of that technical foul is also significant. thomas got it while contesting a foul call on marbury. he has fiercely protected his players -- from opponents and from the news media -- possibly to a fault. but the result is a knicks' team that appears more unified and resilient.  the swaggering, hall of fame point guard in thomas surely envisions a brilliant finish to this curious season. but from his current vantage point -- the embattled coach and president of a widely disparaged team -- thomas necessarily steers clear of bluster.  even the sight of a nets' team whose turmoil now eclipses the knicks' could not draw thomas into a premature comparison of the crossriver rivals. instead, he called the nets ''the class of the division.''  ''if this becomes a rivalry, that's good, because that means that we've gotten to the point where we're looked at as a pretty good team,'' thomas said. ''new jersey is a pretty good team. but you can really only have a rivalry when you have two pretty good teams.''  pro basketball  