a visa problem in canada, and an excursion to spain   isabel bayrakdarian, the soprano, and russell braun, the baritone, were to have shared a recital on sunday afternoon at the morgan library & museum. both singers are canadian, as are the pianists they work with, and at the last minute, visa problems prevented mr. braun from traveling to new york. so ms. bayrakdarian and her pianist, serouj kradjian (they are also married), added two groups of songs and a solo piano work to the schubert and pauline viardot groups they had planned, and had the recital all to themselves.  the amended program was a tour of national styles filtered through 19th- and early-20th-century sensibilities, and ms. bayrakdarian was at her most vivid when the music drew most overtly on folk music and dance roots. she gave a florid account of ''l'invito,'' the bolero from rossini's ''soirées musicales,'' for example, and her reading of the ''tarantella napoletana'' from the same set was brisk, fiery and suffused with an undercurrent of sensuality.  ernesto lecuona's ''malagueña'' was enlivened with a similarly vital performance. here, and in its companion works in her spanish set -- ''del cabello más sutil'' and ''chiquitita la novia'' by fernando obradors -- ms. bayrakdarian caught the essence of the music in her subtly shifting tempos and flamenco-tinged vocalise passages.  spain seemed to exert an unusual pull on ms. bayrakdarian and mr. kradjian. two of the viardot songs, ''madrid'' and ''havanaise,'' emphasized the composer's spanish roots and drew on flamenco figuration as fully as the obradors songs. on the other hand, in his pastel-hued performance of granados's ''quejas o la maja y el ruiseñor,'' from ''goyescas,'' mr. kradjian highlighted the stylistic connections between granados and his french contemporary ravel.  ms. bayrakdarian put viardot's gallic side in the spotlight as well, by way of gracefully turned performances of ''sylvie,'' the gently macabre ''enfant et la mère'' and the swirling ''aime-moi,'' a reworking of a chopin mazurka.  the recital, part of the series that the george london foundation has presented at the morgan since 1995, began with a group of schubert songs in which ms. bayrakdarian acclimated herself to the small, acoustically bright new hall. at first she seemed to overestimate the power she needed, but by the third song, she had taken the room's measure, giving a beautifully serene performance of ''nacht und träume'' that showed her interpretive flexibility and expressive sound to fine effect.  the sporano andrea gruber and the tenor russell thomas will sing the next recital in the george london foundation's series at the morgan library & museum on march 18.  music review  