inside art   independence at the hammer  after six years of negotiations, the armand hammer museum of art and cultural center in los angeles is about to declare its independence from one of its governing bodies, the hammer foundation, which over the years had accused the museum of being in breach of its founding agreement.  since its inception in 1989, the museum has had to operate under certain restrictions imposed by the foundation and its founder, armand hammer, the occidental petroleum chairman and owner of the hammer galleries in new york, who died in 1990. these are some of the rules the museum has seen as hamstringing its operation:  it has always had to have on view at least 140 works of art from the 195 in the armand hammer collection, many of which are considered by experts to be not of museum quality, and at least one gallery has had to be dedicated to them.  it has had to use its full name -- the armand hammer museum of art and cultural center -- rather than simply the hammer museum.  a bust of hammer has had to be on view in the lobby.  perhaps most chafing to the museum, a clause in its governing agreement stated that if the museum failed to follow any of these rules, the art -- as well as the income it receives from the sale of leonardo's codex leicester to bill gates for $30.8 million in 1994 -- could be seized by the foundation, and the building and its endowment could be returned to occidental petroleum.  ''the restriction was very onerous and bringing the institution down,'' said john walsh, director emeritus of the j. paul getty museum, who has been advising the museum.  now it has struck a deal with the hammer foundation, run by michael a. hammer, the founder's grandson, who has also served as a museum trustee. the agreement, which takes effect as soon as all the parties have signed off, amends many of these restrictions.  the foundation will no longer be involved in museum governance. mr. hammer will resign from the board, although he will remain an honorary trustee. the museum will continue to be managed by the university of california, los angeles, which has run it since 1994.  perhaps as important, the museum is returning to the foundation 92 works, valued at about $55 million, from the collection. they include examples by artists including bellows, cézanne, degas and van gogh.  the hammer collection consists of works from the 16th through 20th centuries by european artists like monet, renoir, pissarro, cézanne, rubens, as well as americans like sargent and cassatt. two years ago christie's estimated its worth at $305 million. visitors will still see the best of the collection, including paintings by rembrandt, van gogh and sargent.  the museum has needed two galleries to show the required 140 works properly; with fewer works on display and the freedom to show them as it pleases, it says that more room will be available for special exhibitions and other art, like the hammer contemporary collection. ''the issue was what were really museum-worthy paintings and which shouldn't have been in the hammer in the first place,'' said mr. walsh, who advised the museum on what to keep.  since hammer was a gallery owner, many works in the collection were stock that he bought cheaply to sell at a profit. they were never intended for a museum.  ''this is a happy ending to a very difficult situation,'' said ann philbin, director of the hammer since 1999.  bilbao bound  the guggenheim bilbao in spain, designed by frank gehry and nearing its 10th anniversary in october, has made several significant acquisitions since richard serra's room-size installation went on view in june 2005. it has commissioned ''tulips,'' a sculpture of color-coated stainless- steel tulip-shape balloons from jeff koons's ''celebration'' series. the museum also invited daniel buren, christina iglesias, jenny holzer and liam gillick to propose site-specific works for la salve bridge, which intersects the museum; mr. buren's work was chosen to be executed.  now it has purchased ''discourse on commodus,'' cy twombly's first historical series, from 1963. composed of nine canvases, the work was first shown at the castelli gallery in manhattan, where it received unfavorable reviews and went unsold. the only other time it has been on view was in an exhibition of mr. twombly's work at the whitney museum of american art in 1979.  the series, created while mr. twombly was living in rome, chronicles the decline of the roman empire as personified by the emperor commodus. when the dealer leo castelli couldn't sell the work, he returned it to mr. twombly, who sold it to a private collector in rome. a few months ago the collector sold it to larry gagosian, the manhattan dealer, who sold it to the guggenheim bilbao.  ''cy twombly is very much a bridge figure between europe and america,'' said lisa dennison, director of the solomon r. guggenheim museum in new york. ''he embodies what the museum stands for.''  the bilbao region's basque government, which covers the museum's operating costs and pays for its acquisitions, has spent $35 million on the most recent three works.  sotheby's raises fee  as if buying at auction weren't expensive enough, sotheby's has quietly raised its buyer's premium yet again. two years ago it increased the fee to 20 percent of the first $200,000 of the hammer price from 20 percent of the first $100,000. as in the past, it charged 12 percent on any amount over that.  but ever since it began giving sellers a percentage of the premium over the last few years, its profits have eroded. so it decided to raise the charge to 20 percent of the hammer price of the first $500,000 and 12 percent of the rest.  will the company's archrival, christie's, follow? ''we are certainly going to consider it,'' said marc porter, president of christie's.  inside art  