cars on the edge, and other doubts   it is time again to ask 20 questions about advertising, marketing, the media and popular culture.  why are the chevrolet division of general motors and the ford division of ford motor running campaigns that each show a new product, the chevrolet aveo and the ford edge, perched precariously on the sides and edges of buildings and railings in new york?  who will be the first marketer to buy advertising space being sold by the transportation security administration inside the plastic bins used by passengers at x-ray machines at airport checkpoints, amtrak or greyhound?  now that the fox broadcasting unit of the news corporation is canceling ''the o.c.,'' are consumers who bought a new o.c. line of fragrances during the holidays entitled to refunds?  with the arrival yesterday of tv commercials from conagra foods featuring a digitally recreated version of orville redenbacher, the popcorn maker who died in 1995, can viewers expect to see digital revivals soon of the actors, models and celebrities who once smoked in cigarette commercials?  was there not a sports fan working at the berlex pharmaceutical company who could have told the marketing department that selling a birth-control pill named yaz is like selling a drug for erectile dysfunction named martina?  given the debate over the healthfulness of fast food, was it wise for mcdonald's to run newspaper ads last week that resemble ''most wanted'' posters, which describe chicken mcnuggets as ''dangerous and delicious''?  should the matrix brand of hair-care products sold by l'oréal avoid the possibility of getting caught in a political crossfire and stop selling a men's shampoo called thick surge?  what does it say about the value of print media when the hearst magazines division of hearst offers subscriptions to redbook at a ''special test rate'' of $5.99 a year, or 50 cents an issue -- less than a can of soda?  does the continuation in the vernacular of the phrase ''the $64,000 question'' confuse the tens of millions of americans who were not yet born when the quiz show of that name was popular in the 1950s?  now that fremantle media has licensed rights to ''american idol'' to the dreyer's ice cream brand sold by nestlé, which will introduce flavors like hollywood cheesecake and drumstick diva, will shoppers someday be able to buy from the purina division of nestlé a line of randy jackson what's up dawg food?  should the publishing group of america have accepted for a recent issue of relish, its newspaper supplement billed as ''celebrating america's love of food,'' a two-page ad for nutrisystem featuring 16 pairs of ''before and after'' photographs of dieters?  is this week's sign of the marketing apocalypse, to borrow a phrase from sports illustrated magazine, a decision by bob evans farms to introduce a blog devoted to its stacked and stuffed hotcakes (imstuffed.blogspot.com)?  was the dial corporation division of henkel worried that consumers might confuse its new product line, dial for men, with a dating chat line?  would the time inc. unit of time warner be sending subscription solicitations for fortune magazine, priced at $9 a year, if the condé nast publications unit of advance publications were not getting ready to introduce portfolio, which will compete against fortune?  could it have been a coincidence that two british news organizations, bbc and reuters, were each sponsoring, around the same time in midtown manhattan, outdoor signs with the themes ''how do you see it?'' (reuters) and ''see both sides of the story'' (bbc)?  and could it have been a further coincidence that both the bbc and reuters signs asked passers-by to choose between two sharply different opinions about issues like the war in iraq and gay marriage?  are the performers known as firesign theater, who began in the '60s to create skits that parodied old-time radio shows under the title ''nick danger, third eye,'' familiar with a line of clothing sold by the hampshire group under the brand name nick danger?  is there any significance to the fact that the starz entertainment group division of liberty media is asking consumers to subscribe to vongo, an internet video download service, at the same time the iconix brand group is asking them to buy bongo clothing?  did barbara stanwyck ever get confused while making two 1941 movie comedies, when she had to call gary cooper by his nickname in ''ball of fire,'' which was pottsy, and henry fonda by his nickname in ''the lady eve,'' which was hopsy?  and did ms. stanwyck ever tell an advertising columnist born in the same borough as she, ''you ask a lot of questions for someone from brooklyn''?  advertising  