what's on tonight   8 p.m. (fox) american idol -- they're back, all of them: the contestants, both the screechers and the soarers; the judges, with their own peculiar brand of wit. and then there's the audience, for whom this show has become more of a popularity contest than a talent audition, leaving some questionable winners in its wake -- and some who coulda, and shoulda, been contenders to go back to their garage bands (or, in the case of jennifer hudson, on to a different kind of dream). tonight, the saga continues as paula abdul, simon cowell and randy jackson begin their search for the next singing sensation. ryan seacrest (above right, with, from left, mr. cowell, mr. jackson and ms. abdul), the show's host, keeps the conversation flowing.  8 p.m. (style) fashion police: the 2007 golden globes -- a journey down the red carpet to see who hit their fashion marks, and who fumbled the passes, at the golden globes.  8 p.m. (abc) america's funniest home videos -- subtitle this one: ''no business in show business.'' tom bergeron presents his own version of ''american idol'' auditions with two hours of performance clips from school plays and concerts.  9 p.m. (13) hand of god -- more than 10,000 children have reportedly been sexually abused in recent decades by roman catholic priests in the united states. in this ''frontline'' documentary, joe cultrera tells the story of how his brother, paul (above, as a 13-year-old altar boy), was molested in the 1960's by father joseph birmingham, who is said to have abused nearly 100 other children, and travels the path paul cultrera took toward healing.  10 p.m. (abc) boston legal -- what are you packing there? denny (william shatner) asks alan (james spader) to help him take on the department of homeland security when he learns his name is on the no-fly list.  10 p.m. (logo) the outlaugh festival on wisecrack -- margaret cho is host of this new stand-up series, in which she takes on religion, homophobia and ethnic stereotypes. other comics include jason stuart, who riffs on straight men, and cashetta, a drag magician who shows off a new trick.  10 p.m. (bravo) the real housewives of orange county -- the shopping sprees! the extravagance! the lip gloss and hair weaves! the drama! life in a southern california enclave goes on more or less as usual as this second season of this documentary series about five real-life housewives trying to hold on, with the help of their tough-as-nails manicures, to the good life begins. tonight, jo (above), the youngest of the group, must decide between partying and a relationship with slade, her ex- fiancé; jeana, a former playboy playmate, works on her marriage to matt, an ex-pro baseball player; and tammy, a single mother and the new housewife on the block, struggles to raise three children after losing much of her family fortune through divorce. guess she'll be living in last season's fashions.  kathryn shattuck  