is it spring? winter? what's a flower to think?   it's that time of year again: mail order catalogs are pouring in, and web sites are saturated with color images of gorgeous plants that never get eaten by insects or ravaged by disease. i'm dreaming of fresca strawberries, an everbearing variety that will produce fruit all summer, if i start the seeds 16 weeks before my last frost date (kitchengardenseeds.com; (860) 567-6086).  but then, when is my last frost date? it used to be mid-april in my garden in central maryland. but the warm fall and mild winter are tempting me to push that date up to early april.  and after talking with gardeners from washington to massachusetts who report all kinds of unseasonable spring blooms, maybe i will order some palms and tender bulbs, which, until lately, would never have survived in my garden.  radical experimentation, laced with a willingness to fall flat on our faces, is the modus operandi of adventurous gardeners these days. weather extremes seem to be the new norm. on jan. 6, it was 72 degrees in central park, the kind of weather that encourages, and rewards, experimentation. yesterday, however, the low in manhattan was 19 degrees.  nonetheless, the ladies' border, a wide, 260-foot-long experimental garden on the southeast side of the enid a. haupt conservatory at the new york botanical garden in the bronx, seems to be sailing through these ups and downs, given a little protection. spring's promise, a deep rose-colored camellia, is still in full flower, the buds seemingly intact. the border, dubbed the ''global warming garden'' by the staff, was designed and planted more than four years ago by lynden b. miller and others who wanted to test the hardiness of plants generally considered too tender to thrive this far north.  ''everybody said you're crazy, but lynden just laughs at them now,'' said sarah carter, the curator of herbaceous plants and outdoor gardens. ms. carter, who has been keeping careful records for four years, is reveling in the plants that have successfully over-wintered here. most of these plants are listed as being in zone 7 on the agriculture department's hardiness map, meaning they usually grow where temperatures rarely dip below zero. a few are even listed for zone 8, which is 10 degrees warmer. this part of new york has traditionally been considered zone 6.  ''we will be watching the plants very closely over the next few days, to see how extensive any cold damage may be,'' ms. carter said. the flowers and buds of camellias and japanese apricots, for example, ''will likely turn brown and fall off within a few days,'' she said, because of the sudden drop in temperature. edgeworthia chrysantha, the paper bush, which normally flowers in early march, appears unharmed. ''its silver buds dangle like earrings off the tip of every branch,'' ms. carter said, and its yellow tubular flowers are intoxicating. but it may drop those buds later this week. the early yellow trumpet daffodils are also still blooming. these hardy bulbs are well adapted to extremes and will be fine next year, she said.  ms. carter and her crew did wrap burlap around a few plants, including the himalayan palm, and placed evergreen boughs around the acanthus mollis, or bear's breech, which had put out tender new growth. but both burlap and evergreens are removed during the warmest hours of the day to help the plants acclimate to colder temperatures.  good drainage and the right site can make all the difference between success and failure for these marginal plants. so if you try any, choose a warm spot, near a south-facing wall; or beneath evergreens that provide a wind break. and if cold damage occurs, wait until spring, until all signs of frost have passed, before pruning. otherwise, you might damage an already stressed plant, or encourage new growth, which could be killed in another cold snap. but maybe some plants will be lucky.  down at the united states botanic garden in washington, sappho, a gorgeous white rhododendron with purple splotches, is in full bloom. the winter irises and spring crocuses are flowering. needle palms, which are thought of as south carolina plants, are thriving in this garden.  ''and yaupon holly does well here now,'' said holly shimizu, the executive director of the garden. ''we're saying that washington is a lot more like the carolinas now.''  but up in massachusetts, the palmy days seemed over.  thomas c. cooper, a garden designer and former editor of horticulture magazine, reported that his cordyline x baueri, a hybrid of a cabbage palm native to new zealand, was doing just fine in his unusually balmy garden in watertown, mass.  but it's toast now, after a recent plummet to 18 degrees.  ''without any snow on the ground, any marginal plants are going to have frostbitten toes,'' he wrote in an e-mail message.  still, some of mr. cooper's tender salvias are wintering over, and he plans to leave a few clumps of cannas in the ground next fall.  so, northern gardeners feeling reckless could try the windmill palm, trachycarpus ''hayes stiffie,'' listed as hardy to zone 7b, where winter temperatures stay above 5 degrees, from plant delights nursery, in raleigh, n.c. (plantdelights.com; 919-772-4794). new york city gardeners, or others who think they are now in zone 7, might try descanso dwarf, a weeping deodar cedar that grows very slowly into a small pyramidal tree, and daphne odora, a fragrant shrub that flowers in winter, so plant it by a window or the kitchen door, to enjoy its scent. both are hardy to zone 7. i got mine from forestfarm (forestfarm.com; 541-846-7269).  i've also ordered a southern magnolia and a sweetbay magnolia from the national arbor day foundation (arborday.org; 888-448-7337), which offers 10 free trees to members ($15 for one year). the foundation has taken the lead in responding to warming temperatures, by publishing its own hardiness zone map, which generally places gardeners in at least one warmer zone than the department of agriculture's hardiness zone map, which is still the standard used by most catalogs and nurseries. so, again, adventurous gardeners will have to study both maps, and decide how far to push the limits.  and following ms. carter's example, i'm trying more tender bulbs, especially the species gladioluses, always the province of southern gardeners. unlike the blowsy hybrid glads, these have delicate flowers elegantly spaced along the stem or spike. gladiolus ''boone'' has apricot, buff and gold flowers, and is hardy to zone 6, where temperatures can drop to 10 below zero.  gladiolus saundersii is a coral red with splashes of white, and a hybrid of gladiolus tristis is said to have ''reddish striping and pink flushes over the pale green background.'' it makes a good cut flower and is fragrant at night. it is hardy to zone 7. i've ordered all these from seneca hill perennials, in oswego, n.y., which specializes, among other things, in south african bulbs (senecahillperennials .com; 315-342-5915).  it also sells distant planet, a crocosmia, hardy to zone 5, with a bright orange flared flower that it claims is indestructible.  as for hardy rosemary, i've ordered a few gorizias from sandy mush herb nursery (sandymushherbs.com; 828-683-2014). i've also ordered grosso, a hybrid lavender that can take humidity. i will add plenty of grit, for drainage, to a mounded border, and try my luck.  some expert gardeners caution against making leaps that are too great, saying that this winter's long warm spell could have been an exception, not the new norm.  ''i won't start leaving my rosemary outside,'' wrote deborah nevins, a garden designer who noted violets blooming among the japanese apricots and hellebores in her garden in east hampton, n.y. ''this is not england.''  still, let's have some fun while we can. if the ice caps are melting, and the food chain in the ocean collapses -- a dire prediction based on global warming trends -- i want to have a margarita in the shade of my trachycarpus before i die.  in the garden  