a newsroom fight spills into the streets of a once-peaceful town   a nasty fight between the news staff and the owner of a local paper here has created some new casualties: readers.  take, for example, eric zahm, a hairdresser who hung a sign in his window taking wendy p. mccaw, owner and co-publisher of the santa barbara news-press, to task for not recognizing a vote to unionize her news staff.  within days, mr. zahm got a letter from a lawyer for mrs. mccaw, warning him that the sign -- which read, ''mccaw obey the law'' -- could get him sued for defamation.  ''it freaked me out a little bit,'' mr. zahm said.  after consulting a lawyer, he took the bright orange sign down from the window and instead hung it on the ceiling above the sinks, where clients can now see it while getting their hair washed. as for the cease-and-desist letter, mr. zahm enlarged it, laminated it and hung it in his window.  since a full-blown war erupted last july between mrs. mccaw, a local billionaire, and the staff of her newsroom over protests that she was meddling in news decisions, the hostilities have only spread in this upscale and usually peaceable seaside town.  in september, reporters for the news-press voted to be represented by a union, the international brotherhood of teamsters, but mrs. mccaw rejected the result.  circulation has fallen by 5 percent in the last six months, according to the paper. merchants and residents have taken sides -- mostly against mrs. mccaw. city elders have made many offers to meet with mrs. mccaw to discuss the turmoil at the paper, amid concerns that she has damaged its credibility, but she has rejected the overtures.  the newsroom's union vote was the subject of a hearing of the national labor relations board last week to consider management's claims that the vote was tainted by union intimidation. (a ruling is expected by the end of the month). and by late last week, several angry residents had embarked on a petition drive to get mrs. mccaw to sell the paper.  in response, she has started a flurry of legal actions against figures large and small, making herself into the local bogeyman whose every move seems to lend more fodder to anti-mccaw blogs, while doing little to steer the paper into calmer waters.  lawyers for mrs. mccaw have sent cease-and-desist letters to at least a half-dozen shop owners who posted the ''obey the law'' sign. they have also started legal action against the paper's former editor, jerry roberts; a local alternative weekly, the independent, which mrs. mccaw said obtained copies of two unpublished news-press articles; and susan paterno, a reporter who wrote an article about the conflict in the american journalism review.  meanwhile, the top editing job has remained vacant since the departure of mr. roberts along with five other top editors and a columnist who resigned in sympathy with him last july. some 30 members of the newsroom have left or been fired from the paper, leaving a staff of about 40. and last month mrs. mccaw fired the chief financial officer, randy alcorn, and the company's controller resigned the next week. they too have not been replaced.  the situation ''has created a lot of havoc,'' mr. alcorn told barney brantingham, a 46-year veteran of the news-press who resigned in july and now writes a column for the independent. ''she had made it worse and worse. the whole place was like a morgue.''  after those comments were published in mr. brantingham's column, mr. alcorn found a cease-and-desist letter from mrs. mccaw's lawyer nailed to his front door.  mrs. mccaw, who is co-publisher of the paper with her fiancé, arthur von wiesenberger, declined to comment. scott steepleton, the associate editor who is now running the newsroom, did not return calls seeking comment.  but david millstein, the paper's general counsel, acknowledged that mrs. mccaw, who bought the paper from the new york times company in 2000, was feeling victimized by the negative things being written and said about her. and he observed that journalists writing about other journalists meant that a bias against his client was built into much of the coverage.  ''why do we feel ganged up on? a newspaper's credibility is its stock in trade,'' he said in an interview after last week's hearing over management's objections to the union vote. ''to have people we've knocked in editorials, former employees and the teamsters knocking us -- all of whom have an ax to grind -- is difficult for any business to tolerate.''  mr. millstein said the legal actions were merely a way for mrs. mccaw to demonstrate her belief that she had the right to express her views through the newspaper, and to defend herself from critics.  when asked why mrs. mccaw has consistently chosen legal action when she has felt wronged, rather than engaging in dialogue with readers or her news staff, he said, ''a cease-and-desist letter is a form of dialogue.''  the chasm between mrs. mccaw's world view and that of a great many others in santa barbara has caused distress that is rippling through the community. to visit santa barbara six months after the first news-press crisis is to observe the fracturing of a community, a process that has been heartbreaking for many.  a legal fund has been started by local lawyers to provide help for those in mrs. mccaw's legal cross-hairs, and another loan fund has been started to help idled news-press journalists through financial straits. many of them remain unemployed.  ''lives were really turned upside down, interrupted,'' said don murphy, the 60-year-old former managing editor who resigned in july. he found a job at the daily paper in northern san louis obispo, where he lives half the week, while his wife remains in santa barbara.  ''i'm still looking'' for work, said jane hulse, also 60, the former city editor who also resigned in july. ''financially i'm not destitute, but there's a lot of uncertainty. we're sweating.''  mr. roberts, who said he resigned because he objected to mrs. mccaw's making editorial decisions, was hit with a $500,000 legal suit. he recently filed a countersuit for $10 million in damages.  some misfortunes, however, cannot be addressed with money. in a personal account published last week in the independent, mr. roberts revealed that he had had emergency surgery over thanksgiving to remove an enlarged spleen, leading to a diagnosis of cancer. he said he was living through a ''kafkaesque'' experience.  ''i'm trying to make sense of the blur of it all, as my wife and kids and i try to get our lives back on track -- physically, emotionally and economically -- after the wreckage of last year,'' he wrote.  the news-press itself, once a consistent winner of regional journalism awards (including last year, from the california newspaper publishers association, for general excellence) seems in a state of suspended animation. tension remains high between reporters, who voted 33-6 for the union, and managers. and the coverage of last week's hearings omitted some of the most dramatic moments in the courtroom, as when judge william l. schmidt scolded a news-press lawyer, sandra mccandless, for putting on a shoddy case. at one point the judge raised his voice in frustration over her attempt to link an anonymous threat against management to the union.  ''i am stunned,'' the judge said. ''this is a routine, ordinary, everyday n.l.r.b. election campaign. this is what happens in these things. people express their opinions. this is the american story.''  mr. millstein said there was no chance that mrs. mccaw would sell the paper, despite a public offer from a local textbook publisher, sara miller mccune, at a november dinner where she was accepting a humanitarian award from the paper.  mr. millstein said that mrs. mccaw was determined to build the news-press into a ''trophy newspaper. not by winning awards,'' he said, dismissing a series about hispanic immigrants that ran under mr. roberts' leadership. ''but by being an independent voice that does a great job covering this community, which she cares a lot about.''  mr. zahm, in the meantime, is waiting for the labor board's ruling to come through. ''i expect her to lose, and when she does, i'm putting the sign back in the window,'' he said.  media  correction:  january 18, 2007, thursday  an article in business day on monday about a dispute between wendy p. mccaw, the owner of the santa barbara news-press in california and the newsroom staff misspelled the name of the city where don murphy, the former manager editor of the paper, has taken a job. it is san luis obispo, not san louis obispo. the credit for a picture of ms. mccaw misstated the given name of the photographer. he is paul wellman, not paula.  correction:  february 1, 2007, thursday  an article in business day on jan. 15 about a dispute between wendy p. mccaw, the owner of the santa barbara news-press in california, and the newsroom staff misstated the job title of a former editor at the paper who commented on the controversy. (the error was repeated in a correction in this space on jan 18.) don murphy was the deputy managing editor, not the managing editor.  