persistent cold raises fear in california citrus industry   farmers braced for the worst on monday, as a persistent cold snap seemed likely to deal a serious blow to the billion-dollar california citrus industry.  state officials said there was no clear way of knowing at this point how much damage had been done by the freeze, which has sent temperatures plunging into the teens and 20s from eureka in the north to near the mexican border for several nights.  farmers in some sections of the central valley, the 400-mile-long agricultural engine, and farther south reported near complete losses of fields of oranges, lemons and other citrus.  the state's food and agriculture secretary, a. g. kawamura, said the damage appeared even more widespread than that from a freeze in december 1998 that cost growers $700 million.  ''these numbers will very likely surpass that,'' mr. kawamura, said by telephone from ventura county, a citrus-rich region northwest of los angeles. ''it's a little bit early, in many cases, to know for sure. but in the case of certain growers in certain areas, 100 percent of what's on the tree has been lost.''  in particular, agricultural officials said they were concerned about low-lying areas where cold pockets have exposed trees and fruit to lengthy periods of subfreezing temperatures.  california is the top state in producing lemons and eating oranges, and the food and agriculture department estimates the value of the crop still on the trees at $960 million.  citrus was not the only crop prompting worries. farmers along the coast, where temperatures rarely dip below freezing, kept a close eye on avocados and strawberries.  in the southern regions, lettuce and other leafy greens were at risk.  each crop meant different worries, including blossoms frozen on avocado trees that would hurt the harvest next year and lettuce, cabbage and celery's starting to seed, a natural defense that renders many plants unmarketable.  mr. kawamura and others said freeze damage would not come close to the damage wreaked in 1990, when an extended statewide freeze killed thousands of trees.  this time, farmers seemed to have anticipated the cold weather, a top story on newscasts, which led to snowfall in zones as low as 1,000 feet altitude in san diego county.  a spokesman for the california farm bureau, dave kranz, said farmers stayed up all night trying to keep crops warm, using warm-water irrigation, wind machines and helicopters to try to circulate warm air to ground level.  ''if they can increase the temperature two to five degrees, oftentimes that's enough,'' mr. kranz said.  larry peltzer, 48, works 1,500 acres of citrus in and near ivanhoe, 40 miles southeast of fresno. on saturday night, the coldest recent night in many areas, mr. peltzer drove to his orchards, turning on irrigation pumps and some of his 125 wind machines.  just before dawn, the temperature in his groves averaged 22 degrees. fruits that mr. peltzer cut to sample were slushy inside, indicating that ice crystals had formed. that fruit, worthless for the fresh market, might be salvaged for juice, he said.  ''we'll continue fighting,'' he added. ''but we have all this energy and money put into protecting this crop, and to lose it all at once is devastating.''  shirley batchman, director of industry relations for california citrus mutual, a trade group, said that about a fourth of the crop had been harvested before the freeze and that growers have been rushing to pick as much as they could, leaving about 10 days' inventory in the pipeline.  county agricultural commissioners and packing houses started emergency inspections. citrus picked beginning on friday will be tagged and set aside to ensure that damaged fruit does not reach the market. packing houses can sort damaged fruit, which floats in water.  ms. batchman said farmers had been particularly pleased with the orange crop this year. she said it was smaller than normal but had higher quality.  ''we were humming right along,'' she added.  the freeze is the latest hardship for the state's $32 billion agricultural industry, including spring floods, a summer heat wave and an e. coli scare that financially crippled spinach growers along the central coast.  agricultural officials said they thought that the freeze would break on tuesday night or wednesday morning. but it may be days or weeks before the total damage is known.  ''we believe the worst of the freeze is over,'' mr. kawamura said. ''but it's still a lot of sleepless nights for a lot of producers.''  