a church's challenge: holding on to its young   when frankie lora chuckles, his bass guitar bounces and he loses the beat. sometimes the pianist next to him stumbles and can't keep up with the choir. and one singer gets so emotional that she veers off into tearful shouts of praise.  if music is the motor that drives pentecostal worship, the band and choir at ark of salvation for the new millennium, a little storefront church in west harlem, could use a tuneup. ragged and off-key at times, they are easily outclassed when they sit in with the seasoned musicians at other churches.  yet they grab attention for one simple reason: they are often the only teenagers in the room.  as pentecostalism advances across the world, winning converts faster than any other christian denomination and siphoning believers from more established faiths, it is also suffering its own slow leak: young people who are falling away from the faith.  mainline christian churches have grappled with the problem for years. and recently, evangelical leaders in the united states sounded an alarm over ''an epidemic of young people leaving.''  but the loss is doubly distressing for pentecostals, evangelical christians who can be especially zealous in seeking new members and rejecting the secular culture they feel is luring adolescents away from religion.  against that backdrop, ark of salvation is an unusual success. unlike most of the other pentecostal churches they visit, this 60-member congregation has attracted a devoted core of teenagers -- more than a dozen -- who sing and pray at every service. this is no accident.  when the first of them showed up two years ago at the austere storefront on amsterdam avenue, dragged along by friends or family, they had little inclination toward religion or music. but pastor danilo florian saw in them the seeds of his church band. more important, he saw in this motley bunch of knockabout youngsters the future of his fledgling church.  he gave them instruments. he paid for music lessons. and he lavished gifts that few of them had ever known, growing up in fractured families and on dangerous streets: attention. praise. expectations.  today, they are thriving. the bassist, frankie lora, looks as if he may defy his mother's fears that he will end up like his brother, who is serving a life sentence for murder. the pianist, juan carlos matias, once lonely and aimless, is studying to become an engineer. and the singer, jessica marte, who was cutting class and fighting at age 12, now dreams of opening a clothing store for christian girls.  they have also embraced a strict -- and sometimes strait-laced -- moral code, which they are urged to spread to friends and strangers.  but they are still teenagers, living in a city filled with temptations for quick pleasure and easy money that the founders of pentecostalism a century ago never imagined. at school, they have classmates who live only for the latest music, gadgets or fashions, or friends who sell drugs. at home, some have parents who ridicule their faith.  and being teenagers, they have their own doubts and questions about their newfound religion's many rules and rituals. frankie still recalls his disbelief when he saw people shouting, crying and twitching at his first service. ''i was looking at them like they were retarded,'' he said. ''i never saw jumping like that in the street.''  reaching these young people took a lot of work. keeping them in church as they enter the wider world may prove even harder.  for the pastor and the other adults who lead the congregation's youth group, that means striking a balance between keeping them in line and letting them find their own way. it means shielding them not only from the evils of the world, but also from the excesses of some other churches.  and for the teenagers, it means navigating a tricky adolescence in which the boundaries are strict, but not always understandable. they can have cellphones and video games, but are told not to watch television. they can date, but preferably only other pentecostals and then sometimes only with a chaperon. dancing is taboo, but they can gyrate in religious ecstasy. horror movies are bad, yet preachers regale them with gruesome visions of the apocalypse.  these young people struggle. they sometimes bend the rules, or drift away from religion altogether. but for now, at least, most have their faith in god, and something else just as powerful: the feeling that for the first time, someone has faith in them.  frankie's fight  frankie lives the way he plays his bass -- trying mightily to get it right.  he stopped screaming at his parents and has cut back on cursing, but sometimes the words still slip out. his grades are improving, but italian class still vexes him. ''i might have to copy from a friend,'' he joked.  sometimes he prays to be strong. he certainly looks it, with a bruiser's thick arms and barrel chest, and a scowl to match. just three years ago, frankie ran with a rowdy pack. at 14, he was arrested and handcuffed to a pole at the local station house for stealing pokémon cards from a barnes & noble. his mother grounded him for a year.  she was not overreacting. she knew what could happen to neighborhood boys like frankie when they turned 16. ''the same age my brother was when he started killing,'' he said.  until his mother died of cancer in november, frankie's new faith was the lifeline she clung to, hoping he would not turn out like his older brother, jose, who is in prison for two murders.  in the mid-1990s, their stretch of 109th street was awash in cocaine and bullets. jose and his crew killed a rival dealer and later avenged the murder of his father's friend. they called themselves natural born killers.  ''my brother had beef with everybody on the streets,'' frankie said. ''my mother would hear gunshots, and she would go downstairs looking for him to see if he was alive or dead.''  for years, she refused to let frankie leave their apartment, finally letting him go outside, he said, only after ''everybody got locked up.'' on evenings when she was away, he hung out with friends at a bodega, bragging about fights, sex and girls. they rode their bikes around manhattan all night, or drank rum and beer.  ''we were the baddest ones in the neighborhood,'' he said. ''crazy stuff.''  the loras went to sunday mass, but weekends were better known for family parties filled with music and liquor. nobody blinked when the boys tipped a few beers.  two years ago, frankie and his cousin juan carlos matias visited an older cousin, roy guzman, who was excited about a new storefront church he had just joined. the three were close, playing basketball and video games. but roy grew serious that night, warning that if christ returned, the two boys would be damned.  that message, from an admired older cousin, nudged them to visit the ark. a week later, they joined.  up front, their future beckoned: a keyboard and drums, untouched since the pastor's son was expelled from the band after taking up with an older girl. jefferson abreu, a friend frankie had invited to church, asked to play the drums, and juan carlos began noodling on the keyboard. frankie was already studying the bass.  today, his calm demeanor defies both his looks and his past. pastor florian connected with him. ''the pastor is cool,'' he said. ''he doesn't lie to us. he is a little kid, like us.''  frankie enjoys a joking camaraderie with his bandmates, sometimes cupping his hand over his mouth to stifle a laugh or rolling his eyes at a sour note. but seeing his old friends can be awkward. when they curse, he laughingly tells them to stop. when they talk about fighting or sex, he stays quiet.  he tried getting them to visit the church.  ''they're now selling drugs, hustling,'' he said of the boys on the block. ''i tell them to think about god. they say, 'yeah, it's true.' but they don't feel like coming. they got to make money.''  his home life has been hectic. before she died, his mother, altagracia, had been hospitalized repeatedly for gall bladder cancer, returning home weak and needing care. his father, francisco, he said, insults the ark, calling it a scam to fleece them of what little money they have.  a rough-looking man, francisco lora is the only family member who has not converted to pentecostalism. he scorns the congregation's belief that their prayers kept his wife alive through years of surgery and chemotherapy. and he scoffs at his son jose's conversion in prison last year.  ''what is the use if you already killed a lot of people?'' he snarled while mopping at the bodega where he works. ''if you do something bad, you should think about god before. but they look for god afterward.''  frankie tries to ignore his father's rage, focusing instead on all that has to be done: schoolwork, practicing the bass and praying for his brother's release -- even though jose is ineligible for parole until 2054.  ''i wish he was out,'' frankie said. ''to see what it feels like to have a brother.''  'we are the bridge'  frankie is not the only teenager yearning for an older brother or sister. so when pastor florian looked for someone to start a youth group and nurture his congregation's future, he picked the man who had brought frankie into the church -- his cousin roy guzman -- and roy's wife, giselle.  a newlywed couple in their mid-20s, the guzmans are old enough to be confident in their beliefs, yet young enough to remember being city kids confused about school, dating or friends who think your religion is crazy.  ''most of the people at the church are very mature, very old,'' said giselle, a petite, bubbly woman who easily passes for a high school student. ''we are the bridge between both generations. if young people have questions, they are not going to ask the elders. they're going to ask us.''  not that the elders are stingy with advice. ramon romero growls that the young musicians rush through prayers to spend more time practicing. eneida vasquez warns them about watching anything on television. jeans in church or earrings anytime are forbidden, and the pastor even discouraged one boy from buying a pink shirt.  sometimes the thou-shalt-nots seem endless. when the teenagers trooped one evening into juan 3:16, a basement church celebrating its 37th anniversary, festive music and balloons promised a party. instead, a glowering, skeletal woman -- a visiting preacher -- railed against reggaeton music and even country outings.  ''you do not replace god with the garbage of this world,'' she shouted indignantly. ''you cannot contaminate yourself in the world. we need to be apart!''  giselle, who helped her husband lead the youth group, was horrified. ''she said it was wrong to go to amusement parks,'' she recalled in their walk-up on 109th street, where the irreverent sitcom ''arrested development'' droned in the background. ''that you have to be in church 24/7.''  the temptation to keep a tight rein on the young is strong in storefront churches. pablo polischuk, a pentecostal minister and psychologist in boston, cautions that these man-made prohibitions can be so severe that they deny normal teenage impulses. that, in turn, can backfire.  ''the philosophy is to insulate and isolate to preserve them from a toxic environment, but it does not prepare them to face that environment with dignity,'' dr. polischuk said. ''when you try to protect them so much, the end result is the first germ that goes through them spoils them.''  so the guzmans try to accommodate the young people, going to movies and playing video games with them. once a month, in a variation on a slumber party, the teenagers stay overnight at church, watching christian movies and chatting.  ''people think christians have to be boring,'' roy said. ''that's not true.''  pastor florian takes them swimming, biking and on trips to amusement parks. when one boy got a weekend job that kept him from services, the pastor went easy on him because the boy needed the money.  and though his sermons sometimes condemn the secular world, the pastor holds up the guzmans as examples of well-educated christians who have succeeded in that world. both have degrees in engineering and mathematics from new york university and stevens institute of technology. roy works for the technology and consulting firm accenture, while giselle now works for a construction company.  in fact, pastor florian sometimes sees danger for the teenagers in religion.  one summer afternoon, roy, frankie and the others piled excitedly into the church van for the youth explosion, a revival meeting at st. mary's park in the south bronx. but the stage and the audience were dominated by adults, some with a hard-edged look from their hell-raising days.  the presiding preacher promised to heal people with cancer and aids. waving his hand like a sideshow psychic, he said he sensed there were teenagers in the audience whose lives were imperiled: a young man with a dragon tattoo, a suicidal girl, a gun-toting teenager. as if on cue, they rose and went up to pray.  but even before the prayers ended, pastor florian hustled his teenagers back into the van. ''that was all just a show,'' he said later. ''it gave me such embarrassment.''  the ceaseless vigilance is hard, but every so often it pays off.  for the young people of the ark and their mentors, the transforming moment came in june 2005. after a year of prayer, study and noisy nights in the storefront, the congregation gathered one tranquil saturday morning along the haze-shrouded banks of the delaware river in pennsylvania.  the guzmans joined a procession of seven white-clad teenagers and three other adults, down a boat ramp to the gravelly shore. as they lined up in silent anticipation, pastor florian asked: ''who does not want to be baptized? you still have time.''  no one wavered. slowly, the pastor, his wife and two other preachers waded chest-deep into the river. they turned to the crowd on shore and beckoned.  frankie was among the first. pastor florian cradled his beefy shoulders, whispered urgently into his ear, dunked him backward and gently lifted him back up. the dazed teenager staggered to shore and clutched his weeping mother.  juan carlos emerged from the water heaving with sobs. roy, who was last, punched the air victoriously. when they regrouped on shore, soaked and shivering, pastor florian reminded the teenagers that they were no longer children from the block, but missionaries to the world.  ''now,'' he said, ''you are workers.''  a hard sell  the work started soon enough. one night just a month after the baptism, genesis mora, all of 13 years old, paced a stifling living room crammed with young people. four girls sat near the back, and she fixed her gaze on these potential recruits.  ''you think your friends are going to be there for you when you have problems,'' she told them, dismissively shaking her head. ''but when problems and tribulations come, they distance themselves.'' christians, she said, are different.  earlier, her fellow teenagers from the ark -- prompted by the pastor -- each stepped up to tell how their faith made them stronger, how their grades had improved.  it is a measure of how much the pastor expects of these young people that they are entrusted with preaching to outsiders. and it is a measure of how much he wants to attract even more that he regularly arranges home visits to seek converts in a relaxed setting.  this night, a family in the congregation had offered its west bronx apartment, a half-hour drive from the church, and invited neighbors, who spilled into the hallway. pastor florian -- trading his suit for a polo shirt and khakis -- sat among them, keeping his young charges on message.  ''when you study, god is there with you, too,'' he chimed in. ''he sees what you study and records it in your mind.''  the teenagers from the ark were friendly yet persistent. the invited girls listened quietly. afterward, jessica marte and another girl flanked one, asking her to the ark.  the girl hesitated. ''i feel my heart beating,'' she said, nervously.  ''that is jesus talking to you,'' jessica said.  as peer pressure goes, it was gentle but unmistakable. in the end, however, none of the girls visited, standing up the pastor when he went to pick them up. indeed, the youth group's efforts are often met with blank stares, smirks or empty promises.  but this is how the congregation attracted the teenagers it has -- through invitations from cousins and classmates -- and the pastor keeps telling them they must bring in more. much of his mission is offering alternatives for the young people he sees sitting bored on stoops every day or running wild in the night. and one of his biggest dreams is an after-school center where they could study, play -- and convert.  ''imagine if we had a place where they could play basketball,'' he said. ''we could play some christian music in the background, too. i promise you, after a week like that, you will see changes.''  still, the biggest changes in the teenagers have been prompted not by social events or preaching, but by one another. jessica, whose mother dragged her to services, says she was finally won over by watching frankie, a tough guy turned tender.  ''i was amazed at him,'' she said. ''it was cool that i could see other kids like me, who had problems in school like i did and used to hang out. i saw how they changed.''  jessica, 15, was an unlikely convert. two years ago she was rowdy on the streets, defiant at home and about to drop out of the eighth grade. now she is in church every night. long ago, she put away her earrings and began wearing skirts.  ''my friends were like, 'oh, my god! what are you doing?' '' she laughed.  yet any limits she has placed on herself have been matched by new expectations. she wants to open a store for christian girls offering fashionable skirts that are neither too short nor too long. and though she still quarrels with her mother, she seems to channel that emotion into religious fervor.  one night, jessica arrived at church fuming because her mother wanted her to baby-sit. soon, she was singing so intensely that she trembled violently and collapsed to the floor, almost banging her head on the pulpit.  the service stopped.  the congregation gazed in awe at this pentecostal rite of passage: in their eyes, the girl before them had just received the holy spirit. a friend gently stroked jessica's hair while one woman jumped and shook next to the girl's motionless body.  jessica soon stirred awake and was lifted to her feet. when the service ended, the other girls rushed up to her and pressed for details, as if she had just come home from a date. what had happened? what was it like?  bewildered and tired, jessica said she really couldn't explain it, but she felt peaceful. she felt loved. she felt different.  ''you know what i say,'' she said later. ''you'll never be the same as when you came in.''  'god doesn't do things quick'  the pastor looked a little sad as frankie and the others trickled into church one evening last april. even though the congregation had attracted a few new teenagers, he feared it was not enough.  some others had visited but never returned. and one mainstay was drifting away: a 16-year-old who had stopped attending regularly, just before she was to preach her first sermon -- and around the time her father went back to prison.  pastor florian was particularly worried about one boy who liked hip clothes and sweet cologne and was friendly with even the toughest guys on the block. the boy was troubled. the task was daunting. the pastor turned to roy -- who had converted frankie and others -- to pray for him every day.  ''you cannot let him go,'' the pastor implored.  just in case, he assigned a second adult to pray for the boy.  but roy's life was becoming complicated. he and his wife were expecting their first child, and he had started a job with an international consulting firm that has kept him away from home during the week.  three other adults now lead the youth group, and attendance at meetings has grown spotty.  frankie still shows up. at 17, he is still not quite sure where he is headed, especially since the chilly november day when the congregation crowded into a funeral parlor in washington heights. his mother was laid out in a silver coffin, dressed in white with a lacy veil gracing her head.  ''now i'm left here to suffer,'' frankie said. ''but if she's in heaven, i'm o.k. she's watching over me.''  others may be watching as well. his bandmates still count on him to make time for practice. one woman promised his dying mother she would make sure he didn't stray from church. his father is looking to him to help pay the bills.  frankie said he might have to enroll in night school so he could work during the day. but his brother, jose, hopes frankie will heed his urgent -- though unlikely -- career advice.  it started when frankie visited him in prison recently and encouraged him to turn to god for help. ''he said god doesn't do things quick,'' frankie recalled.  instead, jose is depending on frankie. he told him to become a professional baseball player so he could get a signing bonus, get a lawyer and get him out.  chalk it up to teenage bluster or blind faith, but frankie said he might try out for his school team, even though he hasn't stepped on a ball field in two years. maybe, he said, he could find a baseball camp upstate where a scout could discover him.  ''right now i'm depending on baseball,'' he said. ''i'm only depending on baseball.''  pastor florian, however, is depending on frankie. for his future. for his faith. for his church.  what he whispered into the boy's ear just before baptizing him in the delaware river was this: you are destined to become a preacher.  house afire  about the series  this is the last of three articles about a pentecostal storefront church in harlem. previous articles explored the faith's explosion worldwide, and the pastor's efforts to keep his congregation and family on track.  house afire  