pentagon aide regrets stance on law firms for detainees   a senior pentagon official apologized on wednesday to the lawyers of guantánamo bay detainees for suggesting that corporations should consider severing business ties with law firms that represent the detainees.  the official, charles d. stimson, deputy assistant secretary for detainee affairs, wrote in a letter published on wednesday in the washington post that his comments in a radio interview last week did not reflect his ''core beliefs.''  mr. stimson wrote: ''regrettably, my comments left the impression that i question the integrity of those engaged in the zealous defense of detainees in guantánamo. i do not.''  mr. stimson sparked outrage with his interview for federal news radio in which he named more than 12 law firms defending the detainees.  he said, ''i think, quite honestly, when corporate c.e.o.'s see that those firms are representing the very terrorists who hit their bottom line back in 2001, those c.e.o.'s are going to make those law firms choose between representing terrorists or representing reputable firms.''  the president of the american bar association, karen j. mathis of denver, said it was proper for mr. stimson to apologize, but she added that his original comments reminded americans ''that every accused person deserves legal representation.''  mr. stimson, a former navy defense lawyer, wrote in his letter that ''i believe that our justice system requires vigorous representation.''  he said he ''zealously represented unpopular clients.''  on friday, a spokesman for the pentagon, bryan whitman, said mr. stimson's comments did ''not represent the views of the defense department or the thinking of its leadership.'' michael ratner, president of the center for constitutional rights, a human rights group that is coordinating the detainees' legal representation, said of the apology: ''it is the minimum they should have done. it is basically a message to stimson and the government to let people be represented.''  