rice plans a joint meeting with middle east leaders   secretary of state condoleezza rice announced monday that she would call together israeli and palestinian leaders within the next month for what she described as a high-level yet informal meeting in hopes of pushing along moribund peace efforts.  the announcement was one tangible development to emerge from her visit to israel and the palestinian areas. she held talks with prime minister ehud olmert of israel early monday in jerusalem, a day after a session with the palestinian authority president, mahmoud abbas, in the west bank city of ramallah.  ''i will soon meet with prime minister olmert and with president abbas to have discussions about the broad issues on the horizon, so that we can work on the road map to try and accelerate the road map and to move to the establishment of a palestinian state,'' ms. rice said, referring to the stalled peace plan for the region.  she announced the three-way meeting during a news conference at this nile resort after consultations with president hosni mubarak of egypt and his foreign minister.  the offices of the israeli and palestinian leaders are only about 10 miles apart, but ms. rice met separately with the two men, both of whom have been weakened politically. mr. olmert's approval ratings are dropping after what many viewed as the clumsy military offensive during the summer to counter hezbollah attacks from lebanon. mr. abbas is battling for his political survival after the militant group hamas swept to power a year ago and took control of the palestinian legislature.  ms. rice was pressed to explain reasons for optimism in resolving an israeli-palestinian dispute that has defied both republican and democratic administrations -- and at a time when the region is roiled with conflict.  ''before we say that this is going to end in frustration, let's be glad that after six years and a long time that the parties want to engage in an informal set of discussions about the future between them,'' ms. rice said.  she announced the israeli-palestinian talks as she began three days of meetings with sunni arab allies in the region -- egypt, saudi arabia and the persian gulf states -- to rally support for president bush's new military and diplomatic strategy in iraq.  while ms. rice and her senior aides said there was no quid pro quo, arab governments are eager to show their populations that some progress is being made in resolving palestinian grievances before they endorse, let alone offer concrete support, to the new bush administration effort to salvage victory in iraq.  ms. rice spoke several times of how the two sides could discuss a ''political horizon'' to energize their peace efforts. the palestinians have used this phrase on occasion to emphasize the need for some sort of timetable for achieving statehood.  american and israeli officials declined to define what might be viewed on this distant ''political horizon.'' but the new language seems to be an effort to cast talks on the future course of israeli-palestinian relations in a hopeful light even before the two sides fulfill specific, intermediate steps required by the internationally agreed ''road map'' framework to resolve their disputes.  the road map is a 2003 plan backed by the united nations, russia, the united states and the european union that lays out sequential steps to be carried out by israelis and palestinians on the way to reaching a final political settlement. neither side has met its obligations under the plan, which stalled immediately after it was introduced.  in the first phase, israel is to freeze settlement activity and the palestinians are to break up militant groups. on monday, the israeli government published plans to build 44 additional homes in maale adumim, the largest west bank settlement, just east of jerusalem.  but officials for all three governments to be involved in the informal meeting said those broader discussions to energize their peace efforts would not be allowed to replace the international ''road map'' agreement.  ''i am very clear that the one thing that you do not want to do is to try to rush to formal negotiations before things are fully prepared, before people are fully prepared,'' ms. rice said. ''but that doesn't mean that there can't be progress as we're moving along.''  there was no immediate decision about when or where the three-way meeting would take place, or what the agenda might be.  david baker, an official in the israeli prime minister's office, said mr. olmert and ms. rice ''spoke about ways to generate momentum between israel and the palestinians.''  ms. rice's subsequent meetings here with mr. mubarak and his senior aides were held along the nile, not far from the ancient temple complex of luxor. the ruins date to the greatest era of the pharaohs, but their delicately carved walls and heroic statues have been reshaped over the centuries by designs of other conquering powers -- including empires that likewise have fallen to history, including those of alexander the great and rome.  ms. rice's schedule did not allow time for a visit to the site, though.  joining ms. rice at the news conference here, the egyptian foreign minister, ahmed aboul gheit, acknowledged that his nation shared a regional interest in stabilizing iraq, and he expressed support for the new bush strategy.  ''we are supportive of that plan, because we are hopeful that that plan would lead to, ensure, the stability, the unity and the cohesion of the iraqi government,'' he said.  