neutralizing arenas not enough for knicks   before the knicks' game on wednesday night, they vowed that gilbert arenas would not beat them with his scoring. he did not. he beat them by not taking the game-winning shot.  the knicks were so concerned about stopping arenas at the end of a tight game that they left caron butler open underneath the basket for a dunk that gave the wizards a 99-98 victory at the verizon center.  ''it's obviously frustrating,'' quentin richardson said. ''you never want to lose that way. at the same time, we denied, denied and swarmed. they just made a great play at the end. they found probably the only open guy on the court.''  coach isiah thomas was also dejected. he fielded a few questions from the news media before leaving the arena with a sour look on his face.  arenas scored 16 points in what was a quiet night for him. he entered the game averaging 30.2 points, second most in the n.b.a, and he was coming off a 51-point performance against the utah jazz on monday, when he made a game-winning 3-pointer.  stephon marbury deserved ample credit for his defense of arenas, who made 4 of 14 shots and went 0 for 5 from beyond the 3-point arc. a double team -- and sometimes even a triple team -- never seemed far away when the ball arrived in arenas's hands.  ''i've never really tried to beat double teams like that, because i know what kind of energy it takes to do that,'' arenas said. ''i had to do that all through high school.''  marbury has been playing exceptionally well on defense in recent weeks, which has sparked the knicks (17-23) to four wins in their last six games.  ''i always play defense,'' marbury said. ''i don't get enough credit for playing defense. i think this year it's just being talked about more because isiah spoke about it and he said that i was playing the best defense of my career.''  the knicks led twice in the closing moments. marbury made a driving layup over antawn jamison to give the knicks their first lead of the second half, 96-95, with 31 seconds left. after jamison made a layup, the knicks went to jamal crawford, who made the game-winning shot on monday against the sacramento kings.  crawford delivered again, making a runner in the lane after driving past jamison. that gave the knicks a 98-97 lead with 12.4 seconds left.  after a timeout, the wizards (22-16) inbounded the ball to arenas, and most of the 16,503 fans probably thought he would take the final shot. arenas also made a game-winning 3-pointer against the milwaukee bucks earlier this month.  the knicks closed in, as they had the entire game. arenas passed to jamison, who drove toward the basket before dishing off to deshawn stevenson on the left wing. eddy curry went out to cover stevenson, who passed underneath to butler.  ''that wasn't an easy pass that he made, but he got it through there,'' curry said. ''you got to give him credit.''  butler dunked with one hand to quash the knicks' hopes of a thrilling comeback.  crawford's desperation shot from near midcourt was on target but fell just short at the final buzzer.  ''we played a hard-fought game,'' richardson said. ''we went blow for blow with them. unfortunately they just got the last punch.''  the loss spoiled a fine offensive performance by richardson, who finished with a game-high 35 points and made seven 3-pointers. he had 25 points in the first half.  the game was close for most of the first half, but the wizards took a 14-point lead in the third quarter, when they went on a 19-3 spurt.  the wizards led, 81-70, to start the fourth quarter, but the knicks scored 8 consecutive points to cut the lead to 81-78.  they kept chipping away by going to curry in the paint and threatening with richardson from the perimeter. when richardson made a 3-pointer with 2 minutes 45 seconds remaining, the knicks cut the lead to 93-92.  with arenas quiet, the wizards went to butler and jamison. butler led them with 27 points and jamison added 21.  ''everybody in the league, despite what anybody else says or writes, knows those two can play,'' richardson said. ''but obviously gilbert is the focal point.''  last night it became apparent early on that he would not be the focal point. in the first quarter, arenas mostly stood at the top of the key as his teammates looked for an open man. he took only 3 of the wizards' first 17 shots.  ''we all knew what they were going to do before, and that's why we tried to keep four shooters out there when i was in,'' arenas said.  arenas began to look for his shot in the final minutes of the opening quarter. he finally got going when the knicks handed him four consecutive free throws.  thomas and marbury were hit with technical fouls after arguing after marbury was whistled for a touch foul as arenas was shooting. he missed the shot but he made both technical free throws and both free throws that resulted from the initial foul.  arenas was quiet for nearly the rest of the game, but just the threat of his scoring did the knicks in.  ''we gave ourselves a chance to win,'' jared jeffries said. ''that's all you can really ask for.''  pro basketball  