editorial observer; a bishop's fall provides a view on soviet-era collaboration   stanislaw wielgus had to step down as archbishop of warsaw. the catholic church played too central and heroic a role in the polish resistance to communist dictatorship (think of lech walesa taking communion at the gdansk shipyard, or cardinal stefan wyszynski, or pope john paul ii) for anyone who is known to have collaborated with the secret police to have so prominent a role. yet i find myself pausing to reflect for a moment about bishop wielgus and about how surviving in that world, especially for anyone in a position of authority, presented excruciating choices, again and again.  there are huge numbers of names in those cursed secret-police archives left behind in poland and all other police states past and present, and many are people whose only crime was that they were not heroes. in that same communist poland, a polish friend once came to me, distraught. the secret police had come to him and had ordered him to serve as an informer; if he did not, his only child would be expelled from the university. just telling me was an act of courage. in the end, my friend was saved by the demise of communist rule. but his terrible dilemma was shared by millions of people in the soviet empire.  under stalin, the coercion had been crude and brutal. but even after the gulag was largely shut down, the communist state demanded constant and total fealty. the levers were fear and total control over every aspect of every life. a child's education, a promotion, a trip abroad, a new apartment, everything depended on playing the game. the price ranged from silence, passivity and marching in the may day parade all the way to informing and active collusion.  in his book about the legacies of world war ii in germany and japan, ''the wages of guilt,'' ian buruma wrote that it was not the resistance heroes who fascinated him as a youth in holland during the war, but the ''frightened man who betrayed to save his life, who looked the other way, who grasped the wrong horn of a hideous moral dilemma.'' i had that same reaction when i was a correspondent in the soviet union, perhaps because, like mr. buruma, i could never be sure which horn i would have grasped in that life.  of course there were villains, people who enrolled in the system for the power, who reveled in humiliating and persecuting the helpless. but otherwise honorable people often compromised -- not out of malice, but because they found all the choices were bad. the russian orthodox patriarch, aleksy ii, who had been a priest or a bishop for 40 years under the communists, acknowledged that his ministry required accommodation with the state.  ''defending one thing, it was necessary to give somewhere else,'' he told me in an interview in 1991. ''were there any other organizations, or any other people among those who had to carry responsibility not only for themselves but for thousands of other fates, who in those years in the soviet union were not compelled to act likewise?"  many of the people caught in that web set their own red line beyond which compromise turned to surrender. these were fine lines: one person might convince himself that it was acceptable to report who had been to a secret poetry reading, but not to divulge who retyped the forbidden manuscript. as long as people held to their line, they could hold their heads high.  bishop wielgus argued that he never hurt anyone, that he only reported on his own doings to be allowed to continue studies abroad.  but how can he know whom he hurt, and how can we know what any of them really did? one of the problems with those files is that they were compiled by professional liars, who were often trying to impress their bosses with mythical conquests. as cardinal jozef glemp, the primate of poland, said in defense of bishop wielgus, ''what kind of a judgment was it, based on some documents and shreds of paper photocopied three times over?''  there is no single answer to these questions. we have to know what happened, and the chief offenders should be held responsible. but as we judge others for whom smaller accommodations were the price of survival, we should ask ourselves what we would have done in their place.  