global battle against measles is said to save 2.3 million lives   vaccinators scaled himalayan peaks in nepal, waded through cambodian paddy fields, canoed up the congo river and rode camels across somalia's hinterlands in an effort to immunize children against measles. new data released yesterday documents the scale of their success: the global campaign against measles has saved 2.3 million lives since 1999, mostly in africa.  unicef and the world health organization reported that the goal of halving measles deaths worldwide by 2005 has been surpassed. deaths fell 60 percent to 345,000 a year in 2005 from 873,000 in 1999.  the most comprehensive push against measles unfurled across africa. measles deaths there plunged even more steeply, by 75 percent, saving the lives of more than 1.6 million children.  ''it was the africans themselves who did this magnificent job,'' said dr. edward j. hoekstra, who leads unicef's global measles program. ''we just gave them the tools.''  the results of the international measles undertaking will be laid out in an article by unicef and w.h.o. doctors appearing online today in the british medical journal the lancet.  the $300 million assault on measles was mainly financed by the centers for disease control and prevention, canada's international development agency, the american red cross, ted turner's united nations foundation and the global alliance for vaccines and immunization, which includes countries and the bill and melinda gates foundation.  the world has come a long way since the measles vaccine was licensed in 1963. in the early 1960s, an estimated six million children died each year from measles, a highly infectious disease spread by an airborne virus. since then, measles has been largely brought under control in many wealthy nations, but millions of children in poor countries have continued to die for want of a vaccine that costs 16 cents per dose.  in recent years, as countries and charitable groups sought to bridge the gap between the children in rich and poor countries, more than 360 million children were vaccinated in vast, intricate campaigns that typically sought to reach every eligible child during a short, widely publicized span of days. these took place in more than 40 countries in africa and asia. the percentage of children vaccinated for measles through routine medical care also rose to 77 percent from 71 percent. the new goal, endorsed in 2005 at a w.h.o. assembly in geneva, is a 90 percent cut in measles deaths by 2010.  the greatest remaining challenge lies in asia, where most measles deaths are in india, pakistan and indonesia. indonesia's drive against measles is well under way. pakistan's is expected to start this year. but india has yet to adopt the strategy promoted by unicef and the w.h.o., which calls for a second dose of measles vaccine for children during routine checkups or campaigns.  experts estimate that more than 100,000 children die each year from the complications of measles in india, more than in any other nation.  in africa, to keep measles deaths low, national health systems too poor to provide high levels of immunization through routine health care must carry out immunization campaigns every three to four years.  last year, nine african countries ran campaigns that offered not only measles shots, but also distributed free mosquito nets that cost $5 to $6 to prevent malaria, which kills 800,000 children a year in africa.  public health doctors say the measles-malaria strategy has the potential to strengthen the appeal of drives to slash child mortality.  