manning leaves wrong turn behind   in football and in life, chicago bears cornerback ricky manning has made mistakes. messy, public ones. but he cannot complain about the way things have turned out.  on sunday, in the bears' divisional playoff game against the seattle seahawks, manning was flagged for an illegal block that negated a 66-yard punt return by devin hester for a go-ahead touchdown.  two field goals by robbie gould, the second one in the fifth minute of overtime, propelled the bears to a 27-24 victory and catapulted manning into his third national football conference championship game in four seasons.  that reversal of fortune mirrored what has happened in manning's life over the past 10 months.  last april, within days of receiving a contract offer from the bears, manning was arrested and charged with assault after an incident at a denny's restaurant in los angeles.  manning has acknowledged getting into an argument with a customer and pushing him in the head before leaving. after the news of his latest arrest became public, the carolina panthers declined to match the bears' five-year, $21 million offer for manning, who was a restricted free agent.  the 25-year-old manning was already on probation for a previous assault in los angeles, and if his case had gone to trial he faced the possibility of a prison sentence.  ''i wasn't willing to take that risk,'' he said.  intent on putting his past behind him, manning pleaded no contest to felony assault in the fall and was sentenced to three years' probation, one year of anger-management counseling and 100 hours of community service.  he was suspended for one game by the n.f.l. for violation of its code of personal conduct, causing him to miss the bears' 17-13 loss at new england on nov. 26.  when he plays, he makes a difference. ''he's been a big part of what we're doing,'' bears coach lovie smith said monday of manning, who had five interceptions during the regular season and added onr sunday in the fourth quarter off seahawks quarterback matt hasselbeck.  asked to describe his interception, manning said, ''i guess it's just being in the right place at the right time.''  he was standing in the victors' locker room at soldier field as he spoke, stuffing toiletries and clothes into a louis vuitton duffel bag. later, while putting a square diamond-studded earring in his left ear lobe, manning marveled at how much had changed since last year, when he stood in the victorious visitors locker room after the panthers' 29-21 divisional playoff victory against the bears.  ''it has been a whirlwind,'' he said.  confronting his legal issues was just part of it. after taking stock of his life, manning broke up with his fiancée, married a woman from his hometown, fresno, calif., whom he had been friends with for years, and became a father. his son, ricky iii, was born nov. 14.  ''the last nine months has been a drastic change for me,'' manning said. ''it has been crazy.'' but in a good way, he was quick to add. ''i'm smiling. i've got a kid. i'm married to a beautiful lady. because of the trouble i got in, that's why my life has changed, but i like the change.''  manning used part of the signing bonus he received from the bears to buy a bentley, but it does not get much of a workout. his circumstances have caused him to become a homebody.  ''i don't go out anymore,'' he said. ''i don't do anything.''  a gun enthusiast, manning said he no longer frequented the firing range. he has given his guns to friends and relatives until his probation is over.  he sends his regrets when he is invited to parties.  ''i miss some of the guys' parties that they're throwing,'' manning said, ''but they understand. they know i just can't take that chance of something happening.''  what happened at the denny's in los angeles, not far from the u.c.l.a. campus where manning attended college, was avoidable. he can see that clearly now. for starters, he did not need to be out with a friend at 3 a.m.  ''me being out at 3 o'clock at night and partying and being around people that can take advantage of me is just not a good situation,'' he said.  ''initially i reacted to getting disrespected when i thought i shouldn't have been,'' he added. ''o.k., i shouldn't have done that. but i thought i had done the right thing by walking away, by leaving.''  he was arrested, and his public image took a brutal hit. ''it was tough, knowing that what happened gives people a misconception of me,'' manning said. he added, ''it took for that to happen for me to learn.''  since april, manning has joined the bears' family and created a family of his own. he keeps his relatives closer, having come to the conclusion that they are the best company because they will not lead him astray. for the game sunday, he flew in some cousins, some of whom had never traveled by airplane before.  roughly 90 minutes after the game, manning headed toward the exit, following the wedge created by his wife, tosha, and his cousins. in his arms, he was cradling his sleeping son.  manning walked past a makeshift tv studio where gould was being interviewed about his game-winning field goal. a dozen fans, many of them holding camera phones the way they would lighters at a concert, had gathered to pay homage to gould and were blocking the exit.  a security guard cleared a path for manning, who slipped through as cleanly as a knife through a perfectly baked cake. not a single fan stuck to him. one did recognize him and, nudging another, whispered, ''that's ricky manning,'' but by then, manning had disappeared into the cold, rainy night.  pro football  