comfort food is in at london theater buffet   it is the eve of destruction, although everyone is pretending it is not. hitler is on the horizon, storm troopers are in the wings, and betrayal has replaced friendship as the common social coin. so whom would you choose as your musical dream date for this götterdämmerung moment: the chaste nun-in-training who loves nature and children, or the sexy nightclub singer who loves a cabaret?  a decade ago, when the spectacle of a society's unraveling felt more titillating and less familiar, the answer might have been different. but these days the uncontested sweetheart of the west end is the good girl, maria of ''the sound of music,'' instead of the good-time girl, sally bowles of ''cabaret.''  the consensus seems to be that if you're going to spend a song-filled night with nazis, it is better to be reassured than rattled. this is especially true if life is looking a tad apocalyptic, which it definitely is at the moment. (a recent front-page tabloid headline about the unseasonably mild winter: ''the end of europe as we know it.'')  revivals of ''the sound of music'' and ''cabaret'' -- part of a glut of american-born musicals in london this season (from ''wicked'' to ''porgy and bess'') -- opened late last year to solid, and in some cases rapturous, reviews. neither of these carefully staged, strangely unmoving productions of shopworn classics could be called revelatory. both underline, with moral earnestness, what has always been each show's major selling point: lurid darkness (''cabaret'') and wholesome sunlight (''the sound of music'').  yet only ''the sound of music,'' at the london palladium, is drawing the around-the-block lines that make producers wake up trilling. (it's worth noting that when revivals of these musicals opened within weeks of each other on broadway in 1998, it was ''cabaret'' that became the smash hit.) part of this commercial success is rooted in the publicity surrounding the reality television series on the bbc, ''how do you solve a problem like maria?,'' which chronicled the selection of the show's leading lady, connie fisher.  ms. fisher, a 2005 theater school graduate, turns out to be unflappably professional and as soothingly impersonal as a flight attendant. which fits in perfectly with this interpretation of the last of the rodgers and hammerstein collaborations, first staged (on broadway) in 1959.  as directed by jeremy sams, ''the sound of music'' is steeped in an upper-middle-class stoicism and self-control that match the crisp accents of its principal performers. sentimental it may be, as maria, the fledgling nun turned governess, restores song to the silent home of the stiff-backed widower captain von trapp (alexander hanson) and his seven affection-starved children.  but mr. sams and his producers, andrew lloyd webber and david ian, knew that ''the sound of music'' needed to be reclaimed from the land of comic-strip camp to which the show has been relegated in recent years. (think of those ''rocky horror picture show''-style sing-along presentations of the 1965 movie.) so they have encased the production in a gravely cheerful air that forbids mockery, as if it were a stern but beloved school master reading patriotic poetry.  from its lush orchestrations to its alpine-vista scenery, the whole enterprise has a remote, chocolate-box prettiness. (the only real showstopper is a calisthenic ''do-re-mi.'') and ms. fisher's maria, who sounds a lot like julie andrews and looks like an anime version of diana, princess of wales, emerges as the sort of take-charge, no-nonsense gal you would trust to guide your family through the alps with the ss at your heels. this is rather comforting but not very exciting.  in jolting contrast is anna maxwell martin's sally bowles, who exists in an unending state of nervous breakdown in ''cabaret,'' at the lyric theater. it's a go-for-broke performance that includes a few truly affecting moments. but the bipolar see-saw of her acting leaves little room for surprise or charm. (the production also features the american actor michael hayden, in the thankless role of the american writer who falls for sally, and sheila hancock, who is superb as his life-battered landlady.)  the director rufus norris (''festen'') works hard to trump the roundabout theater company's long-running broadway version in expressionist gloom and x-rated decadence. the shadows are murkier, the george grosz-like faces more nightmarish, the nudity more extensive, the choreography (by javier de frutos) more frankly copulative.  when the burned-out m.c. (a sepulchral james dreyfus) sings ''i don't care much,'' you know how he feels. exhaustion is the keynote here, the ashen mood that descends when a party has gone on for too long. unfortunately, this means that you are never in danger of being seduced or, for that matter, shocked. (you can find images just as creepy and sexually frank on mainstream british television after 11 p.m.) the only way ''cabaret'' might be shocking now would be if it were presented with subtlety.  the venerable and tireless trevor nunn does his best to make ''porgy and bess'' seem new in a good-looking production at the savoy theater. mr. nunn, who has previously directed this george gershwin chef-d'oeuvre as an opera, here reconceives it as a trimmed-down conventional musical with spoken dialogue.  he has also cast actors who can sing (rather than the usual singers who can sort of act) and included lots of sexy choreography (by jason pennycooke). but the emphasis on story and naturalistic character make this plot-dense show seem more quaint and less credible than it does as an opera, where melodrama is an everyday affair. admirably acted (clarke peters and nicola hughes play the title roles) and danced, this ''porgy and bess'' is least persuasive in its big arias: not, in other words, an example of playing to your strengths.  ''dirty dancing,'' at the aldwych theater, is notable for having no discernible strengths. adapted from the popular screen romance about a 17-year-old girl's coming of age at a catskills resort, this production brings to mind a party game in which a bunch of tipsy fans act out their favorite movie, scene by scene. this appears to be enough to satisfy devotees of the film, who have made the show a blockbuster success.  a better advertisement for recycling is ''little shop of horrors,'' the 1982 sci-fi musical, which has been revived by the tiny but mighty menier chocolate factory theater and appears destined for a west end transfer. (only a few years old, the menier is where the broadway-bound revival of ''sunday in the park with george'' originated.)  directed by matthew white and starring the engaging sheridan smith and paul keating as doomed lovers torn apart (literally) by a carnivorous plant, this ''little shop'' offers nothing particularly new. (the show also received an uninspired revival on broadway in 2003.) and the production doesn't always grasp the american musical style being parodied (especially with the girl group that acts as a doo-wop greek chorus).  but it takes the show's silliness seriously, and its cartoonish characters are embodied with irresistible sincerity. aside from a lovely children's opera at the newly restored young vic, ''the enchanted pig,'' and ''avenue q,'' the transplanted broadway hit at the noël coward theater, ''little shop'' is the only musical i've come upon in london that actually made me feel happy.  but couldn't it be interpreted as a story of nature run amok, a parable for the age of global warming? nah, it's just a goof, thank heavens. and there's not a nazi in sight.  theater  