appeals court vacates term of algerian in bomb plot   a federal appeals court on tuesday vacated the 2005 sentence of an algerian man convicted of plotting to bomb los angeles international airport.  the man, ahmed ressam, known as the millennium bomber because of prosecutors' claims that he intended to bomb the airport on the eve of the millennium, was arrested in december 1999 in washington state after driving off a ferry from british columbia in a car with bomb-making materials in its trunk. he was convicted on nine counts, including document fraud and transportation of deadly explosives, and sentenced to 22 years in prison.  but on tuesday, the united states court of appeals for the ninth circuit, in san francisco, reversed his conviction on the ninth count, which charged that he was carrying explosives while committing the felony of making a false statement to customs officials about both his identity and the fact that he had explosives.  mr. ressam became a suspect when a customs agent felt that his itinerary seemed unusual and that he was acting in a peculiar manner.  but the evidence, according to the court's written opinion, did not ''show that the explosives 'facilitated or played a role in the crime' of lying on the customs declaration.'' further, the court said, ''it is not enough for the government to prove that ressam lied because he was smuggling explosives in the trunk of his car. rather, the government must demonstrate that the explosives aided the commission of the underlying felony in some way.''  given its reversal on that count, which carried a mandatory sentence of 10 years, the court opted to vacate the entire sentence.  before his sentencing but after his conviction in 2001, mr. ressam cooperated with investigators in hopes of receiving a reduced sentence, but he failed to continue to provide information after two years, leading prosecutors to ask for a 35-year sentence.  but the federal district court instead imposed a sentence 13 years short of that, in a blow to prosecutors, who insisted that before his decision to stop cooperating mr. ressam provided important and material information about other terror suspects. further, he testified against his co-conspirator, mokhtar haouari, and a sept. 11 plotter, mounir el-motassadeq.  mr. ressam later recanted testimony against hassan zemiri, a fellow algerian who was held as an enemy combatant at guantánamo bay, cuba, and as a result of his refusal to cooperate further, federal prosecutors said, they were forced to dismiss indictments against two other terror suspects.  the appeals court sent the case back to the lower court to issue a new sentence. the united states attorney in seattle, whose office prosecuted the case, said it would continue to recommend a 35-year sentence.  ''obviously we're disappointed,'' said emily langlie, a spokeswoman for the united states attorney's office in seattle. ms. langlie added that the office was ''carefully reviewing the decision'' to determine whether it would ask the united states solicitor general to have a broader panel of 15 judges from the circuit court review the case.  the court's move essentially opens up a question of statutory interpretation about whether the carrying of explosives had to be in some way related or connected to the other felony -- signing a false customs document -- for the count to stand.  it is up to the judge to decide whether to reduce mr. ressam's sentence. because there are eight other counts on which he was convicted, including conspiracy to commit an act of international terrorism, it could remain unchanged.  ''losing a false-statement charge would not be a reason for the court to reduce the sentence significantly,'' said carol chase, a law professor at pepperdine university, adding that it depended on the range of mandatory sentences of the rest of the counts. it is unlikely, she said, that the sentence will be increased, even though the government maintains its position that the 22-year sentence imposed was too short.  