achieving his goal, reese gazes even higher   jerry reese, standing on a raised platform and sandwiched between bright spotlights and a backdrop of giants logos, laughed when he considered just how it was that he got here.  he grew up in poverty in western tennessee, the oldest of eight children, raised mostly by a single mother in a two-bedroom house. he was a good football player at a small college program, but never played professionally. twelve years ago, he was an assistant coach for that university, tennessee-martin.  now, at 43, reese is the third african-american to earn the title of n.f.l. general manager. he was introduced tuesday as senior vice president and general manager of the giants. he wore a suit and a smile and spoke with a mix of determination and ease. and when he was asked if the whole thing felt real, he laughed and called it a ''fairy tale.''  ''if you guys knew where i'd come from -- steve tisch would write a movie about it, to be honest,'' reese said, referring to the giants' co-owner, who is also a movie producer. ''i just come from meager beginnings.''  in reese's mind, the script gets more unbelievable from here. according to his wife, he would someday like to be the commissioner of the n.f.l.  in the shadows next to the stage tuesday stood reese's wife of 18 years, gwen, and their two children, jasmyne, 14, and j. r., 10. they are the people who know reese best, from all angles. they screamed and cried together when the phone rang at about noon monday and jerry reese said, ''i got it.''  twelve hours later, after meetings and a dinner in manhattan with the personnel department, reese returned to his new jersey home.  ''when he became a scout of the giants,'' gwen reese said, referring to december 1994, ''he said, 'i would like to be the general manager.' that was his goal. i said to him last night: 'wow, you reached your goal. this is what you wanted to accomplish. what's next?' ''  she giggled.  ''he has something in mind already, but '' she said.  prodded gently, she let slip her husband's long-range plan.  ''sign his name on the footballs, i'll say that,'' she said.  the notion that jerry reese could become commissioner of the n.f.l. might be preposterous if not for the journey he has already made. many other african-americans who have risen to high-level jobs in the n.f.l., and other major sports, were players, given the inherent advantages of connections and name recognition.  gwen reese has seen the far more anonymous diligence of jerry reese since dating him at tennessee-martin. she is three years younger, and was finishing college when he was an assistant coach there.  ''he called me over to the football office and said, 'i have something for you,' '' she said tuesday. ''i went over, and it was an engagement ring. he was like: 'here put this on. i've got to go to practice.' ''  she laughed. of the things the two share, the most obvious is a comfortable laugh.  ''we got married the next year,'' she said. ''our honeymoon we spent recruiting college players in biloxi, miss. so he still owes me a honeymoon. after 18 years, i still didn't get it yet.''  jerry reese expected to someday be the coach at tennessee-martin, where he was inducted into the college's hall of fame for his exploits as an all-conference safety. those plans changed when jeremiah davis, a former tennessee-martin assistant and a giants scout since 1988, recommended reese for a scouting job with the giants in 1994.  reese blanched. davis persisted.  it spun reese's life in a different direction. in 1999, he took his family to new jersey, far from the relatives who still live in western tennessee, to become an assistant in the team's pro personnel department. in 2002, he was named director of player personnel, overseeing college scouting and the n.f.l. draft.  the giants, particularly the exiting general manager ernie accorsi, saw a rising star. tuesday, it seemed, did not mark the top of the arc.  reese has wholly embraced the notion of being a trailblazer among african-americans. he said he was grateful for those who provided openings deep into the executive offices of the n.f.l. he said he expected many more would follow through a gap he planned to widen.  ''only because i'm going to be successful,'' reese said. ''only because of that reason. this is a show-me business. i can't come in here and win three games every year for four years and expect african-americans to be advanced. i don't take that lightly, that i'm a torchbearer. not being cliché with that, but i am a torchbearer to keep the drive alive. there are many african-americans coming along behind me saying, 'man, look at jerry.' ''  for now, there is no place reese would rather be. he said he believed the giants, who finished 8-8 this season and lost in the first round of the playoffs, were not far from being super bowl champions. he acknowledged that the giants had ''hot spots'' on the roster that needed to be addressed but declined to name them.  he pledged his support to quarterback eli manning and coach tom coughlin; each heads into his fourth season having performed below expectations.  ''obviously it's not where we want it to be,'' reese said of manning's progress. ''we want him to be a pro bowl guy that can lead us into the super bowl.''  the decision to retain coughlin was made by the owners last week, before reese was promoted. he will now decide coughlin's future. ''we're going to support him 100 percent,'' reese said as coughlin stood nearby. ''tom is our coach and we want him to be here for a long time.''  the situation that reese inherits has no obstacles tougher than the ones he has already overcome. as reese was introduced, his wife and children beamed, representing dozens of friends and family members centered in western tennessee.  ''there's been a lot of praying going on, trying to get me into this seat,'' reese said.  and there will be a lot of praying, from people reese knows and many he does not, to see where he takes it from here.  pro football  