a personal toll to setting aside the umbrella   ever since citigroup said it was considering whether to retire its ubiquitous red umbrella logo, the mostly muted reaction has been surprising. for years, many in new york and beyond complained that the giant umbrellas affixed to many of the company's buildings cast a tacky glow.  but with the global banking giant on the verge of permanently folding up the familiar symbol, at least one person, sarah heady, a 43-year-old native new yorker who now lives in new zealand, is genuinely sad.  that is because her mother, virginia, thought up the widely recognized symbol more than four decades ago, ms. heady said. ''i had done some traveling in my life and have lived in some far-flung places and it has always been reassuring to me,'' she said in a telephone interview, noting how she looks for the bright red umbrella sign on citigroup's main building in auckland every time she heads into town. ''it reminds me of my mother and makes me feel closer to home.''  the red umbrella was the longtime logo of the travelers group insurance company. but since 1998, the sign has been synonymous with citigroup, which acquired it when citicorp merged with travelers.  it has also been a regular source of controversy. in 1997, a community group in tribeca unsuccessfully petitioned the city to have the giant neon umbrella removed from travelers' 39-story headquarters at 388 greenwich street, now home to citigroup's investment bank and where a 16-foot, 5,300-pound steel umbrella sits outside.  as part of a rebranding, citigroup executives are considering shortening the company's name to citi and replacing the red umbrella sign with a stylized red arc above the name. the letters in citi will appear in blue for the consumer businesses, red for the wealth management division, and black for the investment bank. but shedding the umbrella has been the most contentious change.  a citigroup spokeswoman said that no final decisions had been made.  the story behind the red umbrella is part of advertising lore, although the details have proven elusive. a travelers insurance newspaper ad from 1870 first pictured an umbrella, sandwiched between the knees of two young boys. but the modern version of the logo was not adopted, it seems, until 1959, according to newspaper articles. that is the year when, ms. heady said, her mother came up with the idea.  verifying this account is difficult, because it appears there is no documented history of the umbrella logo. citigroup and st. paul travelers were unable to produce any records, and a review of newspaper articles and other research did not yield any answers or evidence to refute or prove ms. heady's story.  virginia heady told her daughter that she stumbled across the idea at the window of her murray hill apartment, while sipping her morning cup of french roast on a rainy day. travelers had been preparing to start a new advertising campaign, and ms. heady, then a 30-year-old creative manager at young & rubicam, was assigned to the account.  with a party to inaugurate the new campaign scheduled for that evening, the firm had still not come up with the right symbol to suggest security and protection. but when she looked outside and saw a group of people carrying umbrellas, a light bulb went off.  ''she grabbed a taxi, went to bloomingdale's, and then bought up every red umbrella in the store,'' her daughter recalled. ''she chose the color red because it stands out.''  virginia heady handed out the red umbrellas at the party that night. the travelers executives were impressed, and a logo was born. ''it illustrates the concept of protection, it is friendly, it is warm, and it is very merchandisable,'' herbert j. kramer, a senior manager at travelers, told the new york times five years later, when its insurance agents and brokers gave away red umbrellas at the 1964 world's fair.  mrs. heady went on to become a professor of literature and art history at juilliard in the mid-1970s. she pursued acting and television opportunities, too. but her daughter said she told only a few close friends and relatives about the legacy of her brief advertising career.  in fact, when mrs. heady saw the image in a travelers ad or on a citigroup building, she would shrug her shoulders and laugh. ''i had to drag it out of her,'' recalled sarah, who said she did not learn of her mother's accomplishments until she graduated from college. ''she was very nonchalant about the whole thing.''  but to sarah heady and her two children, the familiar symbol is a big deal. her mother died last year, but she said the red umbrella atop the citigroup building was a comforting reminder when she takes the ferry at least once a week to downtown auckland. from just outside the terminal, she can spot what her son calls ''grandma ginny's red umbrella.''  