people and accounts of note   brian addison joined wirestone, chicago, as a director for brand strategy. he had been united states brand manager for jim beam bourbon whiskey at beam global spirits and wine, deerfield, ill.  amy beamer, vice president for operations at pavone, harrisburg, pa., was promoted to chief operating officer, a new post, overseeing the offices in harrisburg and philadelphia.  lana bernstein was named president at the luxury branding agency, miami, which is being spun off from the ocean drive media group. ms. bernstein will also continue as vice president for public relations at ocean drive media. initial clients of the new agency include gulfstream park.  todd bryce joined the auburn hills, mich., office of the spar group as senior vice president for customer and retail operations, a new post. he has spent 14 years in retail services at companies like acosta sales and marketing, lombard, ill., and mcg retail, chalfont, pa.  celebrity cruises, miami, part of royal caribbean, chose element 79, chicago, part of the omnicom group, as its creative agency. the assignment, with spending estimated at $20 million, had been handled for five years by arnold worldwide, boston, part of the arnold worldwide partners division of havas. arnold continues to work on ads for the royal caribbean brand.  condé nast publications, new york, part of advance publications, signed multiyear agreements to be supplied with data by units of the vnu group: nielsen monitor-plus, the advertising data division of nielsen media research, and the nielsen media research national television ratings service. financial terms were not disclosed.  michael doebler is transferring to the charlotte, n.c., office of eric mower & associates to become an account supervisor there, from the agency's rochester, n.y., office, where he had specialized in tasks like strategic planning and media relations.  barbara friedsam, associate director for information architecture in the interactive marketing group at mullen, wenham, mass., was named the agency's first user experience planner, part of a new experience planning discipline at the mullen brand planning group that will be focused on how consumers interact with digital media. mullen is part of the interpublic group of companies.  ronan gardiner and joyce parente were promoted to new posts at men's health magazine, new york, part of rodale. mr. gardiner was promoted to associate publisher for advertising from advertising director. ms. parente was promoted to associate publisher for marketing from director for marketing and creative services.  interpublic group of companies, new york, closed a unit, the consumer experience practice, formed last year, and laid off its estimated 10 employees. the duties of the unit, which specialized in research into the changing media landscape, are expected to be absorbed by individual interpublic media agencies like initiative and universal mccann.  marcia kline joined esquire magazine, new york, as associate publisher for advertising. she succeeds jeffrey ahl, who left, the magazine said. ms. kline had been publisher at style.com and men.style.com, part of condénet, the interactive division of the condé nast publications unit of advance publications. esquire is owned by the hearst magazines division of the hearst corporation.  kenneth krimstein joined partners & jeary, new york, a member of the partners group, as partner and creative director, a new post. he had been co-creative director at seiter & miller, new york.  magazine advertising pages fell 0.1 percent in 2006 from 20005, according to the publishers information bureau, new york, and for december, ad pages fell 2.2 percent from december 2005. for the full year, the bureau reported, the top three categories by ad pages were apparel and accessories, automotive, and toiletries and cosmetics.  elizabeth mahoney joined elle décor magazine, new york, as marketing director. she succeeds naomi cooper, who left, the magazine said. ms. mahoney had most recently been director for promotion services at the condé nast bridal group, new york, part of the condé nast publications unit of advance publications. elle décor is part of hachette filipacchi media u.s., a unit of the lagardère active media division of lagardère.  pearle vision, cincinnati, part of luxottica, named arnold worldwide, boston, part of the arnold worldwide partners unit of havas, to handle its creative account, which had been at stern advertising, columbus, ohio. spending was estimated at $12 million.  procter & gamble, cincinnati, consolidated the global creative assignment for the clairol herbal essences hair-care line by shifting the north american account, with spending estimated at $50 million, from the kaplan thaler group, new york, part of the publicis groupe, to leo burnett worldwide, chicago, also part of publicis, which handles the brand outside north america. kaplan thaler continues to create campaigns for procter brands like infusium and swiffer.  right media, new york, which operates the right media exchange for interactive advertising, hired two executives for new posts. one, denise colella, becomes vice president for international operations; she had most recently been vice president for product operations at blackfoot, new york. the other, chris mahl, becomes vice president for sales; he had most recently been senior vice president for sales at salesforce.com, new york.  lee rubenstein joined tba global, los angeles, as president and chief operating officer. he succeeds gene cobuzzi, who left to pursue other interests, the agency said. mr. rubenstein had been president at citigate broadstreet, boston, part of the incepta group.  paul santello, senior vice president and managing director of the los angeles office of carat fusion, was promoted to a new post, executive vice president and western regional managing director, overseeing the carat fusion offices in los angeles and san francisco. the promotion is part of a reorganization that also includes the naming of two other executives to new posts as general managers, reporting to mr. santello. one is john cate, vice president and national media director, who becomes senior vice president and general manager of the san francisco office. the other is michael soh, vice president for integrated media in the los angeles office, who becomes general manager of that office. carat fusion is part of the isobar division of the aegis group.  chris shumaker joined publicis usa, new york, part of the publicis worldwide unit of the publicis groupe, as chief marketing officer, a new post. he had most recently been executive vice president and worldwide chief growth officer at foote cone & belding, new york, now part of the draft fcb division of the interpublic group of companies.  tns media intelligence, new york, part of taylor nelson sofres, predicted that advertising spending in the united states for 2007 would grow a ''tepid'' 2.6 percent from 2006. that growth compares with estimated growth in ad spending of 3.8 percent in 2006 from 2005. the 2.6 percent figure would represent the smallest growth in ad spending as estimated by tns since the advertising, marketing and media industries emerged from a recession in 2001.  tom trenta joined egg strategy, boulder, colo., to lead the agency's new office in chicago. mr. trenta had been vice president and account planning director at draft fcb, chicago, part of the interpublic group of companies.  dan ventura, vice president for creative services at kempgoldberg, portland, me., was promoted to partner, joining three other partners at the agency: pam boudreau-kemp, david goldberg and alex kemp.  jocelyn wong joined jumpstart automotive media, san francisco, in a new post, west coast sales manager, based in los angeles. she had been an account executive at ign/fox interactive media, culver city, calif., part of the news corporation.  working mother media, new york, acquired substantially all the assets of the public affairs group, washington, including the business women's network division, the diversity best practices division and the best practices in corporate communications division. the operations were acquired by working mother media from ivillage, now part of the nbc universal division of the general electric company. financial terms were not disclosed.  webdenda  