the virtuoso and the star: a study in contrasts   a singer i know used to collect batons from every conductor he worked with. he was once greatly amused when a conductor he hadn't thought much of presented him with a stick that was warped and appeared to be broken: a reflection, the singer said later, of the conductor's abilities.  there is at least a symbolic power invested in a conductor's baton. this was displayed on tuesday night when lorin maazel, before leading the new york philharmonic and symphonica toscanini at avery fisher hall in a commemoration of the 50th anniversary of arturo toscanini's death, was presented with a toscanini baton (which appeared as if it too might have been broken). mr. maazel proved that a baton itself has little mojo, by using it to conduct the italian orchestra in the intermezzo from ''cavalleria rusticana'' at a glacial pace. the baton had probably not been used like that by its previous owner.  an even clearer comparison of the two conductors' styles came from a video, shown after intermission, of toscanini conducting the nbc symphony orchestra in 1951. his emphasis, conventional wisdom has it, was fidelity to the composer's intentions; maestro maazel's is fidelity to the conductor's.  conventional wisdom may not be worth much. (each generation's view of fidelity to the past, after all, reflects its own present.) both men at least evince a burning desire for control: toscanini's expressed through relentless, even motoric rhythmic drive, mr. maazel's by putting his orchestras through whatever paces his taut baton signals.  mr. maazel may be the greater virtuoso, but he is far less culturally relevant; where a network once founded an orchestra for toscanini, few bigwigs in the mass media today are arguably even aware of mr. maazel's existence, for all of the stirring sound and fury he elicited from the new york philharmonic in a slightly raspy reading of strauss's ''don juan.''  two orchestras were juxtaposed, as well. the symphonica toscanini, founded in 2006 after a few years as the filarmonica arturo toscanini, followed the philharmonic with a lithe performance of respighi's ''pines of rome'' that more than made up in commitment and energy for what it lacked in sonic opulence, drawing the audience to its feet with its show-stopping ending. hunger and ambition are not bad things in a young orchestra; this one is worth hearing. both orchestras then combined for a powerhouse reading of tchaikovsky's ''francesca da rimini.''  before that came another comparison, although a tacit one: between renée fleming, who was scheduled to sing, and rené pape, the german bass who has become something of a darling to new york operagoers, who replaced her at short notice. concert performance is a fine medium for mr. pape, who has a gorgeous warm voice but can be a little emotionally unspecific on the opera stage.  without makeup, and seen at close range, he expressed more subtlety in ''ella giammai m'amò'' than i perceived in his portrayal of the same aria at the metropolitan opera's ''don carlo'' last month. he is, at any rate, a crack singer, and in an evening of symbols added a delightful fillip of substance.  music review  