news summary   international a3-10  u.n. count says 34,000 died in iraq last year  the united nations reported that more than 34,000 iraqis were killed in violence last year, a figure that was nearly three times higher than an estimate for 2006 compiled from iraqi ministry tallies by the associated press this month.  a1  at least 70 people were killed at a largely shiite university in baghdad when a wave of explosions tore through a crowd leaving the school's main gate minutes after classes ended. in all, at least 108 people died across the capital, an interior ministry official said.  a7  president bush said that iraq had ''fumbled'' the executions of saddam hussein and two of his deputies and that the government of prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki ''has still got some maturation to do.''  a8  chirac drops iran mission  president jacques chirac of france arranged to send his foreign minister to iran for talks on lebanon, then abruptly canceled the visit at a time when most world powers have forged a united front against iran because of its nuclear program.  a3  embattled israeli leadership  the israeli military's chief of staff submitted his resignation after criticism of the military's performance in last summer's war in lebanon, and an israeli prosecutor ordered a criminal investigation of prime minister ehud olmert to see whether he exercised improper influence in a bank privatization.  a6  national a13-17  obama signals intent to run for president  senator barack obama of illinois made clear his intention to enter the democratic presidential race, creating a fund-raising committee to open a full-fledged campaign next month to become the nation's first african-american president.  a1  violence grew in los angeles  civil rights advocates say violence grew at an alarming rate last year in los angeles, continuing a trend of more confrontations between latinos and blacks and prompting street demonstrations and long discussions on talk-radio programs.  a1  train derails in kentucky  a freight train carrying chemical cargo derailed and ignited south of louisville, ky., forcing the evacuation of homes, shutting down roads and sending students home from school, kentucky emergency officials said.  a13  choosing jurors for libby trial  the perjury trial of i. lewis libby jr. began with his lawyers trying to eliminate as jurors anyone who might have strongly negative feelings about the bush administration in general and vice president dick cheney in particular.  a14  u.s. attorneys are dismissed  the justice department is removing several united states attorneys from their jobs, among them carol c. lam, the top federal prosecutor in san diego, who led the corruption prosecution of former representative randy cunningham.  a17  new york/region b1-6  bloomberg proposes major tax cuts for city  mayor bloomberg is proposing cutting property taxes by roughly 5 percent and eliminating the city sales tax on clothing and footwear as new york enjoys the bounty from its booming economy and real estate market. the entire tax relief package would consume $1 billion of the city's $55 billion budget. a1  low-cost housing contest  the winner of an international competition to design and build working-class housing in new york plans complexes bound together by courtyards and roof gardens to be used for a variety of purposes, including harvesting rainwater and farming vegetables and fruit. b1  business day c1-13  u.s. told of royalty error  a top interior department official was told nearly three years ago about a legal blunder that allowed drilling companies to avoid billions of dollars in payments for oil and gas pumped from publicly owned waters, a report by the department's independent investigator has found.  c1  cablevision rejects bid  the board of cablevision systems corporation rejected an $8.9 billion offer from the dolans, its founding family. the rebuff was a rare example of a board denying a demand from its controlling shareholder.  c1  business digest c2  editorial a18-19  editorials: the missing partner in iraq; how to choose a fiscal watchdog; keep your shoes on, for a price; ending the prison windfall.  column: maureen dowd.  crossword  e8  obituaries  c14  tv listings  e11  weather  d7  