even free, the price wasn't right   yum brands, the fast-food conglomerate, wanted to buy property for a taco bell in norfolk, va., on the site of a former appliance store.  but the identity of the seller turned out to be an unpleasant surprise.  the real estate department of yum brands made a $1 million offer this month for property on the corner of monticello avenue and 20th street, on the fringes of downtown norfolk. unbeknownst to yum, the property was owned by the peta foundation, a nonprofit group that provides support services for people for the ethical treatment of animals, known as peta.  the animal rights group has been engaged in a campaign against kfc, the kentucky fried chicken chain owned by yum brands. the campaign, called kentucky fried cruelty, has sought to force the chain to adopt more stringent animal welfare guidelines.  in the four years the campaign has been conducted, peta says its members have staged thousands of protests outside of kfc restaurants, often dressed in chicken costumes covered with blood, and the organization has also used celebrities like the ''baywatch'' star pamela anderson, the dalai lama and the beastie boys, to speak out against kfc.  given that background, it is not surprising that peta officials relished the offer from yum brands and saw it as an opportunity to further their campaign. yesterday, in a letter addressed to the yum real estate manager, clint langley, peta made a counteroffer.  ''peta would be willing to give yum this warehouse -- free and clear -- if kfc requires its chicken suppliers to adopt the recommendations made by members of its own animal welfare advisory council on march 11, 2005. a copy of these recommendations is enclosed for your reference, '' peta said in its letter.  those recommendations urged kfc suppliers to phase out the use of nontherapeutic antibiotics, to stop breeding chickens to have breasts so big that the birds have difficulty walking, and to use inert gas, rather than electric stunning, to kill chickens.  matt prescott, peta's manager for factory farm campaigns, said peta made the offer because protecting chickens from what it considers abusive treatment is worth more than the warehouse.  mr. langley referred messages to yum's corporate offices.  ''we don't do business with corporate terrorists and, therefore, we no longer have any interest in this property,'' said laurie schalow, a kfc spokeswoman. she said kfc bought its chickens from the same ''trusted brands'' that consumers buy in local supermarkets.  ''kfc is committed to the well-being and humane treatment of chickens,'' ms. schalow said. ''we're proud of our responsible, industry-leading animal welfare guidelines.''  