taming frizz and setting curls free   growing up, i yearned to have lustrous straight hair that i could wear parted in the middle and let swing down my back, like marcia brady of ''the brady bunch'' or laurie partridge of ''the partridge family.''  instead, amid a sea of long, silky-haired classmates, my zigzagging kinky curls were the target of childhood taunts. (it didn't help that my middle name, claire, rhymed with hair.) hairdressers hacked away at my unruly mop, unsure how to tame it.  even after juice cans, hot rollers, hot combs, oversize brushes, irons, baby oil, gels and chemical relaxers, my hair would fight back, bouncing up time and again into roseanne roseannadanna frizz.  in recent years, at my pleading, stylists have blown my hair into stick-straight submission, and when i'm unable to get to a salon, i dip into a cupboard full of frizz-taming products that help uncoil my curls and keep me from looking like my cocker spaniel.  some people have bad-hair days. until recently i was resigned to a bad-hair life.  but a tide of new products aimed at eliminating frizz, without forcing curlies to go blown-out straight, has entered the market.  curls, from nicole kidman's botticelli ringlets to sarah jessica parker's soft tresses and oprah winfrey's tumbling locks, are in. consequently, there is a swell of hair care regimens, including serums, gels, balms, creams and sprays promising moisture-rich curls, without frizz or flyaways.  ''people with curly hair don't tend to be denying it anymore,'' said mercedes orpin, product development manager at bumble & bumble. ''it's no longer an either-or. it's all about whatever suits your fancy these days. now you can have it any way you like. it is like a smorgasbord for hair.''  in 1998, when michelle breyer and gretchen heber of austin, tex., both journalists, were at a loss for how to battle their own corkscrew hair, they started naturallycurly.com, a web site and social network. at the time, there were few hair care products aimed at the frizzy- and curly-haired.  ''for so long society has viewed people with curly or frizzy hair as that's not desirable, not attractive,'' said ms. breyer, 44, recalling how she relentlessly blew out her intensely curly hair during the ''farrah fawcett painful years.''  dr. mary lamia, a clinical psychologist and psychoanalyst in kentfield, calif., said that feelings about one's hair run deep. hair, after all, is a focal point of an individual's appearance, she said. for those with frizzy curly hair, she added, it can be ''a target for self-conscious feelings that can result in low self-esteem.''  ''unfortunately, hair seems to have a mind of its own, and curly frizzy hair can be outright incorrigible,'' dr. lamia said. but, she added, ''controlling one's hair seems to be important to humans in general -- an attempt to control the perceptions others have about one's appearance.'' add in marketing, she said, and a generation of self-loathing curly-haired women has sprung up.  ginetta candelario, an associate professor of sociology and latin american and latina/o studies at smith college, said the compulsion to have pin-straight hair grew out of the american experience. at the turn of the 20th century, she said, european women, particularly jewish, italian and greek women who tend to have darker, curlier hair, would do whatever it took to wear their hair straight as a way to assimilate into american society.  the vidal sassoon revolution in the beauty-culture industry perpetuated the positive association with straight hair.  ''it's not simply vanity on the part of women,'' dr. candelario said. ''in that setting, where the norm has been this lank-haired beauty, it becomes a source of a stigma, so you want to fix it.''  but that is changing. as mainstream hairstyle trends have become more diverse, a wider range of styles have become acceptable in the workplace, according to a november 2006 report on the $7.2 billion hair-care products market in the united states done by packaged facts, a publishing division of marketresearch.com. and so, conservatively, there were about 70 frizz- and curl-related products introduced this year, compared with about 10 in 1996, said cara morrison, founder of cogitamus consulting in manhattan and the report's author.  there are now more than 1,000 hair care products over all that help eliminate frizz, from john frieda's frizz-ease regimen, which jump-started the market in 1991, to this year's quiet calm curl control, an organic shea butter, wheatgrass and orange oil-based moisturizing cream to enhance curls while providing style control, by innersense. there is also cutler curling cream; citré shine's making waves curl booster; redken crystal curls, a defining shine gel; and none of your frizzness, a line of shampoo, conditioner and frizz leave-in cream by herbal essence.  bumble & bumble developed a silicone-based finishing product called defrizz for blowing the hair straight in the 1990s, and three years ago added a moisturizing regimen. that product line, curl conscious, includes transglutaminase, an enzyme that ''goes into overdrive in heat and humidity,'' ms. orpin said.  it's not just anecdotal that curly-haired women have more shampoos, conditioners, serums and balms in their bathrooms. ''according to market research, curly-haired women spend more on their hair than straight-haired women,'' ms. breyer said.  lorraine massey, co-owner of devachan, a manhattan salon that specializes in curly hair, said she had 28,000 new clients in the past year in her two locations looking to set their curls free and defang their frizz.  ''you can take the curl off the girl, but you can't take it out of her,'' said ms. massey, who is on a mission to help curly-haired women love and accept their hair. ''you can make it go away for a day, but if it is raining or if you take a shower, that baby is coming right back. the more you mistreat it, the drier and frizzier it becomes and you hate your hair even more, so you stay in a vicious cycle.''  ms. massey, who wrote ''curly girl'' with deborah chiel (workman, 2002), rails against blow-drying curly hair straight, a process she calls ''blow fry'' and ''glorified laundering.''  ''frizz is a curl that needs some moisture and direction,'' she said.  dr. david orentreich, a dermatologist in manhattan, said that frizzy hair can benefit more from the use of conditioning products than any other hair type.  ''all of these products aimed at eliminating frizz, reducing unruliness of curly or dry hair, all have the same basic premise: control flyaway, good static control, improve hair feel, improve ease of combing and manageability, detangle, and they may also decrease the color fade,'' dr. orentreich said.  but perhaps their biggest impact is to offer women a choice.  ''people want to have options in how their hair looks,'' said ms. breyer of naturallycurly.com. ''one day they might want to wear it straight and one day they might want to wear it curly.''  you hear that, marcia brady?  hair regimens fit for the jungle? putting unruly locks to a big test  hours before leaving on a 17-day trip to vietnam and cambodia over the holidays, i visited the hairdresser.  ''blow it straight,'' i urged michelle collins, a stylist at paragon salon and spa in greenvale, n.y., who shares my aversion to frizz. ''it has to last.''  a friend and i had already tested a half-dozen frizz-repellent products. we found two brands -- the phyto regimen of phytojoba hydrating shampoo, phytocitrus soin vital radiance mask (for color-treated hair), followed by phytodéfrisant hair relaxing balm; and the l'anza strait-line smoothing shampoo, conditioner and straightening balm regimen -- that made our hair far silkier, lighter and smoother than did john frieda's frizz-ease products when blown straight.  but 24 hours of traveling from new york to hanoi left my blowout flat and grimy.  i was equipped to go natural. but in muggy central vietnam, ouidad deep treatment intensive conditioner, followed by ouidad climate control heat and humidity gel, as well as generous amounts of both ouidad pomade and its shine glaze serum, which had worked so well at home, only kept my ringlets soft and defined for a few hours. devacurl set it free finishing spray spruced things back up, but rinsing my hair with the hotel's generic conditioner revived my unfashionable haystack look.  the situation got even more out of hand in the steamy cambodian jungle. but switching to the bumble & bumble curl conscious regimen loosened the tight knot of frizz back into soft curls. at that, even my three sons -- my harshest curl critics -- stopped begging me to buy a hat.  marcelle s. fischler  skin deep  