wall street 'matchmakers' under new york scrutiny   the battle to be wall street's top matchmaker is getting messier. the new york state attorney general's office is investigating whether employees at best buy, circuit city and the credit card processor first data improperly provided nonpublic information to hedge fund traders, a person briefed on the inquiry said.  also under the attorney general's scrutiny are third-party research firms, including the gerson lehrman group and vista research, a unit of mcgraw-hill. both firms act as matchmakers in the investment world, connecting experts in a variety of fields to investors seeking to learn more about particular companies, trends or ideas.  the attorney general's office issued some subpoenas last month in an effort to determine whether the companies' employees, acting as consultants to the third-party firms, provided nonpublic information to traders. trading on such information could be considered illegal insider trading.  the subpoenas were issued by the then-outgoing attorney general, eliot spitzer.  a spokesman for andrew m. cuomo, the new attorney general, javier gomez, said, ''we do not comment on nor confirm any investigative matter.''  it is unclear whether mr. cuomo will have the same appetite in uncovering wrongdoing on wall street as mr. spitzer did.  the securities and exchange commission is also examining the relationship between these third-party research companies and hedge funds and is trying to detail how information is obtained, used and shared. the agency is pursuing a separate insider-trading investigation related to the use of information passed between a consultant and a hedge fund, according to a person briefed on the inquiry. an s.e.c. spokesman said the agency did not comment on investigations.  new york's investigation was reported yesterday by the wall street journal.  research has been radically transformed in recent years with investors -- and hedge funds, in particular -- doing much more aggressive ''kick the tires'' research. for example, a trader considering an investment in best buy might try to talk to vendors, customers, competitors and employees of the company rather than just a wall street analyst.  unless a public company has a policy explicitly prohibiting employees from talking to investors (or potential investors), these employees are free to talk as long as they refrain from providing any potentially market-moving, nonpublic information.  a vista spokesman said: ''vista research is fully cooperating with the new york state attorney general's subpoena. vista research is committed to strong compliance practices and procedures.''  a first data spokesman also confirmed that the company had received a subpoena from the attorney general's office. ''we are in the process of responding,'' the spokesman, colin wheeler, said.  a spokesman for gerson lehrman declined to comment.  a spokeswoman for best buy, sue busch, said the company was cooperating with the investigation. a spokesman for circuit city did not respond to an e-mail message seeking comment.  both gerson and vista have procedures aimed at preventing the use of material nonpublic information. for example, last year gerson lehrman group began the glg institutional registry, a database of policies and procedures at the 2,500 largest companies documenting any policies related to outside consulting or speaking arrangements.  