spitzer selects a black jurist for top court   gov. eliot spitzer announced yesterday that he would nominate theodore t. jones jr., a black judge who has served in brooklyn for 17 years, to a seat on the court of appeals. it is the new governor's first appointment to the state's highest court.  in august, mr. spitzer's predecessor, george e. pataki, declined to renominate judge george bundy smith, whose term expired in september, leaving the court of appeals without a black jurist for the first time since 1985.  at a news conference in midtown manhattan, mr. spitzer said he believed that the government should reflect ''the diversity of our society,'' but added that ''race, gender did not play a role in my selection process'' and that he only considered ''who would be the best jurist.''  justice jones, 62, was elected to the state supreme court in brooklyn in 1989 and re-elected in 2003. he has handled criminal and civil cases and is now administrative judge of the court's civil term.  justice jones became something of a public figure as the judge assigned to handle the legal matters surrounding the three-day new york city transit strike in 2005.  defying an injunction issued by justice jones, local 100 of the transport workers union shut down the city's subways and buses for 60 hours. last april, he fined the union $2.5 million for violating the taylor law, which prohibits public employees from striking, and sentenced its president, roger toussaint, to 10 days in jail for contempt of court.  at the news conference, justice jones said he felt honored to be selected, given the strong credentials of the six other nominees under consideration. ''i am profoundly aware of the importance of this nomination,'' he said. ''i cherish the position in which i find myself.''  if confirmed by the state senate to a 14-year term, justice jones would replace judge albert m. rosenblatt, who was appointed by mr. pataki in 1998. judge rosenblatt left the court on dec. 31, having reached the mandatory retirement age of 70.  mr. spitzer, who is a democrat, said that he told joseph l. bruno, the leader of the republican majority in the state senate, on saturday about his intention to nominate justice jones and that mr. bruno made ''very affirmative comments'' about the selection.  a spokesman for mr. bruno, john e. mcardle, said yesterday that mr. bruno had told mr. spitzer ''that the senate would move in a deliberate and expeditious way to review the nomination.''  the appointment drew the praise of andrew m. cuomo, the state attorney general. ''governor spitzer has made a well-reasoned selection from a field of fine candidates and i am pleased that the court will again begin to reflect some of the diversity that is representative of our state,'' mr. cuomo said in a statement.  the court of appeals has seven members. during his 12 years as governor, mr. pataki, a republican, appointed six members, leaving a major mark at the helm of the state judiciary. (one of them, judge richard c. wesley, resigned in 2003 to accept a federal judgeship and judge rosenblatt retired.)  to replace judge smith, mr. pataki in august nominated eugene f. pigott jr., a white republican who sat on an appeals court in buffalo. judge pigott was confirmed by the state senate.  of the six current members, four were appointed by mr. pataki and two -- chief judge judith s. kaye and judge carmen beauchamp ciparick -- were appointed by gov. mario m. cuomo, a democrat.  the terms of the four judges named by mr. pataki will not begin to expire until 2014. judge kaye's term expires in march and judge ciparick's will expire next year. (judge kaye will turn 70 next year, so even if mr. spitzer reappoints her, he will soon have another chance to name the chief judge.)  justice jones was born in brooklyn and raised in queens. his mother was a teacher and his father worked on the long island rail road, becoming a station master at pennsylvania station.  justice jones graduated from hampton university, a historically black college in virginia, and st. john's university school of law in queens. he was in the army from 1967 to 1969 and served in vietnam. he was admitted to the state bar in 1973 and was a criminal defense lawyer at the legal aid society and a law secretary for judge howard a. jones of the state court of claims. he also worked in private practice.  he lives in new city, rockland county, with his wife, joan, who joined him at the news conference, along with their two adult sons, theodore iii and wesley, and other relatives.  mr. spitzer, who as attorney general represented the state in litigation against the transit workers' union over the strike, said, ''for the public, that was probably the first significant opportunity to see judge jones's demeanor and thinking and methodology.'' (he declined to assess justice jones's rulings in the strike.)  in another case that attracted some publicity, justice jones in june 2002 upheld a jury verdict that held the jewish defense organization, a militant group, liable for defaming steven rombom, a private investigator, on several internet sites.  as the state's highest tribunal, the court of appeals interprets the state constitution and rules on the limits of governmental power.  long seen as liberal, the court has moved to the right during the past decade, although its decisions are often unpredictable. in 2004, the court effectively invalidated the death penalty statute. last year, it ruled that same-sex couples did not have a right to marriage under the state constitution.  also last year, it ended a landmark legal battle over school financing, ruling that at least $1.9 billion more had to be spent each year on the new york city public schools, far less than the $4.7 billion a lower court had called the minimum needed to give city children the chance for a sound, basic education.  this year the court is expected to revisit the death penalty and to consider grandparents' visitation rights.  justice jones was one of seven lawyers -- six of them judges -- whose names were presented by the state commission on judicial nomination on nov. 30 as candidates to succeed judge rosenblatt. (the commission has 12 members; the governor, the chief judge and the legislature each appoint four.)  the new york state bar association found all seven to be ''well qualified,'' its highest rating for judicial nominees.  the other candidates were juanita bing newton, administrative judge of the new york city criminal court; george f. carpinello, an albany lawyer; james a. yates, a state supreme court justice in manhattan; and three justices of the appellate division of state supreme court: richard t. andrias, steven w. fisher and thomas e. mercure.  mr. spitzer was required to make a nomination by jan. 15; the senate has 30 days from receiving the nomination to confirm or reject it.  