britain tries 6 in bomb plot that fizzled   the city was still edgy, two weeks after the london bombings of july 2005, when suddenly on a summer's day the horror seemed to return. on three subway cars and a bus, young men boarded with backpacks stuffed full of explosives, but there was an all-important difference: this time the explosives failed to detonate.  on monday, in a courthouse here close to the high-security belmarsh prison, six men appeared on trial, charged with conspiracy to murder and cause explosions on july 21, 2005. they are accused of attempting an attack that seemed to mimic the one on july 7 in which four bombers killed themselves and 52 bus and subway travelers in london's bloodiest peacetime attack.  the men have pleaded not guilty to the charges against them.  the prosecution did not directly link the two events. but ''it is our case that the events with which this case is concerned are plainly not some hastily arranged copycat,'' nigel sweeney, a prosecutor, said when the men's trial opened monday. the evidence, he said, ''shows that the conspiracy had been in existence long before the events of july 7.''  in monday's session, devoted entirely to the prosecution, all six men were accused of taking part in what mr. sweeney called ''an extremist muslim plot, the ultimate objective of which was to carry out a number of murders and suicide bombings.''  his opening statement was the first comprehensive official account of the events by british authorities. the allegations offered a remarkable insight into the makings of an alleged jihadist conspiracy.  mr. sweeney denied a claim by one of the men that the bombs had been meant as a politically motivated hoax, to frighten -- not kill. ''we say that the failure of these bombs to explode has nothing to with the intentions of the defendants,'' he said. ''it was simply the good fortune of the traveling public that this day they were spared.''  the bombs failed to explode because the concentration of one ingredient in the explosive, hydrogen peroxide, was too low, the prosecutor said, so the detonators went off but did not ignite the main charge.  outlining the prosecution case, he painted a picture of young muslims, one of them alleged to have been trained in sudan and pakistan, preparing homemade explosives in a bomb factory in a north london housing project and setting out to create carnage with bombs wrapped in shrapnel, hidden in backpacks.  he said two of the men had at one time prayed at the finsbury park mosque run by abu hamza al-masri, a radical egyptian-born cleric currently serving a prison term for incitement to murder.  even after the failure of the alleged attack, the drama did not cease. one man fled north on a bus to birmingham clad in a loose-fitting muslim woman's gown called a burqa, which conceals the face and body. another used a brother's passport to slip by the police and board a train to paris before heading to rome. both were arrested soon after fleeing.  the defendants are muktar said ibrahim, 28; ramzi mohamed, 25; yassin omar, 26; manfu asiedu, 33; adel yahya, 24; and hussain osman, 28. all were living in london. some were born in the horn of africa.  in his statement to the court, mr. sweeney provided what he said was a detailed description of the six men's preparation for the attack, some of them attending fitness camps in scotland and in the lake district of england, where the police had kept a group of men under surveillance in may 2004, including five of the accused.  the prosecutor said that the role of mr. ibrahim, mr. asiedu, mr. osman, mr. omar and mr. mohamed was ultimately ''that of would-be suicide bombers,'' and that mr. yahya had taken part in ''some of the essential preparation done in furtherance of the conspiracy.'' mr. sweeney said mr. yahya left britain six weeks before the attempt and was still out of the country when it failed. he was arrested when he returned.  the preparations began with the purchase of chemicals in april or may 2005, mr. sweeney said, adding that one of the men had told witnesses he had trained in sudan in 2003 and pakistan a year later.  pakistan has frequently been accused in british terrorism cases of providing training bases in plots ascribed to descendants of pakistani immigrants, including three of the four july 7 bombers.  mr. sweeney said mr. ibrahim ''had been trained for jihad in sudan in 2003 and had gone to pakistan in december of 2004 in order to take part in jihad or to train for it.''  ''the evidence shows that events in this conspiracy began in earnest not long after ibrahim had returned from pakistan in mid-march 2005,'' the prosecutor said.  at that time, according to the prosecution, the suspects began assembling material to fashion an explosive made of hydrogen peroxide mixed with flour. the detonators were made of a high explosive called triacetone triperoxide, or tatp, and would be set off by an electrical current from a nine-volt battery.  the main explosives were to be packed in plastic containers surrounded with ''screws, tacks, washers or nuts,'' mr. sweeney said, adding that when the attempts took place, one of the men, mr. asiedu, lost his nerve and ''dumped his bomb in a wooded area.''  but mr. ibrahim, mr. osman, mr. omar and mr. mohamed set off with bombs on july 21, three of them on subway trains and one on a bus, the prosecutor said, a configuration of targets similar to that of july 7.  mr. mohamed, he said, wore a ''distinctive new york top, the words new york across his chest, no doubt connected with the events of 9/11.''  in all four cases, the detonators exploded but the main charges did not, because the hydrogen peroxide was not sufficiently concentrated, mr. sweeney said. the men bought 284 bottles of hydrogen peroxide -- sold in a diluted form -- and sought to make it more concentrated by warming it or boiling it over a stove at mr. omar's apartment using two saucepans and a frying pan on an electric cooker, the prosecutor said.  the men purchased the peroxide using a cover story that they needed it for stripping wallpaper or bleaching wood, mr. sweeney said. he said they also made a suicide video at mr. mohamed's home in west london.  when the bombs failed, mr. osman fled to italy while mr. omar left london disguised as a woman in a burqa, taking a bus to birmingham on july 22, mr. sweeney said.  the trial is expected to last four months. eleven more defendants, including mr. osman's wife and sisterin-law, are to be tried on charges of assisting the suspects or failing to give information about them to the authorities.  at one point on monday, the jury was shown a video of a similar explosive made by government scientists being detonated successfully. the video was shown in slow motion.  ''it is going so slowly, it takes its time, but you can now see that the metal plate with the wooden surround in front of the bomb is starting to be affected by it,'' mr. sweeney said. ''now imagine that on a tube train or a bus.''  