a musical case of the original willis   heard the one about the spurned maiden who became a vengeful ghost? if you have, it's probably through dance: the most famous form of the legend of the willis is adolphe adam's ballet ''giselle.'' and while giacomo puccini's version, ''le villi,'' is remembered as his first opera, it was actually conceived as an opera-ballo.  so the dicapo opera theater's decision to choreograph the work makes perfect sense. the piece is more a story set to music, with two-dimensional characters, than a compelling drama; dance is a good way to mitigate its stasis. and the dicapo production, which opened on friday, went a step further by pairing ''le villi'' with another early puccini work, the so-called ''messa di gloria'' (or ''messa a quattro voci'') from 1880.  the idea was good, and the dancing was strong. nilas martins of the new york city ballet, dicapo's director of dance, has evidently elevated the company's dance standards to a degree disproportionate to its other abilities. his troupe, the nilas martins dance company, gave striking performances of choreography by stephen pier (''messa di gloria'') and mr. martins himself (''le villi''). saturday evening's only problem was one that has plagued many other well-conceived dicapo productions: the performance of the opera just wasn't very good.  it may seem mean to pick on a small company that does a lot with limited resources. but the ''messa di gloria'' showed that dicapo is capable of achieving a higher standard. admittedly the orchestra was weak, but the chorus sang strongly. and mr. pier's choreography reflected the bright, busy (sometimes cheesy) music in interesting ways. when the low voices intoned, ''qui tollis peccata mundi,'' he sent the male dancers across the front of the stage in graham-like poses that were later embellished with the female dancers on a repeat when the women's voices joined in.  the vocal soloists, however, were not a highlight. arthur shen forced a sizable tenor into tautness by over-singing; oziel garza-ornelas similarly focused on pumping out sound. mr. garza-ornelas visibly and audibly relaxed when, as the father of the heroine in ''le villi,'' he had a character to portray.  but even in the opera the level of singing didn't match that of the dancing. as anna, the soprano donita volkwijn was appealing but shrill; as her weak-willed lover, drew slatton seemed a well-meaning amateur. their dance alter egos were ashley tuttle and benjamin bowman, who between them have american ballet theater, new york city ballet and the twyla tharp broadway hit ''movin' out'' to their credit.  and the choreography appeared subdued by the idea of fidelity to a piece that did not merit it. mr. martins's best moment was the orchestral passage in which roberto succumbs to the charms of a siren while anna's ghost and the willis dance around him. but it was hard to transcend costumes that, in the best tradition of ghost outfits, appeared to have been sewn from bed sheets.  michael capasso, the company's co-founder and this production's director, must be held responsible for the decision to leave mr. slatton alone onstage for a lengthy dramatic climax, which he was incapable of sustaining. a few dancers could only have helped.  dicapo's production of ''thérèse raquin,'' by tobias picker, opens on feb. 16; (212) 288-9438; dicapo.com  music review  correction:  january 16, 2007, tuesday  a picture caption in the arts yesterday with a music review about the dicapo opera theater misidentified the production shown. it was ''messa di gloria'' -- not ''le villi,'' which was the other work on the program.  