crawford's typical day ends in knicks victory   charted on a line graph, the zigs and zags of jamal crawford's knicks career would create one long and very jagged mountain range across the page. he zigs between starter and reserve and starter again. he zags from ace shooter to slumping shooter and back again.  the only constant in all of this is that somehow the ball always lands in crawford's hands when the knicks are at their most desperate and -- more often than not, it seems -- the ball is next seen swishing through the net.  so there was nothing particularly surprising about yesterday's events: crawford is pushed back to bench, crawford misfires all game, crawford scores winning basket. the script was familiar to the point of predictability as the knicks rode crawford's late surge to a 102-97 victory against the sacramento kings at madison square garden.  ''he does it too much,'' eddy curry said wryly of crawford, his teammate and close friend. ''it's kind of boring to me.''  the garden crowd has seen this script before too, but the 19,207 who attended the martin luther king's birthday matinee were sufficiently entertained.  the knicks (17-22) won for the fifth time in their past six home games and did so with a dramatic flourish.  they won despite another shaky defensive effort, allowing kevin martin to collect 30 points and shareef abdur-rahim -- whose days as a big-time scorer ended a few years ago -- to score 25. the kings shot nearly 50 percent through three quarters and had a 97-96 lead with 26.2 seconds left.  cue crawford. dribbling near the top of the key, crawford blew by martin and converted a short runner in the lane, giving the knicks the lead with 18.3 seconds left. the kings turned the ball over when corliss williamson set an illegal screen on stephon marbury.  crawford sealed the victory with four free throws in the last 13.8 seconds.  the day began with coach isiah thomas inserting quentin richardson into the starting lineup. crawford, who had started the previous 17 games, went back to the bench, where he began the season. but thomas never gave a thought to changing crawford's fourth-quarter role.  ''i think it's pretty understood on our team that the last couple minutes of the game, we depend on him to make a lot of big shots,'' thomas said. ''the great thing about him at the end of the game is his temperament, that if he misses a shot or makes a mistake, the next day you see the same jamal in practice and you see the same personality and the same temperament.''  that has pretty much been the story of crawford's three-year run in new york. he has played 188 games as a knick, 115 of them as a starter. even on sunday, as thomas pondered the lineup change, crawford played both roles, wearing a white jersey for part of practice, then turning it inside out, to the blue side.  late yesterday afternoon, he wore an aw-shucks smile as someone observed that his role has fluctuated.  ''to say the least,'' crawford said, chuckling. ''at this point, i've kind of gotten used to it. of course you'd love to start, but i can't complain, because i'm still out there at the end of games.''  it was a typically serene response, one crawford has had ample time to practice. his performance yesterday was also typical. he shot 1 for 8 in the first three quarters but 2 for 3 in the fourth, when he scored 8 of his 10 points. he also had eight assists, tied with marbury for the team lead.  crawford said thomas discussed the lineup change with him sunday.  ''both of us had input, and i have a lot of respect for him for that,'' said crawford, who said he gave the usual response: ''that i'll do what's best for the team.''  the scoring load was shared by marbury (25 points) and curry (24 points, 10 rebounds). channing frye added 17 points, and a resurgent david lee had 15 points and 12 rebounds. richardson, making his first start since returning from a back injury, had 7 points and 5 assists.  ron artest, a queens native who burned the knicks for 39 points in sacramento two weeks ago, scored only 12 points. his first shot of the game was blocked by jared jeffries, and his last shot was an errant 3-point attempt that could have tied the score in the final 10 seconds.  jeffries, richardson, lee, crawford and renaldo balkman spent time guarding artest yesterday. but the key defensive move came early in the fourth quarter, when marbury began to guard martin. marbury made the move on his own and held martin to one 3-pointer.  rebounds  isiah thomas said he spoke recently with steve francis but offered no update on francis' health. ''i don't try to keep track of it day to day,'' thomas said. francis has been rehabilitating his sore right knee in houston for the past two weeks. thomas and francis' agent have denied reports that they are negotiating a contract buyout.  nate robinson did not play yesterday and has logged only 18 minutes in three games since returning from his suspension. ''we won today, i'm happy,'' robinson said. thomas said the decision was based on matchups. ''nate's a very important piece to the puzzle, and we need him,'' thomas said.  quentin richardson made his first start at shooting guard, giving the knicks their ninth lineup of the season. richardson had started 24 games at small forward.  kings center brad miller missed the game because of personal reasons.  pro basketball  