mets hope their new math leaves them with 5 starters   with a month to go before pitchers and catchers report to camp, the mets' off-season priority of landing a top-flight starting pitcher remains unfulfilled. instead, general manager omar minaya indicated yesterday that the mets would divide eight into three and hope that a group consisting of john maine, oliver pérez, mike pelfrey, philip humber, alay soler, dave williams, jorge sosa and jason vargas will fill the nos. 3, 4 and 5 spots in the rotation.  minaya was straightforward about the team's pitching strategy during a conference call in which the mets announced their two latest free-agent signings -- sosa and the left-handed reliever scott schoeneweis.  this off-season has been somewhat frustrating for the mets because they have been unable to acquire an ace pitcher, even though they are willing to spend a considerable amount of money. the mets bid nearly $40 million for the negotiating rights to the japanese pitcher daisuke matsuzaka, only to learn that boston bid more. they were apparently willing to give the free agent barry zito $80 million or $90 million in a long-term deal, but the giants snared him with a $126 million offer.  minaya said yesterday that there were few pitchers left on the free-agent market that interested him and that the mets would probably not add anyone before they report to port st. lucie, fla., next month.  it is a team in which tom glavine and orlando hernández, both over 40 years old, have the only two guaranteed spots in the rotation. then comes the group of eight, presumably led by maine and pérez, who pitched well under pressure in last year's national league championship series. there is also sosa, who agreed to a $1.25 million deal and may also be considered for a role in the bullpen.  ''this is the group we are going to go in with and it is going to be fun to watch these guys go at it,'' minaya said of the competition that will ensue in spring training. it will be even more fun for minaya if some of the eight candidates pitch well.  the 33-year-old schoeneweis, meanwhile, agreed to a three-year, $10.8 million deal. he has been a starter, long reliever, setup man and an occasional closer, but minaya said yesterday that he would most likely be used in the seventh and eighth innings because he produces ground balls and does not give up many home runs.  the mets also announced that they had signed two reserve players, endy chávez and ramón castro, to new deals. the speedy chávez will make $1.75 million, a big jump from the $700,000 he made in 2005 as a bargain-basement pickup for the mets.  chávez had an excellent 2006 season, batting .306 with 22 doubles, and he made a spectacular catch in game 7 of the n.l.c.s., robbing the st. louis cardinals' scott rolen of a two-run home run. the feat was to no avail as the mets lost the game.  castro is guaranteed $850,000 next season, only $50,000 more than he made in 2006, when he missed a chunk of the season with a knee injury. he remains the team's primary backup catcher.  sosa and rangers close -- sammy sosa and the texas rangers are negotiating a minor league contract. sosa, 38, has not played since the 2005 season. he had a second workout for the rangers on monday, then had dinner with general manager jon daniels and other team officials. an agreement appears very likely. (ap)  vizcaÍno and yankees reach deal -- luis vizcaíno and the yankees reached agreement yesterday on a one-year contract worth $3 million. the diamondbacks traded vizcaíno and three minor leaguers to the yankees this month for randy johnson.  vizcaíno was 4-6 last season with a 3.58 earned run average in 70 games and made $1,775,000. vizcaíno, a 32-year-old right-hander, is 25-23 with a 4.24 e.r.a. in eight seasons with oakland, milwaukee, the chicago white sox and arizona. (ap)  lidge avoids arbitration -- brad lidge, who blew a career-high six save chances last season, including four before the all-star game break, agreed to a one-year, $5.35 million contract with houston yesterday. lidge was 1-5 with a 5.28 e.r.a. and 32 saves, but his struggles led manager phil garner to adopt a closer-by-committee approach for part of the season. (ap)  devil rays' dukes charged -- the tampa bay devil rays prospect elijah dukes was arrested monday and charged with misdemeanor marijuana possession after a traffic stop. the 22-year-old dukes, who lives in nearby brandon, fla., was pulled over in his 2006 dodge charger on monday night because of a loud music violation, the police said yesterday. a police officer smelled marijuana, and a police dog found less than 2 grams of marijuana in the car's center console, the police said.  dukes, a switch-hitting outfielder who was the team's third-round draft pick in 2002, has a history of problems on and off the field. dukes was suspended for 15 games at class aaa durham last year for disciplinary reasons. he was suspended for five games by the international league after he was ejected for arguing balls and strikes. (ap)  crede agrees to deal -- third baseman joe crede and the chicago white sox agreed yesterday to a one-year, $4.94 million contract and avoided arbitration. crede, 28, hit .283 last season with 30 home runs and 94 runs batted in. he had a .978 fielding percentage in 150 games. (ap)  zambrano makes highest request -- cubs pitcher carlos zambrano asked for $15.5 million in salary arbitration yesterday. zambrano, who went 16-7 for the chicago last year and made $6.65 million, was offered $11,025,000 by the cubs. his request and the club's offer were the highest numbers traded this year. (ap)  baseball: roundup  