saudi dismisses call for an opec meeting   saudi arabia's oil minister said yesterday that he saw no reason for opec to hold an emergency meeting in response to declining prices, quelling speculation that the cartel would take fresh steps to stem a 16 percent decline in prices since the beginning of the year.  opec producers like venezuela and algeria, worried about falling revenue, have been calling for a meeting to consider additional production cuts ahead of the next scheduled gathering on march 15.  but ali al-naimi, the saudi minister and opec's most authoritative voice, said yesterday that he expected oil prices to rebound once production cuts already adopted take effect feb. 1. still, his comments knocked down oil futures by 3.3 percent.  oil prices have dropped by a third since peaking above $77 a barrel in july. twice last fall, the organization of petroleum exporting countries pledged to pare its output in hopes of stemming the slide, but warmer-than-usual weather in the autumn and winter curbed consumption in the western hemisphere, swelling stockpiles in developed countries.  the slide has accelerated since the beginning of the year, with oil futures contracts shedding $10 a barrel in the last two weeks. the contract for february delivery dropped $1.77, to $51.23 a barrel in new york on tuesday, its lowest level in 19 months.  mr. naimi, who has steered oil markets with assurance since the late 1990s, seemed confident that prices would not tumble much further as colder weather sets in across the united states. his comments seemed intended to prompt other opec members to fulfill their pledges and actually reduce production.  ''we took measures in october in doha and measures in abuja, and i believe these measures are working well,'' mr. naimi told reporters while attending an energy conference in new delhi, referring to the group's last two meetings in qatar and nigeria. ''do not panic. actually, there is no reason for a meeting.''  hedge funds and other investors have been selling oil contracts in recent months, testing opec's resolve at a time of slowing demand, and doubting the cartel's ability to set a floor on prices.  still, some analysts caution that the market would bounce back because of previous opec policies to tighten supplies.  ''the reaction signals well in our view the deepness of the bearish sentiment, with markets more concerned about the lack of further cuts rather than about emerging evidence of actual market tightness,'' according to a note by analysts at barclays capital.  the 12 members of opec account for 40 percent of the world's crude oil exports. angola, which was admitted in december, and iraq, because of its turmoil, do not adhere to the cartel's production quota system.  opec members agreed in october to cut overall production by 4 percent, and again in december by an additional 2 percent, to a new ceiling of 25.8 million barrels a day starting feb. 1. but compliance with the first cut has been uneven.  according to bloomberg data, the 10 members that adhere to output quotas pumped 385,000 barrels a day more than their agreed-upon goals in december. nigeria and venezuela were the biggest violators, exceeding their targets by a total of 220,000 barrels. only saudi arabia, opec's largest producer, seems to be actually producing below its quota level of 8.71 million barrels a day.  on monday, rafael ramírez, the oil minister of venezuela, opec's fourth-largest supplier, said he would press for additional production cuts of 500,000 barrels a day to bolster sagging prices. the idea was endorsed by algeria's minister, chakib khelil, according to the country's state-run news agency, algérie presse service.  adam e. sieminski, the chief energy economist at deutsche bank, said saudi arabia wanted other opec members to conform to their quotas before talking about lowering the production ceiling again.  ''the saudi view is that the first thing opec needs to do is to implement the two cuts they agreed to,'' mr. sieminski said. ''if opec were to have an emergency meeting now, there would be a temptation on the part of some members to renege on their earlier agreements.''  