after an early scare, roddick takes control   for nearly two sets in his first official match of the year, andy roddick looked as if he just might be in for another nasty surprise at the australian open.  the first grand slam event of the season is a place of decidedly mixed memories for roddick. it was here that he came of age, winning one of the matches of the decade against younes el-aynaoui of morocco in the 2003 quarterfinals.  but this is also the rubberized place where trouble has surfaced in a hurry. in 2002, he twisted his ankle in the second round and had to default. last year, the unproven marcos baghdatis stunned roddick in four sets in the fourth round and kept him in the downward spiral that ended with his temporarily falling out of the top 10.  despite having beaten no. 1 roger federer in an exhibition less than 48 hours earlier, roddick found himself down a set against jo-wilfried tsonga of france on monday after losing the first in a marathon tie breaker.  roddick then found himself down, 2-5, in the second set before he came back and closed out the match, 6-7 (18), 7-6 (2), 6-3, 6-3.  tsonga, an often-injured player ranked 212th, kept cranking serves and forehands like a member of the current elite and attacking the net like an old australian great.  was roddick scared? ''to say the least, absolutely,'' he said.  but the nerves ended up having more impact on the less-experienced power player, and after roddick held serve at love to get back to 5-3, tsonga stepped to the line in vodafone arena to serve for a two-set lead and failed to win a point.  this first-round match would not be the same after that. roddick took quick control in the ensuing tie breaker to even the score at one set apiece, then won the next two sets easily.  ''i think i got a little first-round jitters there; it's good to get through,'' said the sixth-seeded roddick, who will face another frenchman, marc gicquel, in the next round.  federer had a jitter or two of his own in the early going as he started the defense of his title against bjorn phau of germany before winning, 7-5, 6-0, 6-4.  phau was one of the few men on tour to have a winning record against federer, the world's dominant player, but his victory in their only previous match came in 1999. federer was still a teenager then, trying to find a way to blend all his gifts into the ideal tennis package.  this time, phau had to settle for breaking federer's serve three times in the opening set, which he eventually lost.  federer acknowledged he was a little nervous. ''that's not the usual for me,'' he said. ''but he played well, and i had to play good tennis to come through.''  federer changed his january habits this year, skipping the tournament in doha, qatar, and instead preparing for the australian open by playing in the eight-man exhibition tournament, the kooyong classic, in melbourne.  it was there that roddick beat him, 6-2, 3-6, 6-3, in a high-quality final saturday. roddick had not defeated federer in more than three years; in november, federer had to save three match points to beat him in the masters cup in shanghai. saturday's match, however, does not count in the official tour statistics because it was an exhibition.  ''i think it needs to be done on a big stage before you put too much emphasis on it,'' roddick said.  what should be of some solace to the chase pack is that federer has had more difficulty in melbourne than at wimbledon or the united states open. he was beaten in the semifinals in 2005 by marat safin, who is back in the tournament after missing it last year with a knee injury. this was the only grand slam tournament last year in which federer was pushed to five sets, going the distance against tommy haas in the fourth round.  it is also easier to imagine rafael nadal, the closest thing federer has to a rival, doing more damage to federer here on this relatively high-bouncing court, which is well suited to his heavy spin and fast footwork.  but nadal, who has not won a singles title since beating federer in last year's french open final, remains in more questionable form than federer, although he said that the groin strain that led him to withdraw from the sydney event was not a concern.  he also has an intriguing first-round match tuesday against robert kendrick of the united states, who nearly served and volleyed the spaniard out of wimbledon last year.  in the women's event, amélie mauresmo opened the defense of her title by defeating shenay perry of the united states, 6-3, 6-4, in the opening match on rod laver arena. mauresmo and perry were the first players in australian open history to make use of electronic line calling. the australians, following the lead of the united states open, have introduced the system this year, but it has only been installed in laver arena.  roddick, playing on the tournament's secondary show court, had to make do with the old-fashioned way, and he showed little tolerance for human error, exchanging words frequently with the chair umpire.  the mood outside the arena during roddick's match was even more volatile as more than 100 fans were ejected after groups of serbian and croat supporters scuffled outside a merchandising tent.  back on court, there were only shouts and murmurs and the occasional heated glance, as roddick looked askance at tsonga as the young frenchman celebrated his successes with bellows of delight and fist pumps. perhaps roddick would have been more tolerant if he knew all that tsonga had been through to get back into a grand slam draw.  he finished no. 2 in the world junior rankings in 2003 behind baghdatis and was considered a key member of the young french generation that includes richard gasquet and gaël monfils. but tsonga's career would soon be delayed by a herniated disk in his back, then by shoulder injuries. this was only the second grand slam singles match of tsonga's career; coincidentally, the first one was also against roddick, which he lost in straight sets at the 2005 french open.  roddick succeeded monday without his coach, jimmy connors, who has remained in the united states to mourn the death of his mother and coach, gloria.  ''i've talked to him every day since i've been here,'' said roddick, who is unsure if connors will eventually make the long journey to join him.  ''when we talk, we talk tennis,'' roddick said. ''the last thing i'm concerned with right now is putting pressure on him.''  tennis  