unfettered debate takes unflattering turn in michigan supreme court   in a recent series of written dissents, justice elizabeth a. weaver of the michigan supreme court has accused four of her colleagues of ''bully tactics,'' ''abuses of power and grossly unprofessional conduct'' and trying to censor her.  in response, in a confidential draft opinion, the court's chief justice has accused justice weaver of behaving like ''a child engaging in a tantrum.'' in the opinion, chief justice clifford w. taylor suggested that she continue her protests with a hunger strike, as that ''seemed to have the potential for everyone to be a winner.''  students of judicial history in michigan and elsewhere said they could not remember a similar judicial melee.  ''the justices of the michigan supreme court are making spectacles of themselves," said richard d. friedman, a law professor at the university of michigan. ''they really should start acting like grown-ups.''  the justices' exchanges, which continued this week, have been fueled by personal animus. but their disagreements involve serious issues, including first amendment principles and judicial ethics.  the justices differ about whether they may disclose the details of the court's internal deliberations, about whether lawyers are free to criticize them personally and about how motions seeking their disqualification should be treated.  on wednesday in lansing, the state capital, the justices held a hearing about a rule it adopted by a vote of 4 to 3 last month. the rule forbids justices from making public ''correspondence, memoranda and discussions regarding cases or controversies,'' but does not specify a punishment for violations.  the new rule has not deterred justice weaver. on her web site, www.justiceweaver.com, portions of chief justice taylor's draft opinion attacking her appeared this month, after the rule was adopted.  more than 20 people spoke at the hearing, most of them supporting the rule, a court spokeswoman said.  one of the speakers, judge richard f. suhrheinrich of the united states court of appeals for the sixth circuit, in cincinnati, said in an interview on wednesday that the secrecy of judicial deliberations is crucial to ensuring robust, unfettered and un-self-conscious debate.  ''judges on that particular court have decided to make the deliberations public,'' judge suhrheinrich said, ''and it has caused a great deal of problems.''  through a spokeswoman, chief justice taylor declined a request for an interview. in an interview with michigan public radio on wednesday, he lashed out at justice weaver, saying ''she has been very difficult to deal with'' since she was passed over for a second term as chief justice in 2001.  ''believe me,'' chief justice taylor said, ''she doesn't have anything. it's just about time this soap opera stopped.''  in a written dissent last month, justice weaver called the new rule a gag order. she said it conflicts with a provision in michigan's constitution requiring dissenting judges to give their reasons.  judicial deliberations are almost universally protected from outside scrutiny. there is not much law, however, on the question of whether participants in the deliberations may themselves be forbidden to disclose exchanges in which they participated.  justice weaver wrote last month that the immediate purpose of the new rule was to suppress a dissent that she had written in a disciplinary case. she added that her primary obligations were to the public rather than her colleagues.  the new rule, she wrote, cannot constitutionally apply to ''repeated personal slurs, name calling and abuses of power, such as threats to exclude a justice from conference discussions, to ban a justice from the hall of justice or to hold a dissenting justice in contempt.''  the disciplinary case that gave rise to the judicial disagreement involved geoffrey fieger, a prominent plaintiffs' lawyer and politician who ran unsuccessfully for governor in 1998. his opponent, gov. john m. engler, appointed four of the justices on the current supreme court.  those justices were in the majority in a 4-to-3 decision in july that reprimanded mr. fieger for intemperate language about several appeals court judges.  ''they held that the first amendment doesn't apply to lawyers,'' mr. fieger said in an interview.  in her dissent in the matter, justice weaver said the four justices should have disqualified themselves from mr. fieger's case because they had displayed ''bias and prejudice'' in public comments made about him.  in the majority opinion, the justices acknowledged that they had tangled politically with mr. fieger, but said that having done so did not require their disqualification.  in a related federal case, the court of appeals for the sixth circuit last month reinstated a suit by mr. fieger that challenged michigan's judicial disqualification rules as a violation of due process. justices of the michigan supreme court, like judges on most state high courts, decide for themselves whether to grant motions seeking their disqualification.  ''the traditions of deciding on recusal are due for a fresh review, because there is a new world swirling around the courts,'' said bert brandenburg, the executive director of justice at stake, a judicial reform group. increasingly expensive and nasty judicial election campaigns and political attacks on judicial independence are part of that new world, mr. brandenburg said.  justice weaver did not respond to a request for comment, but an aide directed a reporter to materials on her web site, which includes photographs, opinions, press releases and speeches. it also features her ''10 principles for living.''  principle no. 6: ''avoid unnecessary disputes and confrontations.''  