knicks count on jeffries to help quiet arenas   coach isiah thomas looked ahead tuesday, staring straight at gilbert arenas, whom the knicks will somehow try to contain when they play the wizards on wednesday in washington.  arenas walked off the court monday in washington to a chorus of ''m.v.p! m.v.p!'' after he hit a 3-pointer at the buzzer to beat utah, 114-111. he finished with 51 points, the third time this season he has scored more than 50.  now it's the knicks' turn.  thomas said he would ask stephon marbury, jared jeffries and the rookie renaldo balkman to try to keep arenas in line, which may be asking a lot from the knicks, who often seem defensively challenged.  marbury is generally known for his offensive skills, although he shut down ray allen in seattle recently in a defensive performance that did not go unnoticed. balkman, a forward, is still learning the finer points of the game. but jeffries, another forward, has generally earned his living in the n.b.a. as a defensive demon.  jeffries is an offensive liability who compensates with blocked shots, steals and rebounds. when he is playing well, he can have a noticeable effect on a game. against the sacramento kings on monday, jeffries blocked a shot by ron artest 30 seconds into the game. jeffries had two more blocks in the game, including one more on artest, who ended up with only 12 points. the knicks prevailed, 102-97.  still, more often than not this season, the 6-foot-11 jeffries has struggled to make an impact.  ''i feel like i definitely could do better,'' jeffries said after tuesday's practice.  jeffries, who starts at small forward, missed the first 22 games of the season with a fractured left wrist. he returned dec. 11, and in his fourth game back, he was suspended for four games for his role in a brawl with the denver nuggets.  in 13 games, jeffries has averaged 5.6 points and 5.4 rebounds. he has not consistently been the player the knicks coveted when they signed him to a five-year, $30 million deal in august. monday's game was the perfect example. in the opening minute of the third quarter, jeffries made a bad pass that led to a turnover and shot an air ball on a 3-point attempt.  jeffries's struggles have opened the door to more minutes for david lee, who might not be as imposing defensively but is better at finding ways to score and rebound.  ''just not making mistakes, just being more active,'' jeffries said when asked what areas of his game needed improvement. ''not really thinking when i'm out there; just playing like a natural feel.''  there is no telling what defensive scheme the knicks will use against the wizards. thomas said that marbury would start off guarding arenas; marbury also defended well in the fourth quarter monday against kevin martin.  but jefferies, as a former wizard, is more familiar with arenas, who is averaging 30.2 points and has a knack for sinking game-winning shots.  jeffries was drafted by the wizards with the 11th overall pick in 2002, and he played the first four seasons of his career in washington.  ''i played with him for a couple years,'' jeffries said of arenas. ''it's just a matter of trying to force him to do things. keep him guessing. don't let him get into a rhythm.''  jeffries was a restricted free agent after last season, which meant the wizards had the option of matching the knicks' offer. they chose not to. but jeffries said he expected a cordial reception from the fans wednesday. he was more concerned about guarding arenas.  ''the way he's playing right now, making pull-ups, getting to the rim, passing the ball, it's hard to say he really has a weakness,'' jeffries said.  he'll try to find one.  basketball  