senators demand details on new eavesdropping rules   lawmakers demanded more information on new rules for governing a domestic surveillance program on thursday, a day after the bush administration announced that it had placed the national security agency eavesdropping under court supervision.  senators from both parties who had long criticized the eavesdropping without court warrants said at a judiciary committee hearing that they welcomed the change but wanted details. they said they wanted to be sure that the new rules adequately protected americans' privacy.  a central question is whether the court will approve eavesdropping case by case, its traditional practice, or will it issue broader orders that provide additional government leeway in selecting targets.  a congressional official who has been briefed on the new procedures called it a hybrid of individual warrants and broader approval.  some lawmakers wanted to know why the administration had waited five years from the start of the program to put it under the supervision of the secret intelligence court and asked whether the administration might decide on its own to revive eavesdropping without warrants if the court denied a request.  at the hearing, attorney general alberto r. gonzales, a chief defender of the program, tried, apparently without success, to quell the flood of questions.  the session quickly became a forum for senators to say the administration was withholding pertinent information about the decision. house democrats raised similar concerns.  pressed repeatedly for details, mr. gonzales offered little new information and would not agree to provide more documents to explain the decision. he declined to answer questions about why the administration had reversed itself after saying for more than a year that the program could not operate effectively under court supervision.  ''there was a reason why we didn't do this as an initial matter shortly after the attacks of sept. 11,'' said mr. gonzales, who was white house counsel.  referring to the foreign intelligence surveillance act, or fisa, the law that created the secret court, he added, ''the truth of the matter is we looked at fisa and we all concluded there's no way we can do what we have to do to protect this country under the strict reading of fisa.''  later, mr. gonzales said, after he became attorney general in 2005, he started reviewing whether the program might be brought under the court's supervision.  justice department officials said they had worked on the ''innovative, complex orders'' for two years.  on jan. 10, an unidentified judge of the court approved the first new order. the next day, national security agency officials called the house and senate intelligence committees to outline the new system, and justice department officials briefed some committee staff members on friday, congressional officials said.  a senior administration official involved in formulating the policy expressed frustration with the criticism on capitol hill. he said democrats had repeatedly said the program was valuable but should be conducted under fisa.  now that that has happened, the official said, ''people ought to take yes for an answer.''  he added that even if the critics are suspicious of the administration, ''i don't think there's any basis for being suspicious of the fisa court,'' which has approved the system.  at the hearing, mr. gonzales said the rules protected national security by allowing continued eavesdropping, but required the government to halt quickly the monitoring of people who were not found to be doing anything wrong.  with justice department officials unwilling to provide lawmakers with documents, lawmakers explored other ways to obtain information. in response to a request from the judiciary committee chairman, patrick j. leahy, democrat of vermont, the presiding judge of the foreign intelligence surveillance court, colleen kollar-kotelly, a federal district judge in the district of columbia, said the court would be willing to turn over to the panel its classified orders.  but judge kollar-kotelly wrote in a letter that her court would cooperate only ''if the executive and legislative branches reach agreement for access to this material.''  mr. gonzales, asked by mr. leahy whether he would object to the disclosure of the documents to congress, replied that he hoped to keep operational aspects of the program secret. mr. gonzales said that before he answered the question he would need to consult his ''principal,'' apparently a reference to president bush.  mr. leahy expressed skepticism, saying: ''i don't think i fully understand that. are you saying that you might object to the court giving us decisions that you've publicly announced? are we a little alice in wonderland here?''  mr. gonzales replied: ''i'm not saying that i have objection to its being released. what i'm saying is it's not my decision to make.''  some lawmakers said the administration should have changed course much sooner.  ''it is a little hard to see why it took so long,'' said senator arlen specter, republican of pennsylvania.  senator charles e. schumer, democrat of new york, asked about the court's approval of the surveillance orders.  ''i'd like to know,'' mr. schumer said, ''if there is an intention to do this on an individual basis or on a case-by-case basis where 5, 6, 10, 20, 100 individuals are involved or is it broader brush than that? because if it is very broad-brush approval, again because it's secret, we have no way of knowing, it doesn't do much good.''  mr. gonzales said, ''they meet the requirements under fisa.''  the justice department has tried to streamline the application for warrants under the surveillance law, creating a computerized system called turbo fisa.  threats and responses  