a meditation on mourning, for mothers and generals   the stage is permeated with the ache of loss. three middle-aged women and one younger one (who sometimes dons a white beard) fumble for their lines, groping for what they want to say, numbed by battering grief. their sons have been killed in a senseless war; they want to recover the bodies. enter the cocky young leader: he strikes poses and theatrically declaims stilted poetry, explaining that what they want is not in the interests of the people. when their emotion finally gets through to him, his delivery stumbles, and he too is at a loss.  it's greatly to the credit of target margin theater that it never hammers home the topicality of ''as yet thou art young and rash'' any more than this. the play, based on euripides' ''suppliant women,'' opened on sunday at the ohio theater.  the director, david herskovits, working collaboratively with a very strong cast of five, has created a universal meditation on loss, particularly the personal grief surrounding the death of a child, without doing anything as obvious as dragging in explicit references to the iraq war or sept. 11. the connections are there, but it's left to the audience to make them.  what is given instead is a poetic tissue of image and allusion that communicates emotion more clearly than plot, like shards of painted pottery that do not necessarily combine to make a single picture. the three older women -- mia katigbak, mary neufeld and tina shepard -- make something memorable of haggard grief. the younger one, the luminous stephanie weeks, contains the anguish of the failed and aged general adrastus. satya bhabha manages to be subtle as a hotheaded young leader who, when he realizes the position he's in, is not quite sure what to do. he also plays the cello.  for music too weaves through the evening. sometimes it is amplified over loudspeakers to the point of actual physical pain; at other times -- like when the cast sits around a fire and sings ''home on the range'' -- it becomes a senseless but concrete expression of people coming together to take comfort in the rituals of mourning and nostalgia.  ''as yet thou art young and rash'' continues through feb. 3 (wednesday through sunday at 7:30 p.m.; additional performances on jan. 22 at 7:30 p.m., and jan. 27 and feb. 3 at 3 p.m.) at the ohio theater, 66 wooster street, soho, (212) 352-3101.  theater review  