bank of japan, in a split vote, decides to hold rates steady   the bank of japan, the nation's central bank, kept borrowing rates unchanged on thursday in an intensely scrutinized decision, apparently concluding that the economy was too weak to bear a rate increase.  the bank said in a statement that the policy board was split, with six of the nine members voting to keep overnight borrowing rates at 0.25 percent. the other three members voted against.  the decision followed recent data that showed a drop in consumer spending and slower growth in japan's $5 trillion economy, the second-largest after the united states. the move, which capped a two-day meeting by the bank's governing board, added to growing concerns that japan's longest expansion since world war ii may be losing steam.  after thursday's announcement, many traders were betting that the bank may increase interest rates at its february meeting.  ''the split vote means the b.o.j. will probably raise rates next month,'' tetsuhisa hayashi, chief currency trader at bank of tokyo-mitsubishi ufj ltd., told bloomberg news.  in keeping rates steady, the bank took a similar tack as the federal reserve board in washington, which has maintained rates at 5.25 percent since june amid signs of a slowdown in america.  the japanese central bank also appeared on thursday to back away from earlier statements that seemed to favor a rate increase, economists said.  ''the bank wisely concluded that it is too early to raise rates,'' said naoki iizuka, senior economist at mizuho securities in tokyo. ''the risk of inflation is very, very low, while the real risk is of a turn down in the business cycle.''  while mr. iizuka and other economists applauded the decision, they also expressed concerns about the move for a different reason: that the bank appeared to have reversed course in the face of political pressure.  the bank's decision has been closely watched as a litmus test of its ability to defend its recently won independence from the government, which ran monetary policy until 1998. thursday's announcement followed a series of news leaks and warnings by politicians against a rate increase, which riled markets and raised doubts about the bank's ability to effectively shepherd the economy.  ''it certainly gives the appearance that they are caving into political pressure,'' said richard jerram, an economist in the tokyo office of macquerie securities. ''it will be hard for the b.o.j. to avoid damage to its credibility.''  until a few days ago, mr. jerram and other economists appeared convinced that the bank would lift rates to 0.5 percent, following statements by the bank's governor, toshiyuki fukui, against keeping rates low.  mr. fukui has long said that he wants to end japan's near-zero interest rates, begun in the late 1990s as an emergency measure to revive the nation's then-moribund economy.  but in recent days, senior lawmakers like hidenao nakagawa, who is close to prime minister shinzo abe, have openly called for the bank to delay an increase to avoid squelching economic growth. the appearance of political interference jolted the stock market and sent the yen to a 13-month low against the dollar.  facing upper house elections this summer that are seen as a referendum on mr. abe's new administration, lawmakers in his ruling liberal democratic party are keen for the economy to continue its five-year growth streak.  recent signs of a possible slowdown include a 0.7 percent drop in household spending in november, and a slowdown in the overall economy's growth to an annualized rate of 0.8 percent in the quarter ended in september.  