arts, briefly   hitler comedy is the top draw in germany  a jewish filmmaker's comedy depicting hitler (helge schneider, right, with ulrich mühe) as an impotent, bed-wetting drug addict became the most popular film in germany in its first week in theaters, agence france-presse reported, citing cinemaxx, the country's biggest theater chain. despite negative reviews, the film, ''my führer -- the truly truest truth about adolf hitler,'' by the swiss-born, berlin-based director dani levy, finished ahead of the ben stiller comedy ''night at the museum,'' the denzel washington thriller ''déjà vu'' and the latest james bond adventure, ''casino royale.'' the cinemaxx chain based the rankings on box office returns for 339 screens from jan. 11 to jan. 14.  british 'big brother' draws racism complaints  the british media watchdog ofcom has received about 200 complaints from viewers about racism directed by contestants at the bollywood actress shilpa shetty on the reality show ''big brother,'' agence france-presse reported. ms. shetty, 31, is one of nine celebrities who were locked in a house on jan. 2 and are now being filmed. she has been teased about her accent, and one contestant, since voted off the show by viewers, repeatedly referred to her as ''the indian'' and did not pronounce her name properly. the ''big brother'' show is channel 4's most popular program.  'sopranos' farewell  tony soprano's fate will be decided in a series of ''sopranos'' episodes beginning on april 8, variety reported. the second half of the sixth season of the hbo gangster series will consist of nine episodes, one more than had been expected, and the finale will be written and directed by david chase, the creator of the show. variety also reported that the last ''sopranos'' episode is expected to be followed by the premiere of ''john from cincinnati,'' a series about surfers from david milch, the creator of ''deadwood.''  'misbegotten' schedules its broadway run  as expected, the brooks atkinson theater will be home to eugene o'neill's ''moon for the misbegotten'' when that old vic production, starring kevin spacey, eve best and colm meaney of the london cast, arrives on broadway in the spring for an 84-performance run. directed by howard davies, the drama about tortured souls, longing and love will begin previews on march 29 and open officially on april 8.  london 'rings' cast  the shakespearean actor malcolm storry will play the role of the wizard gandalf in the london production of the $25 million musical ''the lord of the rings,'' the bbc reported. laura michelle kelly, an olivier award winner for her performance in the title role of ''mary poppins'' in london, has been cast as the powerful elf queen galadriel. the show opened last year to unenthusiastic reviews in toronto and is expected to be revised before it makes its london debut on june 19 at the theater royal, drury lane.  a cold disrupts kylie minogue's tour  illness said to be unrelated to her treatment for breast cancer forced kylie minogue to cut short a weekend concert and to postpone two others, but they have since been rescheduled, the bbc reported. ms. minogue, right, was performing in manchester, england, on saturday night when she stopped after an hour and told the audience she had a cold. doctors who diagnosed a respiratory infection ordered her to call off shows there last night and tonight. part of her showgirl homecoming tour, they have been rescheduled for sunday and monday. ms. minogue rang in 2007 in london with her first british show since her recovery from cancer surgery and treatment in 2005.  an innovative guitar in the dublin spotlight  the rickenbacker frying pan is getting the star treatment in dublin, reuters reported. the frying pan, with its cast-aluminum body, is regarded as the world's first commercially successful electric guitar. created by the inventor and musician george beauchamp and the engineer adolph rickenbacker in 1931 and nicknamed by mr. beauchamp for its appearance, the instrument is featured in a new exhibition at the national museum of ireland. called ''rockchic,'' the display, originally conceived by ian spero, a television producer based in london, comprises 130 guitars owned and played by some of rock's biggest names, including keith richards of the rolling stones and jimi hendrix. pat wallace, the museum's director, said: ''museums tend to be elitist and exclusive, and they do a good job of keeping people away. we wanted to break down the age and class barriers to visitors. the guitar is everybody's culture.''  bollywood romance  forget about jennifer and vince, cameron and justin, britney and k-fed. those busted romances are yesterday. it's time for abhishek and aishwarya. yes, after months of speculation that ''feverish'' can barely begin to describe, the families of abhishek bachchan and aishwarya rai, the former miss world, announced the couple's engagement yesterday, reuters reported. mr. bachchan and ms. rai, above, are two of india's biggest film stars, and despite their denials of sharing anything more than a healthy friendship, their hush-hush romance has transfixed the mumbai-based hindi film community. although amitabh bachchan, mr. bachchan's father and a renowned actor, said no date had been set for a wedding, television and radio speculated that it could take place as early as next month. as news of the engagement spread, crowds sang and danced through the night outside the bachchan family home. ms. rai, 33, and mr. bachchan, 30, have worked together on at least five films.  footnotes  the tony- and emmy award-winning actor ben vereen will make his new york nightclub debut by opening the winter-spring season at feinstein's at the regency with ''an intimate evening with ben vereen,'' from feb. 6 through feb. 17. he will feature songs from broadway shows and a tribute to sammy davis jr.  beyoncé, the dixie chicks, gnarls barkley and the red hot chili peppers will be among the performers on the telecast of the 49th annual grammy awards on feb. 11 in los angeles.  