russian, american-style, and a loner on a quest   hard to say what ballets fit into what categories on wednesday night in ''tradition and innovation,'' the catch-all title of the second of 10 themed programs to be presented by the new york city ballet during its winter season at the new york state theater. tradition was possibly best represented by mauro bigonzetti's ''in vento,'' a hit from last spring's diamond project festival, and george balanchine's ''tchaikovsky piano concerto no. 2,'' with balanchine's ''mozartiana'' holding the fort for innovation.  ''in vento,'' set to an appropriately brooding commissioned score by bruno moretti, straddles two choreographic genres. the ballet fits into the american tortured-loner category, with a lithe seeker, danced by an eloquently supple benjamin millepied, interacting with a beautiful woman (maria kowroski) and a shadowy man (edwaard liang in a role debut). mr. millepied's search is clearly doomed.  mr. millepied, ms. kowroski, mr. liang and a large corps, all of whom appear and disappear dramatically on the dark stage, are essentially the ballet equivalent of ships passing in the night. that places the work in a second category, that of european mystification, in which simple themes are turned into thick choreographic volumes. practitioners of this style include william forsythe, cited by mr. bigonzetti as a major influence on his work.  balanchine created ''tchaikovsky piano concerto no. 2,'' originally called ''ballet imperial,'' for a 1941 tour of south america by the american ballet caravan, a company founded by lincoln kirstein that was an antecedent to city ballet. the new piece was to demonstrate that classical ballet was alive in the upstart united states, well within the traditions of russian ballet in which balanchine had trained and perhaps traditional in a livelier way than the war horse story ballets, like ''sleeping beauty,'' that were familiar to south american audiences. this was russian ballet, mr. kirstein noted at the time, as danced by an american company.  there are faint suggestions of hollywood in the wafting lines of corps women, manipulated so romantically by charles askegard on wednesday, but balanchine gives his lead dancers full technical challenges. sofiane sylve, new as the ballerina, looked a little awkward at first but came into her own soon after, particularly in turns that were dazzlingly if perhaps somewhat harshly executed. teresa reichlen was her usual elegant, fully articulated self in the second female lead. susan walters was the impressive piano soloist.  the vocabulary is classical in ''mozartiana,'' but the breathtakingly simple-looking stage patterns and arrangements of dancers exist in a world of their own. children from the city ballet-affiliated school of american ballet are not the typical cute ballet embellishment, but solemn, crucial elements in those patterns and subtly suggestive of the arc of time. tchaikovsky paid homage to mozart in a quiet, reflective score that balanchine re-envisions as a long, calm, clear breath of prayer. wendy whelan was the ballet's heart on wednesday, with nikolaj hübbe an understated anchoring presence and daniel ulbricht bracingly precise in the quick twists of the ballet's gigue. david briskin conducted.  the new york city ballet performs through feb. 25 at the new york state theater, lincoln center; (212) 870-5570 or nycballet.com.  dance review  