the football is fine, but the saints' finances aren't so bright   the new orleans saints' jubilation at beating the philadelphia eagles to advance to the national football conference championship game typified the reactions of a winning team: players embracing, coach sean payton high-fiving fans in the box seats, the owner tom benson flashing v signs and photographers surrounding saints players at midfield of the louisiana superdome.  but the saints are by no means typical. they were born in 1966 as the political price the national football league paid to congress for the antitrust exemption that allowed its merger with the american football league. they play in a small market without the strong business support enjoyed by most teams.  most important, no professional sports franchise has ever been turned into a nomad for a season by a natural disaster, as the saints were by hurricane katrina, only to return to a city with less than half its former population.  ''we're nowhere where we need to be, given the state of the community,'' said ben hales, the team's vice president for marketing. ''the problems we had before katrina have been exacerbated.''  the saints' 2006 season has been, by some measures, a rousing success. still, forbes magazine's estimate of the team's worth ($738 million) ranked the saints 27th out of 32 n.f.l. teams. the season started with the emotional return to the superdome and culminated in a 10-6 regular-season record and sunday's 27-24 defeat of the eagles, which put the saints in the n.f.c. title game for the first time.  the team sold out every game and built its season-ticket base to 65,800. the team signed national sponsors like coca-cola, anheuser-busch, chevrolet, coors and alltel to lengthy deals as a hoped-for financial bridge to a time when the city's and region's struggling companies are healthier.  ''as much as people's hearts are in the right place, it's hard to justify the cost of sponsorships,'' said frank vuono, a partner in 16w marketing in rutherford, n.j., which the league hired to help rebuild the saints' business.  still, about a quarter of the stadium's luxury suites are unoccupied (they are all in various stages of construction), and naming rights to the superdome are unsold.  ''we're financially viable,'' said dennis lauscha, the team's chief financial officer. ''we have two big problems, a facility problem and a market problem. if you fix both, you'll have strong viability.''  the saints face formidable obstacles. not the least is whether local and state governments, with enormous rebuilding priorities, can, or should, help finance a new stadium or let benson move elsewhere. after katrina struck, benson was reportedly interested in moving the team to san antonio, where it played several home games during the 2005 season.  that talk cooled with the renovation of the superdome, but the saints' lease has only four years to go. at its end will come the last of 10 years' worth of subsidies totaling $186.5 million. this year, the saints are scheduled to be paid about $20 million.  ''we hope to sit down with the team and discuss an extension beyond 2010, and that would include inducement payments,'' said larry roedel, counsel to the louisiana sports and exposition district, a state-appointed commission that oversees the superdome and other facilities. ''i don't know if they'll want more than what they're getting.''  but some sports marketing experts said it was unlikely the saints would ever earn enough in new orleans to satisfy the benson family, which could earn much more by playing in a larger, more stable and wealthier market.  new orleans's population has fallen to an estimated 230,000, and nielsen media research has said that the area's market ranking has plunged to 54th from 43rd.  a widely reported spate of murders has made safety a concern, and much of new orleans is in ruins, waiting to be rebuilt or razed.  marc ganis, whose chicago-based sports consulting company has worked with several n.f.l. teams, said the saints would need larger subsidies than they now receive. he said the level of government support might depend on whether the team could truly capitalize on its 2006 renaissance or whether the sellouts and the addition of new sponsors were one-time, post-katrina upticks.  ''pre-katrina, the market was tough at best,'' ganis said.  ''post-katrina, it's even worse for business, but the saints are more important than they were before, because they enliven the spirit of the community.''  michael ozanian, a forbes editor who helped prepare the valuations, said he could envision a long-term future for the saints in new orleans only if the area around the superdome underwent renewal.  ''i think if they get to the super bowl, you'll see a lot of talk of rebirth, but the numbers just aren't there, in terms of people living there and in terms of the business there,'' ozanian said. ''it's a real problem for the n.f.l.''  after katrina, the league's desire to see the saints return to new orleans became a priority, leading to its contribution of $15 million to $20 million to the fast-paced overhaul of the superdome.  the n.f.l. has not set a timeline to evaluate the saints' long-term prospects for survival. for now, league officials have said they have done enough financially.  ''we want the saints to succeed in new orleans, but the business community, especially, has to step up, and continue to support the team,'' said joe browne, an executive vice president of the league. he said the n.f.l. would not offer subsidies because, ''we already have the best revenue-sharing plan in sports and that helps teams like the saints in a small market.''  but mark rosentraub, dean of the maxine goodman levin college of urban affairs at cleveland state university, said the league had to provide subsidies to shore up the saints or they would be ''dead in new orleans.''  ''if i were advising n.f.l. owners,'' rosentraub said, ''i'd say, 'you have two choices: pull the team out or guarantee revenues to the owner.' ''  pro football  correction:  january 19, 2007, friday  a sports article on wednesday about the new orleans saints' financial situation gave the wrong day for the team's playoff game last week against the philadelphia eagles. the game was played on saturday, not sunday.  