fewer serials and closure for 'lost' on abc's horizon   abc sees fewer ongoing, serialized dramas in its future, and at least one of its biggest shows -- the megahit ''lost'' -- is heading toward a definite end.  stephen mcpherson, the president of abc entertainment, told a meeting of television writers here on sunday that after the experience of several failed or mediocre new serials this year -- including ''day break,'' ''the nine'' and ''six degrees'' -- the network has fewer of those types of shows in development.  and for ''lost,'' the biggest of the abc serials, the network is now discussing with the producers how and when to end the series, mr. mcpherson said.  damon lindelof, one of the executive producers of ''lost,'' said that the show's creators had always viewed it as lasting about 100 episodes, and that he still believes that will be the case. fifty-three episodes have been broadcast so far, with the show in its third season, meaning that it is likely that the fifth season will be the last.  ''we're no longer going up the hill,'' mr. lindelof said. ''we're starting to come down now.''  mr. lindelof also said that while abc has the ability to extend the series as long as it wants, with different producers and even different stars, he believes that the network is unlikely to do so.  ''we don't want to produce those episodes of 'lost,' and we are not going to,'' mr. lindelof said. he cautioned against such a move, pointing out that as series like ''the x-files'' and ''alias'' extended their runs by making dubious creative decisions, their ratings suffered greatly as fans abandoned the shows in droves.  he said the network and the producers would announce the decision soon after it is made, to make sure that fans understand that the show has a definite endpoint, and that outstanding questions about the mysteries of the island will be answered.  but there also was some good news for ''lost'' fans.  mr. mcpherson said it is unlikely that viewers will have to weather another extended midseason hiatus. the network has been criticized by fans for running six ''lost'' episodes last fall, then breaking for almost three months before resuming the series next month for 16 straight weeks.  mr. mcpherson said he believes that the next season will run for 22 consecutive weeks, either in the fall of 2007 or the spring of 2008. production requirements and scheduling necessities caused abc to break up the series this season, he said.  abc also said it will present a fourth season of ''dancing with the stars,'' its hit ballroom-dance competition, on monday nights beginning on march 19. the network decided not to schedule the competition installments of the series directly against ''american idol,'' which runs on tuesday nights, although the results show for ''dancing'' will be seen at 9 p.m. on tuesday, going up against at least a portion of ''idol'' on some nights.  as for future serial shows mr. mcpherson said that the experience of the network's current season, with several bad showings for new serials, indicated that audiences have a limited ability to absorb such shows. after the initial success of ''lost'' and fox's ''24'' several years ago, a lot of television production companies put new serials into development, with many of them on at the same time, as they did this year.  ''we're going to see an adjustment this year because people in the fall were able to see whether or not there was a burnout,'' mr. mcpherson said. ''we're seeing a little bit of a shift away from that.''  