$38 billion is rival bid for a reit   the gloves have come off in buyouts.  late yesterday, a group of investors offered $38 billion for the nation's largest office landlord, setting off the biggest buyout battle since the landmark fight for rjr nabisco nearly two decades ago.  the upstart bid for equity office properties, the real estate investment trust that was founded by samuel zell, tops a $36 billion deal that equity office had reached with the blackstone group in november. either bid would win the crown as the largest buyout ever, surpassing last summer's $33 billion deal for hca.  the battle for equity office pits some of the most powerful and colorful financiers against each other. blackstone is controlled by stephen a. schwarzman, who has created one of the largest, if not the largest, private equity firms in the nation.  the rival group includes steven roth of vornado, once the king of new jersey strip malls; barry sternlicht of starwood capital, who created the hotel chain and then left the company after a falling-out with its board; and neil bluhm, a chicago real estate mogul who backed barack obama's successful run for the united states senate. mr. sternlicht worked for mr. bluhm as a young analyst in the late 1980s.  since the blackstone offer was announced, james s. corl, the chief investment officer for real estate at cohen & steers, the largest institutional investor in equity office, has argued that the price of $48.50 a share was too low because the office market is expected to keep improving over the next couple of years.  but the battle may not be tilted in favor of the new bidders, vornado realty trust, the starwood capital group and walton street capital. for one, 40 percent of their $52-a-share offer is in shares of vornado, at an unspecified ratio, compared with blackstone's all-cash bid. and blackstone has already completed many of the steps needed to close the deal. in addition, blackstone has the right to match any rival offer.  ''a tentative proposal relying upon the potential issuance, many months from now, of more than $10 billion in stock trading at near record prices is inferior and carries vastly more risk than blackstone's all-cash deal closing in approximately two weeks,'' a blackstone spokesman said.  if successful, the vornado group would break up equity office, which has some 590 buildings and over 105 million square feet of office space in major metropolitan markets, including the verizon building in manhattan. they would divide the properties among themselves, with vornado getting roughly half of the properties on the east and west coasts.  the consortium calls itself dove parent, apparently a mocking reference to the blackstone-created buyout entity, blackhawk. both bidders would assume $16 billion in debt. equity office said that its board ''will consider the proposal as soon as practicable.''  the offer from the vornado group is the latest sign that the cozy world of buyouts is becoming less genteel. in recent years, the giants in private equity seemed to have avoided stepping on each other's deals while banding together on others. indeed, private equity firms have come under scrutiny from the justice department, which has started an inquiry into whether private equity firms have broken antitrust laws.  and few public companies have shown a willingness to compete with private equity's war chest. private equity firms have been gobbling up publicly traded companies at a record pace, spending some $660 billion last year. the battle for rjr nabisco in the late 1980s showed that bidding wars can get out of control.  last summer, however, a group led by kohlberg kravis roberts & company and bain capital jumped in to offer a rival bid to a blackstone offer to buy freescale semiconductor. blackstone then raised its bid and won the deal, but that showdown was a sign that competition for deals was turning cutthroat.  the new bid for equity office may also demonstrate the differences between private equity and the much scrappier real estate business.  mr. roth of vornado leads a real estate investment trust whose holdings include office buildings in new york and washington, shopping centers and merchandise marts, and the retailer toys ''r'' us.  one of his company's most recent transactions was the purchase of the manhattan mall, a shopping center and office building in the herald square area of new york city, where real estate values have been rapidly appreciating.  in their letter to mr. zell, mr. roth and his partners said they would create the ''largest office reit in the u.s. with the pre-eminent position in the best markets on both coasts.''  the breakup fee for a buyer who is able to push blackstone aside is $200 million. ''sam zell set this up in a very shareholder-friendly manner,'' said barry vinocur, the editor of realty stock review, a newsletter. ''blackstone wanted a higher breakup fee.'' mr. zell is the largest individual shareholder of equity office.  the rival bid for equity is being financed in part by jpmorgan chase, lehman brothers and ubs. jpmorgan's involvement has raised some eyebrows on wall street because of its long ties with blackstone.  keven s. lindemann, the director of real estate for snl financial in charlottesville, va., said equity office shareholders would have to consider whether the vornado shares were overvalued.  