for the bears and the patriots, it's all good   tom brady has won many games by erasing fourth-quarter deficits, leading last-minute drives, throwing improbable touchdown passes.  on sunday, brady proved that he can truly do it all -- he won a game by throwing an interception.  the new england patriots are moving to the american football conference championship game against the colts, largely because their starting quarterback made one terrible mistake. with the patriots trailing by 8 points, late in the fourth quarter and facing a fourth down, brady threw an untimely interception.  it looked like the end of the patriots' season. it was actually the beginning of their rally. new england defeated the san diego chargers at qualcomm stadium, 24-21, thanks to the immaculate interception.  once the ball left brady's hand, he knew it was off-target. it was so off-target, in fact, that it went right to safety marlon mccree. if the pass had been a little better, it would have fallen incomplete, and the chargers would have taken control.  instead, mccree caught the ball and started running. he charged into the middle of the field, toward a herd of new england players. he carried the ball a few inches from his body, providing a narrow window of opportunity for the patriots.  ''i was trying to make a play,'' mccree said. ''anytime i get the ball, i am going to try to score.''  troy brown, a new england receiver who moonlights as a cornerback, immediately turned into a defender. he attacked mccree and swiped at the ball, stripping it loose. watching the sequence unfold, and seeing the patriots recover the ball, brady could not believe his good fortune. the football fates were smiling on him again.  with one more chance, brady drove for a tying touchdown and 2-point conversion, and a winning field goal. stephen gostkowski, the new england place-kicker, made a 31-yard field goal with 1 minute 10 seconds left. nate kaeding, the san diego place-kicker, missed a 54-yard attempt to tie the score with 8 seconds left.  afterward, brady took a deep breath. ''that was not easy,'' he said.  brady has won three super bowls and his playoff record is 12-1, but the degree of difficulty keeps increasing. the patriots lose assistants (eric mangini, charlie weis and romeo crennel) and they lose receivers (deion branch and david givens). but sometimes, especially in january, brady is all they seem to need.  as brady rejoiced with his teammates after the game, ladainian tomlinson rushed off the field, refusing to shake hands with the new england players. tomlinson, the san diego running back and the most valuable player of the n.f.l., was enraged that the patriots were dancing and gloating at midfield.  the patriots cannot seem to celebrate a playoff victory this season without some kind of incident. last week, coach bill belichick shoved a photographer after a victory against the jets. this week, tomlinson accused the patriots of a lack of class.  ''i can't sit there and watch that,'' tomlinson said. ''i was very upset. they showed no class at all, absolutely no class, and maybe it comes from their head coach.''  tomlinson had reason to be frustrated. he finished with 187 all-purpose yards and scored 2 touchdowns, but he got little help. suffering from butter-fingers and brain freeze, the chargers dropped six passes, committed four turnovers and wasted a couple of timeouts.  brady was hardly flawless either. he threw three interceptions and labored through three and a half quarters, but he delivered one vintage pass. facing a third-and-10 at his 34-yard line, with less than three minutes remaining and the crowd howling, brady told receiver reche caldwell to run a go route.  caldwell, let go by the chargers after last season, was single covered by cornerback quentin jammer. with one move at the line of scrimmage, caldwell froze jammer and bolted past him. they both sprinted up the san diego sideline.  forty-nine yards later, caldwell held the ball and new england held the game. ''i had a chance to come home and show what i can do,'' caldwell said. ''this means a lot. it's a lot of gratification.''  but the catch was not his most significant contribution. when brown stripped mccree of his interception, caldwell was the one who pounced on the fumble and held it at the bottom of the pile. ''that was the big play of the game,'' caldwell said.  new england now gets to play at indianapolis on sunday, a daunting task for many teams, but not necessarily for the patriots. new england has traditionally rattled the colts and brady has consistently upstaged indianapolis quarterback peyton manning.  the chargers, meanwhile, could soon be embarking on a coaching search. even though they posted a 14-2 record in the regular season and won 10 games in a row, coach marty schottenheimer failed again in the playoffs.  schottenheimer could be doomed by his 5-13 playoff record -- with cleveland, kansas city and san diego -- and his strained relationship with the chargers' general manager, a. j. smith. smith and schottenheimer rarely speak, and smith has not given schottenheimer a public endorsement for next season.  ''not withstanding the disappointment and frustration of the events of this day, i'll choose to look at this team in a very positive light,'' schottenheimer said.  he may be judged on a decision he made in the first quarter sunday, when he decided to go for a fourth-and-11 at the new england 30, instead of using his pro bowl kicker, kaeding, for a field goal.  schottenheimer apparently wanted to show that he had changed his conservative ways, but the fourth-down play failed and it set the tone for the rest of game.  ''they might have gotten a little tight,'' patriots linebacker mike vrabel said.  schottenheimer has lost playoff games in some of the most creative and excruciating ways imaginable. some of his playoff losses are so memorable that they even have their own nicknames:  the drive. the fumble. and, now, the interception.  pro football  