a producer for all seasons (also juggles)   a hungry producer shivering in the snow outside a theater, handing out flyers to his latest event, is a far less glamorous image than that of a flamboyant impresario, flanked by chorus girls, holding court in a cloud of cigar smoke. but on many nights, rain or shine, outside a broadway theater is where you'll find scott siegel, a producer, writer, critic and aspiring show business entrepreneur, leafleting one of four events he puts on each year at town hall.  on jan. 29 one of his most ambitious enterprises, the 2007 nightlife awards, an annual show honoring the best in local cabaret, comedy and jazz (in clubs, not concert halls) will be held there. these still little-known awards, now in their third year, bring together one of the strongest lineups of local nightclub talent to gather in one room. as mr. siegel observed recently, ''one-night events don't get press coverage, which makes it hard to sell 1,500 seats.''  diminutive, soft-spoken and unfailingly polite, mr. siegel, wearing his signature bolo tie, is the quintessential scuffling, do-it-yourself-on-a shoestring producer working just below new york's pop-culture radar. he is often joined on the sidewalk by his wife and collaborator, barbara, with whom he writes theater and cabaret columns and reviews for two web sites: theatermania.com and talkinbroadway.com.  an ebullient woman aswirl in colorful layers of bargain-basement clothes and zany hats, barbara siegel also happens to be chairwoman of the drama desk nominating committee. both are voting members of the drama desk, outer critics circle and broadcast film critics association. watching them schmooze from table to table at cabaret openings, you might be tempted to dismiss the siegels as eccentric hangers-on or freeloaders, and some people in cabaret circles do. but that would be a mistake.  married for more than two decades, the couple, who met when ms. siegel was deputy director of the new york city urban corps, a local version of the peace corps, can usually be seen on the town seven nights a week at the theater and in nightclubs. often they attend as many as three events a day.  what distinguishes the nightlife awards is that the winners, chosen by new york critics and announced in advance, don't give acceptance speeches; they perform. at last year's event, brian stokes mitchell, chosen outstanding cabaret male vocalist in a major engagement, brought down the house singing an un-amplified ''this nearly was mine.''  this year john pizzarelli, the pop-jazz crooner, guitarist and wit, was voted outstanding cabaret male vocalist (for an engagement at feinstein's at the regency), and his wife, jessica molaskey, with whom he often performs, was voted best female vocalist in a major engagement (at the oak room of the algonquin hotel). although each is an exceptional talent, in tandem, the ''nick and nora of cabaret,'' as they have been called, are a powerhouse jazz and musical-comedy duo whose sophisticated repartee is mercifully free of nagging married-couples shtick.  christine ebersole, currently starring in ''grey gardens,'' and the pianist and arranger billy stritch were chosen outstanding cabaret performance by a duo in a major engagement (at the metropolitan room at gotham). in her cabaret shows ms. ebersole is as charismatic as she is in the musical, which earned her rave reviews.  freddy cole and paula west were chosen best male and female jazz vocalists, and a lifetime achievement award will be given to the pop-jazz coloratura maureen mcgovern. in jazz, the keyboardist cedar walton was chosen best jazz soloist, and ben riley's monk legacy band best jazz combo.  demetri martin and sarah silverman won for stand-up comedy. five other awards also recognize performances in smaller cabarets, including piano bars. most of these performers have signed on to appear at the awards show.  asked if he had thought of adding a rock category to the awards, mr. siegel said he was leery because it might alienate the show's core broadway and cabaret audience, but he allowed that additional rock and world-music categories might help the awards gain television exposure and possibly live coverage.  the embrace of television would be a major breakthrough for a producer whose events are characterized by a rare combination of quality and economy. ''today's equivalent of 'the ed sullivan show' without the spinning plates,'' is how mr. siegel, who is an unabashed show business nostalgist, describes the nightlife awards.  the best known of his projects, which he produces with town hall, is broadway by the year, his efficient, low-budget answer to city center's encores series. each of its four annual concerts is an anthology of theater songs, famous and obscure, from a particular broadway musical season, performed by broadway stars like marc kudisch, nancy anderson and brent barrett.  mr. siegel, who writes the amusing historical commentary, serves as its affable, low-key m.c. typical of his remarks, on the year 1930: ''the night 'girl crazy' opened, george gershwin reportedly told ethel merman, 'never but never go near a singing teacher.' she had stopped the show as she would every night holding the 'i' in 'i got rhythm' for 16 measures. there were those who said she could hold a note longer than chase manhattan.'' this season, which begins feb. 26, will look back to 1928, and later in the year, 1938, 1959 and 1964.  ''barbara and i see these extraordinarily talented people who don't usually get the opportunity to show the range of what they can do for a large audience,'' he said. ''and because you can't get this music on the radio anymore, the options for hearing it are also limited.''  when he presented the idea of broadway by the year to town hall, he was asked to produce it for them. ''i warned them that i'd never produced anything in my life,'' he said. ''not even a puppet show in my parents' backyard.''  since its 2002 inception after two successful trial concerts the previous years, the series now has 900 subscribers. it has had 22 concerts, covering scores composed between 1925 and 1978. it has expanded to include dance numbers, and its backup ensemble, the ross patterson little big band, has grown from three to five musicians. it has generated 14 cds, including two of broadway unplugged, a popular annual spinoff initiated in 2004 in which singers perform without a microphone.  two years ago mr. siegel and town hall thought up the broadway cabaret festival to help fill the hole created when the long-running cabaret convention, produced by the mabel mercer foundation, moved from town hall to frederick p. rose hall at jazz at lincoln center.  held over three days in october, it consists of three distinct parts. the first night is a tribute to a broadway composer. the second focuses on younger broadway performers. (last october's show reunited emily skinner and alice ripley from ''side show.'') ''broadway originals'' on sunday is a gala at which performers reprise signature songs they introduced onstage years earlier.  before he turned producer, mr. siegel, who was born in the bronx (as was his wife), grew up in fair lawn, n.j., and attended rutgers and the university of iowa, was a writer of pulp westerns, which he used to turn out at the rate of one every two or three months. thirty-six of the 47 books he has published were collaborations, the most ambitious being the 400,000-word encyclopedia of hollywood, published in 1989 by facts on file and revised and reissued two years ago.  the encyclopedia led mr. siegel into movie reviewing, and he did telephone reviews for a syndicated network of radio stations that at one time numbered nearly 100. at the same time he was working as a senior editor for a publishing house. when he quit his job, he became a literary agent for several of its clients, including the best-selling fantasy novelist r. a. salvatore, whom he still represents. his relationship with town hall began a decade ago when he became co-host of a film seminar series that he continues to lead.  how does he do it all?  ''i spent my junior year of college learning to juggle instead of studying,'' he said. ''and i'm still juggling.''  he is not the least embarrassed about standing in the cold, night after night, handing out leaflets.  ''people constantly say they can't believe i'm flyering,'' he said. ''my usual response is that it's a grass-roots organization, and i'm a blade of grass.''  read this flyer  here is information about the events mentioned in this article. all take place at town hall, 123 west 43rd street, manhattan. information: (212) 840-2824.  the 2007 nightlife awards will be on jan. 29 at 7 p.m. (tickets, $25 and $75).  ''the broadway musicals of 1928,'' on feb. 26 at 8 p.m., is the first of four concerts in the broadway by the year series; others, devoted to the musicals of 1938, 1959 and 1964, will be on march 26, april 30 and june 18 (tickets, $40, $45 and $50).  the broadway cabaret festival will be held on oct. 19-21, and broadway unplugged in november; ticket prices are not yet available.  