kidnapping suspect's co-workers stunned   behind the counter at imo's, a pizzeria on one of the main strips in this affluent suburb southwest of st. louis, the cooks and cleaners have a penchant for joking around. so when they realized that a kidnapping suspect in the area had a vehicle that matched the description of the manager's white pickup truck, they had a few rounds of fun with it.  ''the guys noticed the similarities immediately,'' mike prosperi, imo's owner, said monday. ''people were joking about it because no one thought it could possibly be him. he was just too nice a guy.''  everybody had a good laugh except the manager himself, michael devlin, 41, who was later apprehended near the kitchen where he had worked, by all accounts, as a model employee since age 15. mr. devlin was arrested friday and charged with one count of kidnapping; he is being held on $1 million bail. the authorities said that he had confessed, and that more charges were likely.  the police had spotted the white truck outside mr. devlin's apartment, and inside the apartment on friday, officers found a 13-year-old boy, william ownby, known as ben, who had disappeared just days earlier, and, even more to their surprise, a 15-year-old boy, shawn hornbeck, who had been missing for more than four years from his home in a rural town about 60 miles from kirkwood. both boys had no visible injuries and have been reunited with their parents in what some are calling the missouri miracle.  mr. devlin, not known as one to take vacation or sick days, had been at work on thursday and friday, not watching over either boy. he even mentioned to mr. prosperi that the authorities were bothering him, snooping around his apartment building.  mr. prosperi said he told mr. devlin on friday morning that he should cooperate, as there must have been some sort of mix-up. but things changed as soon as the federal bureau of investigation showed up to take mr. devlin away.  ''the situation looks pretty grave,'' mr. prosperi said.  in minutes, mr. devlin went from unassuming and good-natured pizza cook to accused mastermind child abductor -- and the people who were most surprised were among those who knew him best. ''everything is so shocking because it's completely out of character,'' mr. prosperi said. ''i still can't believe i'm sitting here talking about this.''  but perhaps what has confounded people around here most is how mr. devlin managed to keep the older of the boys, shawn, under his control. neighbors who knew the two said it appeared that shawn had a considerable amount of freedom.  he was often seen playing with a close friend in the courtyard of the apartment. he seemed to love bikes, skateboarding and computer games. some neighbors assumed he was a dropout. they thought nothing of his being around all day, not in school.  and, they said, mr. devlin certainly did not behave like a man in hiding. he called the police a few months ago to report someone who had parked in his assigned spot. he was known as a stickler for the rules.  ''we've always known him as the dad,'' said mario emanuel, a neighbor. ''that's how they walked; that's how they talked. the kid even used his truck every once in a while.''  ''shawn was out every day in the evening riding his bike,'' mr. emanuel added. ''he seemed like a cool kid.''  no one knows why shawn did not use the truck or his bike to leave, but it is the question that everyone wants answered. he may have had access to a cellphone. the associated press reported that a neighbor found a cellphone outside the apartment last fall and when he dialed the number on it, shawn came to retrieve it.  shawn may even have had internet access. someone calling himself shawn devlin posted a guestbook entry on dec. 1 to a web site run by shawn hornbeck's parents that asked, ''how long are you planning to look for your son?''  within minutes there was another message: ''hey sorry about that last thing i put on there. i write poems and i was wondering if it would be o.k. to write a poem for the hornbeck family.''  the messages have not been verified as authentic, however, and the f.b.i., which had been assisting with the search for shawn for years, would not comment on them.  ''there's a lot of work still to be done and a lot of questions to be answered,'' said peter krusing, the spokesman for the f.b.i. in the bureau's st. louis field office.  law enforcement officials have released few details. the boys' parents did not return calls for comment, nor did the local prosecutor. mr. devlin could be arraigned on the kidnapping charge, which involves only the younger boy at this point, as early as tuesday. detective michael bales of the kirkwood police department said officers had been summoned to mr. devlin's apartment complex once or twice a month -- occasionally at mr. devlin's request.  ''he was kind of a nondescript guy,'' said detective bales, who often went to imo's for pizza. ''this is a small community. you see the same people over and over. he was one of them. he was kind of a fixture.''  the squat, two-story apartment complex has become a local attraction, with cars approaching slowly so passengers can get a glimpse and take pictures.  people have also taken out some of their anger on imo's and mr. prosperi. ''this morning when i came in people tried to throw rocks through the front window,'' he said. ''friday night i got calls saying: 'why on earth didn't you do a background check? you hired a sex predator.' ''  mr. prosperi continued: ''mike had no history. no history of this sort of thing at all.''  