after 42 hours (or so), house democrats complete 100-hour push   house democrats met the goals of their 100-hour legislative offensive with plenty of time to spare on thursday, claiming that their successes proved they could govern.  republicans derided the hurry-up nature of the effort as a bit of one-sided political showmanship that undercut the democrats' pledge that the new congress would be more bipartisan.  but the easy approval of the half-dozen measures in the 100-hour agenda -- dealing with the minimum wage, embryonic stem cell research, health care, national security, education and energy -- was celebrated by the new majority as a validation of the blitz, an idea born on the campaign trail that blossomed into a central house democratic theme.  ''it was a way to say that this congress will no longer be a place where optimism and good ideas come to die,'' said speaker nancy pelosi of california, who devised the approach as what democrats deemed a counterpoint to 12 years of republican control.  ms. pelosi also established another benchmark on thursday, announcing that she had asked democratic lawmakers who serve as committee chairmen to draw up a series of energy bills ''so that by the fourth of july we can have a package of legislation to truly declare our energy independence.''  some republicans predicted that only one or two of the 100-hour bills would eventually become law in a form close to that approved by the house. and they heaped criticism on democrats for not giving them any chance to offer their own proposals.  ''we are short-circuiting democracy here, and i think my colleagues on both sides of the aisle understand this,'' representative john a. boehner of ohio, the minority leader, said thursday on the floor as the democrats pushed through the last bill, rolling back some subsidies for the oil industry.  republicans and some democrats said the 100-hour drive had been somewhat overshadowed by the debate over the war in iraq and president bush's proposed troop buildup there.  ''as long as george bush is in the white house, putting more troops in iraq, that is all that matters to voters,'' said representative tom davis, republican of virginia. (mr. davis said he was still assessing his position on the president's decision to send more than 20,000 additional troops in an effort to quell sectarian violence.)  the ability of house democrats to pass their bills within the prescribed time was never in doubt, given the majority's ability to control the schedule and the leadership's decision to be very selective in how it counted the time. when the democratic clock stopped, only 42 hours 25 minutes of time actually spent on the bills had expired, and democrats said they could have easily handled the legislation more quickly.  the associated press, which counted all the time the house was in session, clocked the 100-hour effort at 87 hours.  while the whole enterprise drew ridicule from republicans, the democratic response was essentially ''look who's laughing now.''  ''they can make fun of it,'' said representative steny h. hoyer of maryland, the majority leader. ''but they cannot make fun of the fact that for the first time in 10 years, we have raised the minimum wage.''  the $2.10-an-hour increase in the minimum wage may be the legislation with the best chance of becoming law. the senate is expected to consider a similar proposal quickly, though senators of both parties support adding tax breaks for businesses to help them offset any new costs. house democrats prefer an increase without such an add-on, but may go along in order to get a measure to the president's desk.  the outlook for other 100-hour measures is more problematic. last year mr. bush vetoed legislation that would have expanded federal financing of embryonic stem cell research, and the house still lacks a veto-proof majority for a similar bill it just passed. another measure, directing the government to negotiate with pharmaceutical companies over the cost of drugs sold through medicare, could also draw a veto.  in addition, senators say they have reservations about the costs of enacting recommendations of the sept. 11 commission that are newly approved by the house, and they have different ideas as well on the remaining bills.  ''many of the 100-hours 'accomplishments' can't make it through the senate'' or survive a veto, said representative roy blunt of missouri, the republican whip.  but democrats said that they had done what they set out to do and that the first flurry of legislation was the start of their work, not the end. ''this is just the beginning of making sure the future is a future that's fair for everybody,'' said representative rahm emanuel of illinois, chairman of the house democratic caucus.  now his party is faced with what to do in the next 100 hours, and the next, particularly after promising a full house workweek. the coming days are likely to be dominated by the war in iraq and by mr. bush's plan for more troops there.  ms. pelosi, who met thursday with democratic senators, said afterward that house democrats would line up behind a version of the new senate resolution declaring that the troop increase is not in the country's best interest.  though that measure is not binding on the president, ms. pelosi said democrats would continue to apply pressure on him to change his approach on both the war and their legislative program.  ''all of these bills are being passed in a bipartisan way,'' the speaker said. ''we hope that he would consider signing them. we will take our campaign on these issues, though, to the public, in hopes that their voices would be heard by him.''  