the latest thing in child's play   to the editor:  re ''new york tries to think outside the sandbox'' (front page, jan. 10):  in the midst of a skyrocketing obesity epidemic among new york children, who have no backyards and very little physical education at school, why would the city build a playground that de-emphasizes running and climbing? while fantasy play is important, children need an outlet for unstructured activity and for the exercise it provides.  in addition, having paid workers telling children how to play seems to counter the very aim of encouraging children to use their imaginations. it also removes the role of parents, who for generations have helped boost their children up the ladder to the slide, mediate sandbox disputes and watch as they embark on flights of physical self-discovery.  hillary kessler-godin  teaneck, n.j., jan. 10, 2007  to the editor:  hooray! we're just back from a vacation in london, where our three children had to be dragged from the princess of wales playground in kensington gardens.  based on a peter pan theme (j. m. barrie financed the construction of the original playground a century ago), it features a huge wooden pirate ship, teepees, a fortress, swings and an elaborate climbing structure.  even our 8-year-old, who is bored stiff by the hyper-safety-conscious (and hence unchallenging) playgrounds near our home on riverside drive, was enraptured and created an elaborate fantasy based on the provocative equipment.  forget the trained ''play workers'' -- what children need is varied, original playground design, not the standard assembly-line structures found in most new york city playgrounds.  linda kahn  new york, jan. 10, 2007  to the editor:  while it sounds like a bold and exciting experiment for the children who will play in the new setting, what about making sure new york city has lovely, clean and safe playgrounds in all our neighborhoods first?  then, start putting the money into new and innovative places for our children to enjoy themselves.  beth rosen  new york, jan. 10, 2007  to the editor:  as a playground safety consultant who, in the 1970s, petitioned for and participated in the development of safety guidelines for playgrounds under the aegis of the federal consumer product safety commission, i think it's evident from the current ''new'' proposal to install nets, water play and sandboxes in a new york city playground that those who don't learn from history are doomed to repeat it.  what might be feasible in a controlled area with round-the-clock maintenance is simply not practical in an urban play space: sandboxes attract animals, which contaminate them, nets are extremely difficult to maintain and are easy targets of vandalism, and water play carries the constant risk of tragedy for toddlers, who can drown in an inch of water.  although the use of play leaders is an idea that harks back to the late 19th century, reviving such a program would require careful screening of those put in charge of young children, and as such would bring its own safety concerns.  theodora briggs sweeney  horsham, pa., jan. 11, 2007  to the editor:  i urge the city park planners not to stop maintaining the city's older-style playgrounds.  the reason: not all children need cooperative play during an afternoon jaunt to the playground. some just want to be alone.  planners shouldn't forget what children's days are like these days. in the classroom, they sit in open circles or small groups designed to foster teamwork. young children go to playgroups where they work on sharing and developing ''social skills,'' and children of all ages often go to several extracurricular classes a week, where they are told what to do by their teachers and coaches.  i love to go out for a jog to clear my mind. i think i've seen the same effect of solitary physical activity on my children, pumping away on a swing or hanging from a monkey bar. for once, no one's asking them to do anything. they're just stretching their muscles, breathing harder, thinking and relaxing.  i say build the new interactive playgrounds, but don't also take away the option of solitary activity.  julie beglin  brooklyn, jan. 11, 2007  to the editor:  new models of playgrounds that promote safe, meaningful social interactions are laudable.  i served as senior assistant comptroller to the former new york city comptroller elizabeth holtzman, a pioneer in helping ensure the safety of the city's children in its playgrounds. i hope that the city has assessed the potential financial risks and burdens of david rockwell's model, including those relating to defending any future claims against the city of the syringe-in-the-sandbox variety.  now a parent of three in new england, i also hope your front-page publicity of the social virtues of the playground experience encourages your nationwide readership to take children out to playgrounds -- away from screen-based entertainment platforms -- and to mind them, resisting the clarion call of their own cellphones and blackberries.  marlene rehkamp o'brien  wellesley, mass., jan. 10, 2007  