as college grows, a city is asking, 'who will pay?'   for most of the last 40 years, this eclectic seaside city and its university of california campus have lived in relative harmony. with its beaches, bistros and relaxed intellectual vibe, santa cruz has long held an allure for those seeking a mellower college experience, a place where hiking trails, yoga mats and surfboards are as common as backpacks filled with books.  santa cruz's appeal has made it into one of the most popular of the university of california's 10 campuses. but this, in turn, has recently led to a deep rift in the cozy relationship between the college and the city, with accusations of bad faith, voter referendums and nearly a dozen lawsuits pending or in the works.  at issue is an ambitious proposal for a campus expansion, approved by the university's board of regents late last year. it promises to transform the landscape and image of santa cruz, 75 miles south of san francisco, from a relatively small undergraduate university into an internationally known institution, with new graduate schools, an elite faculty and hefty research grants.  the plan calls for increasing enrollment over the next 14 years by 30 percent, to 19,500. the university also intends to add 1,500 faculty and staff members, and several new professional programs and research centers. redwood trees would have to be cut down to make way for some of the construction.  ''this plan allows us to continue the upward trajectory that has characterized u.c.s.c. over the past decade,'' the acting chancellor, george blumenthal, said in a written message to colleagues after the regents approved the plan.  but local officials and residents in this city of 55,000 say campus growth has already changed the small-town feel of santa cruz, driving up housing costs, forcing out families and straining the infrastructure. taxpayers often end up bearing the cost.  ''the fact is, we don't have the water, we don't have the transport, we don't have the housing,'' said don stevens, 54, a graduate of the university who lives here and is a member of the coalition for limiting university expansion, or clue, a plaintiff in several pending lawsuits. ''if the university is going to grow, they should pay their way.''  university officials say campus growth is part of a legislative mandate to educate every eligible high school graduate in california. some also point out that the university system is not obligated to answer to its host cities. under the state constitution, the university of california is deemed ''entirely independent of all political and sectarian influence'' and exempt from local land use controls and local taxes.  campuses do pay for the services they use, like water and for on-campus repairs but not necessarily for building new infrastructure.  and the university's tax-exempt status can be costly. for example, when texas instruments, which was paying $186,000 a year in taxes, shuttered its santa cruz division, the university later bought the space.  ''the property tax went to zero,'' said a member of the santa cruz city council, michael rotkin, a santa cruz graduate. ''it may mean paying jobs, but the city tax base is losing'' money.  the university's independent status has been a recurring theme in disputes between campuses and cities around the state. but a state legislative report released this month may foreshadow change. the report, by the nonpartisan legislative analyst's office, cited ''a lack of accountability, standardization and clarity'' in how the university deals with the effects of its growth throughout the system.  ''we don't object to university growth, per se,'' said the santa cruz city attorney, john g. barisone. ''what we do object to is the university taking steps to grow without having mitigation measures in place to counter the impacts.''  the university has argued that it is each city's responsibility to establish a plan for a campus to help pay for infrastructure costs associated with expansion. but the legislative report found that ''no u.c. campus has been able to reach such an agreement with a neighboring jurisdiction,'' and therefore no campus has made a fair share payment, the report said.  santa cruz officials said that despite dozens of meetings with the university about its growth plan, no agreement had been reached. so the council decided to try a new tactic, placing two measures to limit the campus's growth on the november ballot. each was approved by more than 75 percent of the vote.  one of the measures requires the university to pay not just utility bills for city services, but also a contribution toward the cost of building infrastructure, like water or transit systems. the other one requires voter approval before the city can extend services to university buildings outside city boundaries, as is called for under the expansion plan.  citizen groups, the city and the county have filed lawsuits to block the university's expansion unless it provides specific solutions to possible problems acknowledged by the university. the university, in turn, has countersued, including a legal challenge to the validity of ballot measures developed by a city that, as the constitution states, has no authority over the state campus. the suit, intended to block or invalidate the city measures, also claims the city would breach long-term water contracts if it withheld service.  university officials said they had made many concessions to the city, including a decrease in proposed enrollment, which had originally been set at 21,000 students, and cutbacks in construction. a lawyer for the university, kelly drumm, said it was not legally required to describe its plans further.  ''we think our environmental report was prepared in a legally adequate manner,'' ms. drumm said. ''it adequately reflects the needs of campus and community.''  in interviews with about a dozen students, sentiment over a campus expansion was divided. michael fisher, 18, a freshman from los angeles, said he had voted for the november ballot measures.  ''i came here because i liked that the campus was small,'' mr. fisher said. ''a lot more growth will change the nature of the campus. we already have too many students.''  but bokhtar ehsan, 21, a senior majoring in business, said the city had ''no right to be mad'' over university growth.  ''none of the local people complain when they charge ridiculous rents or when we spend tons of money downtown,'' mr. ehsan said.  city leaders in santa cruz have promised to fight until they win. they said they were heartened by the legislative report and by a california supreme court ruling last july in a case addressing similar conflicts between the city of marina and the california state university at monterey bay, about 40 miles south of santa cruz. reversing an earlier court of appeals decision, the high court ruled that the university was required to mitigate significant environmental effects of an expansion project and negotiate fair share agreements for the cost of infrastructure improvements.  ''there is no way we are going to back down now,'' said mr. rotkin, the council member. ''we can't afford to walk away. ironically, it's cheaper to fight than to pay millions to remedy the negative impacts.''  