heaven and high water in south carolina's new wilderness   one moment, the paddler was sliding through a narrow passageway between an ancient bald cypress and a towering tupelo gum tree. the next, the upturned yellow hull of his kayak was all any of us could see.  ''hey chris,'' i called to our outfitter and guide. ''brad's upside down.''  it wasn't as if we hadn't been warned. we were told about spooky trees and chilly black water a few hours earlier as we planned our route through the woodbury tract -- a newly created 25,668-acre nature preserve along the little pee dee river in south carolina, part of a $300 million purchase of timber company lands by conservation groups.  ''this time of year, the area is a flood zone, and you'll be able to get way back into the cypress swamp,'' furman long, a naturalist and caretaker of the nearby sandy island refuge, told our party of four: brad strickland, a transplanted new yorker; chris crolley, our guide; mike cline, an elementary school teacher; and me.  ''but be careful,'' mr. long continued. ''the river channel is not easy to follow. and don't get turned sideways against any trees in the current, or you'll flip right over.''  he also warned that if we paddled too far into the forest, we might have to spend the night. ''bring a compass,'' he said, ''and if you're not sure which channel is the right one, just follow the signs from god.''  the signs from god were, in fact, trail guideposts painted by ordinary mortals. we found the first after paddling down punch bowl landing road. you would usually drive down punch bowl, but it's winter in the lowcountry wilderness, and vast swaths of rain-soaked timberland lie beneath clear, tea-colored water.  mr. crolley, who owns coastal expeditions, based near charleston, led his first expedition down the little pee dee three years ago. last april the agreement was announced protecting the woodbury tract and the separate 13,281-acre hamilton ridge tract along the savannah river near the georgia state line. these were the south carolina components of a larger deal: land purchases from the international paper company across 10 eastern states, arranged by the conservation fund, the nature conservancy and a host of other conservation interests.  woodbury is the largest parcel among the newly protected areas, and mr. long says he believes it to be among the most important. ''woodbury has a lot of different topographical variations,'' he said. ''there's longleaf pine, bottomland hardwood -- several different kinds of hardwood forest. it was an ideal scenario.''  under management by the south carolina department of natural resources, hunters and fishermen will continue to pursue the tract's wild turkey, hog, deer, bass and trout, while kayakers can cruise through a truly wild place that offers rare sites for riverbank camping. the tract will also serve as a refuge for south carolina's small coastal population of black bears -- a group of animals that have been dying on local highways at a rate of more than 30 a year.  woodbury will be a link in what conservationists hope will eventually be a corridor of protected forest, swamps, rivers and sand hills running from the north carolina border to georgia. it's an ambitious goal in the face of heavy development pressure -- myrtle beach lies little more than a dozen miles to the east in the region known as the grand strand -- that has driven land prices up to several thousand dollars an acre from around $300 in the last few years.  ''if we don't get the land now,'' mr. long said, ''the developers will.''  it's a warm, overcast january morning along the banks of the little pee dee, and the silence is astonishing. voices bounce off the leafless trees and over the mirror-smooth water with an odd, reverberating echo. a paddle slapped on the water booms like a gunshot. a red-bellied woodpecker calls in the distance, one of the few birds we hear in this ghostly wilderness.  passing the flooded punch bowl campsite, mr. crolley leads us into the slow-moving river channel. though logged in the distant past, this expansive forest is today home to a breathtaking array of cypress and tupelo gum trees in all shapes and sizes. some are little more than gnarled, fantastically twisted stumps kept alive by tenacious new branches that sprout from seemingly dead wood. others, several hundred years old, tower above, their massive trunks supported by intertwined root systems covering an area nearly the size of a football field.  mr. crolley brushes a pale green moss, which he calls old man's beard. spanish moss turns faintly green when damp and stands out in a winter landscape of grays and browns. the black water below is not really black at all, but stained by tannic acid released by the trees.  ''it's the same thing that gives iced tea, our state hospitality drink, its color,'' he says.  we paddle through the narrow arboreal confines of a tributary called russ creek. just beyond a sign reminding us to ''honor thy father and thy mother'' -- one of the ''signs from god'' mr. long told us about -- we see an enormous cypress off the main branch of the little pee dee. it would take three men to link arms around its base.  mr. strickland and i float over in the slow-moving current to gawk at the tree. its wood is incredibly dense, as it is for all cypress, and special oils make it nearly impervious to rot. after a few moments, we head back through the canopy via different routes. but as mr. strickland carefully wends his way through a tight section, he suddenly flips upside down in the 55-degree water. for a moment, i fear the current has upended him and perhaps pinned him to a tree. but he rights his boat and soon wears a broad grin. he has managed to keep the watertight skirt around himself and the hull.  after toweling off and borrowing a dry shirt, he says that a hidden cypress knee, a protruding root knob just below the water line, shifted him suddenly to the left and caused him to roll:  ''i just said to myself, 'oh, lord, don't panic, don't panic.' there were stumps and vines everywhere underwater, so i just grabbed onto a vine and pushed myself upright again. thank god the weather was warm. it was actually kind of invigorating.''  just downstream, a sign reminded us to ''read the bible.''  near the southern end of woodbury, the widening little pee dee begins to mix with the muddy big pee dee to create a swirling, chocolate tea. at their confluence the rivers become the great pee dee. it has been nearly four hours, and we haven't seen another soul. mr. crolley motions toward mr. strickland and mr. cline, who have drifted a quarter-mile ahead.  ''i like the idea that there are only two people on the planet enjoying that spot,'' mr. crolley said. ''that's pretty pure for me.''  with swifter waters just ahead and several miles to go before the end of a short winter's day, we dig our paddles in. the current carries us along.  if you go  chris crolley runs coastal expeditions (843-884-7684, www.coastalexpeditions.com) and can arrange excursions on the little pee dee for $88 a person for a minimum of four people. he also has longer overnight trips on many of the area's most scenic and wild waterways.  betwixt the rivers (843-423-1999, www.betwixttherivers.com) in marion, s.c., will take kayakers down the little pee dee for $35 to $50 a person, depending on the group's size. it also arranges moonlight paddling tours.  blackwater adventures in pinopolis, s.c., (843-761-1850, www.blackwateradventure.com) also runs trips down the little pee dee. a four-hour trip for a groupof four is $300, and prices per person drop as the party size increases.  adventurer  