boat rescuers report success herding dolphins in l.i. waters   more than 30 rescuers withstood cold winds that swept across northwest harbor on tuesday to successfully herd several dolphins out of an inlet off long island where they have been stranded for at least a week.  banging on partly submerged metal pipes and revving their engines, the dolphin wranglers maneuvered eight boats to corral the dolphins and push them past a shoal that has discouraged the animals from returning to open waters.  the pod, frightened and disoriented, refused to stay together. but in two separate drives the rescuers were able to move 6 to 13 dolphins into deeper water.  ''we're real happy with the success we've had today,'' said chuck hamilton, a regional supervisor for the new york state department of environmental conservation. ''it's truly amazing that they got these animals out. a lot of credit is due to the skillful boat operators.''  when dealing with a mass stranding, the decision to corral and drive the animals is a serious one.  ''we don't take it lightly,'' said kathy zagzebski, executive director of the national marine life center, adding that the stress of being corralled could cause the dolphins to beach themselves.  the marine center, in buzzards bay, mass., is used to such rescue endeavors; the center's coastal region is known as a hot spot for marine animal stranding.  katie touhey, executive director and senior scientist at the cape cod stranding network, the group that provided a high-frequency pinger system that rescuers have been using to help move the dolphins out of the northwest harbor inlet, said that if corralling fails, then rescuers could use nets to capture and move the dolphins.  ''but capturing is super-stressful,'' ms. touhey said, ''and it should be avoided at all costs.''  five dolphins stranded in the choppy waters of the northwest harbor area have already died, possibly of starvation, including one that washed up on shore tuesday morning, mr. hamilton said. another dolphin was euthanized.  there are plans to continue the rescue effort on wednesday. rescuers estimated that three to five animals were still in the inlet. there are concerns that the dolphins that made it out of the inlet may respond to the distress calls of those still stranded.  chuck bowman, president of the riverhead foundation for marine research and preservation, noted that it has been hard to get an accurate count of how many have been stranded.  ''it's not like we can say, 'everybody stop and put up your flippers,' '' he said.  