cost of corn soars, forcing mexico to set price limits   facing public outrage over the soaring price of tortillas, president felipe calderón abandoned his free-trade principles on thursday and forced producers to sign an agreement fixing prices for corn products.  skyrocketing prices for corn on the world market have pushed up the price of the humble tortilla, the mainstay of the mexican diet, by nearly a third in the past three weeks, to 35 cents a pound in mexico city and even higher in other parts of the country.  half of the country's 107 million people live on $4 a day or less, and many of them survive largely on tortillas and beans. the price increases have riled the public to such an extent that it has created a political storm that threatens to swamp mr. calderón's fresh presidency.  this month, the president, who took office in december, was booed and heckled at events around the country over food prices. mexican lawmakers called on him to impose price controls, while leftist opposition leaders suggested that he was protecting giant corn companies. one editorial cartoonist depicted him falling from a tower as tortillas flew upward like birds.  even members of mr. calderón's own conservative party in congress called on him this week to do something quickly.  last week, the president tried to contain the crisis by allowing more corn imports from the united states and ordering an investigation into whether corn distributors were colluding to manipulate prices. but the public outcry continued, and the central bank warned that the rise in corn prices would push the price of other staples up and feed inflation.  on thursday morning, mr. calderón, a fierce advocate of free trade in last year's campaign, let the hammer fall. he announced that he had reached an agreement with the major businesses involved in corn products to stabilize the price of tortillas at a maximum of about 35 cents a pound.  he also fixed the price of cornmeal sold to mom-and-pop tortilla shops at 14 cents a pound and announced that government-owned shops in rural areas would sell tortillas at the same price, far below the market rate.  ''we will not tolerate speculators and monopolists,'' he said. ''we are going to apply the law firmly and punish anyone who tries to take advantage of the needs of people.''  there is a continuing debate here about what caused the price of tortillas to shoot up so quickly. some economists blame the increased demand for corn from ethanol plants in the united states, and it is true corn prices in the states last week reached their highest point in a decade, the united states agriculture department said. at the same time, the cost of white corn has risen about 13 percent here over the past year, mexican government figures show.  but mexican lawmakers and other officials have suggested that giant tortilla companies and corn flour distributors -- among them grupo maseca s.a. and maíz industrializado s.a., often known as minsa -- have taken advantage of the situation, hoarding supplies to drive prices up even more.  the central bank governor, guillermo ortíz, said last week that the steep rise in tortilla prices could not be justified when inflation over the past year had been about 4 percent. ''we clearly have a problem of speculation,'' he said.  on thursday morning, president calderón extracted promises from several large companies to freeze prices. wal-mart and other large retailers promised to keep their tortilla price at 27 cents a pound, while grupo maseca, also known as gruma, agreed to lock in corn flour prices at 21 cents a pound and sell tortillas at no more than 35 cents a pound.  the spike in corn prices has hurt small storefront tortilla makers, a hallmark of the mexican street. josé solano, a 27-year-old tortilla maker in mexico city, said he had lost about 40 percent of his business since early january, when he was forced to start raising his prices.  ''people are still buying tortillas, but many of them buy less,'' he said. ''look, we can't give our product away because we need a profit, and if they raise the cost of corn, there's no other way.''  the crisis has hit hardest for the poorest mexicans, who may spend more than a quarter of their daily salaries on tortillas.  ''this really affects my budget, the expenses of my family, because i cannot tell my kids to eat less,'' said ruth soria, a 37-year-old housewife, who was buying four pounds of tortillas for her six children on thursday. ''this is something that they must control well. the tortilla is something basic for us. what the government did today is the least they could do.''  