nets get unexpected lift from moore on offense   the nets' success was clear and emphatic monday.  jason kidd, the 33-year-old captain, fell one rebound short of his 83rd career triple-double. vince carter made it look easy, scoring 31 points. the journeyman center mikki moore blocked a shot and then yelled so loudly and scowled so fiercely that he seemed to rattle a young girl sitting in the first row at continental arena.  leading by as many as 27 points against the indiana pacers, the nets won for the sixth time in their last eight games, 105-95. the game followed a disappointing defeat at minnesota on saturday night, when the nets fell apart in the fourth quarter.  weeks ago, such a deflating defeat would have probably sent the nets (17-20) into a slide. but now they carry themselves with a winning swagger.  ''i think we've been competing at a high level in the sense of as a team,'' said kidd, who had 19 points, 10 assists and 9 rebounds. ''it's not been just one person playing. i think everybody's been pitching in.''  the most unheralded contributor during the nets' turnaround has been moore. he replaced nenad krstic, who tore his anterior cruciate ligament last month.  moore, acquired last summer from the seattle supersonics for a second-round pick, has exceeded expectations as an off-the-bench energy player. although he cannot recall being a first option on offense, moore has been scoring at an unusual pace.  moore scored 19 points monday, the third time this season that he has matched or surpassed his previous career high, 18.  ''i'm having a good time out there,'' he said. ''the team is real unselfish, man. if the play is there for me to get the ball, they make sure i get the ball. if they're going to put that much trust in me, i've got to finish.''  moore, who made his first four field-goal attempts, all dunks, made his biggest mark on defense in the third quarter. he swatted a layup attempt by pacers center jermaine o'neal, screamed, flexed and stared ahead.  ''anybody can score, but once you get a stop, once you make a team do what they don't want to do, you can make offensive runs,'' moore said. ''you can make transition baskets easy off of defense.''  the nets' offense was precise in the first quarter -- eight straight field goals over one stretch -- and late in the period, kidd scored 7 consecutive points. the first 2 points came on a smart play in which he intercepted an outlet pass by al harrington, who led the pacers with 18 points, and then drove for an easy layup.  he followed with a 16-foot bank shot over jamaal tinsley, and after making a free throw, he hit a fadeaway jumper to give the nets their first double-digit lead of the game, 29-18, with 3 minutes 35 seconds to play in the quarter.  the nets steadily pulled away in the second quarter, building a 21-point lead at halftime. they led by as many as 27 points in the third quarter. through three quarters, the nets were shooting 50.8 percent from the field and they held the pacers (20-18) to 37.9 percent shooting. the statistics were skewed by the fact that the nets entered the fourth quarter with a 25-point lead and were not at their sharpest.  since filing for divorce last week, kidd has been playing some of his best basketball of the season. by all indications, he has appeared as happy as ever during practices and games.  ''i think you could make the argument he is having as good a year as he's ever had,'' nets coach lawrence frank said. ''i think any time it is called into question that he is not where he was, that just fuels the fire, and that's what the great ones do.''  kidd may be looking to add to his legacy. he addressed a report that he would be invited to join the united states national basketball team.  ''if that's the case, i would love to be a part of that team this summer to help try to regain that special feeling of winning in international ball,'' he said.  rebounds  marcus williams, the nets' rookie point guard, returned after a two-game absence because of strep throat, which left him bedridden for four days. williams finished with 6 points, 3 rebounds and an assist in 11 minutes.  pro basketball  