echoes of grief and loss, modulated by humor   the teddy bear seemed an unpromising portent. coddled in a junior armchair and bathed in a cool spotlight, the raggedy little creature sat at the front of the stage, looking self-consciously forlorn, as audience members took their seats at the huntington theater for nicholas martin's new production of ''the cherry orchard'' here.  but fears that mr. martin's approach to anton chekhov's comic masterpiece would be soggy with sentiment proved happily unfounded. while this production, starring a softly radiant kate burton as the mercurial madame ranevskaya, does place a subtle emphasis on the tragedy in her past -- the death of her young son some five years before the play begins -- the teddy bear was a bit of a red herring, as it were. mr. martin's ''cherry orchard,'' presented in a clean new adaptation by the playwright richard nelson, is brisk, unfussily funny and steeped in just enough emotion to give it a gloss of tender feeling without drowning it in teardrops.  ms. burton, most recently seen in new york in theresa rebeck's ''water's edge'' and in w. somerset maugham's ''constant wife,'' has an impressive chekhovian curriculum vitae. she appeared in london as olga in ''three sisters,'' directed by michael blakemore and opposite kristin scott thomas. (she has played all three of chekhov's moscow-hungering sisters during her career.) ms. burton has also appeared in a film version of ''uncle vanya'' and played anya opposite colleen dewhurst's ranevskaya in an earlier production of ''the cherry orchard.''  but her most recent classical role on broadway was hedda gabler, in a production also directed by mr. martin and seen at the huntington before moving to new york. an actress of easygoing warmth, natural earthiness and bright comic instincts, ms. burton seemed an uneasy fit for ibsen's darkly thwarted antiheroine. shaping the role to suit her strengths, she and mr. martin uncovered unexpected -- and in my view untoward -- humorous underpinnings in ibsen's tormented and tormenting hedda.  by contrast, ms. burton's natural assets are ideally suited to ranevskaya, the flighty but endearing russian aristocrat who comes home to her beloved country estate after years of scattered living in europe, just in time to bid it a tender goodbye and lay to rest a few lingering ghosts, living and dead.  despite ranevskaya's frequent recourse to tears -- generally accompanied by smiles, in any case -- ''the cherry orchard'' was emphatically denoted a comedy by chekhov, who famously bridled at stanislavsky's mournful premiere production for the moscow art theater in 1904. since then, directors have had to negotiate the distance among perceptions of the play as a heart-rending chronicle of loss or an indictment of an idle class or a comedy about the painful necessity of change. although mr. martin's production is in a strictly naturalistic mode that derives at least superficially from the stanislavsky model (the beautiful sets in a soft palette are by ralph funicello), he keeps the play's texture light, bright and active.  mr. nelson's felicitous translation is stage-worthy and natural, with just a few jarring contemporary notes: ranevskaya describes her feckless lover in a pop-psychy way as ''thinking only of himself and his needs.'' in a program note, mr. nelson writes in a similar tone that in the play ''chekhov is bringing us through the stages of the grieving process with ranevskaya.''  on paper that may sound reductive -- chekhov as an artistic progenitor of elisabeth kübler-ross -- but in performance it isn't. the idea gives ms. burton and mr. martin a lucid emotional entry into the play, and a result is a performance of transparent feeling from ms. burton that is neither stagy nor overwrought. in the second act her casual placing of a small bouquet of flowers on a grave -- presumably her son's -- flits by unheralded, for instance.  ms. burton has a smile that can radiate any number of conflicting emotions, from simple joy to steely courage to trembling love, and she uses it beautifully throughout; this easy smile is the coin of a prodigal heart with nothing in the purse to draw on.  the more somber notes are poignant, but unforced, as when, hard upon her entrance, ranevskaya's eye falls with a queasy jolt on that abandoned teddy bear, and her face goes slack with renewed grief. in the second act, ms. burton's open-spirited ranevskaya turns anxious and carping, as if in steeling her heart against the loss of the cherry orchard and the estate, she has closed it off to the field of human feeling around her, too.  it's an intelligent, defensible choice, but it results in a constriction of the play's psychological texture, and ms. burton barges through at least one speech, ranevskaya's upbraiding of the callow idealist trofimov (a fine and feisty enver gjokaj), with too much scorn and not enough silken sympathy.  unfortunately, ms. burton's accomplished ranevskaya is surrounded by a few portraits more consistently lacking in crucial feeling. jessica rothenberg's anya, ranevskaya's teenage daughter, who has taken up a maternal role in her own mother's life, possesses little depth. and the characterization of lopakin (will lebow), the descendant of serfs who has triumphed in business and successfully wins the orchard and estate at auction, is disappointingly harsh. mr. lebow has been outfitted in sinister facial hair to begin with. and chekhov's clear compassion for lopakin, who himself has sympathy for the aristocrats whose place he is stealthily usurping, is largely missing from mr. lebow's interpretation.  bright spots include mark blum's gaev, ranevskaya's idle brother, who has a quiet warmth to complement ms. burton's; mr. blum captures the character's foolishness, but his odd dignity, too. as her adopted daughter varya, sarah hudnut has a businesslike bustle and an easy tear, but also a touch of upstanding pride that brings a note of nobility to her rejection by the newly minted bourgeois lopakin.  the lighter comic roles are for the most part nicely played. jeremiah kissel is fine as the superfluous cadger pishchik; jeremy beck's yephikhodov finesses a few prime pratfalls; and dick latessa dithers with geriatric grace as the fossilized servant firs.  firs, of course, wanders into the empty parlor at the curtain, as usual, concluding the play's movement from pathos to humor with a deft image. as the curtain falls, the place of that piteous-looking teddy bear has been usurped by an old man drifting into sleep, forgotten but somehow content.  the cherry orchard  by anton chekhov; translated by richard nelson; directed by nicholas martin; sets by ralph funicello; costumes by robert morgan; lighting by donald holder; sound by drew levy; original music by michael friedman; production stage manager, stephen m. kaus; stage manager, eileen ryan kelly. presented by the huntington theater company, mr. martin, artistic director; michael maso, managing director. at the boston university theater, 264 huntington avenue; (617) 266-0800. through feb. 4. running time: 2 hours 10 minutes.  with: jeremy beck (yephikhodov), robert bonotto (tramp), mark blum (gaev), kate burton (ranevskaya), jessica dickey (dunyasha), gene farber (yasha), enver gjokaj (trofimov), sarah hudnut (varya), jeremiah kissel (pishchik), dick latessa (firs), will lebow (lopakin), patrick lynch (station master), jessica rothenberg (anya) and joyce van patten (charlotta).  theater review  