just 'citi' as the brand, and a folded umbrella   citigroup, the global banking giant, is shrinking -- but only its name. executives are prepared to rebrand the company ''citi'' and to fold up its familiar red umbrella and instead use a logo with a stylized arc above the name.  the new name and look, which follows a 14-month review of the bank's brand, will be presented to the citigroup board this week, according to several executives close to the process. no final decision has been made and it could still undergo some minor changes.  ''we continue to work on our branding effort and will announce our decisions when it is completed,'' a spokeswoman, leah johnson, said. if adopted, the revised citi brand and logo will be used at nearly all the vast financial services company's businesses, including retail branches and its investment bank concentrated in the new york area, and showcased around the world.  the design is similar to the ''citi'' logo that now appears on much of its consumer advertising, office buildings and credit cards. a rollout could begin as early as next month.  the plan to unify citigroup's businesses under a new, single brand is part of an ambitious campaign by the chairman and chief executive, charles o. prince iii, to better integrate the bank's sprawling parts after years of acquisitions -- a strategy investors are still waiting to see pay off.  symbolically, it also marks the end of an era. just as a new name became one of the signatures of a transformative deal by the former chairman, sanford i. weill, a more coherent brand strategy signals mr. prince's plans to shift the focus of a company sometimes seen as a deal machine to one largely powered by internal and international growth.  the brand makeover comes out of the playbook of other big companies. apple computer, for example, last week shortened its name to apple emphasize its broader ambitions for other technologies, like the new iphone. several years ago, morgan stanley ditched the suffix of dean witter, and federal express became just fedex.  by shedding the suffix ''group'' as well as the red umbrella, mr. prince is severing the bank's most tangible ties to mr. weill, citigroup's patriarch, who made the old travelers group logo a key term of that company's landmark 1998 merger with citicorp and who is rarely seen without a small umbrella pin affixed to his lapel.  over two decades under mr. weill, commercial credit turned into the travelers group, which morphed into citigroup -- while many of its operating businesses like the retail operations, citibank, and the brokerage arm, smith barney, adopted their own looks and retained their old names. over the last few years, citigroup's consumer businesses took on the ''citi'' prefix to become citibank or citimortgage without an overarching plan or a formal approval process. its card business, which spends the largest amount on advertising, became known as citi.  the result, in the eyes of some, was a mishmash of logos and titles that appeared disconnected, while many wall street clients, main street customers and even citigroup employees simply referred to the different parts of the conglomerate as citi.  now, mr. prince hopes to unify the company under one global name at a time he is urging more cooperation between the businesses. he also hopes to achieve some small cost savings on media spending, which totaled $623 million in 2005, according to tns media intelligence.  most of the operating businesses are expected to adopt the ''citi'' prefix, but each will use a different color arc to maintain a distinct look. citi's corporate and investment bank will feature a black arc; its wealth management division will use a red arc, and its consumer businesses, a blue arc. banamex, its mexican retail bank, and smith barney are expected to retain the old names.  since october 2005, a panel of senior citigroup business leaders and marketing executives has been evaluating the future of the brand. at the time, mr. prince said he believed that the company could benefit from ''a more coordinated approach'' to dealing with ''one of our most important assets.''  the company hired landor associates, a brand-consulting firm owned by the wpp group, and put ajay banga, a co-head of its consumer businesses, who helped build pepsico's pizza hut and kfc franchises in india, in charge of the review.  still, many in the company were divided. top investment bank executives, some of whom had been campaigning for the resurrection of the salomon brothers name, initially thought that the adoption of the consumer brand's citi logo would cheapen their image. smith barney executives expressed similar concerns. by late fall, when citigroup announced that it would call the new york mets' new stadium, citifield, there was a growing consensus in favor of the new look. plans were not final, however, until mid-december.  at the same time, other citigroup managers were deeply divided over the fate of the red umbrella.  in the end, however, citigroup's brand committee decided to drop the 137-year-old symbol, which has adorned the bank's pitch books, buildings and business cards -- as well as some executive attire.  it has also been a source of local controversy. in 1997, a tribeca community association petitioned to have the neon umbrella removed from travelers' 39-story headquarters building at 388 greenwich street, now home to its investment bank. the new york city buildings department said it was a logo, not a sign, and it stayed after the company agreed to dim its lights overnight and turn it off for four hours after sunset.  now it appears that the umbrella will be folded up altogether. citigroup executives said that outside marketing research suggested that the umbrella had no resonance for bank customers in the united states, especially since the travelers insurance businesses had been spin off. outside the country, a bank executive, the symbol is associated with insurance as well as with bad luck in certain asian countries.  whether or not citigroup retains the rights, or sells it to another company, remains a question. it is also unclear what will happen to the 16-foot, 5,300 steel umbrella that sits outside the investment bank in lower manhattan.  of course, mr. prince may already have a place to display it in mind. several months ago, he half-jokingly suggested to mr. weill that ''if it ever does happen, that he is going to have to take the umbrella in front of our office downtown and move it out to my home in greenwich,'' mr. weill recalled in an interview last fall.  a greenwich zoning department official said that any structure above six feet requires the agency's approval.  