courtroom brought to tears by slain detective's widow   retired detectives with red eyes and untucked shirts faced the men's room wall and wiped their faces with brown paper towels. back in the courtroom, the convicted man covered his eyes. in the front row, his mother, sister and cousins fell together and sobbed.  the police widow had finished her testimony. delivered in a halting keen through tears and a deep haitian lilt, her words gave crescendo to the government's case to execute ronell wilson, 24, for the murder of two undercover detectives on staten island in march 2003.  ''we no longer celebrate father's day at home,'' said the widow, rose nemorin, testifying in united states district court in brooklyn yesterday. ''instead, we go to the cemetery and i get to watch our children talk and hug a cold wall. it breaks my heart to see my children leaving notes, gifts and hugging a piece of cold wall. the children's notes read: 'i love you, daddy. i miss you. we wish you were here to celebrate father's day with us. we hope you are having a good time in heaven with god.' ''  when she finished, the jurors walked out for a break. there were wet eyes among them. they have already convicted mr. wilson of murder for shooting the detectives, james v. nemorin, 36, and rodney j. andrews, 34, in the back of the head during a covert assignment to buy a gun.  at the close of testimony, prosecutors rested their case for the death penalty. next week, mr. wilson's family will give an accounting of his loveless boyhood. judge nicholas g. garaufis has ruled that mr. wilson will be allowed to read a short statement of remorse without cross-examination.  after hearing testimony on tuesday from detective andrews's son, who is 16, mr. wilson wrote a longer, more detailed statement, his lawyers said in court. outside the jury's presence, a defense lawyer, kelly sharkey, asked to substitute the new statement, which says, ''i am truly sorry for the pain i have caused.''  prosecutors contested the substitution. judge garaufis demurred, worn from the emotion of the day.  ''after a good night's sleep,'' he said, ''i'll reflect on what to do.''  the day had been a full one. for the first time since the trial's start in november, jurors heard mr. wilson's voice. in recorded telephone calls from a federal detention center, he suggested retaliation for an assault on his nephew. prosecutors offered the recordings as evidence of his ability to order violence from prison.  ''call him and tell him to go see what's up, yo,'' mr. wilson says on the recording, ''and i ain't talking about talking about nothing, yo.''  jurors also heard the voice of detective nemorin, who described his undercover work in a clip from a police documentary.  ''you've got to be nervous,'' the detective says. ''if you don't care, you're going to get hurt. you've got to care.''  and jurors heard from those he left behind. first came sgt. richard abbate of the undercover unit, who found his detectives bleeding in the street. he has since retired.  ''i'm a supervisor,'' sergeant abbate said. ''it's my job to bring my team home safely. i did not accomplish my mission that night.''  marie-jean nemorin, sister of the detective, said she had given her baby brother the nickname little sweetheart. ''we'll never see him again,'' she said.  then the convicted man's mother, cheryl wilson, rushed from the courtroom. her son fingered the lining of his suit.  and the widow took the stand. for the benefit of the court stenographer, she spelled the surname that came from her husband. she was 19 when they met.  ''my name is rose nemorin,'' she said. ''i am 35 years old. i am the widow of detective james v. nemorin. james, my hero, my husband and the father of my three children: stephan, 11, rudolphe, 8, and sarah, 5 years old. their father and my husband was taken away from us when i was 31 years old and they were only 7, 5 and 18 months.''  her shoulders were tightly hunched and she held her head sidelong and braced.  ''he once told me, 'rosie, i am one of the happiest men in the world,' '' she said. '' 'i have a beautiful wife whom i love very much, three beautiful children who i love so much and a great job that i love. rosie, i made success.' ''  mrs. nemorin continued: ''i miss seeing his face, his smile and his love. unfortunately this loving man was taken away from us. for what? he was just trying to make this world a better place for your family, his family and everyone else.''  there were pictures, and she identified those seen on the screen for the jury. in the pictures, mrs. nemorin and her husband were young and smiling. he was holding her with both hands, and his nose touched her nose and he was pulling her close. then they were in wedding clothes and still smiling, and he was holding her hips. then he was in a t-shirt with their baby on his shoulder.  in the courtroom she was in front of all these people crying. the prosecutor put another picture on the screen, but the machine failed to focus. there was rose nemorin up on that screen with her husband pulling her close and the colors bleeding together and the image blurred beyond all recognition.  