all together: let's go, jack! let's go, jill!   to the editor:  re ''equal cheers for boys and girls draw some boos'' (front page, jan. 14):  some years ago when my daughter was a gymnast, she expressed interest in becoming a cheerleader. i told her i would not approve of her cheerleading until boy cheerleaders were cheering for the girls' teams.  that may seem like a ridiculous idea, but so did the idea of a female surgeon or a female judge; or a female investment banker -- which is what my daughter is now.  times change, but we have to help them change in the right direction. a young, pretty girl in a short skirt prancing around to encourage the athletic performance of others (male or female) belongs to the same era as the housewife in pearls welcoming her husband to their sparkling clean house with pipe, slippers and a home-cooked meal.  cheerleaders should be treated like other athletes, appearing only in meets where they are the competitors.  nancy lowenthal  hicksville, n.y., jan. 15, 2007  to the editor:  your article begs us to replace the gender issue with that of race or disability, and asks if this would be acceptable.  as a society, it would be unthinkable to allow students to cheer only for white athletes and individuals without disabilities. yet we have no problem providing cheerleaders to only men's sporting activities.  discrimination is discrimination, regardless of race, gender or ability. if the presence of cheerleaders helps motivate players and create a level of excitement at the games, shouldn't we be fostering this type of atmosphere at all sanctioned sporting events?  when schools treat their athletes differently, they are creating a culture that emphasizes support only for the male athletes and devaluing the notion of women supporting one another. is this the overall message we want to be teaching our children in school?  landmark discrimination laws like the voting rights act of 1965, title ix of the education amendments of 1972 and the americans with disabilities act say otherwise.  donna lopiano  chief executive officer  women's sports foundation  east meadow, n.y., jan. 17, 2007  to the editor:  in 1979, i played on my high school's first girls' soccer team. i recall the afternoon when the cheerleaders showed up for a game. it was a novelty for us to hear screams from the sidelines, but i can't say they improved our performances or morale.  but the day that the boys' varsity soccer team showed up unexpectedly to cheer us on, there was a noticeable charge to the air.  that gesture meant so much to our new team because we felt that they cared about the game. their chants came from pure emotion; they weren't canned cheers halfheartedly sung by swirling distractions.  it's not so much that organized cheering matters; it's the presence and energy of true fans that helps motivate players.  melanie alberts  austin, tex., jan. 14, 2007  to the editor:  anyone who has attended an american high school knows that cheerleading is as much about the erotic power of adolescence as it is about sports boosterism.  hence, part of the awkwardness, when bureaucrats dictate that cheerleaders cheer for teams of both sexes.  since secondary schools should be teaching the power of independent decision making, why not let the kids decide whom they want to cheer for?  david hayden  wilton, conn., jan. 14, 2007  