family life and other hazards as refracted in a jaundiced eye   ''the vietnamization of new jersey,'' christopher durang's 1977 satire of the arrogant american character, the hypocrisy of middle class family life, consumerism and the branding of just about everything, seems, in retrospect, to have been about more than all that. what seems clear now is that it embodied, as well, a particular prescience about where late-20th-century television would head -- or perhaps it even informed that direction.  to watch the current revival, a bracingly entertaining production of the alchemy theater company of manhattan, which opened last night, is to see, in some sense, from exactly what higher madness ''married with children'' was wrought. a sitcom in all but name, mr. durang's play follows the downward mobility of a suburban new jersey family from the late 1960s to the bicentennial, and relishes its own vulgarities.  the family's teenage son, et (nick westrate), eats cereal out of his pants; their housekeeper, hazel, is a man in drag (a terrifically droll performance by james duane polk). the matriarch is a cheerful ignoramus who can't get her head out of 1955. she wears a housedress throughout and is named ozzie ann. and she is played with a perfect honed dopiness by blanche baker, an actress who, it seems, would make you laugh if she asked you how to make soup.  furthering the insanity is the family's older son, david (corey sullivan), a vietnam veteran just back from the war and blind, who arrives home with a go-go dancer, a young woman who has pretended to be vietnamese to appeal to his guilt and land him.  in mr. durang's universe, the impulse to consumerism and the impulse to imperialism are one and the same, but the play never gets bogged down in its arguably banal ideology. it moves too quickly under robert saxner's direction for any of that.  and mr. durang himself seems as disapproving of commercialized 1970s liberal piety as he was and (presumably remains) of 1950s-era blind conformity. the play makes it clear that he had as little tolerance for ''all in the family'' as he did for ''ozzie and harriet.''  performances continue through jan. 28 at the samuel beckett theater, 410 west 42nd street, clinton; (212) 279-4200.  theater review  