what's on tonight   8 p.m. (espn classic) ali rap -- muhammad ali turns 65 today. these three specials celebrate the big event, starting with this rundown of the quotes, witticisms and poems that peppered mr. ali's career, followed at 9 by ''ali's dozen,'' a look at his top 12 fights, and at 10 by ''ali's 65,'' a list of 65 things that everyone should know about the heavyweight boxing champion (above, in 1962) who liked to call himself ''the greatest of all time.''  5 p.m. (mtv) maui fever -- they spend their days sunning and their nights partying, with no rules and no one to answer to. this new reality series, sort of ''cocktail'' meets ''beach party'' meets ''laguna beach: the new orange county'' all in one, follows a group of 20-something resort workers in kaanapauli, maui, as they try to pay off their tickets to paradise.  8 p.m. (fox) american idol -- another night, another round of auditions.  8 p.m. (13) 22nd century -- this science special, under consideration for development by pbs as a new series, imagines the world 30 years from now based on new scientific and technological research. robin robinson, the show's host, is joined by two virtual co-hosts: one, representing aldous huxley, will speak from the past, and the other, a time-traveling visitor, will talk about the future.  9 p.m. (13) china from the inside -- for all of china's vaunted power, much of the country remains a mystery to the outside world. tonight, parts 3 and 4 of this documentary look at china's environmental problems, including bad air, polluted rivers and dire water shortages, and venture into tibetan temples, newspaper offices and a labor camp (above) to explore censorship of religion, information and speech at 10.  9 p.m. (bbca) turn back your body clock -- get ready to swallow a bitter pill. in this new health series, dr. una coales tells  eight people who have let their healthy habits slide exactly how it is -- including revealing some nasty images of their damaged internal organs -- and helps them make changes to stop their body clocks from ticking like a time bomb.  9:30 p.m. (bbca) how clean is your house? -- scrub-a-dub-dub, two neat freaks in white gloves: in this new series, kim woodburn and aggie mackenzie whip filthy homeowners into shape with a swat of their feather dusters. at 10, in ''the wow factor,'' tara powers helps people punch up their homes by thinking outside the box.  10:30 p.m. (comedy central) the naked trucker & t-bones show -- t-bones, ''a lovably cracked transient of dubious moral fiber'' played by david koechner, in the words of comedy central, and the naked trucker, ''a freespirited everyman'' portrayed by dave (gruber) allen (above, with mr. koechner), wax poetic about their cross-country adventures in an 18-wheeler on this new comedy show. and then they play a few tunes.  kathryn shattuck  