talking it over at lunch: toussaint and m.t.a. chief   pigs were not seen flying around the meatpacking district on monday afternoon, but they might as well have been. that is when roger toussaint, the fiery president of the transit workers' union, sat down to lunch with elliot g. sander, the new executive director and chief executive of the metropolitan transportation authority.  they met at the old homestead steak house, on ninth avenue at 14th street. mr. toussaint, who had the herb rubbed roast chicken ($22), was quick to point out to a reporter that they split the bill.  the unlikely pair broke bread a little more than a year after mr. toussaint led more than 30,000 members of local 100 of the transport workers union on a 60-hour strike that halted subway and bus service, nearly nine months after mr. toussaint served a brief jail sentence for leading the illegal strike, and a month after he won a third term as union president.  it helped immensely, of course, that mr. sander, who had the rack of lamb ($33), did not take over the authority until the beginning of this month and so was not associated with the strike or the protracted contract dispute that still rankles people who were involved on both sides.  ''we talked,'' said mr. sander, referring to a social activity that is familiar to many people who eat lunch together but has not always been a feature of relations between the union and the authority.  ''we talked about where he was coming from philosophically and where i was coming from philosophically. i learned a little more about roger's background, and vice versa.''  the two men sat at a table in the back of the clubby, wood-paneled restaurant for more than three hours, according to mr. sander. the meal was a dry one -- neither one drank alcohol -- nor did either confess to having dessert, but they finished with coffee.  ''we discussed the relations between the t.w.u. and the m.t.a. and how to move the relationship to a better place,'' mr. toussaint said. ''it was a very constructive conversation.''  the feel-good meeting does not mean that a food fight between the two sides might not start at any moment, but it did represent, at the very least, a significant change in tone.  ''did they use taste testers?'' gene russianoff, the staff lawyer for the straphangers campaign, a transit riders' advocacy group, said when he learned of the lunch date. ''nobody had his back to the door?''  joking aside, however, mr. russianoff called the lunch a promising development. ''the last couple years have been the worst labor relations at the m.t.a. i've seen in a quarter of a century. the sides were barely speaking and they demonized each other, and that's no way to run a railroad.''  mr. toussaint said that he had previously had one-on-one meetings with peter s. kalikow, the chairman of the authority who figured as his primary antagonist during the strike, but that they never shared a meal. mr. kalikow remains the chairman of the authority but mr. sander, as an appointee of gov. eliot spitzer, has taken over responsibilities for setting policy and running the agency.  one issue they discussed was public security.  mr. sander said the authority would develop a program to train subway and bus employees on security issues, including how to respond in case of an emergency or terrorist attack. the union has long criticized the authority for not doing enough to prepare its workers.  since he took over, mr. sander has been trying to set a new tone with the authority's employees, visiting subway yards and bus depots to chat with workers. he said mr. toussaint would join him on one of those excursions in the coming weeks.  ''we're both going to make an effort to turn the page,'' mr. sander said.  