the neediest cases; a family of nine, buffeted by an injury, remains intact   christmas presents came a few days late for the fardan-daniels children. on dec. 28, nadine bosson, a social worker, took gifts to the brooklyn shelter where the family was living.  ''thank you, miss nadine!'' rang out from behind a flurry of christmas paper.  sayeedah fardan, 15, got a book of japanese sudoku games and a paint set. she is a ninth grader at legacy school for integrated studies. she wants to learn japanese so that she can study in japan someday.  dawn daniels, 10, unwrapped a chemistry set.  darren daniels iii, 4, got a learning pad. his father, darren daniels ii, 43, fiddled with the batteries. ''we are learning to read; it's a big thing for us,'' said his mother, shebah fardan, 35, referring to her son.  there was a remote-controlled car for khalif fardan, 17; a board game for sashii fardan, 13; harry potter books for deloi daniels, 11; and blocks for daaimah daniels, 8.  there were not many presents on christmas day, but ms. fardan said that it was filled with family time.  after being homeless for four years, the family was poised to move into an apartment as soon as the kitchen was finished.  at the shelter, the family has lived in two rooms that are not connected, each with a bathroom, kitchen space and bunk beds. the four youngest shared with their parents, and the older children slept in a room around the corner. safety was a concern. they had to limit their children's movements after a certain hour, ms. fardan said.  the gift revelry was interrupted by room inspections. ''we never pass; it will be fine in the morning,'' ms. fardan said, and sayeedah finished, ''and trashed by the afternoon.''  lack of privacy in the shelter was continually wearing. but it was an improvement over a shelter in auburn, n.y., where the family lived for two years.  ''nine of us in one room, and it was just a room,'' mr. daniels said. no kitchen, no bathroom, no sink.  with two working parents, and a rented house in queens, the fardan-daniels family in 2001 never imagined that they would be homeless. ms. fardan worked freelance, building web sites and also as a hairdresser. mr. daniels juggled jobs as a security guard and a forklift operator, among other things.  ''it was enough that the kids didn't need,'' mr. daniels said. ''we didn't go hungry; our bills were paid. we were able to live and not stress day to day.''  but in july of that year, a bicycle accident left him unable to work. ''it all stopped when i had the accident,'' he said. little more than a year later, they entered the shelter system.  they have been trying to find a way out ever since. they need a five-bedroom that is wheelchair accessible. daaimah was born with cerebral palsy and uses a wheelchair. she sleeps in the top bunk in her parents' room. ''it's because it's got railings,'' mr. daniels said. ''she'll roll, and we don't want her to roll onto the floor.''  in june, daaimah had surgery to repair a dislocated hip socket. the damage was caused in part, ms. fardan said, because she had outgrown her wheelchair. the surgery also released her achilles' tendons, which had atrophied.  the family lives on mr. daniels's social security disability of $577 a month, and daaimah's supplemental security income of $574. they receive $555 in food stamps and $83 in public assistance. with the help of ms. bosson at new alternatives for children, a member agency of the federation of protestant welfare agencies, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund, they were approved for the housing stability plus program. it will cover all of the $1,676 monthly rent on their new apartment for the first year, and will subsidize a smaller percentage for the next five years.  a week before christmas, $1,000 in neediest cases money was used for blankets, towels and sheets. ms. fardan also bought storage bins, in preparation for her move.  ''it's all about packing; that's all it is, right now,'' she said.  the family is looking forward to retrieving its belongings from storage. they are short two beds, one for mr. daniels and ms. fardan, and one for darren, who was born in the shelter system. they will also need a dining room table and nine chairs.  mr. daniels and ms. fardan feel the stigma of homelessness keenly. ''just because we're labeled homeless doesn't mean we're second-class citizens, and we shouldn't be labeled as such,'' ms. fardan said. ''we're not homeless,'' mr. daniels added. ''we're houseless,'' ms. fardan agreed.  previously recorded: $6,878,126.62  recorded tuesday: $153,723.67  total: $7,031,850.29  last year to date: $6,390,914.34  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, dioceseof brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  