retreating statewide, g.o.p. finds good news on s.i.   last november's election was not particularly kind to the republicans in new york state. republican leaders were taken aback by the breadth of their statewide defeat and saw losses in some areas where they once confidently reigned.  but there is one area in new york city where the republicans have dominated and show little sign of losing control: staten island.  in that borough, united states representative vito j. fossella jr. withstood a particularly vigorous challenge from a democratic insurgent, while democratic candidates gained ground in house seats in the state.  andrew j. lanza, a republican city councilman, easily won in a state senate race to succeed the longtime legislator john j. marchi. assemblyman vincent ignizio, a republican representing a district on staten island, is expected to succeed mr. lanza on the council in a special election on feb. 20. and staten island republican leaders say that they will find well-prepared candidates to succeed mr. ignizio in the assembly, should he move to the council.  ''the last dozen years or so have been good to the republican party on staten island,'' said mr. fossella, who was first elected 10 years ago. ''i think it's because our principles seem to be in line with those of the people here. we talk about lower taxes and solutions to overdevelopment and the closing of the fresh kills landfill. that resonates with people.''  in a borough where registered democrats outnumber republicans by a ratio of 4 to 3, democratic candidates often sound similar themes in their campaigns. despite the democrats' advantage, the borough is known for ticket splitting. officials from both parties say that voters pay more attention to the personalities of the candidates than to party affiliation. while staten islanders re-elected an official of the conservative party as borough president in 2005, they also voted for united states senator hillary rodham clinton, a democrat, last year.  many also say that the republicans benefit from always having a group of up-and-coming candidates. indeed, the party in staten island has developed one of the more successful political farm teams in all of new york city. the candidacy of mr. ignizio in next month's special election is an illustration of how the republicans have helped young aspirants take advantage of any opening.  the chief architect of that strategy was guy v. molinari, the former borough president, who has groomed a long list of republican candidates for office. his earliest success came in 1990, when mr. molinari left congress and became borough president. he backed his daughter, susan, a city councilwoman who succeeded her father in congress.  alfred c. cerullo iii succeeded ms. molinari on the city council, with support from mr. molinari and the borough republicans. when mr. cerullo left the council in 1994 to become commissioner of consumer affairs in the giuliani administration, mr. molinari and the republican leaders picked mr. fossella, then a young lawyer who spent three years working on mr. giuliani's campaign, to take that council seat.  in 1997, mr. fossella succeeded ms. molinari in congress when she resigned to take a job in television.  ''having a dynamic farm team is the best way to operate,'' said mr. molinari, who stepped down as borough president in 2001 and is now working as a lawyer on staten island. ''it's important to always reach out and find young people of real promise. that's how we've been able to make our mark.''  and the youth of staten island's elected republicans could well enable them to serve in public office for some time. in addition to representative fossella, 41, and assemblyman ignizio, 32, there is mr. lanza, 42, in the state senate and james s. oddo, 41, who is the republican leader in the city council. mr. oddo is considering running for staten island borough president in 2009, when the incumbent, james. p. molinaro, is barred from running again by term limits. (mr. molinaro ran on the conservative and republican lines.)  democratic leaders say that staten island is the city's most republican-leaning borough and is far more conservative than most other parts of new york city. that, they contend, explains why the party remains most competitive there.  ''they are strong, particularly in certain parts of staten island,'' said assemblyman john l. lavelle, the staten island democratic chairman. ''in some places on the island the odds are definitely in their favor. but they still have some problems. they have their infighting.''  despite their successes, the staten island republicans have at times had their inner-party rivalries and friction. and they have not always been victorious at the polls.  just last year, there was a competitive race for the assembly seat vacated by matthew mirones, in a district that included parts of the island and brooklyn. while the republican candidate, anthony xanthakis, won the staten island part of the district, the race was narrowly won by the democrat, janele hyer-spencer.  the most recent tension within the party came last year, when senator marchi announced that he would not run for re-election. mr. lanza narrowly won the republican primary. but the loser in the race, robert j. helbock, who had served as the party's chairman, planned to run on the conservative party line, thereby providing a rare opportunity for the democratic candidate to win.  in the end, mr. helbock withdrew from the race at the urging of mr. marchi and senator joseph l. bruno, the majority leader.  a high-profile rift occurred three years ago, when mr. molinari and mr. fossella feuded over their support for different candidates for an assembly seat. mr. fossella's choice, mr. ignizio, won.  nonetheless, the republican officials on the island say they have healed old wounds. over the weekend, mr. molinari attended the opening of mr. ignizio's campaign headquarters, joining other republican-elected officials.  ''we're all working together these days,'' mr. molinari said. ''we've had our differences in the past. but we are all on the same page. can we do better? of course. but we're committed to finding talented young people with real promise to become part of the leadership in the party in staten island.''  