rebuke in iran to its president on nuclear role   iran's outspoken president, mahmoud ahmadinejad, appears to be under pressure from the highest authorities in iran to end his involvement in its nuclear program, a sign that his political capital is declining as his country comes under increasing international pressure.  just one month after the united nations security council imposed sanctions on iran to curb its nuclear program, two hard-line newspapers, including one owned by the supreme leader, ayatollah ali khamenei, called on the president to stay out of all matters nuclear.  in the hazy world of iranian politics, such a public rebuke was seen as a sign that the supreme leader -- who has final say on all matters of state -- might no longer support the president as the public face of defiance to the west.  it is the first sign that mr. ahmadinejad has lost any degree of ayatollah khamenei's confidence, a potentially damaging development for a president who has rallied his nation and defined his administration by declaring nuclear power iran's ''inalienable right.''  it was unclear, however, whether this was merely an effort to improve iran's public image by lowering mr. ahmadinejad's profile or was signaling a change in policy.  the presidency is a relatively weak position with no official authority over foreign policy, the domain of the supreme leader. but mr. ahmadinejad has used his post as a bully pulpit to insert himself into the nuclear debate, and as long as he appeared to enjoy ayatollah khamenei's support, he could continue.  while iran remains publicly defiant, insisting that it will move ahead with its nuclear ambitions, it is under increasing strain as political and economic pressures grow. and the message that iran's most senior officials seem to be sending is that mr. ahmadinejad, with his harsh approach and caustic comments, is undermining iran's cause and its standing.  the security council passed a resolution on dec. 23 with sanctions intended to curb iran's uranium enrichment program, which iran says is for peaceful purposes but the united states and some european nations contend is for the purpose of creating nuclear weapons. the measure bars the trade of goods or technology related to iran's nuclear program. enriched uranium can be used for making nuclear fuel but also for making nuclear weapons.  the president dismissed the security council resolution as ''a piece of torn paper.''  but the daily jomhouri-eslami, which reflects the views of ayatollah khamenei, said, ''the resolution is certainly harmful for the country,'' adding that it was ''too much to call it 'a piece of torn paper.' ''  the newspaper added that the nuclear program required its own diplomacy, ''sometimes toughness and sometimes flexibility.''  in another sign of pressure on the president to distance himself from the nuclear issue, a second newspaper, run by an aide to the country's chief nuclear negotiator, ali larijani, also pressed mr. ahmadinejad to end his involvement in the nuclear program. mr. larijani also ran for president and was selected for his post by the supreme leader.  ''they want to minimize the consequences of sanctions now that they have been imposed,'' said mohammad atrianfar, an executive at the daily shargh, which was closed last fall, and a reformist politician. ''but they don't have clear strategy, and they are taking one step at a time.''  mr. ahmadinejad took office more than a year ago as an outsider, the mayor of tehran who promised to challenge the status quo, to equally distribute iran's oil wealth and to restore what he saw as the lost values of the islamic revolution. his was a populist message, centered on a socialist economic model and islamic values. he found opposition from the right and the left, in parliament and among so-called pragmatists.  that pressure has continued, and the criticism now seems to have gained more credibility in the face of the sanctions and iran's troubled economic standing. the united states increased pressure on iran over its role in iraq has also raised concerns in tehran and may be behind efforts to restrain the president, political analysts in tehran said.  ''the resolution has decreased iran's political credibility in the international community, and so other countries cannot defend iran,'' said ahmad shirzad, a reformist politician and a former legislator.  although the security council sanctions were limited to iran's nuclear program, they have started to cause economic disruptions.  about 50 legislators signed a letter this week calling on the president to appear before parliament to answer questions about the nuclear program. they need at least 22 more signatures.  in another letter, 150 lawmakers criticized the president for his economic policies, which have led to a surge in inflation, and for his failure to submit his annual budget on time.  the iranian stock market, which was already in a slump, continued to decline -- falling more rapidly in the past month -- as buyers stayed away from the market. the daily kargozaran reported last week that the number of traders had decreased by 46 percent since the security council resolution was passed.  ''the resolution has had a psychological effect on people,'' said ali hagh, an economist in tehran. ''it does not make sense for investors not to consider political events when they want to invest their money.''  kargozaran reported that a group of powerful businessmen, the islamic coalition party, met with mohammad nahavandian, a senior official at the supreme national security council, and called for moderation in the country's nuclear policies to prevent further damage to the economy.  in the past year, several major european banks have severed their business ties with iran. economists say the banks' actions will also lead to an increase in inflation because importers must turn to complicated ways to finance purchases.  ''the nuclear issue has paved the way for other forms of pressures on iran,'' mr. shirzad said.  despite mr. ahmadinejad's harsh language since the resolution was passed, ayatollah khamenei has not referred to it directly and only once said that iran would not give up its right to pursue its nuclear program.  mr. larijani has said that iran will not quit the nuclear nonproliferation treaty or bar international inspectors despite earlier threats to do so.  correction:  january 25, 2007, thursday  a front-page article on friday about criticism of mahmoud ahmadinejad, iran's president, by iranian religious authorities over his involvement in the country's nuclear program misstated the connection between ayatollah ali khamenei, the supreme leader, and jomhouri-eslami, a newspaper that has rebuked mr. ahmadinejad. (the error was repeated in an article about iran on tuesday.) ayatollah khamenei owned the newspaper until 1989, when he became supreme leader and transferred ownership to massih mohajeri, a conservative politician. however, the newspaper still reflects ayatollah khamenei's views.  