owner of outlet malls agrees to a buyout   one week after disclosing that it might be forced to seek bankruptcy protection, the mills corporation, the owner of suburban outlet malls around the country, said yesterday that it had agreed to be acquired for $1.4 billion by brookfield asset management.  under the terms of the agreement, brookfield, a public company that owns high-quality office buildings like the world financial center in lower manhattan, would pay $21 a share for mills, an 18 percent premium over tuesday's closing price. at its peak, in august 2005, the company traded for nearly $66 a share.  shares of mills, a real estate investment trust, soared to $22.46 after yesterday's announcement, gaining 26.4 percent. shares of brookfield rose 1 percent, to $48.50.  the agreement with brookfield, which the companies valued at $7.5 billion, including debt and preferred stock, came just as two of the company's largest shareholders, farallon capital, a large hedge fund, and gazit-globe, a real estate investment company listed on the tel aviv stock exchange, have been trying to pump hundreds of millions of dollars into mills in order to overhaul the struggling company and improve its performance. yesterday, gazit said its offer was worth an average share price of $22.  those companies and two other hedge funds own 40 percent of mills and might block the sale to brookfield at the current price, said barry vinocur, the editor of realty stock review, a newsletter.  ''obviously, these people believe, as does brookfield, that there's money to be made here,'' mr. vinocur said.  in a statement, bruce s. rubin, a gazit-globe spokesman, expressed disappointment that mills had accepted ''an inferior proposal'' but said the company had not determined how to respond. he declined to elaborate.  a farallon spokeswoman said the hedge fund would have no comment.  mills, based in chevy chase, md., owns all or part of 38 malls, including sawgrass mills near fort lauderdale, fla. once admired for its innovative off-price malls in outlying suburbs, the company stretched itself too thin with an ambitious development program and by adding traditional malls like the del amo fashion center in the los angeles suburb of torrance.  in november, mills gave up control of a troubled project being built in northern new jersey, the $2 billion meadowlands xanadu shopping-and-entertainment center, to a venture led by colony capital, a private investment firm in los angeles.  last week, mills disclosed for the first time that an internal audit had found ''errors caused by possible misconduct'' by former employees. the company, which has not issued a financial statement since november 2005, has replaced all of its top management during the past year.  though brookfield's interest in mills was no secret, benjamin yang, an analyst at green street advisors, a research company in newport beach, calif., that specializes in reits, said the company was not the logical buyer. brookfield, based in toronto, has $50 billion worth of assets, including hydroelectric plants and timberland, but its retail real estate portfolio consists of just three shopping malls in brazil.  several mall operators considered buying mills, ''but they didn't believe the value was at $21 a share, like brookfield did,'' mr. yang said.  katherine c. vyse, a senior vice president at brookfield, said the mills acquisition would give brookfield the chance to apply its experience in real estate leasing and financing to a complementary sector.  in its announcement yesterday, brookfield said that mills shareholders had the option of receiving up to 20 percent of their payout in shares of a public company that will be created. brookfield asset management also owns 51 percent of another publicly traded company, brookfield properties, which operates its north american real estate assets.  