they may be automatons, but they sure have heart   they say you mellow with age. trisha brown's new ''i love my robots'' certainly supports that thesis. in her 70th year, ms. brown, the innovative high priestess of postmodernist dance for four decades or so, has created a work of irresistible charm and silliness. it had its world premiere performance on thursday night by the trisha brown dance company at the alexander kasser theater at montclair state university as part of peak performances@montclair, the college's avant-garde performing arts series.  the robots, in this case, are not the usual tin-plated surgers-in-spurts. created for the dance by kenjiro okazaki, an artist and architect in japan, the two mechanical objects are made of cardboard tubes fastened to small platforms. they skim across the stage, pause and gather and disperse, controlled by offstage computers. at high speed, they tend to swing wildly from their boxy platforms. strangely, they are more human than the compelling dancers.  that is the great fascination of the piece. ms. brown's dancers are rather solemn. they are, after all, the instruments of a master choreographer. but dancers these days tend not to look naturally expressive. and the robots brim with emotions.  the montclair program makes it possible to savor ms. brown's development, from her signature 1983 ''set and reset,'' which opens the program, to the lushly beautiful ''how long does the subject linger on the edge of the volume ,'' a 2005 collaboration with the interactive media artists paul kaiser, shelley eshkar and marc downie. the evanescent flutter-and-wheel of ''set'' has become rooted, gutsy movement by ''robots'' time, the eight dancers tilting solidly, like off-balance merce cunningham performers.  there is a passage in the new work that says it all about the robots' odd expressiveness. two men are locked into a tight duet, body curving around body. it is pure movement, watched curiously from a short distance, as often seems to be the case here, by the robots. the tubes lean together a bit, as if engaged in murmuring commentary. are they robotic homophobes or do they find reassurance in what they see? later ms. brown performs a poignant and funny closing trio with the robots that feels at times like a meditation on growing old.  paul taylor once commented on the inherent drama of bodies in space: one dancer alone onstage says plenty, with more being expressed with the mere entrance of a second dancer. so much is expressed on that shared stage by the incline of a cardboard tube -- an inclination, after all -- and so clearly.  ''i love my robots'' is set to an appropriately sweet and unobtrusive score by laurie anderson, with lighting designed by jennifer tipton and costumes by elizabeth cannon.  trisha brown dance performs through tomorrow at the alexander kasser theater, montclair state university; (973) 655-5112.  dance review  