in which we reach southern california in a season of strange weather   it was a fitting end to the trip -- a 15-mile traffic jam snaking over cajon pass and down into the refrigerated depths of southern california, where avocados were freezing on the bough and sprinkler-soaked lawns had iced over by morning. the day before we left, it was 70 degrees at home in upstate new york.  the route was snowless nearly till santa fe. but we drove through flurries in the mojave desert, and the traffic jam was caused by more snow falling on the san bernardino side of the pass than we had seen at home in all of november and december. the jam was a place to put impatience aside, to never-mind the 2,900 miles we had come and hope that somewhere in the last 30 miles the traffic would break up.  here is what has changed since the last time we made this drive: in 2005, it felt as though the trip was continuous with all the long-distance drives my family had taken when i was a kid. those trips embodied the modesty of our expectations. we were camping in those days, not staying in motels, and driving, not flying or taking the train.  driving across the country was not only normal, it was a sign of frugality. but this time i felt the excess in the trip. partly it was a matter of knowing we were on the wrong side of the global carbon equation. but it was also like traveling along the edge of one's historical epoch, and knowing the judgment that would be made upon it in the unimaginable future. the scale of the road system -- the volume and velocity of its traffic -- seemed grievous. and so did the painful, nagging question of whether there is any way to make this american way of life sustainable. as easy as the drive was, it felt untenable.  it still surprises me that if you get up morning after morning and drive all day you eventually get to california. and it almost still surprises me that you can get up morning after morning and drive all day. the miles came and went, the soybean fields of illinois, where water stood in place of snowdrifts, the hills of missouri, the broad sweep of oklahoma shoaling off into texas. we headed out of tulsa an hour before any sign of dawn, and i could barely realize that that long-imagined way-point was now slipping behind us. no matter where we stopped, it seemed hard to believe that we were really there, because the only there was the pickup cab and the two sleepy dogs in the back-seat and the sound of our audiobook.  ''last spring, 1846, was a busy season in the city of st. louis.'' so the book began. it was francis parkman's ''the oregon trail,'' which recounts his adventures along the platte and arkansas rivers in what are now kansas, nebraska, wyoming and colorado.  nothing defines the moment in which you travel like listening to the moment of someone else's travels. by coincidence, we began the book as we crossed the mississippi into st. louis, and whenever parkman mentioned the trail to santa fe, we felt a historical serendipity, as if we had more in common with him than the fact that we were pointed west.  from the distance of 160 years, it is easy to see the boundaries of parkman's historical epoch. every buffalo he comes across is ''stupid,'' and of the bulls he writes, ''thousands of them might be slaughtered without causing any detriment to the species, for their numbers greatly exceed those of the cows.'' he feels a profound ambivalence toward the emigrants who are just beginning to crowd the trails west. he can praise the indians he meets only by comparing their bodies to the works of ancient greek sculptors.  parkman was not yet 23, and he carried a large quiver of judgments, all of them sharp-edged and many utterly wrong. most of them he eventually set aside, becoming one of america's greatest historians. we listened to him not for his prejudices but for his powers of observation, his ability to translate the freshness of the prairie in language that still sounds newly felt. while lindy drove, i thought about a sentence of parkman's, something he says after an unnamed indian looks at a vacated campsite and names the very men who stopped there. ''by what instinct he had arrived at such accurate conclusions,'' parkman writes, ''i am utterly at a loss to divine.''  the real question, of course, is by what instinct parkman chalked up the careful observations of a very different mind to instinct. it was a way of asserting primacy, of assuming that that indian knew what he knew without knowing how. that passage marks a seam between two cultures, a profound gulf between parkman and his native american compatriot. the more i thought about parkman's words and our trip west, the more i began to feel as though we were driving along a seam of our own, across a landscape of vanished knowledge, secure in a cultural instinct that was coming, year by year, to seem more and more insecure. then, around victorville, we were brought to a dead halt by the snows of san bernardino county.  editorial observer  