the neediest cases; homelessness, abuse, illnesses and theft yield to perseverance   on a recent evening, jose hodges and his wife, laticha, unpacked a cartful of groceries while their 1-year-old son slept in his crib in their bronx apartment. the couple have not had many moments like this. when he was 16, jose hodges, who is now 24, left his home in the bronx. he began hanging out with the wrong crowd, he said, and at the age of 19 was convicted of attempted arson for trying to set fire to a car.  he was placed on probation, and he returned to live with his mother, his three siblings, and his mother's longtime male companion. mr. hodges said there was friction between him and his mother's companion, so, after two months, he chose to leave again.  despite a learning disability that made it difficult for him to read, mr. hodges had learned to read music in middle school. he was hired by eugene klymyshyn, a blind man, to read music and text to him. but because mr. hodges had trouble reading, mr. klymyshyn hired him instead to repair his audio equipment.  ''i could read notes, but as far as reading text, i would stumble over words and would have to spell it out for him. so the progress was slow,'' mr. hodges said.  he lived alternately at his mother's home and, for three months, in mr. klymyshyn's basement, even though mr. klymyshyn had warned him not to do so.  laticha hodges, 21, was raised by her grandmother in the bronx since she was 5, when her mother, a former prostitute and crack addict, was murdered in yonkers in 1990. she, too, was unhappy with her living arrangements. at the age of 6, she said, she was sexually molested by a relative. she said that a year later she was raped by two men, and that at the age of 14 she was gang-raped by four teenage boys.  mrs. hodges has received money from supplemental security income, a federal cash-assistance program, since she was 5, because she has a learning disability, she said. however, she said, the money often went toward the rent.  ''i would be lucky if i got $20 out of my own check,'' mrs. hodges said.  when she was 16, she had a mental breakdown, and, she said, tried to poison everyone in the apartment -- her grandmother, her sister and her aunt -- by putting rubbing alcohol in their drinks. no one was seriously injured. mrs. hodges' grandmother took her to a counselor, who prescribed medication to regulate mood swings and anger.  she met mr. hodges in 2003, while he was secretly living in the basement of mr. klymyshyn's house, in the same bronx neighborhood where she lived.  mrs. hodges said she had found her savior.  ''jose was my rescue,'' she said. ''i found a way out when i met him.''  mrs. hodges asked her grandmother if he could move in with them. when she refused, mrs. hodges joined him in mr. klymyshyn's basement apartment. there was a problem: mrs. hodges snored, and the noise led to their discovery by mr. klymyshyn. he ordered them out, but they did not move far, sleeping under his front porch.  after what they said were many unsuccessful attempts at getting into shelters separately, they married on valentine's day 2005, making themselves eligible for a family shelter. three weeks later, they were placed in the parkview hotel, a shelter in manhattan.  in november 2005, mrs. hodges gave birth to their son, anthony, and the family was relocated to help morris, a shelter in the bronx.  a week after anthony was born, he became ill. after he vomited and had diarrhea for a day, the hodgeses called anthony's pediatrician, who advised them to change the baby's formula. but he got no better and they took him to children's hospital at montefiore medical center in the bronx. he was given a blood transfusion because he was so dehydrated that his blood was not circulating properly, mrs. hodges said.  ''he was 6-14 when he came out, and he was 4-11 when he went in,'' she said, referring to her son's weight in pounds and ounces when he was born and when he was admitted to montefiore.  anthony remained hospitalized for four months for treatment of a blood clot in his leg and an enlarged vein in his head. doctors told the hodgeses that their son might have some developmental delays.  a social worker at help morris helped the hodges to get an apartment. because they did not have a mattress, however, they had to spend one last night at the shelter, and, they said, that night they were robbed of all their possessions.  ''i'm a video game collector, and they took all my classic stuff,'' mr. hodges said. ''but oh, man, the feeling was amazing, when i got the keys to my apartment.''  montefiore referred the couple to enock mensah, a caseworker at st. mary's hospital for children in queens, who in turn referred them to the federation of protestant welfare agencies, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund.  the federation used $800 from the neediest cases to buy a crib for anthony, and a mattress and headboard for the hodgeses.  mrs. hodges, who receives counseling four times a month, said her $640 supplemental security income check covers the family's household essentials. mr. hodges, who is unemployed, is determined to find a job, ideally as an artist. he is good at sketching layouts and blueprints.  ''i just want to be able to provide for my son and his education,'' he said.  previously recorded: $7,031,850.29  recorded wednesday: 500.00  total: $7,032,350.29  last year to date: $6,399,378.18  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556- 1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  