sales tax cut in city may dim allure of stores across hudson   for years, shoppers from new york city have played a game of retail arbitrage, traveling to the many malls in northern new jersey, a state where there is no tax on clothing and shoes.  even accounting for tolls, gas and time, shoppers could save money by visiting the westfield garden state plaza and other malls here, escaping the 8.375 percent sales tax they must pay in new york city on clothing and shoes that cost more than $110 per item.  such shopping trips may become less appealing, though, if mayor michael r. bloomberg gets his way. on wednesday, he proposed eliminating the city portion of the sales tax on clothing and footwear as part of a tax relief package worth about $1 billion. that would reduce the sales tax rate by four percentage points on those items.  the change could cause visar gervalla, 28, of manhattan, to reconsider his shopping trips to new jersey malls.  though lower prices and a large selection of stores are also part of the appeal, the possibility of lower new york city taxes ''would definitely make a difference,'' he said before entering the century 21 at the bergen town center in paramus.  during the busy back-to-school and end-of-year holiday seasons, about one-quarter of the shoppers in this town's many malls are from new york. clearly, retail analysts say, many of those shoppers will continue to make the trip across the hudson because of the variety and concentration of stores, and the free and abundant parking.  yet the tax advantages have also played a big role in luring consumers from new york, said john holub, the president of the new jersey retail merchants association. retailers in new jersey were already hurt once last year when lawmakers raised the state sales tax to 7 percent, from 6 percent, to plug budget gaps, mr. holub said.  stores would take another hit from mayor bloomberg's proposed tax cut if new jersey's state government does not counter the move with enticements of its own.  ''there was definitely a concern before, and now they have been compounded,'' mr. holub said.  retailers in paramus and elsewhere in the state could also lose if new jersey residents did more shopping in new york city, others say.  ''any store in manhattan that's either a specialty or one-of-a-kind store will increase their business because people who live in new jersey and work in new york will shop in new york more now,'' said joe lev, a retail industry consultant. ''it's not good news for some stores in new jersey.''  many stores in new jersey declined to comment on the mayor's plan because it is still only a proposal. but a spokeswoman for one mall operator, westfield, said there was little need for concern with so many relatively wealthy shoppers nearby.  about 2.4 million people live within a 10-mile radius of the westfield garden state plaza in paramus, which is the largest shopping mall in the state and draws 20 million visitors a year. shoppers at the mall also spend 30 percent more than the industry average, according to catharine c. dickey, a spokeswoman for westfield.  new yorkers interviewed in another shopping mall, in short hills, said they would keep going there because of the selection of shops and the opportunity to drive home with their packages instead of having to haul them on buses or trains.  corey todres, 33, a manhattan resident who works in new jersey, said she does all her shopping in new jersey because it is more convenient. still, if new york city reduces the sales tax on clothing and shoes, she will be more inclined to shop at home on the weekends. the lower tax rate, she said, ''adds up over time.''  