even for a tomato, looks aren't everything   for about three years, flavor has been pitted against form in a bureaucratic battle over tomatoes. and although the governor of florida took sides against it, flavor has prevailed.  in a ruling being issued today by the federal agriculture department, a creased and ridged but tasty tomato, the uglyripe, can be sold outside florida until late spring.  ''thanks to the u.s.d.a., consumers can now have the midsummer goodness of the tomato season all year round,'' said joseph g. procacci, the chairman of procacci brothers of philadelphia, whose subsidiaries grow the tomato in florida. ''the uglyripe gets fan mail. there's no other way to put it.''  the line in the salad bowl was drawn when the florida tomato committee, which controls most of the $500 million industry in the state, refused to allow procacci brothers to ship uglyripe tomatoes out of the state. the committee was established by a federal agreement in 1937, and is one of many such groups that regulate agricultural products in several states.  the committee's rules, called marketing orders, are very strict as to the shape and uniformity of florida tomatoes that can go to other states during the season, from oct. 10 to june 15. flavor is not a factor because, in the committee's view, it is too subjective.  an exemption granted to the uglyripe by the committee for three years for the purpose of seeing whether there was a market for these tomatoes was withdrawn in 2003 and not reinstated.  so last year, procacci brothers petitioned the federal government for an amendment to the marketing order, regarding the shape of this particular tomato.  after a proposal for the rule change was published last july in the federal register, 88 comments were received. in his letter of comment opposing the change, reginald l. brown, manager of the florida tomato committee, said his committee had not reinstated the exemption because ''uglyripe was a direct competitor with traditional florida tomatoes that meet the standards.''  this was one of nine negative comments. another, from the florida governor, jeb bush, opposed the change on the grounds that it would give an unfair advantage to the grower of uglyripes. ''every grower has some percentage of its crops that is flat, elongated, ridged, etc., yet they are still required to adhere to the minimum grade requirements,'' the governor's letter said.  but the difference, when it comes to uglyripes, is that their deviation from the norm is not accidental, but the result of breeding. they were developed from a french heirloom called maramondo that was cross-bred with non-heirlooms to make it more disease resistant and to strengthen the stem.  the favorable comments all had to do with taste, often comparing uglyripes to homegrown tomatoes.  the tomato committee, which guarantees the consistency of florida tomatoes, said that the new ruling could create a precedent that might allow inferior tomatoes to get to market. but the rule change applies only to uglyripes, whose authenticity must be verified from seed to distribution under a new agriculture department heirloom program.  procacci brothers plans to begin shipping the tomatoes, including some that are grown organically, tomorrow. they will carry the brand name santa sweets and each will be nestled in a stretchy white netting to protect the ripe fruit. among the markets in the new york area that plan to sell them are pathmark, shoprite, waldbaum's and whole foods. the tomatoes will carry a premium price, around $3 a pound.  