the good, the bad and the bush baby: new low on 'idol'?   the season-opening episodes of ''american idol'' are notorious for their auditions by untalented performers and the catty comments of the judges, particularly simon cowell, whose one-liners have been known to deflate the most confident of hopefuls.  but some commentators said thursday that they thought that fox show reached a new low in ridiculing contestants, pointing to an audition televised on wednesday, when mr. cowell likened one contestant to a jungle creature, evoking hysterical laughter from his fellow judges paula abdul and randy jackson. mr. cowell also poked fun at the physical appearance of a contestant who appeared to be mentally handicapped.  the show ''prides itself on not discriminating against anyone during the audition process,'' said ken warwick, an executive producer of ''idol,'' in a statement on thursday. the reaction of the judges to the two performers, kenneth briggs and jonathan jayne, both from the seattle area, were the subject on thursday of commentary online and on ''the view'' on abc, on which elisabeth hasselbeck, a co-host, said that the ''idol'' hosts ''hit an all-time low'' with statements that were ''apparently not about the music anymore.'' she was referring to mr. cowell's admonition of mr. briggs, whom he said looked ''a little odd.''  ''your dancing is terrible, the singing was horrendous, and you look like one of those creatures that live in the jungle with those massive eyes,'' mr. cowell added. ''what are they called? bush baby.''  once the contestant had left the room, ms. abdul and mr. jackson began to convulse with laughter.  when the portly mr. jayne appeared onstage, mr. cowell asked him if he had borrowed mr. jackson's pants. mr. jayne, 20, from his speech and movement, appeared to be mentally handicapped. an online biography from a private school in seattle where mr. jayne graduated in 2004 notes that his hobbies include participating in the special olympics in several sports.  