no clear-cut path for tribune's board   when members of the tribune company board assemble this weekend to review bids for the company, they will have a lot to consider but not much to be happy about.  the company received at least two firm bids by wednesday's deadline, one from the los angeles team of eli broad and ronald w. burkle, and another from the chandler family, the company's largest shareholder. a third potential bidder, the carlyle group, has expressed interest but only in tribune's television group. the company also owns 11 papers, including the los angeles times.  none of the offers, made on wednesday, had enough clout or sizzle to generate much investor interest. tribune shares rose only 56 cents, to $30.90 yesterday.  indeed, the offers from the chandlers and particularly from the broad-burkle team left investors and analysts more confused than anything else. in one way, the result of the auction could relieve some of the pressure on the company to act because both bids came in so low.  gary weitman, a tribune spokesman, said yesterday that the company would not comment on any proposal, nor on the possibility that the company would solicit other offers. but he added that a special committee charged with reviewing the offers would make a recommendation to tribune's board, which will make its decision by the end of march.  the chandler family, which owns 20 percent of tribune's stock, sent a letter to the board offering to divide tribune into a newspaper company and a television station company in a tax-free deal that values the company at about $32 a share, according to a report by peter appert, an analyst with goldman sachs.  that figure represents a small premium -- just under 5.5 percent -- to wednesday's closing price. the chandler family, however, says its offer actually represents a premium of more than 18 percent because the company should be valued at $27 a share but is trading artificially higher because of speculation surrounding the auction.  when the chandlers first provoked the auction process by publicly criticizing management over the company's performance last june, the shares were trading at just over $32.  the joint offer from mr. broad and mr. burkle left analysts more perplexed. the team is offering shareholders a one-time dividend of $27 a share. their representatives say the value of the shares would then be about $4 a share, putting the total value of the offer at $31 a share. mr. burkle and mr. broad would finance the dividend with $500 million of their own money and arrange for the tribune company to borrow $10.5 billion.  their offer, a form of recapitalization, would allow them to gain effective control of the company by ''putting up about $500 million in cash and ending up with 34 percent of the equity of tribune company,'' according to robert willens, a tax expert at lehman brothers.  the carlyle group, the buyout firm, has expressed interest in bidding for tribune's television stations, according to someone close to the plan. no details were released, and carlyle officials could not be reached for comment last night.  analysts said yesterday that the offers left tribune in a quandary. ''management has a long weekend ahead of them,'' said alexia quadrani, an analyst at bear stearns. she said the broad-burkle offer takes on a ''shocking'' amount of debt and the chandlers, despite their bid, do not really want to run the business.  ''none of the offers appears compelling,'' she said, ''so it's going to be a difficult decision to figure out what they should do.''  the company's inclination, she said, will probably be to pass on the current offers, ''but they have to come up with plan b,'' and there are no obvious alternatives. doing nothing does not address the original concerns about the stock price, and, in fact, could send it lower. selling individual assets could mean a big tax hit for the company.  to add to the intrigue, the chandler family has three representatives on the board who will help decide on which bid, if any, the company will accept. first, the special committee must make a recommendation. then the 11-member board, including the 3 chandler representatives, votes on what is in the best interest of all shareholders. the chandler directors have the right, despite having a vested interest in their own bid's winning, to vote on the bids.  to accept one offer over another requires a majority vote of the board. ultimately, it would be voted on by shareholders. the tribune company's charter specifies that a deal involving any shareholder holding more than 10 percent of the company's shares must get approval from 80 percent of the company's shareholders for any transaction.  the bid by the chandlers was tailored to avoid any taxes that might result from spinning off the television stations. the plan calls for tribune to create a separate company called tribune broadcasting, which would own tribune's 23 tv stations.  tribune's shareholders, with the exception of the chandlers, would get one share of stock in the new broadcasting company, as well as $19.30 a share in cash, or a total of $3.7 billion.  as a result, the chandlers would own about 51 percent of the newspaper operation with the balance to be owned by the private equity investors, so far not identified. the chicago cubs and careerbuilder.com, an online job ad unit, would remain part of the newspaper company.  shareholders would get stock in the broadcasting company tax-free, but would have to pay a capital gains tax on the cash component.  