preservation commission turns down proposal for upper east side tower   the new york city landmarks preservation commission resoundingly rejected a proposal yesterday to build a 30-story glass tower designed by norman foster atop a 1949 building on madison avenue. the decision was a major victory for a coalition of upper east side residents who argued that the tower would rend the fabric of their historic neighborhood.  the battle over the proposed tower has attracted prominent combatants on each side. the writer tom wolfe, who attended the commission meeting yesterday wearing a navy-and-white houndstooth flannel suit with a shiny pale green tie, vehemently criticized the project, while artists like jeff koons supported the building's owner, aby rosen, a real estate executive and art collector.  without formally voting, the commission declined to approve the addition or support a zoning waiver, two steps that would have been essential for the project to go forward.  the battle may not be over; the commission encouraged mr. rosen and mr. foster to come back with another proposal for an addition to the building, the former parke-bernet galleries, at 980 madison avenue, between 76th and 77th streets. but several commissioners made it clear that they would approve only a very modest addition of perhaps a few stories -- nowhere near 30.  ''we will ask you to rethink, restudy, in light of everything that's been said, and revisit this at some point down the line,'' the commission's chairman, robert b. tierney, told mr. rosen and mr. foster at the end of a public meeting at the surrogate's court building in lower manhattan.  in an interview afterward, mr. rosen vowed to continue pursuing the project. ''maybe it can come down in size, and we'll study that,'' he said. mr. foster, who said he gained ''many valuable insights'' from the meeting, said, ''to be an architect, you have to be an optimist.''  at the start of the session, mr. foster offered a passionate defense of his design in a presentation before the commission, responding to objections raised by opponents of the project at a public hearing on oct. 24. ''the most appropriate, delicate intervention is to contrast a slim, vertical tower against the original, very horizontal base,'' he said.  he said he had adjusted the color of the building's skin -- less silver and more bronze -- but defended the juxtaposition of modern glass and steel additions on older stone structures, citing additions to the metropolitan museum of art by kevin roche and to the morgan library & museum by renzo piano.  he also said his tower would be a graceful complement to the carlyle hotel, an art deco landmark completed in 1929 that sits just across madison avenue. mr. foster also noted that the gallery building had been extensively altered since its original construction, most notably in 1957 when a roof garden was replaced by a fifth floor.  the commission was unpersuaded.  nine of the 10 commissioners in attendance (the 11th was absent) said the project's scale and, to a lesser extent, its materials and design were out of place in the upper east side historic district, which is protected by landmark status. but several, including the historian christopher moore, took pains to praise the proposal by mr. foster, whose works include the 46-story hearst tower, which opened last year atop the hearst corporation's 1928 building in midtown.  ''my issue is not with the proposed tower, which, as a student of modern architecture, i applaud,'' said joan gerner, a design and construction executive, the first of the 10 commissioners to address the project. ''my issue is with its location on top of the historic building. this proposed building is so elegant and sophisticated that in my mind it is not appropriate to hide it on top of a five-story building. the public should be able to walk up to it and touch it and experience it and enjoy its presence at eye level.''  another commissioner, richard m. olcott, said, ''i really have been surprised at the level of hysteria we've heard in all of these hearings.'' he called the building ''very elegant'' but ''just too big'' and raised concerns about the shiny, silvery skin and the mansard roof that would separate the existing building from the addition.  he called the mansard ''an alien element in what is otherwise a very spare and rectilinear composition.''  the commission's vice chairman, pablo e. vengoechea, an urban planning expert, said the height of the tower ''just overwhelms the parke-bernet building.'' another commissioner, the architect stephen f. byrns, argued that ''madison avenue must maintain its low scale, with the carlyle tower's prominence undiminished.''  one commissioner, the rev. thomas f. pike, called the addition ''breathtakingly beautiful'' but said, ''i'm afraid that this marriage makes me nervous.'' another commissioner, elizabeth s. ryan, a real estate broker, said the tower's reflective glass surfaces were ''at severe odds'' with the existing building.  in arguing that the foster addition was eligible for the special waiver, mr. rosen said the project would actually advance the purpose of preservation because it would restore the building's facade, remove the fifth floor and put back the roof garden.  the commission was unmoved. margery h. perlmutter, a lawyer, an architect and a commissioner, said the waiver provision was not intended to allow huge additions to historic structures.  the only commissioner to support the addition was jan hird pokorny, an architect, who said that adding a vertical tower on or near a horizontal base ''has been done in history many times.''  drawing laughter, he handed out copies of a german print depicting the leaning tower of pisa, begun in 1173, next to the dome of pisa, begun a century earlier. ''the marriage that has been proposed was very carefully thought out,'' mr. pokorny said. ''i think that we would quickly get used to having those two entirely different buildings next to each other, doing their thing, doing it well.''  a leading opponent of the project, william m. kahn, who lives in the carlyle residences, part of the hotel complex, said he was satisfied with the outcome but vowed to fight any effort to build a substantial addition atop the building.  fredric m. bell, executive director of the new york chapter of the american institute of architects, which endorsed the project, said he hoped the meeting was ''not so much a decision but a postponement,'' but said he was disappointed. ''new york is a city where scale, juxtaposition, don't destroy the quality of the streetscape,'' he said.  in a telephone interview, mr. wolfe said he was ''surprised and relieved'' by the decision, ''not so much because it looks as if they're not going to accept any building that big, but because they showed some backbone.''  ''they should be commended,'' he said.  