cross-country program picks up speed   when 18-year-old alexa turzian poled past the finish line of the 10-kilometer freestyle race at the united states nationals in houghton, mich., on jan. 4, she became the youngest person to win a united states title in cross-country skiing. her coach, rick kapala, was amazed. ''she hadn't been a dominating junior,'' he said in a telephone interview after the race.  in hailey, idaho, turzian's classmates at wood river high school were incredulous. ''i think they think it seems so unreachable for a young athlete to be national champion,'' turzian said by telephone last week. ''they just think, 'how is that possible?' ''  turzian is not on a national team, nor is she a member of a development team. in fact, a year ago, there was no national women's cross-country team because it was thought to have little promise against top international competition. last year there was no united states women's development team, though teenagers like 19-year-old morgan arritola, of sun valley, and 18-year-old liz stephen, racing for burke mountain academy in vermont, were winning medals against older women at the nationals.  instead, leading up to the turin olympics in italy, the united states cross-country team invested its $650,000 budget on five men. ''we made a conscious decision to focus more money on fewer athletes,'' said luke bodensteiner, the united states ski team's nordic director. ''we took everything we had and put it in play until the olympics, and if we had to fold up shop after that, then that's what we'd do.''  ''we just went down the world-ranking list,'' said pete vordenberg, the cross-country head coach. ''the top-five ranked americans stayed on our team.''  the all-men's squad included kris freeman, who placed fourth in the men's 15-kilometer classic at the 2003 world championships, and andy newell, who, after the olympics, became the first american in 23 years to win a world cup medal, a bronze in a 1-kilometer freestyle sprint in china.  others, including kikkan randall, had to find outside funding to attract the attention of coaches who were scheduled to name a 17-member olympic team three weeks before the opening ceremony in turin. (the united states olympic committee -- not the united states ski team -- finances the olympic team.)  for randall, that meant cobbling together funding from alaska pacific university, which paid all her travel expenses and most of her training expenses, and sponsors that included a local dairy and an orthopedic clinic. she also used savings from her part-time job in anchorage.  sustained by her fund-raising acumen and an independent training program, randall made her second olympic team without competing on the world cup tour as a member of the national team. she then finished higher than any cross-country skier on the 2006 united states olympic team, placing ninth in the 1.2-kilometer freestyle sprint. two weeks later, she had the best world cup finish by an american woman, fifth in a 750-meter sprint in sweden.  turzian, meanwhile, was honing her talent under kapala's guidance at the sun valley ski education foundation, one of the nation's premier clubs. she had just given up an overlapping career as a promising alpine racer at the same idaho mountains where the olympic medalists picabo street and christin cooper had been groomed.  with solitary focus, turzian became one of the most driven nordic athletes on her club. kapala said he received calls from his friends every day saying they saw her roller-skiing the five-mile path to school before dawn or running up mountain trails.  now she trains 500 hours a year and loves the sport so much that she does most of it on her own.  ''alexa knows what she wants,'' said her father, mike turzian, in a telephone interview. ''she's always wanted to be on the u.s. ski team.''  recognizing that the sport had been underfunded, the ski team has allocated $1 million of its $24 million net budget this season to cross-country skiing. (the team also finances six other programs: alpine, snowboarding, freestyle, ski jumping, nordic combined, and disabled skiing.)  the boost in funding has allowed the cross-country team to nearly triple in size. six athletes are competing internationally on the world cup (five men and randall). eight athletes represent the united states on the lower-tier continental cup series. of the eight, six are women, all under age 23. bodensteiner and vordenberg believe the women are poised to make breakthroughs by 2010 and 2014.  ''the challenge will be to keep them going,'' vordenberg said.  moments after stepping off the winner's stand at the nationals, turzian had to return the $1,200 prize money because she will be a freshman at middlebury college this fall and accepting payment would have violated n.c.a.a. rules.  she also took her first doping test. ''it's kind of weird having someone in the bathroom with you,'' she said. ''but at the same time, it's a good idea. i see why they do it.''  of all the olympic sports -- summer and winter -- cross-country skiing ranks third in positive doping tests at the games since drug testing was started in 1968, in grenoble, france. five of the seven positive tests came at the 2002 games in salt lake city, where three athletes had to return medals. ''the sport's not 100 percent clean, for sure,'' said bodensteiner, who competed in the 1992 and 1994 games.  later this month, turzian will compete at the junior world championships in tarvisio, italy, and randall will be watching. ''it's lonely over here on the world cup by myself,'' she wrote in an e-mail message from switzerland. ''i am excited to see other u.s. women stepping up and skiing well. i know we can all get better if we build a team.''  winter sports  