in a sweeping new vision for schools, big risks for the mayor   mayor michael r. bloomberg yesterday effectively doubled his bet that the nation's largest school system is capable of unprecedented improvement, wagering the education of the city's nearly 1.1 million students and his own legacy on a far-reaching decentralization plan that puts enormous pressure on principals to raise student achievement.  the mayor's announcement, in his state of the city address, made clear that by the end of his second term he hopes to leave behind a school system irreversibly changed and virtually unrecognizable from the bureaucracy that existed before he took office.  it will have new rating systems for schools, principals and teachers, a new finance system designed to break the lock that many schools in middle-class neighborhoods have had on highly paid veteran teachers, and a sharply increased role for private groups in helping to run schools. it will also make it harder for teachers to get tenure.  but mr. bloomberg's plan, while cementing his place at the forefront of urban education reform in america, also carries huge risks, raising questions about whether yet another reorganization will bring such swift and noticeable improvement in test scores and graduation rates that it can mute critics who say the administration is using constant change to mask mediocre results.  ''it's very peculiar to say how successful we have been, but, ugh, even though we have been so successful, we are reorganizing again,'' said merryl h. tisch, a member of the new york state board of regents and ardent supporter of mr. bloomberg who fought to help him win control of the school system during his first term.  mr. bloomberg, after all, has limited time left to show clear gains. in just three years, he will have to persuade the state legislature to reauthorize mayoral control of the schools -- a point crucial to his legacy as the self-described education mayor. he will need to overcome complaints by many state lawmakers, parent groups and the unions that he has overstepped his authority.  the teachers' union instantly bridled at mr. bloomberg's comments about tenure. there has been rising anger in the principal corps over the lack of a pay raise for principals and assistant principals since their last contract expired in 2003, even as mr. bloomberg and schools chancellor joel i. klein repeatedly stress that their success hinges on giving principals more power and responsibility.  and the mayor's plans also threatened to incite rebellion among parents, particularly in relatively wealthy areas in manhattan and queens and on staten island, where the changes to the city's decades-old school budget system may be felt hardest.  such groups have often felt shut out by the administration and expressed doubts about the changes to the bureaucracy. ''the notion that this was all part of the plan all along is nonsense,'' said tim johnson, the chairman of the chancellor's parent advisory council, a citywide group. ''it's constant correction with no acknowledgment of error whatsoever.''  in his speech, mr. bloomberg acknowledged that student achievement remained far too low, but he noted that standardized test scores had risen in recent years and that the four-year graduation rate, now over 58 percent, is the highest in more than 20 years.  meeting with reporters after the mayor's speech, mr. klein said it was precisely because of earlier success that it was time to take the system to a new level. he and other administration officials described the latest plans as the logical next step in the mayor's efforts to reverse decades of failure by the school system.  ''this mayor doesn't bet on complacency and the status quo,'' said deputy mayor dennis m. walcott, the mayor's top education advisor at city hall. ''this mayor believes in bold change.'' calling the plan ''a major step forward,'' mr. walcott added: ''the mayor is saying we are investing directly in our schools. we're not investing in the bureaucracy.''  indeed, mr. bloomberg said he will dismantle the 10 regional superintendents' offices that he created four years ago to supplant the city's 32 community school districts. with the regions gone, principals will choose from three types of ''learning support'' structures -- one of which will offer private groups hired on contract.  another option will be created by four regional superintendents who will remain in the system but will support rather than supervise schools. mr. bloomberg said the 32 community superintendents required by state education law would answer to the chancellor rather than to regional superintendents and would rate principals.  the third option is to become a so-called empowerment school, in which principals get wider authority by agreeing to meet performance targets.  the increased role of the private groups in public schools is one of a number of proposals that top the agenda of advocates in washington and across the country calling for the reinvention of american public schooling. and mr. bloomberg's plan to set higher hurdles to teacher tenure and to revamp the school budget system also fits into the popular thinking of education reformers.  these proposals, however, could get a cooler reception at home. on tenure, the city has long had the ability to dismiss teachers during a three-year probationary period. but while many teachers quit in their first three years, few are dismissed, a fact chancellor klein readily acknowledged yesterday.  the administration said it wanted to toughen the process so that tenure is earned rather than granted by default. mr. klein said student test scores would be used in the tenure evaluations, a move the teachers' union is certain to fight.  perhaps the mayor's boldest move is the effort to change the school budgeting system, a hugely complex undertaking about which he offered scant details.  mr. bloomberg said only that there could be differences of as much as $2,000 per child in allocations to similar schools. such discrepancies result in part from the way teachers are assigned. schools are given a set number of teachers without regard to how much those teachers are paid. that means that higher paid veteran teachers can cluster in better schools, effectively giving those schools more money per child. many schools unfairly get too many teachers, officials said, while others get too few.  in addition, the administration has long believed that some current school budgets are too high because of decades of patronage and corruption by community superintendents. but an earlier effort to erase inequities failed amid loud complaints about painful budget cuts.  the new system, which is to be phased in gradually, would allocate a fixed dollar amount to schools per student, with uniform higher amounts for students with greater needs, including those from impoverished families, those who did not speak english and those in special education.  but there are big risks. some schools in politically active neighborhoods could lose money over time, making them unable to keep their highly paid veteran teachers. and while a more mechanized budget formula would promote equity, it is unclear that equalized funding would change student achievement.  broadly, the mayor's plan raised questions about whether the system could withstand further drastic change, given that most experts say stability is crucial for troubled schools.  ''the whole concept of mayoral control was to bring some stability and order to the system,'' ms. tisch said. ''and the more they continue to jimmy around with stability and order during a time when academic achievement has not been soaring, the more difficult it is for people to accept. what's to say that they are not going to reorganize again next year?''  news analysis  