loss of marshall field's has store loyalists seeing red   bundled in a puffy black coat, a navy blue chicago bears hat pulled tightly over his ears, jim mckay worked a corner along state street.  with an ''i want my marshall field's'' button pinned to his shoulder, mr. mckay was handing out green leaflets -- ''marshall field's green,'' he pointed out -- urging passersby to boycott macy's, the new tenant at 111 north state street.  the debut of red-clad macy's and the loss of green-clad ''field's,'' which presided over a city block bounded by wabash avenue and state, washington and randolph streets for more than 150 years until september, has unleashed a flood of nostalgia and spirited protests from chicagoans like mr. mckay who intend to reverse recent retail history.  ''we think it's reasonable to have field's back for christmas 2008,'' said mr. mckay, 43, an architecture professor and a vocal critic of macy's. ''i think things can change.''  a few people sidestepped mr. mckay and his leaflets. but some, in a response perhaps symbolic of this city's ambivalence toward the presence of macy's, read the handout, smiled and nodded -- and then walked right past mr. mckay into the store.  four months into chicago's wary acceptance of the department store many here unequivocally associate with new york, the outcry over the demise of marshall field & company continues to rage. it is a public discussion, carried out in the pages of the city's newspapers, on crowded rush-hour buses and in line for morning coffee.  ''we're all kind of surprised at the deep, emotional, gut response it caused,'' said gayle soucek, 52, who works for a global aircraft sales company and lives in the suburb of westchester.  even though macy's is owned by federated department stores of cincinnati, ms. soucek and others still blame the rival city back east. ''there was a sense of new york coming here and cramming something down our throat,'' ms. soucek said.  not everyone is sentimental. business is business, many say, and life goes on whether the store is green or red.  but the most fervent, and the most vocal, of the believers are determined to send macy's and its little red stars packing. the arrival of macy's, they say, wiped out a landmark store founded by a retail giant who was also a benefactor to many of the city's cultural and educational institutions.  fueled by a mix of nostalgia and civic pride, 60,000 or so people signed an online petition last year urging executives at federated -- which in 2005 bought out marshall field's parent, the may company -- to keep the name marshall field's for all the stores.  some field's loyalists have printed t-shirts, sweatshirts, lapel stickers and bumper stickers reading ''boycott macy's'' and ''forever marshall field's.''  patricia craven, who lives on the city's southwest side, is one. ''if you were looking for something special, it was field's you went to,'' said ms. craven, 56, who does inventory control for a car dealership and wears a ''boycott macy's'' sweatshirt. ''that's how chicago was.''  for others, it was not so much the arrival of macy's but the displacement of field's that disturbed them.  ''chicagoans would have welcomed macy's to our market alongside field's,'' said grant paplauskas, 28, who works in marketing and lives in the southwest suburbs. ''but there is resentment because in coming to chicago, they took away what was ours. we miss what was here.''  federated executives have taken pains, particularly in chicago, to lure former field's shoppers back to the stores that they grew up with but that now have a new name, a new owner and a new look. federated's chairman and chief executive officer, terry j. lundgren, has responded personally to e-mail messages from disgruntled shoppers. next month, linda piepho, a native of the chicago area and a veteran retail administrator, will begin as the new manager of the state street store.  ''we know how attached people were to marshall field's,'' said ralph hughes, the state street store's current manager, who was an executive with marshall field's before the merger and is being promoted to regional vice president of corporate communications. ''we knew we had some work to do. we understand the emotions.''  inside the state street store, a string of red neon now snakes around the interior railings of a 12-story atrium. shopping bags, once dark green and adorned with the white script of marshall field's, now sport red stars. scarlet rugs anchor tables displaying the signature marshall field's frango mints, still sold in green boxes.  but aside from the color shift, most of the state street building's famous flourishes have not changed. the giant cast bronze clocks jutting from the store's two western corners remain, as does the glass ceiling designed by louis comfort tiffany and the historic ''marshall field and company'' plaques affixed to the exterior walls. even the elevator button for the seventh floor, home to the famed walnut room and its chicken pot pie, is still green.  ''we're still here,'' insisted one macy's employee, who declined to give his name, as he watched mr. mckay distribute leaflets. ''they didn't fire anybody. they tweaked the store, and they're making it better,'' said the employee, who worked for marshall field's for 16 years before the change.  ms. craven, however, is adamant. field's, she says, is irreplaceable.  ''i don't know what they could do to make us go in there again and buy anything unless somebody wanted to re-buy and name the store marshall field's again,'' she said.  but since that prospect seems unlikely, many say they have reached their own uneasy peace with the change.  ''i'll speak for every chicagoan and say we're all heartbroken,'' said gayle m. schor, 40, a lawyer, as she left the store recently. ''but,'' she added, holding up a macy's bag , ''we're still shopping.''  chicago journal  