flavor of new orleans right in bears country   like mike ditka, who coached the chicago bears to the super bowl and the new orleans saints to more misery, jimmy bannos has close ties to both cities that will be represented in sunday's national football conference championship game.  in contrast to ditka, who has created a stir here this week by saying he has no rooting interest in sunday's game, bannos is clear about where his loyalties are rooted.  ''i'm new orleans's adopted son, but i definitely want the bears to win,'' said bannos, a chicago native and chef who owns heaven on seven, a chain of three chicago-area restaurants specializing in cajun and creole cooking.  bannos's rush street restaurant sits like a piece of chocolate pecan pie surrounded by slices of pepperoni pizza in a deep-dish pan. ''the best louisiana cookin' outside of new orleans'' is how the restaurant bills itself, and to enter from rush street and ride the escalator to the second floor is to feel as if you have arrived at bourbon street.  diners on thursday were greeted by a giant sign on an easel that trumpets the big event on the horizon: heaven on seven countdown to mardi gras: 35 days left.  purple, green and yellow streamers flow from the ceiling, purple, green and yellow balloons scrape the ceiling, and framed mardi gras posters adorn the walls.  along one wall are shelves containing about 2,000 bottles of hot sauce pressed side by side like a cheering section of soldier field fans standing at attention during the national anthem.  on the shelf of another wall sits a ceramic alligator with a strand of gold mardi gras beads dangling from its mouth. nearby hangs a novelty sign that is said to be from the new orleans police department and reads, ''beware pickpockets and loose women.''  there are limits to the new orleans decorative touches. there is nothing to suggest, for example, that the city is home to an n.f.l. team. there is not a saints helmet, jersey or season schedule in sight.  scott netterville, a host at the restaurant, is a new orleans native and lifelong saints fan, but he keeps his allegiance under wraps. with a sly grin, he pulled up his long-sleeved red sweater to reveal a black saints t-shirt.  the only other trace of the saints is a bottle of the team's hot sauce on one of the shelves. like netterville's shirt, it is covered up. a ribbon of yellow crepe paper, arranged just so, hides its label.  ''that's because i'm a bears fan,'' bannos said thursday. he laughed. ''and also, we get a lot of bears players coming in, so i don't want to get them mad at me.''  bannos said his regulars included linebacker hunter hillenmeyer and offensive linemen fred miller and john tait. once or twice a year, he added, he will drive out to the bears' training facility in the suburb of lake forest and cook lunch for the players and the coaches.  a third-generation restaurateur, the 48-year-old bannos got his start working in his family's kosher deli, which was located downtown on the seventh floor of a medical building on the corner of wabash and washington.  in the early 1980s, bannos traveled to new orleans in search of the perfect gumbo recipe. he met with paul prudhomme, the famed chef at commander's palace, and his palate was never the same.  bannos returned home and introduced his family's deli customers to red beans and rice with andouille sausage. it was such a hit that in 1985, the same year the bears assembled their super bowl team, bannos changed the menu to cajun cuisine. the restaurant's name is a nod to the deli's seventh-floor location, where the first heaven on seven opened and is still operating.  the andouille sausage that bannos uses in his dishes is shipped from louisiana. last sunday, when the bears played host to the seattle seahawks, bannos said he sold 25 gallons of gumbo to tailgaters and other bears fans who planned to watch the game at home.  he expects to do a brisker business this weekend, so in that respect he wins no matter what the final score is.  ''if it weren't the bears they were playing, i'd definitely be rooting for the saints,'' bannos said. he added, ''my perfect thing would be a bears win in overtime or a last-second field goal by the bears to win.''  pro football  