perhaps thinking of legacy, bush has rice on the move   two years from the end of his second term, president bush -- perhaps with his legacy in mind -- sent his secretary of state to try to restart moribund peace talks between israelis and palestinians and to create a foundation of muslim support for the administration's new strategy in iraq.  secretary of state condoleezza rice flies home on friday, after a quick trip across the middle east and europe, with just enough progress to shield herself from criticism that the trip was a bust. the palestinian president and the israeli prime minister promised to join her for three-way talks within a month, with a meeting in washington in advance by the so-called quartet -- the united states, russia, the european union and the united nations -- that has been trying to promote middle east peace.  and powerful arab states gave their blessing, however reserved, to mr. bush's initiatives to try to snatch victory from the growing chaos that is iraq -- even though these wealthy nations committed nothing of their own to that effort.  throughout a week of long flights and long nights of negotiations, ms. rice carried the message that the moment was right for progress and that the bush administration's accelerated efforts could succeed in a region where past american presidents, democratic and republican, also sought to burnish their late-term legacies, but usually fell short.  with chaos across the region offering a loud and bloody counterpoint to her argument, ms. rice cited an oft-quoted chinese aphorism that crisis and opportunity are a couple. but it is clear that crisis currently rules.  ms. rice's israeli and palestinian negotiating partners have been weakened -- the palestinian president, mahmoud abbas, by the victory a year ago of the militant group hamas in legislative elections, and prime minister ehud olmert of israel by perceptions that the war with hezbollah militants in lebanon during the summer was bungled.  so even if ms. rice has the vision to peer through the fog of regional conflict and see what she labeled a ''political horizon'' for israelis and palestinians, her israeli and palestinian partners may not be around long enough to move in that direction with her.  (ms. rice, a scholar of soviet affairs, is no doubt aware of the brezhnev-era joke in which a kremlin party leader intones, ''comrades, global communism is on the horizon,'' to which a reply is whispered from the back of the hall, ''doesn't the horizon always move away exactly as fast as you move toward it?'')  the white house, of course, is also struggling. mr. bush's new plan for iraq is meeting deep resistance from democrats in congress and even from the iraqi prime minister. in a political sense, though, the opposition could help the administration lay blame for any ultimate failure in iraq far from the white house.  administration officials already contend that past errors in setting troop levels were made by generals, not the white house; that prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki may have neither the ability nor the will to quash sectarian militias and forge a unity government; and that the democrats on capitol hill are not willing to give their plan a chance.  ms. rice spoke at length on this trip about historical determinism, about how great presidents and prime ministers divined the moment when geopolitical stars aligned, and rushed in then to take advantage.  ''i tend to place a lot of emphasis on the fact that people see their interests differently now than they did 5 years ago or 10 years ago,'' she said. ''they see their interests less as continuing or having maximalist positions about this conflict and are more concerned about the kind of broad strategic picture.''  she said that the israeli-hezbollah conflict in lebanon ''was a major contributor to that shift in alignment'' and that it made a middle east peace deal more promising, and that toppling saddam hussein, despite the current violence within iraq, removed what she called an ''eastern front'' against the israelis.  looking more broadly across the region, in particular to the nations bordering iraq and along the persian gulf, ms. rice said she was trying to construct a geopolitical framework of moderate sunni and shiites into a stronger, and more active, alliance against extremist sunni and shiite states -- meaning syria and iran.  but tensions emerge. america's muslim allies in the region do not like being called moderate, as they see themselves as fervent in their religious belief, though mainstream, perhaps, in their view of the world. there are also divisions over how and whether to negotiate with iran.  ''there's still a tendency to see these things in sunni-shia terms,'' ms. rice said. ''but the middle east is going to have to overcome that.'' she added that neighboring sunni-led arab states should understand that iraq's shiite-led government primarily saw itself as arab and that the only way it would ally itself with iran, which is shiite but not arab, would be ''if people deny the shia-led iraq a place in the arab world.''  some critics have said that the iraq war has sidetracked, or even derailed, the bush administration's efforts for a middle east peace deal and that the administration's renewed focus on the region is an effort to change the channel from images of iraq as the bush administration enters its final two years.  but ms. rice said her efforts had nothing to do with legacy building.  ''i don't think about it in terms of my reputation,'' ms. rice said. ''i am going to be concerned about what we can get done, when, and how.''  news analysis  