ambush kills an american teaching democracy to iraqis   an american woman killed here on wednesday when gunmen fired on her convoy of vehicles was ambushed just minutes after leaving the headquarters of a prominent sunni arab political party, where she had been teaching a class on democracy, party members said thursday.  they said the woman -- andrea parhamovich, 28, of perry, ohio -- left the party's fortified compound in western baghdad around 4 p.m., heading east to her group's offices outside the green zone, when she and her armed guards came under attack from all sides.  les campbell, middle east and north africa director for the national democratic institute, which hired ms. parhamovich about three months ago, said that during the fierce firefight, guards tried to escape, fought back, then called for reinforcements from other private security contractors.  the attackers -- perhaps as many as 30 men, according to witness accounts passed on to mr. campbell -- used heavy weapons, possibly rocket-propelled grenades, destroying the armored sedan that ms. parhamovich was in and killing three of her armed guards: a croatian, a hungarian and an iraqi. two other security contractors were wounded. the attackers then scattered back into the neighborhood.  saleem abdullah, a senior member of the sunni political group, the iraqi islamic party, said that ms. parhamovich's group might have been chosen as a target when it arrived. ''it seems that someone, when they saw her in the area, set up an ambush,'' he said. ''that's what we think.''  mr. campbell described ms. parhamovich as a driven young woman, inspired by politics and a desire to help iraqis connect with their newly elected government.  he said she joined the national democratic institute, a nonprofit organization based in washington that has worked in iraq since 2003, after working for a few months with a similar group in baghdad.  ''she was an idealistic person who saw an opportunity in iraq to help, to work with people in iraq who were interested in democracy and human rights, which is what she cared about,'' he said.  mr. abdullah emphasized that yarmouk, the largely sunni area where the attack occurred, had become increasingly dangerous. it lies west of the tigris river where clashes between sunni insurgents and shiite militias have been concentrated in recent months.  he said that even before the attack on wednesday he had asked the american military for more protection.  the attacks also underscored why american and iraqi leaders have turned toward a new military effort to retake baghdad, the capital.  unrelenting violence has kept civil and political development at bay here and in other areas of iraq, creating an environment in which guns and ambushes have trumped blueprints and dialogue.  on thursday, a car bomb exploded in central baghdad around 8 a.m., killing four people and wounding 15. two other car bombings in shiite areas east of the capital left six people dead, and mortar attacks across the city killed five.  an additional 26 bodies were found throughout baghdad.  in southern dora, once a mixed district of the capital that the american military cited as a success story as recently as the summer, three bomb explosions in quick succession at a wholesale vegetable market killed at least 10 people and wounded 30.  witnesses said the blasts occurred within minutes of one another, one at the market entrance, a second in the middle and a third near the far end. it was difficult, many people said, to distinguish parts of destroyed bodies from smashed vegetables.  ''they all are ordinary workers who are poor,'' said walid al-musawi, who works at the market. ''they are just people looking for their daily bread. this guy who died, his name is hosham. he has six children. this guy who sells sweets, who died today, lost a brother a few days ago. and now he died, too.''  several people at the market said they feared what an expanded american military operation would do to their neighborhood. last summer, when american and iraqi troops locked down parts of dora for days, leaving only one entrance and exit, residents complained that it was nearly impossible to get enough food or get to work.  one resident said the new security plan, which would bring more than 20,000 additional troops to iraq, most of them to baghdad, ''is going to be a disaster for all iraqis whether they are rich or poor'' because it was likely to keep people from work.  on thursday, details also emerged about an american operation in dora on christmas morning that appears to have gone awry. witnesses and relatives of ali murad jafar, 76, the uncle of the iraqi ambassador to romania, said american soldiers raided mr. murad's home before dawn and shot him in the jaw after discovering him and his wife awake.  ''there was no electricity at that time, and my parents were terrified -- they thought they were under attack by insurgents,'' said ayad ali, mr. murad's son.  he said his father had been taken to a hospital in the green zone, then sent to another hospital in baghdad, where he later died.  the american military did not respond to repeated phone and e-mail messages seeking comment on the incident.  the struggle for iraq  