hollywood rethinks its ratings process   stung by a low-budget documentary that assailed the movie ratings system last year, motion picture industry officials are vowing to make the system more transparent to filmmakers and more accessible to parents.  the most substantive rule change will let aggrieved filmmakers refer on appeal to other movies -- for example, to argue that because another film was permitted to run a similar scene, their film should be permitted to as well. until now, directors were barred from citing other films when appearing before the appeals board. but ratings officials decline to say that they will cede to precedent; the ''context of the entire film'' will still guide their decisions.  officials of the motion picture association of america, its classification and ratings administration and the national association of theater owners plan to meet with filmmakers and producers monday in park city, utah, at the sundance film festival to discuss other tweaks to the ratings system, a spokeswoman for the motion picture association said. the efforts to change the system were reported yesterday in variety and the hollywood reporter.  dan glickman, chairman and chief executive of the motion picture association and overseer of the ratings administration, said that this round of changes wasn't likely to be the last and that filmmakers were welcome to suggest others. (the previous procedures were set up by his predecessor, jack valenti, in the 1960s,) ''my view is that we have a continuing obligation to listen,'' he said. ''nothing is locked in forever.''  the changes come a year after a sundance film, ''this film is not yet rated,'' excoriated the rating system as a supersecret star chamber. the film outed the otherwise anonymous ratings-board members and revealed that several were no longer parents of minor children, the only requirement for the job.  the documentary, which was directed by kirby dick and released by ifc films in september, also disclosed the closely held names of the ratings system's appeals-board members and revealed that lay representatives from the roman catholic church and the protestant national council of churches sit in on the appeals process.  the association now says it will remove a film rater whose children have grown up. it will also post to a soon-to-be-revamped web site the names of its three senior movie raters -- whose names are already public -- and limited demographic information about the others. but the identities of other board members will remain secret, and the appeals-board members still won't be identified publicly, though the board will be expanded to include film industry people from outside the association and the theater owners' group.  in addition, ''observers from different backgrounds'' will be admitted into the appeals process under an ''occasional designation,'' the association said, but it didn't say if the roman catholic and protestant observers would be grandfathered in.  mr. glickman said that he had seen mr. dick's documentary but that he had begun work on updating the system much earlier, shortly after taking his job in late 2004. still, he said, ''if there's any perceptions that the system is secret, i don't want those out there.'' he said he and the ratings board's chairwoman, joan graves, would be reaching out more frequently to film schools, parents' groups and members of congress to demystify the process.  the new web site will also include the ratings system's rules, which until now were provided only in writing and on request, a spokeswoman said.  the association also said the ratings administration would work on clarifying how its ratings are defined so that, while adults would still be allowed to take children to r-rated movies, they would be made aware that many of those films were not appropriate for younger viewers.  the ratings administration last year began a program to send weekly e-mail alerts to parents about ratings for new movie releases, but its red carpet ratings service has signed up only about 2,000 people. plans now call for advertising in theaters, schools and video stores, and on the radio, to explain the ratings, and for posters and a video to promote the e-mail alerts.  mr. dick, the documentary maker, said he welcomed the rule change allowing reference to other films on appeal but called the other changes cosmetic and said transparency was still a ways off. ''if this is a ratings system for the public, it should be public, the entire process, and all the raters should be known to the public,'' he said.  