regulators examining commerce bank   commerce bancorp, which calls itself ''america's most convenient bank,'' rattled investors yesterday after it disclosed that federal regulators were investigating the bank's real estate deals with executives.  shares of commerce fell 8.3 percent, or $2.89, to $31.83, after the bank said the office of the comptroller of the currency and the federal reserve were conducting an inquiry.  commerce has become one of the fastest-growing banks in the nation, thanks in part to its extended branch hours, and has made an aggressive and successful push into new york's crowded banking market.  commerce, based in cherry hill, n.j., said, ''the scope of the investigation will include but not be limited to transactions with its officers, directors and related parties, including transactions involving bank premises.''  investors were unnerved by the announcement, in large part, because ''it was so vague,'' said meredith whitney, an analyst with cibc world markets. ''it could be the lightest offense or it could be the most severe offense.''  bank executives declined to answer questions about the investigation on a conference call with analysts and reporters yesterday. commerce said it had appointed a committee of independent board members to oversee the investigation.  critics have long complained about the bank's business ties with firms that are either owned or controlled by commerce's chairman and president, vernon w. hill ii, and his wife, shirley hill.  mr. hill and his family trusts own or are partners in real estate firms that lease property to commerce for bank branches; the firms earned about $1.9 million in annual rent in 2005. also, mrs. hill runs a firm that designs commerce branches; she earned $7.5 million from the bank in 2005. that year, commerce spent $482,000 at galloway national golf club, an 18-hole course near atlantic city that is owned by mr. hill.  analysts said the re-emergence of issues that were widely believed to have been resolved is unsettling, because it suggests that regulators have uncovered new problems.  ''many were of the mind-set that the regulatory clouds were behind them, and then all of a sudden, wham, you see this today,'' said adam barkstrom, an analyst with stifel nicolaus & company. ''it's befuddling.''  mr. barkstrom, who was once a bank examiner, said it was common for regulators to scrutinize how banks treat loans and other relationships with executives, directors and other insiders.  officials at the office of the comptroller of the currency and the federal reserve declined to comment, citing polices of not discussing individual banks.  mr. hill, 61, founded commerce in marlton, n.j., near philadelphia at the age of 27 soon after he started a commercial real estate business and graduated with an economics degree from the wharton school of the university of pennsylvania. he has cultivated the image of a maverick in the staid banking industry by bucking the trend toward automation and by publicly belittling the policies and approaches of competitors.  the company reported yesterday that its assets grew 18 percent in 2006, to $45.27 billion, as deposits rose 18 percent and loans climbed 23 percent. profits increased 11 percent, to $315.1 million. commerce added 55 branches last year and said that it expected to add another 65 in 2007, nearly half of them in metropolitan new york.  the bank's growth comes as rivals are struggling to increase deposits and profits because short-term interest rates, which determine the cost of money for banks, are higher than long-term rates, which often determine how much money banks can make from loans and investments.  mr. hill, who declined to comment yesterday, has said the company has been forthright in disclosing its business relationships with his family and the transactions were always conducted at an arm's length.  the company, however, has suggested in previous filings that it would alter how it does business with firms connected to the hills in response to criticism of the deals. but it is unclear if it has made any significant changes.  in 2002, for instance, a commerce spokesman, david flaherty, told the record of bergen county, n.j., referring to mrs. hill: ''our association with her will change. we don't know what that change is going to be yet.''  mrs. hill's firm, interarch, earned $8.1 million in revenue from commerce in 2002.  in 2005, the last year for which the company has provided information, it did $7.5 million in business with mrs. hill.  commerce has also faced scrutiny for the close ties some of its executives have had with local and state officials in the northeast. in november, the company said the office of the united states attorney in philadelphia had informed it that it would not bring charges against the company in a corruption investigation in which two former bank officials and a former treasurer for the city of philadelphia were convicted of trying to steer municipal business to the bank in exchange for favors.  