memo pad   registered travel at kennedy -- the first extension of the registered traveler program beyond orlando, fla., is scheduled to start today at terminal 7 at kennedy international airport as the expedited security program begins nationally. the program at kennedy is being operated by verified identity pass under the brand name clear, in a marketing partnership with british airways. a clear program has been in operation at orlando international airport since july 2005. clear is also taking enrollments for airports in indianapolis, cincinnati and san jose, calif. the program costs $99.95 a year (including a $30 federal fee) and requires a federal background check. competitors, among them unisys, are expected to begin operating their own programs later this year.  use of eurostar surges -- as short-haul air traffic delays worsen in europe, more business travelers are taking the train. eurostar, the high-speed rail service that links britain, france and belgium, said it carried 7.85 million passengers in 2006, up 5 percent from the year before. the largest increase in sales was in unrestricted business premier tickets, up 17 percent. on-time arrivals averaged 91.5 percent, a record for the service. more business travelers ''are discovering the punctuality and productivity advantages that eurostar offers compared with the experience of flying,'' said richard brown, eurostar's chief executive officer.  talks continue at british airways -- something to watch if you are planning a trip to london soon: the union representing aircraft cabin crew workers at british airways voted overwhelmingly yesterday to authorize a strike while negotiations continue with the airline. in a statement, british airways said, ''this does not mean that a strike is inevitable,'' and added, ''no dates have been set for potential action, and all our flights continue to operate normally.''  retail sales rise at terminal 4 -- record passenger traffic at kennedy's terminal 4 had the cash registers ringing at the 100,000-square-foot retail and food area called the shops at terminal 4. concession sales were up 15 percent last year as the number of passengers boarding planes at the terminal rose 19 percent, to 3.8 million. terminal 4 is a 1.5 million-square-foot building that opened in 2001 and is used by 50 international and domestic carriers.  fewer foreigners visit orlando -- it's not such a small world after all at orlando international airport in florida, where international visitors (not including those from mexico or canada) were down 13 percent in the first half of 2006 compared with the same period in 2005, according to the sarasota herald-tribune, which cited commerce department figures. a domestic travel industry organization, the discover america partnership, recently issued a report saying that the united states entry process ''has created a climate of fear and frustration that is turning away foreign business and leisure travelers from visiting the united states and damaging america's image abroad.''  airline hiring flight attendants -- in another sign that the domestic airline industry is slowly recovering, republic airways said yesterday it was recruiting 200 new flight attendants in the denver area as part of a plan to increase the number of attendants to 1,600 by 2008 from the existing 1,100. the carrier's subsidiary, republic airlines, is increasing operations in denver in march, when it will begin a partnership operating embraer 170 regional jets for frontier airlines.  joe sharkey  