record price for name on nets' arena   setting a record price for the naming rights to an american indoor sports arena, the british bank barclays has agreed to pay nearly $400 million over 20 years to put its name on the nets' planned future home in brooklyn. the arrangement could double the old record of $185 million for 20 years that royal philips electronics paid to name philips arena in atlanta in 1999.  the nets' arena, a glass-walled, 18,000-seat hall with a park on top, is the centerpiece of the atlantic yards, the $4 billion complex of apartment towers and commercial space designed by frank gehry.  the arena, together with several of the buildings, will be called barclays center, said another person with direct knowledge of the deal. the developer building atlantic yards, forest city ratner companies, hopes to open the arena in time for the nets' 2009-10 season.  the city's deputy mayor for economic development, daniel l. doctoroff, called the sponsorship deal particularly impressive given that barclays does not even have retail banks in this country.  ''to have an international investment bank without a major local presence to invest the way they are in the image of brooklyn and the image of new york just is a remarkable vote of confidence,'' doctoroff said yesterday. ''the idea of using brooklyn and new york to build a global brand is one that we think is a very wise investment.''  barclays is among the largest banks in the world by total assets, with more than $1.5 trillion.  the deal, first reported yesterday in the new york post, will be formally announced at a news conference today in brooklyn. neither barclays nor forest city would comment on the deal yesterday.  forest city's principal, bruce c. ratner, bought the nets for $300 million in 2004.  the atlantic yards, planned for a 22-acre site near downtown brooklyn, includes 6,400 rental apartments and condominiums, office towers and a boutique hotel, in addition to the arena. the project was approved by the state last month.  forest city is also the new york times's development partner on the newspaper's new headquarters in midtown.  one of the people with knowledge of the deal said the money would go a long way toward defraying the cost of the arena, which is expected to cost more than $550 million.  ''that money has to come from somewhere,'' he said.  brian schecter, an analyst who tracks naming rights for kagan research, said that while he did not know the details of the deal, it sounded like a good one for forest city.  ''it strikes me as a nice price tag,'' he said. ''what makes this deal even more lucrative is that it's basically a basketball-centric arena.''  philips arena in atlanta is used by both basketball and hockey teams.  pro basketball  correction:  january 20, 2007, saturday  a sports article on thursday about the sale of naming rights for the nets' planned home in brooklyn referred imprecisely to the arena's anticipated cost. although the price will indeed exceed $550 million, the latest cost projection has raised it to about $637 million. the article also referred incompletely to a park planned atop the arena. it will be a private open space for the complex; it will not be a public park.  