changes in top leadership are expected at channel 13   after two decades under the same leadership, the new york public television station wnet, channel 13, is planning a change at the top. under a succession plan to be voted on today by the board of wnet's parent, educational broadcasting corporation, william f. baker, the chief executive officer, will step down in february 2008, to be replaced by neal shapiro, the former president of nbc news.  mr. shapiro is expected to be named president of the educational broadcasting corporation today. if approved, he would work with mr. baker as his deputy for a year until assuming control.  the choice of mr. baker's successor comes after a protracted search that began when educational broadcasting's chief operating officer, paula a. kerger, became the president of the public broadcasting service last march.  the decision to choose a candidate from commercial television -- and one with experience in programming, not fund-raising -- reflects the reality of the intense, fast-changing competition that public broadcasting faces. ''at the end of the day, it's programming that really maintains our viewership and our membership,'' said james s. tisch, the president and chief executive of loews corporation, and the chairman of the board of trustees of educational broadcasting, which also includes wliw, channel 21.  mr. tisch, in an interview, praised the programs that wnet already produces for national distribution, including some of pbs's most recognizable series, from reports by bill moyers to ''now,'' ''nature,'' ''american masters,'' ''great performances,'' ''cyberchase'' for children and the interview program ''the charlie rose show.''  ''but the problem is,'' mr. tisch said, ''in the content world you have to run just to stay in place. the viewer is very fickle, and it is important to understand what the viewer wants.''  he said that mr. shapiro has managed a large organization, and that he ''has a close affinity with programming'' and a sense both of the mission of public television and the competitive challenges in a world of ''seemingly infinite choices.''  mr. shapiro's lack of fund-raising experience would not be a problem, mr. tisch said, noting that ''the best fund-raisers are people who believe in what they're doing.''  mr. shapiro, 48, was a producer for abc's ''world news tonight'' and ''primetime live,'' as well as the executive producer of the ''dateline nbc'' newsmagazine before being named to lead nbc news in june 2001. he stepped down from that post in 2005. a graduate of tufts university, he is married to juju chang, a correspondent for abc's ''20/20.''  the ''dateline'' franchise ''to catch a predator,'' in which potential sex offenders are lured to meetings, then caught on camera, was created while he was at the helm of nbc news. the news division won awards for its coverage of sept. 11, hurricane katrina and other events.  part of the allure of public television, mr. shapiro said, is ''a certain freedom without commercials.''  ''i'm not going to have to agonize about losing a 10th of a rating point in adults 18 to 49 in the second half hour,'' he added.  assessing wnet's current programming, mr. shapiro said: ''i think they have a lot of great franchises. but like all franchises, there is always room to innovate, to improve them, to make them better. but it is reassuring to start with a baseline of quality.''  mr. baker, 64, will become president emeritus when he steps down, with a continuing role at the stations. he said he would also do more writing and producing.  with an operating budget of more than $175 million, educational broadcasting corporation is one of the city's largest nonprofit organizations, excluding hospitals and universities. given that status, it has puzzled some observers that it took nearly a year to fill the job.  mr. baker said the corporation was initially seeking to replace ms. kerger, whose strength was fund-raising. but the search changed, he said, when ''i had an epiphany and decided that after 20 years of doing what i think has been a very successful job, that it was a time for a repotting for me.''  mr. baker took wnet from an operating loss and $70 million annual budget in 1987 to financial stability, helped establish a $100 million endowment, led the merger with wliw in 2003 and helped start several digital cable channels.  in addition to learning how to attract grants and donations, mr. shapiro will have to learn on-air pitching for the station's pledge drives.  ''i've won a lot of emmys but i don't think i'll win one more for best on-air fund-raising,'' mr. shapiro said, though he added, gamely, that he expected it to ''be fun.''  