the titans return, carrying lacrosse sticks   casey powell made a big mistake bringing his wife to new york to watch him play saturday night in the first lacrosse game ever at madison square garden.  ''now she wants to live here,'' powell, a former syracuse all-american, said yesterday.  derek jeter can afford the island of manhattan. so can david wright. professional lacrosse players are not quite there yet. powell sometimes drives down from his home in the syracuse area with his teammate gewas schindler, who lives on an indian reservation.  new york's insane real estate market is out of range for members of the new york titans, an expansion team of the national lacrosse league. the average salary is said to be around $14,000, with almost every player working another job.  madison square garden, which has been host to lion tamers and rock stars, slam-dunkers and even a pope, is part of the dream for lacrosse.  ''you'd love to be able to live in this market and not have to split time,'' said ryan boyle, a former princeton star who signed a lease in austin, tex., before he was acquired by the titans.  there are former lacrosse players all over new york, particularly in the financial institutions, using the same aggressiveness they once demonstrated with sticks in their hands. one former intramural player at johns hopkins, michael r. bloomberg, currently works at city hall, in the top job.  the horror of 9/11 cut deeply into the lacrosse community. a friend of mine, who played for hopkins, said he attended five funerals in the days after the attack. another casualty that day was eamon j. mceneaney of cantor fitzgerald, a former star at cornell, who left behind an aura of family man, professional, athlete and poet. his widow, bonnie, found poems he had written, and allowed them to be published three years later under the title, ''a bend in the road.''  other famous americans have played lacrosse, including jim thorpe, the olympic champion; jim brown, the football running back; and bruce arena, the former national soccer team coach. none of them were from the preppy side of town.  ''my father worked in a steel mill, and i'm the first member of the family to go to college,'' said powell, from carthage, n.y., whose two younger brothers, ryan and mike, also starred at syracuse.  boyle, originally from hunt valley, md., said, ''i'm one of six children, and we're definitely middle class.''  their sport has taken a beating in the past year after rape charges were filed against three duke university lacrosse players after two women had been hired to strip at a team party. the initial rape charges were recently dismissed, but sexual offense and kidnapping charges are pending. the bulk of duke's 2006 season was terminated, and the coach resigned, but the district attorney, who had labeled the duke players hooligans, took himself off the case last week.  ''it's like any legal situation, you hold your judgment until the facts are in,'' boyle said yesterday. ''but as time progressed, this case has definitely gotten weakened.'' boyle added that some of the players may have ''made a mistake in judgment.'' powell said he did not like the way ''the media put its spin on it.''  many of the players in this indoor league come from the top lacrosse colleges, but some come directly from indian regions in the northeast quadrant of the continent, where the sport began centuries ago. (the first men's intercollegiate game, between manhattan college and new york university, was played in central park in 1877. the titans held a publicity jaunt to the cold, sun-dappled park yesterday, as homage.)  the players on the league's 13 teams have occupations as diverse as firefighter, teacher, insurance agent, electrician, soldier, winemaker, refrigerator repairman and police officer.  ''we were having a league telephone conference, and paul day, the coach of edmonton, who's a police officer, said, 'i've got to get off the call because i've got a situation,' '' said george daniel, the president of the titans. ''he was in some kind of chase, because we could hear the sirens in the background.''  powell and boyle each run a business -- powell brothers lacrosse and boyle's trilogy lacrosse. as entrepreneurs, they seem to appreciate the thin margin for operating this league. reebok has invested more than $10 million for five years, while other sponsors include dodge, progressive insurance and supercuts.  the league has a weekly game on the versus cable network and the average attendance is said to be more than 11,000, with crowds of 18,000 recorded twice last weekend, in buffalo and in denver. nearly half the teams have common ownership with franchises in the n.h.l., sharing large arenas comfortably because an indoor lacrosse carpet can be laid on ice in an hour or two.  the new york team (which will play four games at the garden and four at nassau coliseum) is owned by a group led by gary rosenbach, the founder of the galleon group, a hedge fund. fans voted for the nickname, titans, which was also the nickname of the original new york team in the american football league in 1960, before they became the jets.  does this mean a joe namath is in the near future? not necessarily. powell and boyle are big names in their sport, but for the foreseeable future they are commuters to the big city they represent.  sports of the times e-mail: geovec@nytimes.com  