police shooting led mayor to bolster review board   concerns about police-community relations following the sean bell shooting prompted the bloomberg administration to examine the board that investigates claims of police abuse -- a review that led the mayor to announce an increase in funds for it during his state of the city speech, city officials said.  the $1.5 million increase will allow the agency, the civilian complaint review board, to retain 25 more staff members, officials said. it has a budget of about $10 million.  mayor michael r. bloomberg's announcement on wednesday was seen as bolstering a city agency that many see as struggling beneath the weight of an increasing number of complaints. the independent board was created 14 years ago; some critics of the administration said the budget increase was long overdue.  the catalyst that prompted the increase, people in and out of city government said, was the shooting of mr. bell, an unarmed black man who was killed on nov. 25 by some of the 50 bullets fired by five officers outside a queens strip club. ''it would not have happened without the shooting,'' a city official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said of the plans to enlarge the board's budget.  mr. bloomberg spoke with black politicians and religious and community leaders following the shooting and met with them at city hall, and heard as many complaints about the broader themes of police-community relations as he did about the shooting of mr. bell, officials said.  that led to a dialogue involving the mayor, police commissioner raymond w. kelly and others about what some leaders described as bitter tensions between black residents and police officers, the officials said.  and it prompted the administration to take a closer look at the board's operations. complaints against police officers rose to 7,774 last year, compared to 4,612 in 2002. in that same period, the board's annual budget has remained static and the number of full-time employees has remained the same, around 185.  the administration determined that the surge in complaints, largely due to the 311 telephone system instituted in 2003, meant that more resources were needed. mayor bloomberg decided, for the first time in his tenure, to increase funds for the board.  in years past, as part of the annual budget wrangling, board officials had had to rely on the city council to keep its funds at the existing level. and that was never a sure thing because of competition for funds from other programs. ''it has been a stepchild of the administration, and that is why the council has had a fondness for it and funded it,'' said peter f. vallone, jr., the chair of the public safety committee, whose father played an important role in shaping the board as an independent agency in 1993. ''hopefully, the mayor's announcement changes that attitude by the administration.''  florence l. finkle, the board's executive director, said the mayor's message highlights the board's importance as the only mechanism in city government that allows people to register complaints against specific police officers.  ''historically, across the country, when there are controversial police actions, public attention is naturally drawn to police-community relations, the issue of police misconduct and agencies that might play a role in holding police departments accountable,'' ms. finkle said.  norman siegel, a civil rights lawyer, suggested other measures beyond a budget increase to strengthen the board are needed. he said that former mayor rudolph w. giuliani had proposed moving lawyers who prosecute misconduct cases against officers from the police department to the review board.  christopher dunn, the associate legal director of the new york civil liberties union, said there is tension between the police department and the board that seems ''to have intensified'' since mr. kelly arrived for a second stint as commissioner in 2002. ''at best, the department has ignored the c.c.r.b. and arguably it has been hostile to the c.c.r.b.,'' he said.  ''the mayor's giving the c.c.r.b. more money is nice, but that will not address the serious issues of police misconduct raised by the bell shooting,'' he said. ''to address those concerns, the board needs to be much more aggressive in investigating policy issues, not just individual complaints of misconduct, and the police department must be much more responsive to the board recommendations,'' which it may or may not follow.  the board's chairwoman noted that its primary mandate was to investigate complaints of police misconduct, not issues of policy.  paul j. browne, the police department's chief spokesman, said mr. dunn's criticism was "as uninformed as it is predictable and biased.''  he added: "the department works hand in glove with c.c.r.b. on a daily basis. we train their investigators, our internal affairs bureau initiates complaints on behalf of potential complainants who have yet to come forward and commissioner kelly championed and got off the ground a mediation program that was a c.c.r.b. priority. ''  he said that commissioner kelly supported an increase in funds for the board. ''the police commissioner believes anything that can strengthen the quality of c.c.r.b. investigations is good for both the police department and the public,'' he said.  andrew case, a spokesman for the board, said eight teams of investigators at the board have been resolving increasing numbers of cases annually, but the cases resolved are being outpaced by the influx of new complaints. the result is that the number of unresolved cases at the end of last year was 3,739, compared to 2,149 in 2002, a 74 percent increase.  mr. dunn said that a complaint lodged with the board by the mother of trent benefield, who was wounded when mr. bell was killed, has taken a back seat to an inquiry by the queens district attorney's office for policy reason, but he wished that the board would examine broader questions raised by the shooting about firearms use and the role of race in police shootings. complaints about police raids related to the inquiry in the bell shooting are being investigated, he said.  