after setbacks, bp may be forced to give up some control of joint venture in russia   when bp announced a landmark investment of $6.15 billion in russia in 2003, the event was celebrated with a healthy dose of british pomp and circumstance.  president vladimir v. putin flew to london for the announcement of a joint venture, standing with prime minister tony blair of britain, who called the deal a ''concrete testament'' to britain's long-term confidence in russia. bp's chief executive, john browne, who announced his retirement unexpectedly on friday, was personally instrumental in brokering the deal.  in some measures, that may have been the high water mark for the joint venture. tnk-bp, as the venture is known, has already suffered many setbacks and is excluded by national security rules from developing large new fields. now bp may be forced to cede some control over the venture, analysts and investors say, as the russian government steps up control of its natural resources.  the state-controlled energy giants gazprom and rosneft are jockeying for the rights to buy out bp's russian investor partners, a move that could come as soon as this spring, analysts say, and might eventually leave bp with a minority stake in the venture.  tnk-bp is russia's second-largest private oil company, after lukoil, and the only energy company with partial foreign control, something analysts say has made it a takeover target.  indeed, bp's position in russia is looking more tenuous after another large oil company, royal dutch shell, was forced in december to cede control of the world's largest oil and natural gas development, known as sakhalin 2, to gazprom.  ''time is not on their side, just as it was not on the side of the foreign owners of sakhalin 2,'' james r. fenkner, a managing partner at red star, a brokerage firm in moscow, said in a telephone interview.  shell and two japanese partners, mitsui and mitsubishi, sold a controlling stake in sakhalin 2 after an environmental regulator threatened to freeze work on the $22 billion showcase project. ominously, that same agency, rosprirodnadzor, has accused tnk-bp of illegal logging and drilling at a massive siberian gas field called kovykta.  now, one of mr. browne's partners in the venture, the russian oligarch viktor vekselberg, is negotiating on behalf of tnk-bp to resolve this dispute. any change to the tnk-bp structure is bound to have serious repercussions for bp.  tnk-bp, which has 10.5 billion barrels of reserves, provides about a quarter of bp's production. it brings in 15 percent of bp's net income. bp has no other major projects coming on stream that could take the place of tnk-bp if production drops over the short term.  the best-case outcome is that gazprom buys out the russian oligarchs, and the big projects that tnk-bp has planned continue, said neal mcmahon, an analyst with sanford bernstein in london. the worst case is that gazprom takes an even larger stake in the gas fields, including kovykta, that tnk-bp is developing and forces bp to accept its pipeline and marketing plans, he said.  the project was viewed as one of mr. browne's diplomatic achievements, and any disintegration or changes to it are sure to figure in to the re-examination of his legacy as bp suffers from a spate of problems. bp said last week that mr. browne was leaving the company 18 months earlier than expected. the company has been hit by an explosion in texas, a pipeline leak in alaska and allegations into market manipulation at its trading desks.  on tuesday, james baker, the former united states secretary of state, will release the results of an investigation into bp's health and safety practices that is expected to be critical of the company's overall strategy. mr. browne and dozens of top executives in london were interviewed for the report.  still, bp has already profited handsomely from mr. browne's russian ventures, whatever their future prospects. the company has also maneuvered well to adapt to russia's mercurial politics.  just in three years, it has earned in dividends more than enough to cover its initial investment in cash and shares in tnk-bp. by the third quarter of 2006, bp had earned $6.9 billion, according to tony odone, a bp spokesman in london.  ''we're happy with our position in russia at the moment,'' he said. ''we're getting on well with our partners and the government.''  separately from the tnk-bp deal, bp bought $1 billion in shares of rosneft, the russian state oil company, during an initial offering in july, in what was seen as a gesture of acceptance of the kremlin's dominant role in the industry. since rosneft is one of the companies likely to benefit from any nationalization of tnk-bp assets, that investment served as an unusual form of hedging, analysts say.  