welterweight bialystock treads softly on big shtick   max bialystock is many things -- a stinking liar, a crook, a shameless noodge, a stud muffin for the elderly and infirm. and of course a big fat broadway producer. but a mensch he is not.  this incontrovertible fact has apparently not been imparted to tony danza, who is struggling gamely through this gargantuan role at the moment, treating audiences to a soft and chewy sweetheart of a bialy as the mel brooks musical, ''the producers,'' approaches its sixth anniversary on broadway this spring.  come to think of it, mr. danza, best known for his appearances in the television series ''who's the boss?'' and ''taxi,'' doesn't quite come up to snuff in the big and fat department either. now, when leo bloom, played with zest by roger bart, descends into one of his many bouts of hysteria and hisses venom at max, he abuses his partner as a ''former fatty.''  clearly the producers of ''the producers'' were so little inclined to tinker with a winning formula that they chose not to excise a few lines of dialogue to accommodate the svelter physique of their new leading man, preposterous though it is that anyone in a fit of pique would deride a fellow as ''once-husky.''  then again ''the producers'' has always prided itself on the ludicrous. that's half the fun of the show, and the essential problem with mr. danza's weirdly likable max bialystock is that he isn't ludicrous enough. mr. danza whispers and croons when only a brash belt will do. he capers when max would charge.  once a frenzied purveyor of shtick, max now plays the straight man, and not just to this cheerfully offensive musical's panoply of mincing queens. mr. danza's max plays straight man to the little old ladies too. why, even the fake comb-over wig that has replaced mr. danza's inaptly full head of hair looks more pathetic than truly funny.  in short, through no fault of his own, the great max bialystock is now a featured player in a musical he once ruled over with the imperial splendor of a king.  well, stuff happens, as max himself finds out the hard way. fortunately ''the producers'' is a comic machine sturdy enough to power ahead even if a cylinder or two is idling. the director and choreographer, susan stroman, has seen to it that the new star is surrounded by a rich stock of seasoned stage performers who play well together, and with mr. danza too. (by the way, mr. danza's nimble feet are a nice surprise; he dances easily, with a boxer's quickly dodging center of gravity.)  mr. bart, who first took the role of leo in 2002, now takes over a healthy portion of the show as the sniveling ex-accountant. mr. bart seems to be inhabited by a whole menagerie of animals, each with a serious psychological disorder of some kind. expressing fear and loathing, lust and joy, mr. bart barks and bays and whinnies with uncanny verisimilitude. happily, he sings and dances with a more human touch, and is the only performer i can think of who possesses an innocent leer.  angie schworer is sweetly wistful as the swedish dumpling ulla, contorting the english language with the same limber ease that she does her statuesque body. lee roy reams doesn't quite have the flamboyant wattage to fully illuminate the character of roger debris, the director who ensures that the musical-within-the-musical, ''springtime for hitler,'' is kept light and bright and gay. (mr. reams's garland takeoff is terrific, though only about a half-dozen people in the audience seem to get it these days.) but brad musgrove manages to work some minor and successful variations on the role of debris's epicene ''common-law assistant,'' carmen ghia. (it cannot be easy to play the role opposite mr. bart, who set the filigreed template for it when the show opened.) perhaps best of all is bill nolte, whose goggle-eyed franz liebkind, the neo-nazi nitwit, possesses a booming voice, a hearty presence and a splendid unawareness of his own idiocy.  as the stage fills with these vibrantly silly caricatures, mr. danza eases into the show and begins to exude a livelier spirit, as if the vital comic energies of his co-stars were contagious. he is most ill-showcased when he is the center of attention, as in the opening number and in the hugely demanding tour de force ''betrayed,'' the second-act number in which max re-enacts the whole show in the course of three minutes or so of song. (mr. danza got his biggest, and well nigh only, laugh in this scene when he sat still, looking lonely, to pantomime the intermission.)  in such moments the many thousands who saw the role's creator, nathan lane, onstage -- and the two dozen or so who caught him in the movie -- may find themselves in the presence of a stage ghost, as the antic phantom of mr. lane's indelible performance seems to swirl around mr. danza's less-animated figure. it's then that you realize the heaping plate of brined ham you were expecting to have for dinner has been replaced by a respectable but unexciting slice of meat loaf.  theater  