patriots' rookie kicker ignores pressure and fills large shoes   stephen gostkowski said he cleared his mind as he searched for a kicking path between distant uprights, the road that might deliver the new england patriots to the american football conference championship game.  gostkowski said he did not burden himself with the pressure of the moment, the shoes he was trying to fill or the feat he was aiming to accomplish in his first season in the n.f.l.  ''i don't think about that stuff,'' gostkowski said after nailing a 31-yard field goal with 1 minute 10 seconds remaining in an a.f.c. second-round playoff game, which lifted new england to a 24-21 victory against the san diego chargers on sunday at qualcomm stadium. ''we kick 200 kicks a week. it seemed like any other kick to me.''  one day after adam vinatieri, the former patriots place-kicker, connected on five field goals for the indianapolis colts and reminded the patriots of what they had lost, gostkowski helped the patriots move on without him.  gostkowski also made field goals of 50 and 34 yards, making him 6 for 6 in the postseason and adding a dependable weapon to a patriots arsenal headlined by quarterback tom brady.  gostkowski's clutch kicks stood out especially because of how the game ended, with san diego's kicker, nate kaeding, failing to make a 54-yard attempt with eight seconds remaining that would have tied the score.  ''i knew i had to hit it on the screws,'' said kaeding, who missed a field-goal attempt in overtime against the jets in the playoffs after the 2004 season. ''i just didn't have enough juice on it.''  gostkowski said of kaeding: ''he's a good kicker, and he's got a pro bowl in him. he's just got to keep his head up.''  the chargers had a chance to use kaeding earlier, but san diego coach marty schottenheimer passed up a 48-yard field-goal attempt on fourth-and-11 in the first quarter. instead, linebacker mike vrabel sacked philip rivers, causing a fumble that new england recovered.  ''i thought we had a play that we could use that would make the yardage,'' schottenheimer said. ''the intention was to be very aggressive, and i thought we had a play that would get it.''  the patriots turned the error into gostkowski's 50-yard field goal for a 3-0 lead.  ''it was the big plays they made,'' chargers linebacker shawne merriman said. ''you have to play a team like that for 60 minutes, and you can't make mistakes because they will capitalize on them.''  san diego safety marlon mccree said: ''we were the best team in the n.f.l. with home-field advantage. our loss is very disappointing.''  among the supposed soft spots on a patriots roster that has sustained coaching defections and free-agent losses, the position of kicker stood as a potential weakness this season.  even though gostkowski finished his college career at memphis with 369 points -- placing him 13th in division i-a history -- replacing a veteran with a rookie seemed risky. vinatieri had been integral to each of new england's three super bowl titles.  gostkowski said he had never felt bogged down by the task of replacing a patriots legend.  ''i just kick,'' he said. ''i don't know too much about offense, defense or momentum. i just do my job.''  as brady led the patriots down the field in the final minutes, gostkowski said he figured his number would be called soon.  ''i knew we were in good position,'' he said. ''it was a tie game, and we were ready to win. game-winning kicks are fun. i haven't had too many experiences with them. i'm glad it worked out.''  pro football  