some signs of economic resilience seen   a tight labor market is pushing up many workers' wages, consumers are spending more at their local shopping malls and the skid in the housing market is easing in some areas of the country.  these observations, reported in the latest regional survey of economic conditions by the federal reserve, offered further evidence that the economy is expanding at a slower pace, but one that has so far defied predictions of a sharper slowdown.  the fed's report, known as the beige book from its jacket cover, came amid other signs of economic resilience yesterday.  a survey of industrial production showed unexpected growth last month. furthermore, a sampling of confidence among home builders rose in december.  together, the findings are consistent with some other signs of a muted but healthy expansion -- including job growth and rising stock prices -- that have come into clearer focus recently.  bernard baumohl, managing director of the economic outlook group, commented: ''in the last few weeks we've been getting a string of data that consistently seem to point to an economy that is turning out to be stronger than anyone expected. we really are shifting into a higher gear.''  yet there were reminders on two fronts yesterday that resurgent inflation could counterbalance such positive data. in remarks at an economic conference in scottsdale, ariz., the president of the federal reserve bank of san francisco, janet l. yellen, said that a labor market ''going gangbusters'' could touch off a spike in prices. and a labor department report showed that the prices businesses charge one another for a wide range of wholesale goods rose in december.  the producer price index increased 0.9 percent last month and 1.1 percent for all of 2006, significantly slower than 2005 but fast enough to give some investors and economists pause. stocks closed down yesterday after a day of mixed trading.  food became a lot more expensive in december, causing much of the overall increase. the prices of fruit and vegetables jumped by more than one-fifth. chicken and fish also cost significantly more than in november. and economists noted that with freezing temperatures laying waste to crops in california in recent days, food prices are likely to increase further.  rising energy costs also contributed to the overall increase in producer prices. gasoline climbed 7.1 percent and home heating oil was up 4 percent. still, the rate of increase was down significantly from november.  some economists said that the new report was not likely to change any minds among federal reserve policy makers as they consider whether to change their essentially neutral stance on interest rates when they meet at the end of the month. the fed generally gives more weight to the consumer price index, which will be released today, as a gauge of inflation in the economy.  chris varvares, president of macroeconomic advisers, said, ''the fact is that when you look at the correlation between the producer price index and the price increases the fed watches more closely, there's not real high month-to-month correlation.''  whether the rise in wholesale costs portends a rise in prices for consumers is unclear, and economists dispute this point.  ''we're starting to see some yellow flags now,'' mr. baumohl said. ''i won't call them red, but there are some flags.''  the beige book, which surveyed economic conditions from late in november through early january, said that overall inflation was moderate, and in some cases appeared to be stabilizing. in new york, for example, businesses reported some increase in cost pressures, ''but no discernable acceleration in consumer prices.''  john shin, an economist with lehman brothers, said the overall theme of the report -- moderate and healthy overall growth -- was consistent with what fed officials have been saying recently about the state of the economy. ''the basic message of the fed is still one of fairly strong inertia,'' he said.  while wages rose moderately in most regions, there was little evidence that businesses increased prices as a result. finding workers, especially skilled ones, continued to be a problem for businesses in most parts of the country. the kansas city fed reported worker shortages of many kinds, in groups as diverse as hotel housekeepers and accountants. in west virginia, a retailer reported having to pay lower-wage workers more because competition for their services was so tight.  almost all housing markets experienced continued softening. but real estate activity in manhattan remained relatively isolated from the price declines, with sales of co-ops and condominiums rising noticeably. manhattan rents rose by an estimated 5 percent on average, with the increases on small apartments steeper.  the fed's report noted that a ''significant proportion'' of new condos were being purchased by investors, who turn around and rent the units.  commercial real estate activity was even stronger. vacancy rates in lower manhattan and midtown fell to their lowest levels in more than five years. in upstate new york and new jersey, however, sales were sluggish, the report said.  elsewhere, there were signs that the market was leveling off. in richmond, va., for example, real estate agents said sales grew 9 percent in december compared with a year earlier. in minneapolis and st. paul, where inventories of unsold homes declined, contractors are adapting to the slowdown by focusing on remodeling rather than new construction.  