buffalo suspect's uncle misled them in '81, officials say   a succession of rapes and killings stretching back a quarter-century might have been averted if the uncle of the man the police arrested this week had told the police the truth when detectives questioned him back in 1981, the authorities said on tuesday.  the uncle, wilfredo sanchez caraballo, had been questioned in a 1981 rape in delaware park here, after the victim saw a man resembling her attacker at a shopping mall, followed him to his car and wrote down the license plate number. mr. caraballo owned the car, but he told the police the car had not been driven for a month, and when the victim was shown his picture, she said he was not the rapist.  but mr. caraballo told officials this month that he had left out a crucial detail: he had lent the car to his nephew, altemio sanchez, on the day the victim spotted it at the mall. the police now say that mr. sanchez, 48, who pleaded not guilty on tuesday to a charge of murder in the death of majane mazur in 1992, is the ''bike path rapist,'' responsible for some nine attacks over a quarter-century, including the one in delaware park.  ''did the uncle lie? yes, he did,'' said frank clark, the district attorney of erie county, where all the attacks took place. ''he said no one else used the car.''  asked whether the succession of attacks and slayings might have been prevented if the uncle had told the truth, mr. clark said yes. he also said that the statue of limitations on any charge of obstruction of justice had elapsed.  mr. sanchez was arrested on monday after dna taken from dishes he used at a restaurant where he and his wife ate dinner on saturday was matched to crime-scene evidence from ms. mazur's killing, as well as two other killings, one in 1990 and another last september, and at least seven rapes that took place in the buffalo area between 1986 and 1994, the police said.  the victims ranged in age from 14 to 45. each was attacked from behind on a weekday morning between may and october and led to a secluded spot, like a junked car, an abandoned building or heavy underbrush. in most cases, the victim's mouth and nose were covered with tape and her hands bound.  at tuesday's arraignment, mr. sanchez's lawyer, andrew c. lotempio, said that mr. sanchez denied any connection to the attacks and that the defense would challenge the validity of the dna evidence.  ''just because law enforcement said there's a dna match doesn't mean the testing was done right or ethically,'' mr. lotempio said after the hearing.  judge michael l. d'amico refused mr. lotempio's request to require prosecutors to preserve dna samples taken from the slaying scenes so that they can be tested by defense experts.  mr. sanchez, who wore a dark gray sweatshirt and jeans and appeared distraught, was ordered held without bail. mr. clark, the prosecutor, said mr. sanchez could be charged with one or both of the other killings in the next few days; the five-year statute of limitations on rape has expired.  the authorities began investigating the unsolved 1981 rape earlier this month after forensic testing linked the sept. 29 killing of joan diver, who lived in the buffalo suburb of clarence, with the earlier attacks.  mrs. diver, a 45-year-old mother of four, was reported missing after she did not return from a morning jog along a secluded rural path, 16 years to the day after the rape and killing of a university at buffalo student, linda yalem, who was attacked while jogging near the suburban campus. mrs. diver's body was found two days later.  a task force was formed after investigators found the forensic link between mrs. diver's slaying and the earlier attacks. it began focusing on mr. sanchez two weeks ago, because of his record of two arrests for patronizing a prostitute, as well as dna evidence and physical descriptions by rape victims indicating that the attacker might have been hispanic. they contacted mr. caraballo, who now lives in north carolina, as they reinvestigated all open rape cases.  mr. caraballo could not be reached for comment for this article, but he was quoted on tuesday in the buffalo news as saying he regretted not being more forthcoming when he was interrogated in 1981.  ''if i knew he was doing all this raping, i would have reported it,'' mr. caraballo told the news.  mr. caraballo said his nephew told him at the time, ''no, freddie, i didn't do anything wrong,'' but, mr. caraballo told the news, ''i didn't really believe him because of his eyes.''  ''you know, when people lie, you can see it,'' he continued. ''i suspected something happened because the cops would never come to the house without a reason.''  mr. sanchez talked with investigators for about 10 hours after his arrest on monday morning before hiring a lawyer, mr. lotempio said, adding that he would seek to bar the use at trial of any statements mr. sanchez made to the police, as well as searches of his home and vehicles.  prosecutors have not offered an explanation for the 12-year gap between a 1994 rape and the killing of mrs. diver, or why she was the only victim who was not sexually assaulted. before monday's arrest, law enforcement officials theorized that the suspect may have moved out of the area, died or been in prison. mr. sanchez has lived in the same quiet suburban neighborhood with his wife and worked at the same factory in buffalo throughout the time span, mr. clark said.  mr. sanchez did not speak during the hearing.  ''he's emotional -- crying, tearful and kind of sideswiped,'' mr. lotempio said. ''he can't believe it's happening to him.''  mr. sanchez's wife, kathleen, and one of their two adult sons were seated in the courtroom and left after the hearing without talking to reporters.  ''she's totally shocked, traumatized -- she can't believe it,'' mr. lotempio said. ''how would you feel? she had no idea there was an investigation going on around her husband.''  