chemical train derails in kentucky; evacuations are ordered   a csx freight train carrying chemical cargo derailed and ignited south of louisville, ky., yesterday, forcing the evacuation of homes, shutting down roads and sending students home from school, kentucky emergency officials said.  there were no reported injuries, the officials said.  more than a quarter of the cars on the 80-car train derailed in brooks, ky., about 15 miles short of its louisville destination, just before 9 a.m. officials had not determined a cause of the accident.  fire broke out in 14 cars, sending billowing plumes of smoke into the air. officials closed about 20 miles of interstate 65 and restricted airspace over the fire, said yvette smith, a spokeswoman for the kentucky division of emergency management.  the state ordered the evacuation of all homes within a one mile of the accident and asked all residents of bullitt county to stay inside, shut their windows and take pets inside, ms. smith said.  the state fire marshal, rodney raby, said in a news conference televised nationally that there had been some anxious moments over the possibility of explosions, but that by midday, the incident was ''winding down successfully.''  the fire was still burning last night, but officials said interstate 65 had been reopened.  the chemical cyclohexane, which is a highly flammable chemical and an eye and skin irritant, may have fueled the fire, said maj. lisa rudzinski of the state police.  at least one train car also contained the chemical butadiene, which is hazardous if inhaled, but it was not clear whether that car had ruptured, major rudzinski said.  a csx spokesman, gary sease, said one train car contained ethyl methyl ketone, a flammable solvent, two others contained maleic anhydride, a corrosive material used to make resins, and two others carried alcohol. mr. sease said the railroad was obligated to carry hazardous substances for its customers.  ''knowing the sensitivity and safety concerns around hazardous materials, we work very hard to make sure that those hazardous materials are transported safely,'' he said.  fifteen members of the national guard were dispatched to help in detecting chemicals and other hazardous materials, major rudzinski said.  the national transportation safety board said it was sending investigators, and its chairman, mark v. rosenker, to the scene.  the agency for toxic substances and disease registry, which is part of the centers for disease control and prevention, sent an environmental health scientist to brooks to assess public health risks, said an agency spokesman, john florence.  bullitt county school officials moved brooks elementary school to another school because of a concern that the fire might snarl bus routes, not because of danger to the children, said a school spokesman, john roberts.  jack roberts, administrator of the private micah christian academy, said that he could see smoke from the wreck site, which he estimated to be about two miles away, and that the smoke left an unpleasant burning sensation in the mouth. he closed the school as a precaution.  ''they say that it's not dangerous, other than maybe to folks who have breathing problems, but we're close enough to where we feel like it's necessary that we close,'' mr. roberts said.  next month, the department of homeland security will hold public hearings on its proposal to require railroads to continuously track tanker cars carrying chemicals that are ''toxic inhalation hazards,'' and bar them from leaving the cars parked or unattended for long periods.  coincidentally, the federal railroad administration announced yesterday that it was cooperating with dow chemical company, the union pacific railroad and the union tank car company to develop a ''next generation'' rail tank car. the car would be designed to resist puncture in accidents or terrorist attacks.  joseph h. boardman, the agency administrator, said he hoped to issue a final rule for the cars early next year. mr. boardman would not say when current cars would be replaced, but he said cars used for the most hazardous materials would be replaced first.  