german leader vows to revive constitution for europe   chancellor angela merkel of germany set two daunting tasks for herself on wednesday in her new role as european union president, saying she wanted to save the bloc's faltering constitution and revive stalled global trade talks.  in a speech to the european parliament, mrs. merkel said that a constitution was vital to the union and that it would be catastrophic if there was no action on the charter by 2009, when elections to the european parliament will be held.  ''it is in the interest of europe, its member states and its citizens to bring this process to a successful conclusion,'' she told parliament's assembly in strasbourg, france, referring to the stalemate over the constitution, which was rejected in referendums in the netherlands and france in 2005.  ''a collapse in that process would be a historic failure,'' she said, adding, ''we must give a soul to europe, we have to find europe's soul.''  turning to trade, she described an urgent need to complete world trade organization talks and called on europe to ''take a resolute stand'' to succeed.  ''there is too much to lose for us and the developing countries,'' she said, adding that only a short window of opportunity for the talks to succeed remained. but she gave no indication whether she would push for a cut in european farm subsidies, which united states diplomats have said were crucial to any global agreement.  next week, trade officials from 26 countries will meet at the world economic forum in davos, switzerland, in pursuit of an agreement.  if officials can agree on the outlines of an acceptable deal, negotiators for the united states will try to persuade congress to extend the bush administration's trade-negotiating authority, which is set to expire on june 30.  mrs. merkel said energy security remained a priority of global trade, and she demanded that russia become a ''reliable'' energy supplier.  european officials have been increasingly concerned that russia is using its energy supplies as a political weapon, after it temporarily shut down an oil pipeline to europe in a pricing dispute with belarus. ''we need reliable relations,'' she said. ''at the same time we can't ignore issues like freedom of the press, civil liberties or conflicts in russia's neighboring countries.''  she said germany would do all it could to revive energy talks between russia and the union; they have been blocked by poland, which is involved in a dispute with russia.  many assumed mrs. merkel's call for tolerance also was directed at a newly formed group of far-right nationalists in parliament.  reviving the constitution, which has been ratified so far by 18 members, faces enormous challenges. many europeans view the 200-page charter as an arcane document that lacks the unifying elements mrs. merkel so ardently advocates.  the netherlands has warned that efforts to resuscitate the charter risk spawning a backlash throughout the union, and top government officials in britain, poland, denmark and the czech republic view the constitution with enormous skepticism.  mrs. merkel's campaign received a lift wednesday when the french presidential candidate for the socialist party, ségolène royal, announced that she would put the constitution to another vote if she were elected.  mrs. merkel is determined to save as much as possible of the constitution. she believes that union expansion, the bloc's most potent foreign policy tool in the post-cold-war world, is all but impossible without the changes outlined in the treaty.  ''we need a foreign minister for europe. that's enough of a reason to adopt a constitutional treaty,'' she said, setting off a standing ovation.  she also pledged to use her six-month term to revive the middle east peace process and help settle the status of kosovo.  