plan will allow 911 and 311 lines to accept digital images   mayor michael r. bloomberg, who built his fortune on innovations in information technology, announced a plan yesterday that will allow emergency 911 call centers and the popular 311 service line to receive digital photos and videos from callers.  the city will be the first in the nation to incorporate digital images into its 911 system, mr. bloomberg said, calling it a ''revolutionary innovation in crime fighting.''  ''if you see a crime in progress or a dangerous building condition, you'll be able to transmit images to 911, or online to nyc.gov,'' the mayor said in his annual state of the city address. ''and we'll start extending the same technology to 311 to allow new yorkers to step forward and document nonemergency quality of life concerns, holding city agencies accountable for correcting them quickly and efficiently.''  john feinblatt, the mayor's criminal justice coordinator, could not say how long it will take to implement the plan, but said it would be fairly inexpensive because the technology already exists.  ''this is absolutely brand new for law enforcement, and it's absolutely new for a call center like 311, but by no means is it new technology,'' mr. feinblatt said. ''so what we're going to do is take applications that already exist in the industry and adapt them to 911 and 311.''  mr. feinblatt said the popularity of text and photo messaging and internet services like google and youtube made this initiative a natural next step for emergency services.  ''the truth of the matter is, this is the way the world is now working, so it's just time to bring 911 and 311 into cyberspace,'' he said.  the city's 311 line, which mr. bloomberg introduced in march 2003, receives 40,000 calls a day from citizens reporting quality-of-life problems like leaky fire hydrants and potholes or inquiring about voting locations and city services.  the most common call is from people asking whether parking enforcement is in effect that day, especially before the holidays, said paul j. cosgrave, commissioner of the department of information technology and telecommunications, which oversees 311.  the new initiative will increase the ability to evaluate the severity of a problem, mr. cosgrave said.  law enforcement and emergency management experts praised the plan.  ''anything you can do to advance the information flow is good,'' said jerome m. hauer, director of emergency management under mayor rudolph w. giuliani and now an antiterrorism consultant in washington.  ''imagine someone caught in a hostage situation transmitting pictures or video,'' he added. ''it's just an incredible amount of information that can be gathered from fairly simple technology.''  police commissioner raymond w. kelly said the technology could lead to quicker resolutions of crimes.  ''law enforcement is operating in the information age, so the more information we can get, the more quickly we can solve a crime, and potentially use less resources to solve that crime,'' mr. kelly said. ''anything that does that, i'm certainly for.''  