the food pyramid takes its show on the road   new run at the dietary guidelines  the agriculture department has joined forces with food retailers and manufacturers to get more americans to follow the 2005 dietary guidelines.  at a news conference last wednesday the agriculture secretary, mike johanns, said the interactive web site for the guidelines, mypyramid.gov, has had 2.4 billion hits since it went up, an impressive number by any standard. but anecdotal evidence from nutritionists suggests that some people find the site too complicated to use.  the new pyramid has six colored lines going from base to peak, representing the food groups. clicking on a color provides a little information: eat lean meat, for instance. the pyramid it replaced had the healthful foods at the base (whole grains) and not so healthful ones at the pinnacle (sugar, potato chips). it didn't differentiate between whole grain and refined carbohydrates, but at least it was easier to understand.  now, in a second attempt to call more attention to the guidelines and persuade people to use them, a group of food industry trade associations has announced a program called ''take a peak,'' which will put information about healthy eating in participating supermarkets. signs in stores will remind people to eat more healthfully by, for example, making sure that half the grains they consume are whole. the displays will also suggest appropriate serving sizes and will feature computers at which shoppers can draw up their own diet plans.  asked by reporters at the news conference several times how much money they were spending on this project, the manufacturers' and retailers' representatives repeatedly said they had no figures.  in a telephone interview, michael jacobson, executive director of the center for science in the public interest, a nutrition advocacy group, said the agriculture secretary ''is wasting his time at a feel-good press conference when he should be funding major campaigns urging people to consume more fruits, vegetables and whole grains, and fewer soft drinks and less cheese and meat.''  imitation what?  goodbye, imitation crab; hello ''crab-flavored seafood made with surimi, a fully cooked fish protein.'' when two words will do, leave it to the government to approve 11.  the change, which the national fisheries institute has been seeking for 10 years from the food and drug administration, will also apply to fake lobster and fake shrimp. the institute thinks the word imitation turns shoppers off.  surimi is fish, usually alaskan pollock, that is mixed into a paste with starch, egg whites, flavorings and colorings. it is then cooked and shaped to resemble the food it is imitating. now that the name is being changed, what will waiters tell consumers?  ''this evening, madam, the chef is preparing california rolls with crab-flavored seafood made with surimi, a fully cooked fish protein.''  more on 'natural'  consumers have been puzzling over the meaning of natural ever since the agriculture department gave its official imprimatur to the term in 1982.  for the record, the definition says natural foods are minimally processed without artificial or synthetic ingredients.  but one person's synthetic is another person's natural. example: apple cider vinegar is natural because it is fermented; distilled white vinegar is not natural because it is distilled, which in the eyes of the government is a form of processing.  to try to clear the air, the agriculture department has decided to propose a new rule for the term, but no one knows what it will say.  it's probably way too late. long ago, people like me came to the conclusion that natural means almost nothing at all, and shop accordingly.  the trouble with that rosy meat  a new survey suggests that consumers are not comfortable with the meat industry's practice of using carbon monoxide in some packages of meat to keep it bright red for weeks.  in a survey of 1,019 men and women, conducted by the opinion research corporation late last year, 78 percent of respondents said the practice was deceptive; 68 percent said they would strongly support a law requiring such packages to be labeled; 74 percent said ground beef treated with carbon monoxide should not be allowed to have a 28-day shelf life when the typical shelf life for untreated meat is 10 to 12 days.  carbon monoxide is harmless at the levels used in the treated packaging. but opponents say that the process allows stores to sell meat that is no longer fresh, and that consumers would not know until they opened the package at home and smelled it. the packaging gives no indication that the gas has been used.  in tests conducted in my kitchen, treated and untreated packages of meat were both red when purchased. after 11 days under refrigeration the conventional meat was brown, but the treated meat was still rosy. other treated meat, left unrefrigerated for two days, remained red.  eating well notebook  