the neediest cases; family faces uphill fight for bigger home   martina rosario and antonio colon would like nothing better than to move from the two small, dingy rooms they have lived in for more than 20 years, 15 of them with their daughter, tabitha colon. and the management of their building, on the lower east side, would certainly like them to move, which it made clear last year in its attempt to evict them.  but as cramped as they are in their fourth-floor space, and as difficult as it is for the ailing ms. rosario and partly paralyzed mr. colon to trudge up to it in their walkup building, they have fought to stay there.  they have done this, the financially struggling couple and a social worker aiding them say, despite the conditions -- and despite a rent that consumes half their annual income of less than $15,000 -- because the only option they see, moving into public housing, is not now available.  one reason is that the city's housing authority ''said they have a sketchy history'' of paying the rent in their current building, said the social worker, sister lucita cangemi of catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund.  indeed, a representative of the building's management and ms. rosario recently agreed that the management had taken the couple to court several times because of rent disputes, and that they were currently behind in their rent by about $3,000. the rent is $700 a month, and their obligation is about $630, while the city's welfare program pays the rest, said ms. rosario, 43.  translating from spanish for mr. colon, her companion, who is 71 and speaks little english, she said that aside from their difficulties in affording the rent, mr. colon ''wants them to take him to court so he can fight them for a new lease and to fix the apartment.''  among the problems, she said, is that the stove cannot be used because it leaks gas when it is turned on. their lease has expired, and they occupy the apartment month to month, according to the management's papers in the eviction case last year. eviction was avoided then, ms. rosario said, when the city's welfare system paid the arrears.  sister lucita said she would seek to get the couple free legal help with their rent and occupancy problems. but resolving those problems in their favor would still leave many more. for one thing, they would still be in their two cramped rooms, one of which, about 12 feet by 12 feet, serves as the bedroom for all of them, with ms. rosario and tabitha, 15, sleeping in one bed and mr. colon in the other. the other room, similar in size, is a kitchen and a living room.  ''there's no privacy,'' ms. rosario said, sitting in the combination room, where pots, pans and other household items were stacked on shelves running high up on the walls or piled atop furniture that was chockablock with kitchen appliances. these included a microwave oven, which catholic charities bought for the family, using neediest cases money, so they could have warm meals without the expense of ordering in.  the family's housing situation reflects its poverty, which is deepened by the medical handicaps that mr. colon and ms. rosario say keep them from working. ''i had two knee replacements because of arthritis,'' she said, adding that she is also being treated for severe heart disease and high blood pressure.  mr. colon said recently that much of his left side, including his arm, was paralyzed, and he lost the sight in his left eye, 45 years ago, when, as a passer-by, he was shot on the lower east side. on saturday, he was hospitalized with pneumonia, ms. rosario said last night.  the family lives on $1,234 a month, ms. rosario said: the parents' total of $894 in federal supplemental security income benefits and $340 in food stamps. sister lucita helped the family get supplies from a food pantry and clothing donated for charity. medicaid covers their health costs.  the couple told of hard lives as children in puerto rico and then new york, and of not having gone beyond elementary school. ms. rosario had a daughter with another man when she was 18. the next year, she met mr. colon, then 47.  they have lived in their apartment for the entire 24 years of what they refer to as their common-law marriage. before tabitha, they had a daughter who was mentally retarded and died at 12, ms. rosario said.  but all the past troubles and present grimness do not keep them from aspiring to a brighter future, hoping the housing authority will change its mind. ''we hope to get into the projects and leave this building,'' ms. rosario said, ''and our nerves will calm down, and we'll get a better life.''  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  previously recorded: $6,484,079  recorded thursday: 240,690  total: $6,724,769  last year to date: $6,285,241  