scaling a bach monument with a masterly touch   it seems remarkable at first glance that the annual weeklong carnegie hall choral workshops, founded by robert shaw in 1990, have only now gotten around to bach's ''st. matthew passion,'' perhaps the cornerstone of the western choral literature. but anyone who attended any of the workshop sessions last week must have come away with a new appreciation of just how vast and varied a canvas the ''st. matthew'' is, and how difficult to prepare in a mere six days with an ad-hoc chorus.  true, this was a chorus of music professionals, many of them choral directors themselves. still, it takes a master to pull it all together quickly, and carnegie had one in the person of helmuth rilling, the german bach specialist, who directed the workshop and conducted the culminating concert on saturday evening in the stern auditorium.  asked in an interview earlier on saturday how many times he had conducted the work, mr. rilling, 73, replied: ''i didn't count. at least 100, maybe 300. it has occupied me throughout my life.''  that depth of experience was evident in the final result, an eloquent performance, conducted from memory and cannily unified. ''the art is in the pacing,'' mr. rilling said in the interview, ''knowing where the piece is dramatic and where it is meditative.''  his tempos were sometimes surprising: slowish in a chorus or two, fast in the final bass aria, ''mache dich, mein herze, rein.'' as he pointed out, that ineffable aria of contrition and consolation is actually modeled after a dance form, in bach's marvelous alchemy: the gigue.  mr. rilling used a full-bodied chorus of 77, partly, no doubt, to make the workshop as inclusive as possible, but he makes no apology for spurning current suggestions that since bach may have used only one or two voices per part in his ''chorus,'' performers today should do the same. whatever bach may have done, mr. rilling argued, a substantial chorus is needed to make an effect in a modern concert hall.  he has a vested interest of course, having performed and recorded so much bach in the traditional manner. but the proof is in the performance, and the chorus here was lithe and responsive. nor did it overbalance the orchestra of 39. the vocal soloists were uneven, with good reason in some cases.  gigi mitchell-velasco, replacing an indisposed mezzo-soprano on less than a day's notice, sang the alto arias, some of the work's most glorious movements. she seemed understandably cautious and uncertain at the start, but she worked up to a distinguished account of the famous alto number in part 2, ''erbarme dich.''  james taylor, in the key role of the evangelist, was also said by carnegie to be ailing, and he had an early problem with pitch and a late one with stamina. but for the most part he sang beautifully and expressively. in a role that is often given to stentorian, reedy-sounding, merely serviceable tenors, mr. taylor showed a sweetness of tone that added greatly to the poignancy of subdued moments.  klaus häger, a sturdy, sometimes bluff bass, was also an unusual choice in the role of jesus, most often played for warmth and vulnerability. michael nagy, singing the bass arias and the role of pilate, had many fine moments and accrued stature as the evening progressed.  the orchestra of st. luke's, an integral part of these workshops from the beginning, played with its typical authority, flexibility and flair, on only three days of rehearsal. it danced that gigue in the bass aria with a lovely lilt, and krista bennion feeney, the concertmistress, played the violin solo in ''erbarme dich'' with lovely tone and feeling.  mr. rilling, whose work is familiar to americans not only from recordings and occasional appearances but also from his almost four decades as director of the oregon bach festival, was directing his second carnegie workshop, having done mozart's c minor mass in 2005. (last season the workshop was divided into smaller-scale events, one directed by ton koopman, another bach specialist; the other, by meredith monk, the contemporary singer and composer.) in rehearsal mr. rilling's techniques proved very different from those of robert shaw, who directed eight workshops before his death in 1999.  over decades of working with amateur as well as professional choruses, shaw developed a system for mining vocal gold, as he called it, involving extensive warm-ups and vocalization to numbers and syllables before adding the actual texts, and including tricks like redistributing notes from one voice part to another to make for simpler execution or greater effect. mr. rilling did none of that here, working his way through chorus after chorus, words in place, with frequent stops and repetitions to ensure the integration of music and text. he pushed ahead with maximum efficiency, showing little of his dry wit.  although shaw's methods typically produced brilliant results for the audience, not every singer liked them. david stevens, a professional singer and choral conductor from austin, tex., and a perennial participant in the carnegie workshops, is one who did, he said last week, but he has also come around to mr. rilling's way. he spoke glowingly of the first shaw workshop, in 1990, which produced a performance of brahms's ''german requiem'' that is still spoken of with reverence by many in the field.  when he did the piece shortly after at the oregon bach festival with mr. rilling, mr. stevens said, he was initially disappointed with mr. rilling's straightforward approach. ''i loved shaw's deconstruction of the details,'' he added. ''but in the end, we arrived at the same place.'' mr. rilling's rehearsals, mr. stevens said, make a sort of crescendo leading up to a climactic performance.  myron lutzke, who, as the stalwart cellist and continuo player of the orchestra of st. luke's, has more experience with these workshops than most of the choristers, is also an admirer of both shaw and mr. rilling. ''in many ways,'' mr. lutzke said, mr. rilling ''is the most appropriate person'' to run the workshops.  ''he has the gravitas to fill shaw's shoes,'' mr. lutzke added.  a spokeswoman for carnegie hall said that there are no plans yet for a choral workshop next season, but suggested that it would be no great surprise if the current pattern held, with mr. rilling coming back every other year or so.  music  