governor is challenged on ethics by bruno   the honeymoon may be coming to an end. joseph l. bruno, the republican senate majority leader, accused gov. eliot spitzer on wednesday of being hypocritical for championing campaign finance reform while headlining a $25,000-a-couple fund-raiser later this week for the state democratic party.  mr. spitzer has been campaigning for craig m. johnson, the nassau county democrat running for the senate seat that opened when the governor tapped senator michael a. l. balboni, a republican, to serve in his administration. mr. bruno and his shrinking republican majority in the state senate have made keeping the seat a priority.  ''i wouldn't be talking campaign finance reform on one hand, and then on the other hand, doing 25,000 price of admission to funnel money -- funnel money, launder money -- into a senate contest,'' mr. bruno said. ''i think it's inappropriate, i think it's inequitable, i think it's unfair, and i think it's time to step up and tell it like it is.''  shortly after he was elected, mr. spitzer unilaterally placed a $10,000 limit on campaign contributions that he would accept, and asked the legislature to pass a law significantly lowering the limits on donations. but his aides said he would abide by the higher limits that exist under the current law when raising money for other entities -- in this case, the state democratic party. the money could end up being used on the senate race.  an e-mailed invitation to the fund-raiser, which will be held thursday evening on the upper east side, promises ''an intimate evening with new york state governor eliot spitzer'' and lists a minimum ticket price of $25,000 per couple.  up to now, mr. bruno has gone out of his way to praise mr. spitzer publicly. but in campaigning for mr. johnson, mr. spitzer has shown he is willing to break the so-called nonaggression pact that has sometimes existed in albany between governors and lawmakers of the opposing party whose support they need to govern.  christine anderson, mr. spitzer's press secretary, said he was glad to campaign for mr. johnson. ''the governor is asking people in the district to support reform, and he is proud of that,'' she said.  mr. bruno's decision to criticize the popular new governor's ethics was something of a gamble, given his announcement late last year that the f.b.i. has been looking into his business dealings. senate republicans have long shifted money between campaign accounts to protect incumbents.  the campaign of the republican candidate in nassau county, maureen o'connell, is being supported indirectly by mr. balboni, the new member of the spitzer administration she hopes to succeed. campaign filings show that he sent $110,000 from his campaign account to the new york state senate republican campaign committee on dec. 27. on jan. 8 the committee sent ms. o'connell $330,000, the vast majority of what she has raised so far.  mr. johnson has raised over $125,000, and taken in $92,500 more in personal and family loans, campaign finance filings show.  