rangers more worldly; devils go native   the rangers and the devils have always been separated by more than the hudson river and a few miles of swampland. their bitter rivalry has pushed them to opposite ends of many scales -- playing style, free-agent signings -- making it often seem as if one serves as the other's n.h.l. counterweight.  now, however, they also find themselves with an unintentional cultural gap. the rangers have become a sort of united nations of the sport, featuring players from eight countries and even selling t-shirts with ''be a ranger'' written in those countries' languages.  the devils, in contrast, have the most players from the united states of any team in the n.h.l., 14. (a 15th, cam janssen, has played 28 games with the devils this season but is in the minors.)  the next closest team is the islanders, with eight. several teams in the league have as few as one. the rangers have four. given that active rosters are limited to 23 players, the number of americans is an astounding majority for the devils. ''i can assure you, it wasn't by design,'' said lou lamoriello, the devils' president and general manager. ''it is a unique roster. we have american players who played junior hockey in canada. we have international players that went to college. it just happened that we ended up with a lot of americans.''  as the team came together over the summer, center scott gomez -- a longtime devil who is from alaska -- said the players joked about becoming ''america's team.''  ''we were going to get a softball game going, the canadians versus the americans, and they started having to recruit the europeans,'' gomez said, laughing. ''i think you have trends. one year it seemed like we had six or seven russians, and then we had a lot of czechs. it's an american year, i guess.''  the rangers also did not construct their team in order to fly different flags around their rink. both franchises are coached by canadians, tom renney for the rangers and claude julien for the devils. their captains are czechs, rangers right wing jaromir jagr and devils left wing patrik elias.  in recent years, the rangers' road has become the more common one; the n.h.l. has grown more international, although canadians still dominate the league. of the approximately 670 players on n.h.l. rosters, which change almost daily, nearly half are canadian. about 120 are united states natives, with about 70 czechs, 43 swedes and 45 from countries that made up the soviet union.  ''i think you build a team with the best players available,'' said rangers forward brendan shanahan, who became a united states citizen in 2002 but still plays for canada. ''i don't think there's a team or a general manager in the league who has a choice between two players and chooses the nationality over who's the better player. everybody wants to win. any sort of makeup of a team is probably accidental.''  the rangers assembled their melting-pot team in a city that carries diversity to an extreme. and the devils live in a state where, lamoriello said, the number of youth hockey teams had quadrupled since the team moved there in 1982.  the rangers have dealt with their diversity by celebrating it. the ''be a ranger'' t-shirt grew out of the coaches' attempt to give the players a common rallying point. renney started by making a shirt for each player with ''be a ranger'' written in his language. the marketing department put them all on one shirt.  ''we understand that it takes all of these cultures to have success and what we wanted to do was bring it to a common denominator, and that was being a ranger first and foremost,'' renney said. ''i understand how much of an honor it is to wear the jersey, to be an original six player, playing in new york. i'm proud of the fact that our international guys embrace that.''  conversely, the devils do not trumpet their red-white-and-blue credentials. it would be an awkward sell; after all, their best players are elias and goalie martin brodeur, who is from montreal.  ''it's definitely been a little different situation,'' said forward jamie langenbrunner, a 10-year veteran who was born in minnesota. ''it's a good mix, but definitely a bit odd.''  lamoriello grew up in rhode island, used to coach at providence college and has long been a supporter of usa hockey's attempts to develop players. but he pointed out that he was among the first to sign players from russia, when it was still part of the soviet union, and remembered being criticized for bringing in too many russian players.  but lamoriello has not shied away from scouting young players from the united states and he has enjoyed success with the ones he has signed. gomez and jay pandolfo have been devils stalwarts since the late 1990s and have helped the team win two stanley cups. langenbrunner and brian gionta were key members of the 2003 cup-winning team.  ''if the 14 american players that we have make us a pretty good team, then why not?'' julien said. ''there's a lot of guys here, american players, who have been here for quite a while and won stanley cups and that's something, the experience of winning those, you can't buy.''  by most predictions, there are more star american players coming through the league's pipeline.  since usa hockey began its national-team development program 10 years ago, its players have begun to creep higher in the n.h.l. draft. a record 10 united states-born players were chosen in the first round last year. st. louis took erik johnson, a defenseman from minnesota, with the first overall pick. (johnson also chose to play this season for the university of minnesota.)  ''lou has always been aggressive about scouting college kids,'' said dave ogrean, the executive director of usa hockey. ''some g.m.'s approached american players with a certain bias. that's gone now, but lou appreciated that early and scouted them as well as anyone. he just knows where to look.''  the rangers' sights have stretched overseas in recent years, but they have not relied on that alone. in last year's draft, the rangers' first pick was defenseman bobby sanguinetti.  not only is he american, he is from new jersey.  hockey  