what's on tonight   8 p.m. (amc) jeremiah johnson -- (1972). an ex-soldier, played by a scruffily golden robert redford (left), opts out of civilized society in the 1850's to live alone in the colorado wilderness, where he unwittingly violates an indian burial ground and loses his wife and adopted child to vengeance. will geer plays the trapper who teaches johnson how to survive in this stark meditation on the american west, directed by sydney pollack. parts of the film were shot northeast of provo, utah, near the ski area mr. redford eventually bought and named ''sundance,'' after his character in ''butch cassidy and the sundance kid.''  8 p.m. (tcm) written on the wind -- (1956). melodrama in the oil fields, not to mention adultery, impotence, jealousy and nymphomania. rock hudson, lauren bacall, robert stack and dorothy malone play texans in love, and in lust.  8 p.m. (cnn) the war within --christiane amanpour, cnn's chief international correspondent, talks to young people, clerics and shahid malik, one of only four muslim members of the british parliament, about the cultural conflicts within muslim communities in britain (above) and other western societies, and the influences pushing some toward philosophies of extremism. the documentary inaugurates the network's new series ''cnn: special investigations unit.''  8 p.m. (animal planet) big cat diary -- in this ongoing series, simon king, saba douglas-hamilton and jonathan scott report from a camp in the heart of masai mara in kenya on the family life of africa's big cats.  8 p.m. (espn classic) muhammad ali - the final chapter -- ''ringside'' looks at the last of the champion boxer's fights.  8 p.m. (abc) seabiscuit -- (2003). run, baby, run! jeff bridges portrays a millionaire car dealer who rescues a scrappy, crooked-leg race horse from obscurity; chris cooper plays the one who trains it; and tobey maguire is the jockey who races it, in scenes that thrill no matter how many times you've seen them, first across the finish line.  9 p.m. (hallmark) mcbride: semper fi -- john larroquette returns as the disillusioned l.a.p.d. officer who quit the force to go back to school and become a lawyer for the little guy. tonight's case: a marine (liam waite, above right, with mr. larroquette), just seven months back from afghanistan, charged with the murder of his pregnant wife. he blames the woman he was having an affair with, and why not? but her alibi is airtight.  11 p.m. (fox) mad tv -- carmen electra joins the cast in riffs on condoleezza rice and there turn of bae sung.  kathryn shattuck  