for mcallister, long wait to taste a playoff win   he has long been a good soldier on a bad team, always professional and personable, hugely popular, but seemingly destined to play in frustration in a city where seemingly everybody has a drink but nobody has toasted a local champion.  until this, his sixth season in the n.f.l., running back deuce mcallister had never participated in a playoff game for the perpetually underachieving new orleans saints. on saturday night, he had his first chance, and while the postseason was unfamiliar, it was not unaccommodating as the saints defeated philadelphia, 27-24.  for the first time in its often-forgettable 40-year history, new orleans will play in a national football conference championship game, at chicago next sunday. the formerly wretched saints, left as a vagabond team after hurricane katrina, are one victory away from the super bowl after a 3-13 season in 2005, thanks in no small measure to mcallister's determination and timely rescue.  he rushed 21 times for 143 yards against the eagles. he pounded into the end zone from 5 yards, dragging teammates, opponents and the hopes of 70,001 fans across the goal line. he caught an 11-yard swing pass for another touchdown. and, finally, he cleaned up the mess caused by a late fumble on a pitch from quarterback drew brees to the saints' more visible back, the rookie reggie bush.  ''i was just trying to have the will to win,'' the 6-foot-1, 231-pound mcallister said. ''as much as we've been through as a team, as much as this city has been through, we talked about leaving it all on the field. i was trying to be determined not to fail.''  this might have become an awkward season for mcallister, with sean payton coming in as a new coach and bush arriving from southern california with his heisman trophy as the second pick in the draft. but payton counseled that mcallister could still play a vital role, none more essential than on saturday night.  ''when we got reggie, a lot of guys might have looked at that as a negative,'' brees said. ''deuce embraced it as a positive. he knew he would get his opportunities. he's been nothing but great, mentoring reggie, showing him how to be a professional.''  having won the n.f.c. south, new orleans had two weeks to prepare for the playoffs, while the eagles were forced to play on five days' rest after surviving the giants in a first-round matchup. payton figured correctly that philadelphia's defensive line might not be fully recovered and could be worn down by the saints' rushing attack.  brees said he told mcallister that the saints were going to ''ride his back.''  on the game's first play from scrimmage, mcallister rushed for 12 yards. on his next carry, he plowed for 28 yards. but payton, with so many available choices on the n.f.l.'s no. 1 offense, seemed to be trying to outthink the eagles instead of outpunch them. the saints squandered an early chance to blow the game open and found themselves trailing, 21-13, early in the third quarter.  ''this was my first opportunity to be in the playoffs; i didn't want to be one and out,'' mcallister said. ''i knew what this meant to the city, and i was determined to give them everything we had.''  new orleans drove 63 yards in seven plays, cutting the deficit to 21-20 as mcallister bulldozed into the end zone from the 5-yard line. it was pure power and resolve and physics, a 230-pound back running in the wake of a 255-pound fullback, legs churning, a pile of bodies inching ahead until a referee raised his hands and a crowd responded with deafening celebration.  ''i was trying not to get stripped,'' mcallister said. ''but if you don't get hard contact on my knees, i'm hard to bring down.''  an 11-yard touchdown reception by mcallister put the saints ahead, 27-21, late in the third quarter. later, ahead by 27-24, new orleans again opted for garishness over muscle. bush could not handle a pitch on a misdirection play with 3 minutes 18 seconds remaining, philadelphia recovered at its 44-yard line and had an inviting chance to win or force overtime.  a false-start penalty nullified a potential first-down pass, then philadelphia elected to punt on fourth-and-15 from its 39, instead of attempting to gain a first down with 1:56 left.  it was a decision that will long be second-guessed in philadelphia, especially in light of the eagles' famously successful pass to receiver freddie mitchell on a fourth-and-26 play against green bay three postseasons ago.  ''i guess, maybe in hindsight, maybe we should have done that,'' coach andy reid said of attempting a first down. ''i figured they would run the football and we might be able to stop them and get the ball back.''  not saturday.  the eagles had not stopped mcallister to that point and, growing tired, they were unable to stop him now. on third-and-1 at the new orleans 31, mcallister felt a cramp in his legs, but he powered through a philadelphia safety for 5 yards and a game-sealing first down. brees twice took a knee as the clock wound toward zero and the crowd went to its feet in delirium.  ''this may be destiny,'' mcallister said.  pro football  