american songbook returns, horizons still expanding   what is american song?  eight years ago, lincoln center offered an answer with a new concert series, american songbook. presenting evening-long tributes to composers of popular standards of the 1940s and '50s like harold arlen, jimmy van heusen and richard rodgers, it took what might be called a particularly lincoln center approach, defining a strict canon of immortals.  but a funny thing happened on the way to the pantheon. as the songbook series developed, it came to expand widely its conception of american popular music, juxtaposing 30-something indie rockers, alt-country singer-songwriters and even rappers with the grand old men of musical theater and traditional pop.  as the spring portion of its ninth season opens tonight with the rapper and actor mos def, who performs with a big band, american songbook has become one of the bright new hopes at lincoln center, drawing praise from musicians and critics for something not often associated with the home of the new york philharmonic and the metropolitan opera: provocative programming that links the classics with the sharpest in contemporary popular culture.  ''it's exactly what should be happening and isn't happening enough,'' john schreiber, a veteran concert promoter and theater producer, said of the series. ''what mos def is doing is in its own way a contemporary version of what cole porter did 80 years ago.''  created as a pet project of nathan leventhal, who was then the president of lincoln center, american songbook had as its first artistic director jonathan schwartz, the disc jockey and author known for rhapsodizing about classic songs in his avuncular baritone. with mr. schwartz playing the affable host, the first concert was held at alice tully hall on feb. 5, 1999, with an orchestra accompanying barbara cook, audra mcdonald, diana krall and others in songs by arlen.  it was a classy and auspicious start. but before long, the series faced criticism for its conservative approach. ''from the beginning, the concerts have played like deluxe, formulaic cabaret tributes massaging the nostalgia of an old-guard theater audience in dully predictable ways,'' stephen holden of the new york times wrote in a review of a frank loesser tribute in 2000.  mr. leventhal stepped down as president in 2000, and mr. schwartz left a year later. programming for american songbook was taken over by a group that included jon nakagawa, who had worked with mr. schwartz and also books classical programs at lincoln center.  a pivotal moment came in the spring of 2002, when the band magnetic fields, led by the wry and urbane stephin merritt, had a rare two-night concert of its ''69 love songs'' cycle. mr. nakagawa said that it was not easy to persuade the performance-averse mr. merritt to do the show, but that his involvement was crucial to the new direction of the series.  ''we were trying to extrapolate what is the popular music of our time,'' mr. nakagawa said. ''we came to think of american song as being everything from stephen foster to stephin merritt.''  more contemporary singer-songwriters were invited, and by the time the series moved into the 450-seat allen room at frederick p. rose hall, whose wide windows offer a glittery view of columbus circle and central park, it had struck a balance between old and new.  among those in the 16-concert spring season are the jazz pianist and composer fred hersch, tomorrow; the broadway singer judy kuhn performing songs by laura nyro on friday; the 30-year-old indie-folk singer josh ritter, on jan. 31; alan and marilyn bergman celebrating 50 years as a songwriting team, on feb. 2; betty buckley, on feb. 10; and neko case, whose music straddles indie rock and alt-country, on feb. 23. ms. mcdonald kicked off the ninth year of the series with two concerts in october.  with few strict guidelines to define national song beyond quality and lyrical sophistication, the series is open to a variety of interpretations of the idea of american music. the tucson band calexico, playing on feb. 8, draws from a wide palette of southwestern influences, including surf guitar, country and mariachi, positing geography itself as a criterion.  ''that element of mixing it all up, whether it be jazz or folk or rock, is quintessentially american,'' said joey burns, calexico's singer and guitarist.  mr. nakagawa, the producer of the series, and charles cermele, the associate producer, say their only instruction to artists is to do something special. many have done just that, making use of lincoln center's extensive resources to put on a show that would be too expensive or elaborate to do on an ordinary tour date. last year the songwriter sufjan stevens, in a gig heard round the indie-rock world, appeared with a large ensemble that included an eight-piece string section. those arrangements became the basis for his subsequent tour.  ''this series has a chance to be something really alive and viable,'' said rosanne cash, who performed early versions of songs from her latest album, ''black cadillac,'' at her songbook show in 2005. ''if it turns into a thing where people just go and sing rodgers and hart, then it will become the smithsonian. but if you keep it alive by being more inclusive and spanning a wider period of time and space, then it could be great.''  the series also has an important function in lincoln center's broader aim of drawing in younger audiences. lincoln center does not have demographic information on songbook ticket buyers, though anecdotal evidence from recent concerts suggests that the series has had considerable success in this regard.  but not everyone thinks lincoln center is the best steward for the most contemporary forms of pop.  ''the lincoln center moniker doesn't necessarily serve them well,'' mr. schreiber said, ''because lincoln center necessarily brands old. if i'm a young music fan, i want to go to joe's pub.''  mr. merritt praised the series for recognizing the virtues of serious popular songwriting and for giving his band the chance to perform its four-hour cycle when few other promoters were willing to take a similar risk. but he warned that if the process he called ''the downtowning of lincoln center'' were too successful, it would leave concertgoers with a novel conundrum.  ''if lincoln center is captain cool,'' he said, ''then where do you go for stodgy?''  