3 bombs kill at least 70 at university in baghdad   at least 70 people were killed at a largely shiite university in northeastern baghdad on tuesday when a wave of explosions tore through a crowd of students and employees leaving the main gate minutes after classes ended.  witnesses said the lethal strike of two car bombs and a suicide bomber at mustansiriya university left the campus littered with shattered glass, body parts, ashen books and charred metal.  as one of the most deadly attacks on shiites since the summer, it suggested that sunni insurgents remain unfazed, even brash, in the face of the american military's newest plan to secure the capital.  the attacks came only a day after a fresh spark for sunni outrage: on monday, the sudden hanging of barzan ibrahim al-tikriti, saddam hussein's half brother, and awad hamad al-bandar, mr. hussein's former chief judge, ended with mr. ibrahim's head being severed from his body by the noose.  and if the bombs at mustansiriya -- capping a day of attacks in other shiite neighborhoods of baghdad -- amounted to a show of sunni force, they also highlighted the divisions between the shiite-led government and the americans.  in all, at least 108 people were killed in the capital, an interior ministry official said, and 25 more were found dead, many showing signs of torture.  american officials have emphasized that such violence justifies the imminent addition of 20,000 troops to make an immediate push to pacify the country.  prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki, by contrast, issued a statement after the bombings blaming supporters of iraq's ''buried regime'' for the violence, stressing again that sunnis lay at the heart of the country's problems. he has repeatedly rejected american efforts to crack down on shiite militias that attack sunnis, and has demanded control of the effort to bring peace to the country.  his support for the american plan to add troops and stamp out violence from both sects has been tepid at best. on tuesday, his office released a statement emphasizing that iraq would continue to build up its armed forces ''to prepare for the withdrawal of the multinational forces from the cities or the withdrawal of 50,000 american soldiers from iraq.''  meanwhile, four american soldiers, from the first cavalry division, were killed monday by a roadside bomb in ninewa province, northwest of baghdad.  sectarian vigilantes, insurgents and criminals seem to be directing baghdad's daily life. for many iraqis on tuesday at least, the additional 20,000 american troops called for under president bush's latest strategy were still understudies to the pounding drama of sectarian revenge.  mr. maliki announced that he had met with the sunni speaker of parliament, mahmoud al-mashadani, to address plans for national reconciliation, yet iraqis seemed to barely notice. for much of the day, the reach of both the american military and the iraqi government seemed to stop at the university's main gate.  taqi al-mussawi, president of mustansiriya university, said it had not been the first strike at the university, one of the country's most prominent, which takes its name from a medieval college of sunni islam.  all over iraq, academics have been a magnet for bombings, kidnappings and assassinations for more than a year, in what appears to be a concerted effort to drive out the middle class, the secular and the educated.  but mr. mussawi and other witnesses said tuesday's violence seemed to be an escalation of the campaign. the force of the car bombs in particular shattered glass in the university's academic headquarters 100 yards away, and turned windows, desks and supplies into shrapnel.  mariam hussein, 20, a literature student, said she had barely escaped injury while standing near the front gate in the crowd. the first blast seemed to come from a minibus a few steps away, she said; the second from near a restaurant down the block.  ''i saw remains of human flesh,'' she said. ''it was horrifying. flesh and blood were everywhere. people started to run, and there was a state of chaos. some people fell on the ground and got trampled by others.''  the death toll from the blasts seemed to have been baghdad's largest from a single coordinated attack since this summer, when a series of explosions killed dozens in sadr city, the capital's largest shiite enclave.  mr. mussawi said it could have been worse: the suicide bomber detonated his load only after guards discovered his intent and shot him. he said the guards were able to warn people away from the bomber before he could kill anyone else, though two were wounded.  at least 169 people were wounded from the three blasts, according to an interior ministry official.  for some, the consequences arrived slowly. ali kamal, 25, survived intact, with only shards of glass strewn through the photography store nearby where he worked. he said he had run outside and watched, shocked.  ''later i heard that two of my relatives who own a small shop near the university to sell soft drinks and cigarettes were taken to the hospital,'' he said. ''one of them died, and the other is in a coma. i still can't believe what happened.''  elsewhere in baghdad, a car bomb killed six people in sadr city, an interior ministry official said. twelve others were killed in a shiite area near downtown when gunmen opened fire.  two policemen and two civilians in the shiite area of karada in central baghdad also died when a roadside bomb exploded after the police had set out to defuse it.  they had already knocked out one bomb when they discovered the second.  the familiar mix of shock, disgust and sadness could be found wherever the violence appeared. on kifah street, in a mixed sunni and shiite neighborhood, two bombs exploded in quick succession near a market for motorcycle parts and car stereos, killing at least 15 people.  ''i lost my uncle,'' one man shouted. ''i lost my brother,'' said another.  as a group gathered at the site, a convoy of american humvees drove past. an old man spit on them, shouting, ''you are the ones who brought to us all this disaster.''  the struggle for iraq  