giants' reese reaches top of a long, steady climb   a boy from a poor, rural corner of tennessee, who never played professional football, has grown up to become the leader of the giants' football operations.  the giants promoted jerry reese, 43, to senior vice president and general manager, replacing ernie accorsi, who is retiring. reese spent most of the past five years as the team's director of player personnel, overseeing college scouting and drafts.  reese, a native of tiptonville, tenn., will be one of three african-american general managers in the n.f.l., joining ozzie newsome of the baltimore ravens and rick smith of the houston texans. newsome was the league's first black general manager, in 2002, though other african-americans hold top-level positions in personnel departments.  the giants confirmed the move late yesterday, which was officially accorsi's last day with the team. they scheduled a news conference for today to introduce reese.  the promotion is the apex of a steady climb for reese, a former defensive back and assistant coach at the university of tennessee at martin. in 1994, he accepted a largely anonymous job as a field scout for the giants.  that was the year that accorsi joined the giants as an assistant general manager. accorsi was elevated to general manager in 1998, and reese was promoted to a job at the team's headquarters in 1999. reese became an assistant in the pro personnel department, which evaluates professional players, mostly potential free agents.  accorsi promoted reese to director of player personnel on may 1, 2002. and when accorsi decided to retire, he told the team's owners that reese should be his replacement.  after interviewing at least four other candidates, the giants' president, john mara, and treasurer, jonathan tisch, whose families share ownership of the giants, agreed.  reese inherits a team that appeared, just months ago, well positioned to challenge for championships in the coming years. but the giants, under coach tom coughlin, finished 8-8 and lost in the first round of the playoffs to the philadelphia eagles. in losing seven of their last nine games, the giants generated unexpected questions about the overall quality of their team.  the giants decided last week to retain coughlin, and extended his contract through 2008. that decision was complicated to some degree by the delay in naming a replacement for accorsi. coughlin will report to reese, who will have a huge say in whether coughlin coaches beyond next season, viewed as a make-or-break year in his tenure.  the late-season skid raised sudden questions about the quality of the roster, too. running back tiki barber retired, and a defense that was overhauled last off-season needs further patching, particularly at cornerback and linebacker.  the giants have the 20th selection in april's draft, and they are believed to have enough wiggle room under the n.f.l.'s salary cap to be competitive participants in the free-agent market. accorsi, wanting to position the giants for the future, was vigilant about signing players to long-term contracts before he retired. the highest-profile veterans who remain unsigned are center shaun o'hara and kicker jay feely.  in searching for accorsi's successor, the giants interviewed four internal candidates and at least one external one. besides reese, they interviewed the assistant general manager kevin abrams; the director of pro personnel dave gettleman; the vice president for player evaluation chris mara (john mara's brother); and the former redskins and texans general manager charley casserly.  they had hoped to talk to scott pioli, the patriots' vice president for player personnel, but pioli declined an interview.  reese is often credited for seeing the potential of defensive end osi umenyiora, a little-known college player at troy state whom the giants drafted in the second round of the 2003 draft. umenyiora had 14 1/2 sacks in 2005 and was named to the pro bowl.  beyond the three african-american general managers -- reese, newsome and smith -- other african-americans who currently hold upper-level personnel positions include the arizona cardinals' vice president for football operations, rod graves; and james harris of the jacksonville jaguars and tony softli of the st. louis rams, who each hold the title of vice president for player personnel.  extra points  as the giants and tom coughlin try to rebuild the coaching staff, they have run into an unexpected hurdle: the miami dolphins. after nick saban resigned as dolphins coach, the giants and other teams asked permission to interview his assistants, only to have those requests denied while miami searches for a new coach. the giants have vacancies at offensive and defensive coordinator (the quarterbacks coach kevin gilbride took over the offensive coordinator's duties before the last regular-season game but has not been officially promoted), and they asked to speak with miami's defensive coordinator, dom capers, and its quarterbacks coach, jason garrett. but the dolphins are rejecting such requests. in the meantime, capers signed a three-year contract to stay with the dolphins.  pro football  