decorative arts galleries offer worthy complements to the armory show   the winter antiques show, which opens today at the seventh regiment armory, may have dozens of booths. but some monumental examples of decorative arts can be found only in new york galleries with special exhibitions coinciding with the show.  helen costantino fioratti, for example, has cleared out much of her gallery, l'antiquaire and the connoisseur at 36 east 73rd street, to show more than 50 european mirrors made in the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries. they include a huge 17th-century mirror from naples, italy, with a stunning silver frame, an 18th-century venetian looking glass with blue glass borders, a few splendid over-mantel mirrors and a pair of italian mirrors whose carved and gilded frames are confections of interlocking scrolls and leafy garlands. all retain their original glass, making them far more valuable.  mrs. fioratti has covered her walls with the mirrors, displaying them side by side and one above another, in imitation of the 16th-century vogue for lining rooms in mirrors. in the catalog for her show she writes that this style was popularized by catherine de' medici (1519-1589), who had 119 venetian mirrors inserted into the paneling of her paris apartment. the italian-born catherine was a great patron of the arts, inventing the high heel for her marriage to the french king henri ii, and later setting new standards for sumptuousness as ruling queen after the king's death in 1559.  in the following century mirrored rooms became the rage in france. in the catalog mrs. fioratti quotes an anonymous contemporary writer who attended a ball given by the archbishop of sens in 1651 and noted that ''50 of the richest and most beautiful venetian mirrors served as delightful pictures displaying the faces, the experiences and poses, the smiles, the graces, the charms, the hands and arms of all the fine company.''  in 1678 louis xiv commissioned the mirrored gallery now known as the hall of mirrors at versailles. by day the room's 306 panes of mirrors facing the windows reflected sunlight and the view of the park. by night the mirrors doubled the illuminating power of candlelight.  louis xiv was also responsible for an obscure art form known as ''bagard de nancy,'' after césar bagard, a 17th-century sculptor living in nancy, france. to finance his constant wars, louis xiv ordered that the silver and gold in his realm, including his own, be melted down. as substitutes, craftsmen began to carve wooden mirror frames, boxes and candlesticks in the style of the gold and silver originals. they used a type of cherry called bois de saint lucie, which is extinct, but mrs. fioratti has a few rare survivors of the form, including a densely carved dressing table box, a mirror frame of carved foliage and a pair of featherweight candlesticks.  most of the mirrors are italian, many from venice, an early glassmaking center. the oldest, from tuscany, circa 1580, is in the shape of a palladian door, about 20 inches high, with yellow marble columns on the sides and a broken-pediment cornice. the ebony frame has insets of pink, green and yellow marble. gilt bronze statues adorn the cornice.  another small italian mirror, only 131/2 inches tall, is rarer. it was made in rome in the mid-17th century. its octagonal ebony frame is covered by pieces of jasper, lapis lazuli and other hard stones.  the seamless joining together of pietra dura (literally, hard stones) was a technique perfected in italy in the 16th century, and it was a way to embellish many types of furnishings, from table tops to mirrors. ''it could take 40 years to make one table top,'' mrs. fioratti said.  in the catalog she writes: ''the technique proclaimed the owner's nobility and his collecting acumen. the harder the stone, the more difficult it was to cut, the higher the prestige associated with the work.''  (coincidentally, in its continental furniture sale on wednesday, doyle new york is auctioning a pair of 19th-century gilded neoclassical tables with pietra dura tops boasting dozens of specimen marbles. the presale viewing begins tomorrow.)  mrs. fioratti also has a 35-inch-high dutch mirror etched with a large galleon under full sail, from about 1780. the etching was done by a wheel, which requires enormous patience and skill. ''the rijksmuseum in amsterdam has similar pieces, but its mirrors are all fitted into furniture or boxes,'' she said.  some say that mirrors replaced tapestries as favorite wall decorations in european palaces in the 17th century, but the franses gallery, at 132 east 61st street, has a show that challenges that view. ''chinoiserie: european tapestry and needlework, 1680-1780'' has several wall-size tapestries that would enhance any palace décor, then or now.  china ''was a distant and exotic land, a place of fantasy, unlikely ever to be visited but brought more vividly into the imagination by travel books and a flood of imported porcelain, lacquer screens and other wares,'' david franses, one of the owners, writes in the catalog. the designs for european chinoiserie tapestries ''depicted or imitated life in the orient from a western viewpoint.''  the most enchanting are two 12-foot-high beauvais tapestries that survive from a series, ''the story of the emperor of china,'' that was originally created for louis xiv in the 1680s. (they were the earliest examples of european chinoiserie.) in the first, priced at $1.2 million, a bejeweled (and european-looking) empress sits on a carved and gilded (again, western-style) armchair in a seaside pavilion watching as the emperor departs in a sailing boat filled with pink-cheeked oarsmen. what makes it ''chinese''? the porcelain is blue and white, and a seven-story pagoda is seen on a distant shore.  the second, called ''the astronomers,'' shows men grouped around a globe. the standing figure is thought to represent the emperor. a seated figure with a drawing compass is said to be the rev. johann schall von bell (1592-1666), a german jesuit priest welcomed at the qing court for his knowledge of astronomy. to the side, one man peers through a telescope while another stands beneath an armillary sphere.  ''the telescope, celestial globe and armillary sphere depicted still survive at the old imperial observatory in beijing,'' said simon franses, a third-generation member of the family that founded the london gallery in 1909. what is chinese here? a dragon, more pagodas and the emperor's long, droopy mustache. don't miss the chance to see these enchanting fantasies.  antiques  