caution: grown-ups at play   a generation ago, the adult world looked from the ground as it does to a looney tunes character: a flash of trouser cuff, a blur of hemline, the jingle of a highball glass and poof! -- it was gone. in the age of professional parenting, it is something of a mystery that any of us survived, much less learned to add, dream or brush our teeth.  last week, new york city officials unveiled plans for a cutting-edge downtown playground, conceived as the first of many. partly financed by its designer, david rockwell, the burling slip project combines running water, sand, an open boardwalk, an array of loose parts, and -- to encourage ''imaginative interaction'' -- a trained team of ''play workers.'' let's leave the oxymoron to die of natural causes. philanthropy, and thinking beyond the swings and seesaws of the robert moses era, are both to be applauded. but has any consultant to this project ever offered catnip to a cat? as has been noted, kids will turn anything into a rocket ship, including dinner plates.  i'm the first to admit that it takes a village. i would no sooner vote against foam blocks or burlap bags than against the tooth fairy, especially in lower manhattan; my eldest was raised indoors, at the winter garden. but as tom perrotta made splendidly clear in ''little children,'' the only toxic element on a playground tends to be the adults. and i don't mean the child molesters. surely more maternal anxiety has been whipped up on park benches than in preschool interviews.  you can write ''play workers'' down to affluence; if you have a bath butler, you surely need a play worker. assisted living is wasted on the elderly. in a consultant-driven culture, anything can be elevated to a science or reduced to a how-to book. should you doubt yourself, ''the experts' guide to the baby years'' will handily advise you on how to pack a diaper bag, choose a name, locate your inner patience, and trust your instincts as a new parent.  with battalions of therapists, tutors and coaches we have now commandeered most aspects of our children's existence. do we really mean to intrude on their fantasy lives, on their stories and societies and civilizations and -- most critically -- their first steps toward a sense of self?  it's an ill-kept secret that having children can be hazardous to your health. they decimate your bank account, your furniture and your immune system. your nerves, your abs, your attention span will never be the same. even their dietary habits undermine ours; a new study by the centers for disease control and prevention reveals that those of us who live with children eat more fat and more saturated fat. but if on the surface they seem to have invaded our world, i'd argue we've actually colonized theirs. surely something other than affluence and overthinking is at work here. is it just a little bit possible that we're using our kids as an excuse not to grow up?  participatory parenting happens after all to make for participatory childhood. which would explain why cupcakes are back in vogue; why the grown-ups are reading ''harry potter''; why my wardrobe is indistinguishable from my 13-year-old's. where children once counted as miniature adults, adults today look like outsized children. somewhere along the way we repealed the generation gap. it's easy to share playlists, but we're not supposed to like their music, remember?  there are perfectly legitimate reasons for our appropriation; in the history of innovation, macaroni and cheese is up there with interchangeable parts. and innovation is the force of the day. the grown-ups have lost the corner on savvy and adept. when silicon valley needs wise men, it summons teenagers -- who presumably don't roll their eyes as they do in our household, when called upon to open the unopenable file. the evolutionary psychologist bruce charlton terms it ''neoteny''; in a climate of vigorous change, the advantage goes to the flexible-minded. immaturity is a gift. the adult is useless.  one baby sitter drove the point home in an interview with the times. ''the parents are not going to know what to do with all that stuff,'' predicted 18-year-old bonnie huarotte, turning up her nose at rockwell's design. ''they'll need the attendant.''  the good news is that if i can't get the kids to download the pesky file, i can throw a temper tantrum. the bad news is that we might just need an expert to remind us to leave the childhoods to the children.  stacy schiff is the author, most recently, of ''a great improvisation: franklin, france and the birth of america.'' she is a guest columnist.  