she always had hope. she needed a new lung.   from the time i met her, she had a phlegmy cough, the kind that can linger for months after a bad cold. her limbs rattled and her body quaked when she coughed, as if she were trying to expel an unwelcome intruder. her doctors diagnosed asthma, chronic but treatable. though she was married to a doctor and had many physician friends, no one thought to question things further. it didn't help that she never complained.  she was one of my closest friends: good through and through, the kind of person you would guess was the teacher's pet, the teenager who always made it home before curfew. it made sense that she would be a model patient, following every doctor's directive to a t.  but it took two years, and tests and more tests, to pin down the reason for the cough: cystic fibrosis, the genetic disease that causes the body to produce a thick mucus that obstructs the lungs and digestive system. eighty percent of the 30,000 americans with cystic fibrosis get their diagnoses by age 3, but very rarely the disease waits until adulthood to strike.  she tried her best to keep life as normal as possible -- remembering even to reapply her lipstick in her van's rear-view mirror before picking the kids up for carpool. it was hard to believe that someone so reliable, so there for everyone else, was so sick.  things got worse, slowly. over the next few years the coughing increased, but she kept the beat to life's rhythm. she volunteered for school events, showed up for life's celebrations, was always there with kind words and a smile.  she wasn't always up to driving the 45 minutes it took to see her pulmonary specialist in ann arbor, mich., a man whose eyes told me what she failed to see. she had lost a few pounds, and her test results weren't good. if she didn't put on some weight, the doctor told her, she would need to be hospitalized. as soon as she got home, she asked me to pour her a nutritional supplement. ever the compliant patient, she finished every drop of the odious sludge.  that summer my husband and i vacationed in the canadian rockies. when we left for our trip, she was already walking with an oxygen tank, administering iv antibiotics at home.  i called often, and learned from her sister-in-law that she was in the hospital again. i was traveling in alberta, from lake louise to banff, swallowing deep gulps of pristine air while my close friend was nearly choking back home. i cried, and asked her sister-in-law if i needed to return home. no, she said. but the image of my beautiful friend, lying in the hospital believing that she would be all right, kept intruding: even the brilliant white glaciers looked gray.  one of her great strengths, her positive view of life, clouded her ability to see what was happening. no one discussed ''what if,'' but during our summer travels, i came to terms with the possibility of the most terrible outcome. i hoped i was wrong. i told no one but my husband, who understood my devastation each time i saw my friend, who by this time could barely catch her breath between words.  the last time i saw her, she was in the hospital, moored to a ventilator, waiting to be airlifted to california for a live-donor lung transplant. the walls of her room were decorated with cards and drawings by her young children, and she wrote out what she could no longer say.  i was afraid that she would sense the effort behind my smile. as i left, she gave me two thumbs up, and i kissed her blanketed leg and told her, ''i love you.''  in california, her left lung was replaced by her husband's left upper lobe; her right lung by her brother's right lower lobe. her recovering husband was beside her when she died soon after, from a virulent fungal infection. that was six years ago.  at that time, cadaver lungs were in short supply and organ transplants were given to those who had waited the longest. in may 2005, the rules changed and the sickest patients received priority.  had these changes been carried out earlier, chances are that this wife, mother, sister, daughter and friend would have gotten a transplant much sooner -- and perhaps survived, as she always believed she would. she died too soon, at 44, but i know she would have celebrated the progress that has saved other lives.  cases  