rooting around grandma's basement in cyberspace   some years i receive nothing.  the holiday season passes peacefully. i dismantle the tree. and the only nagging social obligation i feel guilty about is not managing to mail out a family greeting card. so i sweep up the pine needles and tell myself everyone will be thrilled to receive the annual photo of my children on valentine's day.  this year was different.  one day last month i found a festively wrapped bottle of wine on the porch. (thanks, dawn and bill.)  it was the start of a trend. the unexpected gift tipped the scales of heaven in my direction. the next day a friend delivered a plate of homemade cookies. (thanks, lisa). another dropped off a holiday wreath to hang on the door. (thanks, stephanie.) by the end of december i was the delighted recipient of a sleighful of iced sugar cookies, bottles of champagne and tiny christmas tree ornaments (the one shaped like a bird was a regift, but still adorable).  this sort of situation creates a crisis in january.  i call it the response gift syndrome. i know that someday -- maybe not today, maybe not tomorrow, but soon -- i will have to reciprocate. the best way to thank my friends for a gift is with a gift in return.  but what? the last thing i want them to know is that it's a response gift because i don't want them to think i'm keeping score (although i am). i don't want them to think that i think they won't like me unless i show my gratitude with a gift (although that is my secret fear).  most important, i don't want to become locked in a terrible cycle. i envision an escalating round of gift-giving, starting innocently enough with that box of mail-order pears but potentially leading to buying porsches and diamond necklaces for the neighbors, instead of saving all our money to pay for college tuition.  and i really want my children to go to college.  the solution is a stealth response gift. this is one that seems thoughtful but in an offhand way, a casual sort of token that says, ''i like you and gave you this for no reason, certainly not because you gave me something.''  the solution does not come from the mall. it is a handmade one-of-a-kind thing, perhaps with a crafty tinge to it.  in the old days i used to wander the stalls at weekend fairs. but now such objects are available at a growing number of internet sites that operate like online crafts shows. at sites like cutxpaste.com, dozens of do-it-yourselfers sell handmade wares, ranging from letterpress notepads ($8 each, from deluce design) to crocheted pompom hats ($42 each, from purldrop.com).  at handmadecatalog.com a painted beehive birdhouse made from a gourd is $21.95. and at artsefest.com shoppers can click on ''shop by crafter'' to link directly to more than 500 sites that sell merchandise like handmade journals bound with a ribbon made of tree bark ($35 to $65, depending on size).  but the site with the widest selection, about 300,000 items, is etsy.com, which describes itself as a ''a place to buy & sell all things handmade.''  ''we know a lot of people who sell things on our site sell at crafts fairs, too,'' said rob kalin, a founder of the site. ''we're trying to serve a class of artisans who are making things in quantities not large enough to stock a store, but maybe enough to take out a booth at a crafts fair.''  etsy.com is a mishmash of merchandise, organized in categories like knitting, housewares, furniture and toys. if it evokes your grandma's basement, that's no accident.  ''when i was a kid, one compensation for visiting my grandmother in buffalo after an eight-hour trip was that i got to root around in her basement,'' mr. kalin said.  navigating the site, which mr. kalin created with two college friends in 2005, is like going on a weird treasure hunt. it is hard to predict what you will stumble across: curiosities like a pair of clay earrings in the shape of salmon roe sushi ($8, from stitcherx) or a velvet pillow decorated with an anatomy-book illustration of a skull ($35, from crows cloth).  there's a handcrafted feel to the site's design, thanks in part to its search features. on the home page, for example, shoppers can click on ''time machine'' to view a swirling display of the most recently listed wares for sale. or you can click on ''colors'' to unleash a rainbow flurry of colored bubbles. a click on one of them links to items of the same hue.  while these features are amusing, i prefer a more old-fashioned and efficient approach to shopping. last week i conducted a keyword search on the site for a tea towel --who doesn't need a nice new one? -- and came up with a number of choices that qualify as useful response gifts.  a flour-sack tea towel embroidered with an apple ($5, from heatherhalesdesigns) would please anyone with a vintage kitchen. a set of two white-on-white hemstitched towels (which you can order with a monogram, $20, from trndesigns) would fit any décor.  the only drawback to shopping on etsy.com is that it's as time-consuming as digging through all those boxes in the basement. to find the perfect response gift you have to root through a lot of idiosyncratic stuff -- like a pink quilted purse that looks like a brain (''it's a must to complete any zombie or mad scientist type ensemble,'' $65, from bakingwithmedusa) -- before you stumble across something you think you want.  i bought a set of four beaded wineglass tags with painted charms shaped like flip-flops. they were a one-a-one-of-a-kind set, but you're not missing anything -- they arrived in a little fabric bag that smelled so heavily of cigarettes that i can't give them to anyone.  but luckily i also bought 10 adorable envelopes that were handmade from atlas pages (with note cards, $2.25, from time2cre8). so at least i have the proper stationery to attach to response gifts.  smug about making progress in the response-gift department, i rewarded myself with a trip to the grocery store. on the way out the door, i tripped over a new year's gift addressed to me. (thanks, amy.)  online shopper e-mail: slatalla@nytimes.com  