and for the best on the red carpet   one of the bewildering aspects of the red-carpet parade at the golden globes last night is how many actresses said they spent little time getting dressed, breathily insisted they had no help, yet looked as if they were auditioning for a camp remake of ''cleopatra.''  big hair of the elizabeth taylor-richard burton era overshadowed most of the clothes, and even some of those adorable bobbing heads. penélope cruz, though sensational-looking in a fluttery black chanel couture dress (''my friend karl lagerfeld made it for me''), had her hair piled and pinned in the old-new fashion. so did jennifer lopez, her big lashes batting as she intoned, ''marchesa,'' the label behind her off-the-shoulder goddess dress.  kate walsh and ellen pompeo, from ''grey's anatomy,'' had dueling hairdos, teased and curled. the brilliant, strange exception to all this was sienna miller, the ''factory girl'' star, whose english sense of irony probably led her to wear a heidi braid across her head. today, though, the fashion police will murder her.  just what brought on the pagan hair is hard to say, but it had an aging effect on many of the actresses; in the case of angelina jolie, who wore a strapless gray gown, it suggested a humorlessness that doesn't exactly go with the spirit of an awards show.  by contrast, reese witherspoon (in buttercup-yellow silk), beyoncé knowles (in ''dreamgirls'' spangles), kyra sedgwick and kate winslet, her lips scarlet against her pale skin and white azzaro dress, wore their hair down and loose. and they looked young and properly happy.  but in a sense, all red carpets are a trail of good intentions gone haywire. and if you could run the action backward, beginning with ''iccug gniraew ma i,'' to the limo and the fast climb back up the hills, to the bedroom, the blabbing hairstylist, the racks of clothes, the doubts, the sighs, the soiled wads of blotting paper -- well, you would probably find something that required less exertion.  that was the trouble with many of the dresses you saw: they looked a lot less self-reliant than their wearers claim to be.  at least william h. macy was honest. when he and his wife, felicity huffman, were asked about their preparations for the evening, mr. macy replied dryly, ''we have people who take care of these kinds of things.''  on the whole, the fashion establishment got its plugs in: eva longoria wore a navy ungaro dress with a low swimsuit back. cate blanchett had on a black lace alexander mcqueen number with panniers. and drew barrymore wore a strapless dior gown in pink silk.  there were no faux pas, everyone looked generally polished to perfection -- and that was maybe the problem with the golden globes red carpet. how nice if more girls just wanted to have fun.  on fashion  