for 9/11 families, new sorrow in fight over grandchildren   five years after their father was killed at the world trade center, two little girls, ages 7 and 5, sat crying in a car parked at the curb of their grandparents' home here one december day, refusing to go inside for a court-ordered visit. it was a painful family tableau rooted in a hundred tangled details, but one overriding and uncontested reality: 9/11.  sometime after the death of peter v. genco, a cantor fitzgerald bond trader, in the sept. 11 terrorist attacks, the relationship between the girls' mother and their late father's parents went sour. the grandparents, barbara and victor genco, obtained a court order in 2003 allowing them to see the children -- under supervision, and for exactly four hours, once each month. in legal documents, the mother accused her in-laws of abuse and neglect, including drinking in front of them.  and on that sunday afternoon in december, as described by the grandparents, the girls had apparently had enough of the whole business.  ''we had hoped to be a part of their lives and a link to their father,'' barbara genco, 69, said in an interview. ''we imagined taking them with us to europe, to disney world. but it is too painful to see how the children have changed toward us.''  this sad tale is not entirely uncommon among families torn by the terrorist attacks. there is no official registry of such separations. one 9/11 family advocate said he had encountered more than 100 conflicts in which aging parents of a world trade center victim, desperate to remain connected to the children of their lost offspring, had found themselves in bitter struggles with a surviving spouse who would rather they did not. a mediator who helped negotiate settlements among 9/11 families in the early years after the attacks said 1 in 10 of his cases involved estranged grandparents.  a few have been to court, where recent laws give grandparents some leverage. many other grandparents have not. some have been wise and circumspect in efforts to mend relations with their deceased child's widow or widower. some have not.  ''sometimes, the spouse is remarried and just doesn't have time for grandma and grandpa anymore,'' said bill doyle, who lost his son, joseph, at the world trade center and maintains an e-mail registry of several thousand surviving relatives for the coalition of 9/11 families.  ''sometimes, the spouse and the grandparents had differences about whether to bury or cremate the remains, or about where remains should end up,'' mr. doyle added. ''or sometimes, there is money at stake. or the people just never liked each other and it comes to blows over the kids. it can get so ugly, it's beyond belief.''  by most accounts, these situations are the exception. family advocates and professionals involved in working with 9/11 families, including kenneth r. feinberg, head of the sept. 11 victim compensation fund, said in interviews that most families had remained on more or less good terms with in-laws, even after remarriages.  one 9/11 widow who recently remarried described her children as having ''three sets of grandparents'' -- her parents, the parents of her husband killed on 9/11, and her new husband's parents. linda favuzza, the sister of bernard d. favuzza of suffern, n.y., a bond trader whose children were grown when he was killed on 9/11, said her brother's widow, linda, had ''welcomed us, reached out to us, done everything she could for my brother's family, especially our mother.''  and yet, there is a british woman who has not spoken to her twin grandsons since her son handed them the phone on sunday, sept. 9, 2001. a florida grandmother who said her daughter-in-law called the police the last time she tried to visit. a couple who have seen their grandson in brooklyn only a few times through a four-year court fight.  for the widows and widowers, the grandparents can be a reminder of their darkest day, kept at a distance to let the children -- and themselves -- move on. but the older generation often clings to the children, not just as any doting grandparents would, but as their sole connection to the children they lost on 9/11.  ''all i had of my son's was his dog, and the dog died last year,'' said barbara krukowski-rastelli, who has not seen her grandson, now 15, since 2002.  similar emotional dislocations can affect individuals and their in-laws after any death or divorce, family professionals say. but to the basic fuels of discord, 9/11-specific issues are the accelerants: disputes over the federal compensation money or the remains of the dead, and perhaps the most unmentionable issue, the desire of some surviving spouses to start over.  alan gross, the mediator who said 10 percent of the 9/11 cases he worked on involved grandparents, said most involved ''people who had a problem beforehand.'' mr. feinberg said that he did not encounter many such disputes but that when he did, ''they could be bitter.''  neither the gencos' daughter-in-law nor her lawyer responded to repeated requests for interviews. in other cases, parents asked not to be quoted but called their estrangements private matters with unique histories. some accused their former in-laws of being mentally unstable.  court documents fill in some of the nasty background. the gencos' daughter-in-law has accused them of transgressions including striking the children and allowing a dog to frighten them (none of the charges were verified by court-appointed investigators). in another case, a grandfather, also accused of inappropriate behavior, calls his long-term court fight to see his grandson ''the secondary trauma of 9/11.''  people who have been limited or blocked from contact with their grandchildren describe situations as varied, complex and uncategorizable as the multitude of reasons people cite for getting divorced.  some, like the gencos, have been accused of abuse. some were called overbearing or interfering. some were accused of seeking money from the sept. 11 victim compensation fund at the expense of the spouses and children. some admit they never got along with their child's spouse.  ''much of this family squabbling had been seething for years, with decades of slights now drawn to the surface by tragedy,'' mr. feinberg wrote in a passage dealing with conflicts -- over a different flashpoint of tension, money -- in his 2005 book about the victims' fund. ''where did the truth lie?''  patricia bingley, 72, the mother of kevin dennis, a cantor fitzgerald bond trader killed on 9/11, said her daughter-in-law refused to return her phone calls after the attacks. mrs. bingley looked into hiring a lawyer but thought she would have little chance of winning visits with her twin grandsons, since she lives outside london and they are in new jersey, and since she had a fraught relationship with her daughter-in-law predating her son's death.  ''on the sunday before 9/11, kevin put the boys on the phone with me, and that is the last time i spoke to them,'' mrs. bingley said. ''kevin was my only child. i lost him, and now i've lost my grandchildren.''  mrs. krukowski-rastelli, the mother of firefighter william edward krukowski, 36, of ladder company 21 in manhattan, said her son was divorcing at the time of his death. his widow has since remarried.  after mrs. krukowski-rastelli, 65, filed a petition in queens family court seeking visitation rights, a legal guardian appointed on her grandson's behalf interviewed him and recommended the petition be dismissed. they have not seen each other in almost four years.  under a new york law that gives grandparents certain rights to visitation, grandparents must show that they have a longstanding relationship with the child, and that seeing the child is in the child's best interests. the guardian said mrs. krukowski-rastelli had not established either condition.  vladimir gavryushin, 56, the father of a 9/11 victim, yelena melnichenko, came to new york from lithuania after her death to be with his 7-year-old grandson, eric. during two months in the family's apartment in brooklyn, mr. gavryushin said, his relationship with the boy's father became difficult.  when mr. gavryushin and his wife returned to new york for the first anniversary of 9/11, his son-in-law refused to allow them to see eric, and the gavryushins sued.  in court documents, eric's father says that mr. gavryushin upset eric by bringing up conspiracy theories about the 9/11 attacks, tried to stop him from riding a school bus and interfered with efforts to ''bring closure'' to the child.  mr. gavryushin denied all the accusations, and introduced affidavits from 14 neighbors attesting to the positive effect his presence had on young eric during the grandfather's two-month stay in 2001.  two judges, forensic psychologists and a legal guardian were involved during a four-year legal fight until, in early january, the grandparents' petition for visitation was denied. mr. gavryushin, a professor of physics at the university of vilnius, said in an e-mail message that the issue was moot. ''we lost the child,'' he wrote. ''he permanently was influenced against us. he forgot us. for us, it is the secondary trauma of 9/11.''  for barbara and victor genco, the case they initiated in nassau county family court is in its third year of motions and countermotions. in the most recent development, their grandchildren's mother asked for an end to the monthly court-ordered visits. (that december afternoon, the girls were eventually coaxed inside. they are supposed to visit again in january, but the visit has not yet been scheduled.)  ''i feel like we're reaching the end of the line,'' mrs. genco said. ''but our grandchildren have a right to the love and affection of their father's family. they have a right to be connected to him.  ''if we end up unsuccessful in court, that would be terrible for all of us. but at least, when they are older, they will know that we tried.''  