one goal and brodeur are all the devils need   for much of the second half of the devils' 1-0 victory over the rangers on tuesday night, rangers forward jaromir jagr was trying to create a couple of feet of personal space. it was nearly a full-time job for jagr, staying on the ice for double shifts or jumping out early, all for a few precious seconds without devils forward jay pandolfo hounding him.  in the end, his effort proved futile. the devils clung to their lead like a terrier on a pants leg. no amount of jagr's shaking would work. the crowd of 18,096 at continental arena reveled in the devils' playing a textbook version of their defensive selves, and the rangers could do nothing to change it.  ''it's a chess match with them,'' jagr said. ''they're a very disciplined team, and if you don't match that level of discipline and kind of defensive game, you don't have a chance. they are a very patient team, and discipline is a big advantage for them.''  the devils' victory pushed their record to 28-14-4 and gave them a 10-point lead over the second-place rangers (23-20-4) in the atlantic division. martin brodeur made 26 saves for his eighth shutout and 28th victory of the season.  the devils seem to have found their stride, having won 9 of their last 11 games.  but the rangers had, by and large, eluded the devils' grip this season, winning three of their previous four meetings, including a shootout victory here jan. 2. the rangers had played some of their best hockey in those games, turning what few mistakes the devils made into goals.  this game, though, was all about the devils, and it started with pandolfo. teamed with his usual linemates, john madden and sergei brylin, pandolfo hopped onto the ice every time jagr, martin straka and michael nylander came out for a shift. they held jagr, straka and nylander to four shots: two in the second period and two in the third.  ''we kept a lot of chances to the outside, the stuff that we do against other teams,'' madden said. ''we played well. we backchecked. everybody was accountable defensively and offensively.''  it allowed the devils to lean on their one unlikely goal, a shot by the light-scoring defenseman brad lukowich. it went through a screen set by forward jamie langenbrunner and between the legs of rangers goalie henrik lundqvist 9 minutes 42 seconds into the first period.  the rangers mustered few chances to tie the score until the third period, when a flurry of offense was turned away by brodeur. they had no help from the referees, who did not call a penalty on the devils. it was the first game since march 30, 2004, that the rangers had gone without a power play.  the devils were so successful in shutting down jagr's line that it put a rare spotlight on pandolfo, who does this nearly thankless job every game. he, madden and brylin take on the opponent's top line, counting their success in other teams' frustration.  ''he's just a very unselfish player,'' langenbrunner said of pandolfo. ''it takes that type of guy to go out and play that style and sacrifice your own playing and your own stats. maybe soon, people will start to recognize how valuable he is and what a great player he is.''  if anyone recognizes it, jagr does. he expends energy just trying to stay away from pandolfo, who excels at crowding him when he has the puck, giving jagr little room to pass or skate.  ''you've got to be smart, limit the time he has it,'' pandolfo said. ''if he does get it, you just get on him as quick as you can. that's the biggest thing. you can't give him time. that's when he's dangerous.''  one of the few times jagr set up a scoring chance was when he hopped on the ice with the fourth line. he set up petr prucha late in the second period for a shot that brodeur saved. with 3:44 remaining in the game, jagr helped set up straka for a great chance, which brodeur saved by sliding across the crease.  ''i get used to it,'' jagr said. ''when you play against new jersey, it's even tougher because they know how to do it. some guys try to do it, but they're not good at it. they are.''  for pandolfo, that is the greatest compliment. he knows few outside his own team appreciate the job that he does. he counts his success in two of the devils' stanley cups in his tenure.  ''everyone has a role here on this team, and that's what makes us so successful,'' he said. ''everyone's willing to accept their role, and that's the reason we win games. it shows the character we have on this team.''  slap shots  the rangers kept forwards adam hall and jason ward out of the lineup for the second straight game and made defenseman darius kasparaitis a healthy scratch as well.  devils defenseman johnny oduya practiced monday for the first time since sustaining a shoulder injury jan. 4, but still missed his sixth game. he is expected to return to the lineup soon.  hockey  