the zoning policy that worked too well   when simon lim, president of the holborn group, bought a one-block building site in downtown vancouver last summer, he had plans for a hotel and a commercial and condominium complex. but a few months later, city planners proposed rezoning the site, which is known as the bay parkade. the change would require mr. lim to double the amount of commercial space, with priority given to a new office tower.  ''i have to admit when i first caught wind of this policy change, i wasn't exactly a happy puppy,'' said mr. lim, who is developing another downtown hotel-condo project, called vancouver's turn. ''i suspect there is some profit in developing commercial, but it is significantly more profitable to build residential.''  over the last 15 years, downtown vancouver has become a leader in north america's urban housing renaissance. under vancouver's ''living first'' policy, which was adopted 20 years ago, the downtown population has increased to 80,000 from 40,000, out of a total city population of 600,000. by 2030, planners expect 120,000 people to live in the city's shimmering glass skyscrapers, which overlook the snowcapped north shore mountains, english bay and coal harbour.  but now, city officials and businesses are concerned that downtown vancouver may become a victim of its own success, and that residential development will encroach on jobs and office space. officials put a moratorium on new housing near the business district two years ago, after allowing two condo towers -- one called living shangri-la -- in what was supposed to be a commercial-only zone.  last month, the city released a jobs and land-use study, which concluded that the downtown peninsula could run out of job space within five years under current zoning regulations.  '' 'living first' was genius -- we now have 80,000 people living downtown,'' said brent toderian, the city's planning director. but a successful downtown is a balanced organism, he said. ''we are now at a different point in the evolution towards balance, as we shift gears to protect office capacity.''  planners are considering several options, including raising the limits on building height, offering incentives to developers and capping residential construction. vancouver is also experiencing a period of significant growth, driven by a spike in the price of natural resources, which has benefited the forest products and mining companies based in the city; an active professional services economy; and the construction linked to the 2010 winter olympics.  nevertheless, encouraging new office construction will not be an easy task, mr. toderian said. the vancouver office market has a number of relatively small tenants, and he said there was a reluctance on the part of local developers to build office towers on speculation. and now the bay parkade project, which is a test case of the city's new approach, has some developers suggesting that office growth is not viable.  ''the problem is, in the grand scheme of dollars and cents, residential is much more profitable,'' mr. toderian said. ''we have to fight to protect the viable option from the more profitable option.''  according to the city's jobs and land-use plan, downtown will need about 65 million square feet of space to accommodate job growth over the next 20 years. that is about 10 million more than the capacity under current land-use regulations. class a office vacancy rates have already dropped to 3.3 percent, down from 12.3 percent two years ago, and recent transactions set a new high of 40 canadian dollars ($34) a square foot, according to jennifer robertson of cushman & wakefield.  commercial tenants say they are feeling the squeeze.  ''we were disappointed there wasn't more new building in the city,'' said iain mant of fasken martineau dumoulin, a law firm based here. this spring, mr. mant said, the 350-employee firm will relocate from a ''fairly oppressive'' 37-year-old building to the bentall v, the only new office tower under construction downtown.  ''we thought we would have more options to consider,'' he said. ''but the projects you kept hearing about ended up being residential and hotel.'' there are currently 47 residential buildings under construction in the central core.  last march, propaganda games, a division of buena vista studios, leased two and a half floors in an office building on west georgia avenue, downtown's primary business corridor. ''it was very difficult to get contiguous floors,'' said howard donaldson, vice president for studio operations. ''the market is so tight.''  the company, which has grown to 120 employees from four in less than two years, had considered locating in burnaby, a vancouver suburb. ''but we liked the central location with so many other businesses nearby,'' mr. donaldson said. mass transit was also an important consideration. over half of propaganda's employees regularly use skytrain (the city's light-rail system), ferries, commuter trains or buses, he said.  ''vancouver probably has one of the most thriving central business districts in north america,'' said don vassos, regional managing director of cb richards ellis. but the amenities that make the district attractive as a place to live -- waterfront parks, mountain views and a lively dining and entertainment scene -- now threaten local economic growth. ''commercial sites have been gobbled up by developers who are building residential,'' mr. vassos said. ''that creates serious problems from a tax point of view.''  the city's housing moratorium, which affected areas that had previously been optional commercial or residential, was an important step, mr. vassos said. ''it's in everybody's interest for the commercial sector of the real estate industry to be increasing with the population. we can't afford to have thousands of people living downtown who jump in a car in the morning and head off to the suburbs for a job.''  as part of a proposed deal with the city, mr. lim would be allowed to increase the residential density of his bay parkade site, which is on west georgia avenue, in return for expanding the commercial component. but mr. lim also said he would ''like some flexibility on height,'' a move that would probably obstruct the city's revered view corridors, which preserve public views from downtown streets.  ''we are being told there is a commercial shortage,'' said mr. lim. ''but nobody is throwing big fat rent checks at me.''  vancouver is not a ''head-office city,'' said tony astles, a senior vice president of bentall real estate services who is managing the development of the bentall v on behalf of sitq, quebec's public employees pension fund. ''you have smaller tenants that don't occupy large blocks of space.''  to mitigate the risk, bentall v was built in two ''vertical phases,'' with the second phase started two years ago after the city's economic upswing. ''but in the long run,'' mr. astles said, ''there is not enough commercial space in the pipeline, and the city will have to take some action in order to prepare for that eventuality.''  the land-use study will have policy implications for developers and other stakeholders, mr. toderian said, but he said he saw no crisis ahead.  ''most downtowns would love to have our problem,'' he said. ''we are well-positioned to do that deeper level of urbanism.''  square feet  