why the strongest armies may lose the newest wars   the utility of force  the art of war in the modern world  by gen. rupert smith  430 pages. alfred a. knopf. $30.  right now in iraq the mightiest army on earth is being fought to a standstill by insurgents using rocket-propelled grenades, rifles and improvised roadside bombs. this should not come as a surprise. in nearly every respect the war in iraq fits a new paradigm of conflict that has been operative since the end of world war ii, although military and political leaders have been slow to recognize it. until they do, conventional armies, applying conventional wisdom, will continue to misapply their power and risk defeat at the hands of seemingly inferior enemies.  this, in brief, is the hypothesis put forward by gen. rupert smith in ''the utility of force,'' a closely argued, searching textbook on strategy and the efficient use of military power in the post-cold war era. general smith, whose more than 40 years of service in the british army has included command positions in northern ireland, iraq and the balkans, maintains that the world has entered a new era dominated by nebulous, open-ended conflicts that are as much political as military.  modern armies and their civilian masters are ill suited to win these new-style conflicts, largely because they fail to recognize that the old conceptual model of all-out industrial war between nation states has evolved into what general smith calls ''war amongst the people'' -- political struggles in which combatants do not wear uniforms, mingle with the people and battle as much for hearts and minds as for outright victory on the battlefield.  to make his case general smith gives a detailed history lesson. throughout this difficult, challenging book, you can almost hear the pointer hit the blackboard as he works his way rigorously through each argument and sub-arguments a, b and c, before proceeding to the next step. at times the history lecture becomes a forced march over very familiar terrain, but patient readers will discover that there is indeed a final destination.  from time to time general smith enlivens the narrative with personal anecdotes from his own experiences in the field. this helps, as does a detailed final chapter on his command experience in bosnia, intended to illustrate the book's theoretical principles.  general smith starts with napoleon, creator of warfare's first modern paradigm. for several hundred years european states had fought static, nonideological wars intended to rearrange the map without drastically altering the overall balance of power. rulers and governments were expected to remain in place.  napoleon changed all that. he invented the idea of war as an event marshalling all the resources of the nation, both material and spiritual, with the aim of destroying an opponent and installing a new political order. carl von clausewitz, in ''on war,'' gave theoretical coherence to this new kind of warfare, and prussia, in a series of sweeping military reforms, built an army and a powerful state dedicated to winning what general smith calls interstate industrial war, epitomized in the two world wars of the 20th century.  general smith, as he does throughout, analyzes the changes in how force was applied to achieve specific goals. this is his all-embracing idea. he also stops to note, in his discussion of the napoleonic wars, the first stirrings of a new kind of conflict, in which spontaneously organized, irregular forces carried out campaigns of ambush and harassment. the spanish peninsular campaign, as general smith describes it, was nothing less than the first war amongst the people, a baffling, rule-breaking conflict in which hopelessly outnumbered and poorly equipped guerrillas fought, not to win, but to keep alive the idea of spanish independence, and to redeem it once britain and its allies prevailed.  the atom bomb made industrial war obsolete. but industrial-style military forces remained in place, along with industrial-war thinking. the old paradigm lingered, although it had no life. ''throughout the cold war military and political leaders on all sides clung to it, building armies to its specifications, swearing by its redeeming capabilities in time of need,'' general smith writes. to an alarming extent they still do, which is why the french faced defeat in indochina and algeria, why the united states lost in vietnam, why nato fumbled in the balkans and why general smith decided to write ''the utility of force.''  many readers will find it tempting to jump right to the second half of the book, in which general smith analyzes modern guerilla movements and looks at present-day conflicts in africa, the balkans and the middle east. with variations, these are wars amongst the people, and they present seeming intractable problems for conventional forces. the israeli army, countering the palestinian intifada, found its armored vehicles and superior firepower useless in a struggle that required careful intelligence-led searches for the enemy.  as often as not, failing to grasp the new rules of warfare, political leaders and military planners rely on force in situations when it has no utility, commit troops without defining strategic and political objectives and -- operating on the old industrial-war model -- plan for the decisive engagement that never comes. in war amongst the people, he writes, ''no act of force will ever be decisive: winning the trial of strength will not deliver the will of the people, and at base that is the only true aim of any use of force in our modern conflicts.''  in the new paradigm, general smith argues, war does not lead to victory and peace. rather, confrontation leads to conflict, which subsides into confrontation. the weapons, instead of cruise missiles, are machetes, ak-47 assault rifles and suicide bombers. only carefully defined and tightly intertwined political, diplomatic and military missions can hope to be effective, if only temporarily. that's another feature of the new paradigm: no war, but no peace either, only conflict without end.  books of the times  