today in business   industry call to limit emissions -- ten major companies with operations across the economy have banded together with leading environmental groups to call for a firm nationwide cap on carbon dioxide emissions that would lead to reductions of 10 to 30 percent over the next 15 years. [page c1.]  outsize personality and ambition -- college dropout, stock market aficionado, motorcycle enthusiast and, on occasion, an uninhibited dancer to hip-hop music, jonathan g. ornstein, left, the chief executive of the mesa air group, is a throwback to an era when airlines tended to resemble the personalities of their chief executives. and if his personality is outsize, so are mesa's ambitions. he wants to make the regional airline global. [c1.]  fed warning on deficits -- ben s. bernanke, the federal reserve chairman, said that recent positive trends on the federal budget were a ''calm before the storm'' masking a long-term danger posed by looming deficits in social security and medicare. [c1.]  house passes oil royalties bill -- house democrats easily passed legislation that would rescind $14 billion in tax breaks and subsidies for oil drillers and reserve the money to develop alternative energy projects and conservation technologies. [c1.]  betting on the farm -- wall street commodity funds that have been investing heavily in energy futures are now loading up on agricultural commodities like corn and livestock futures, raising concerns among grain traders and producers that speculative money is gaining an undue influence over their markets. [c1.]  seat ratings retracted -- consumer reports magazine retracted an article on infant car seats that said most of them had failed side-impact crash tests. [a16.]  help for the uninsured -- a broad coalition of business and consumer groups, doctors, hospitals and drug companies laid out a major proposal to provide health insurance coverage to more than half of the 47 million uninsured americans by expanding federal benefit programs and offering new federal tax credits to individuals and families. [a21.]  i.b.m. edges past estimates -- i.b.m. reported quarterly profit and revenue that slightly surpassed wall street estimates, lifted by strong software sales and a solid performance from its big services unit. [c4.]  economy holding its own -- the american economy seems to be shaking off a slowdown brought on by the precipitous drop in housing, the latest data suggested. [c4.]  time inc. cutting 300 jobs -- time inc. announced that it would cut nearly 300 employees at its top magazines, including its most profitable one, people, as it moves to invest more in its web sites. [c4.]  no more company jet -- mark fields, president of the americas region for the ford motor company, said that he would give up the use of the company's private jets for his weekend trips home to visit his family in florida and would fly commercial instead. [c4.]  merrill's net up 68 percent -- merrill lynch, the nation's largest brokerage house, capped a record earnings season for the major brokers by announcing a 68 percent gain in fourth-quarter profit. [c4.]  law firms pressed on retirement -- a special committee of the new york state bar association is calling on law firms to end the practice of mandatory retirement for partners. [c6.]  makeup for the youth set -- cosmetics companies like clinique, avon and lancôme are placing a new emphasis on their advertising campaigns aimed at younger customers. advertising. [c8.]  insurer to buy all of french unit -- allianz, the european insurer, announced that it would buy out the minority shareholders of its french subsidiary agf for $12.6 billion, another step in a drive by its chief executive, michael diekmann, to reduce the complexity of the company. [c9.]  oil and tech drag down shares -- stocks fell for a second day, buffeted by declining oil prices that sent energy shares down and technology company sales forecasts that fell below analysts' estimates. [c11.]  business briefing  articles on these developments are at nytimes.com/business.  continental airlines said that it narrowed its fourth-quarter loss by 40 percent as it flew more passengers and increased fares. (bloomberg news)  harley-davidson said that strong international sales of its motorcycles helped drive its fourth-quarter profit up 9.7 percent, a touch above wall street expectations, but sales in the united states were flat. (ap)  the bidding for elkcorp, the roofing products maker, heated up, with the building materials corporation of america raising its bid to $865.2 million, topping a $834 million offer by a private equity firm, the carlyle group. (reuters)  the bank of new york, one of the nation's largest trust banks, reported an increase in fourth-quarter earnings on strength in its corporate trust business, depositary receipts and global custody services. (ap)  the coca-cola company said that its marketing chief, mary e. minnick, would leave, a month after the company promoted its international chief, muhtar kent, to chief operating officer. (bloomberg news)  the general electric company reached an agreement to buy part of the diagnostic-equipment unit of abbott laboratories for $8.13 billion to expand its line of testing devices. (bloomberg news)  