g.e. buying a british aerospace company   general electric said yesterday that it would pay $4.8 billion in cash for smiths aerospace, the cockpit electronics arm of the london conglomerate smiths group. the two companies also said they would pool their technologies for detecting bombs, chemicals and other dangerous items into a joint venture, smiths ge detection.  the two deals give g.e. the ability to round out its aircraft engines business as well as increasing growth in its nascent security business. the deals give smiths access to capital and research that its chief executive, keith butler-wheelhouse, concedes the company needs badly.  in a statement, he said that ''increased capital requirements and the growing importance of supplier scale'' in the aerospace industry made it harder for smiths business to grow.  the deal did not surprise g.e. analysts, many of whom noted that it was another sign that jeffrey r. immelt, g.e.'s chairman, would make good on his promise to get out of underperforming businesses and redeploy capital to fast-growing ones. earlier this month g.e. said that it would acquire the oil and gas operations from vetco international for $1.9 billion. g.e. also said it would seek a buyer for its lackluster plastics business.  ''getting out of plastics, investing in oil and gas business last week and in aerospace and security this week, all of this is exactly in line with what they said they would do,'' said daniel j. rosenblatt, an analyst with marble harbor investment counsel, an investment advisory firm.  under the terms of the deal, g.e. will pay about 1.8 times the smiths unit's 2006 sales. analysts say that considering the intense activity in the aerospace business, g.e. had little power to negotiate a lower price.  ''we are in a growing travel cycle, with more first-time travelers in china and indonesia, with new airlines springing up, and with everyone buying more planes,'' said virginie maisonneuve, head of international equity investment at schroders, a global asset management firm based in london. ''there aren't many companies out there that g.e. could buy, so you've got the law of supply and demand at work.''  indeed, with this acquisition, g.e. goes into head-to-head competition with honeywell international, a company that has long been a major player in electronic flight management systems. g.e. attempted to acquire honeywell in 2001, but the deal was scuttled when european regulators deemed it to be anticompetitive.  in 2005, the european commission acknowledged that some of the reasoning it used to reject the honeywell deal might have been flawed. the commission has cleared 16 g.e. acquisitions since 2001, and few experts expect regulatory opposition to the smiths deal.  still, it is a combination that could make competitors sweat. ge aviation, which had $13.2 billion in revenue in 2006, is a major supplier of jet engines and services for both commercial and military planes.  smiths aerospace, which has more than 11,000 employees and had $2.4 billion in revenue in 2006, makes the type of electronic flight management systems that ge aviation has long needed to round out its portfolio. smiths aerospace controls are widely used by boeing, a major g.e. customer, as well as by airbus. the controls are used on both military and commercial airplanes.  g.e. is by far the more profitable of the two, and investors are expecting the smiths unit to benefit quickly from an infusion of g.e. efficiency. ''g.e. has the resources to grow this business and make it competitive,'' said timothy m. ghriskey, chief investment officer at solaris asset management.  russell wilkerson, a g.e. spokesman, amplified that thought. ''their aerospace business has an 11 percent profit margin, ours has a 20 percent profit margin,'' he noted. ''we certainly can help expand theirs.''  although g.e. has traditionally used stock to pay for at least part of its large acquisitions, the all-cash deal made sense, analysts said. in december, mr. immelt said that g.e. had ample cash on hand and was planning to spend at least $7 billion on industrial acquisitions this year. ''we have the cash available and this won't dilute equity,'' mr. wilkerson said.  moreover, smiths may well have made it a condition of the deal. shares of the company, whose diversified portfolio includes medical devices, detection and a potpourri of industrial products, have performed poorly over the last year.  ''people are concerned about the lack of overlap between the businesses, but also about low margins in aerospace,'' said mark lovett, chief investment officer of rcm, the institutional equity arm of allianz global investors.  mr. butler-wheelhouse, the smiths chief, has said he wants to return much of the money from the deal to shareholders. ''that would mean a stock buyback or special dividend, and it's hard to do either of those with a foreign company's stock,'' mr. ghriskey said.  smith shareholders are clearly happy with the deal. the company's shares rose more than 11 percent on the london stock exchange. the new york stock exchange, where g.e. is listed, was closed yesterday.  g.e. shareholders are hoping the deal will eventually reflect well on their shares, which have had a hard time making it past the mid- to high-$30s for several years. ''this is a good deal, and it will ultimately come back to us, if not in a higher stock price than in dividends, buybacks or other ways,'' said richard d. steinberg, the president of steinberg global asset management, which counts g.e. shares as its largest holding.  in the long run, the formation of smith ge detection may have the bigger impact on the fortunes of both companies.  the joint venture will meld ge security's homeland protection business, which had about $300 million in sales last year, with smiths detection, which had about $700 million in revenue in 2006. g.e. will own 46 percent of the company, and will have minority representation on its board.  smiths ge detection will be based in london. mr. butler-wheelhouse will be its chairman, and stephen phipson, currently group managing director for smiths detection, will serve as its president.  under the deal, g.e. cannot buy out smiths for five years, unless smiths -- which has on occasion been rumored to be a takeover target -- goes through a change of control.  g.e.'s agreement to be the minority partner in smiths ge detection is unusual, in that g.e. normally wants to apply its management efficiencies to any new company it invests in. analysts say that smiths, while eager to tap into g.e.'s global research operations, was adamant about not giving up control of the growing detection business.  ''part of the reason they sold aerospace was to focus management's attention on growth areas like medical and detection,'' said mr. lovett, of rcm. ''so in detection they're sacrificing some equity in return for access to the g.e. name and resources.''  correction:  january 18, 2007, thursday  an article in business day on tuesday about general electric's purchase of smiths group's aerospace business misstated g.e.'s percentage of ownership of smiths ge detection, a joint venture between the companies. g.e. will own 36 percent, not 46 percent.  