retelling shakespeare with an abundance of tenors   if the main characters in rossini's ''otello'' were not named otello, desdemona and iago, most of the audience would never guess that this opera is based on shakespeare's tragedy. the story is bowdlerized into a generic drama of romantic intrigue, jealousy and revenge.  still, one could argue that the great decades of serious 19th-century italian opera are framed by rossini's 1816 version and verdi's 1887 version of ''otello.'' the conductor will crutchfield made that very point by presenting concert performances of both operas during the caramoor festival in 2001.  on wednesday night the conductor eve queler, that tireless champion of overlooked works, presented a concert version of rossini's ''otello'' at carnegie hall with the opera orchestra of new york. the venture had a setback last week when the tenor ramón vargas, a mainstay at the metropolitan opera who was scheduled to sing the title role, withdrew because of illness. bruce ford, who has sung rossini's otello extensively, stepped in on short notice.  rossini's opera may appear to make a hash of shakespeare. but philip gossett, author of the recent ''divas and scholars: performing italian opera,'' the definitive book on the topic, makes the point that shakespeare's original texts were relatively unknown in italy at the time. in preparing this opera for its naples premiere, rossini and his librettist, francesco berio di salsa, were working under very pragmatic constraints. for example, the company had an abundance of tenors who needed work. so the three main male roles -- otello, iago and rodrigo -- are all for tenor. forget the three tenors. when the doge of venice joins these three characters at the start of act one, there is an extended scene for four tenors!  if some music in the first two acts seems not much more than professional work on rossini's part, there are many inspired strokes and exciting arias. the triumph of the opera is the musically rich characterization of the vulnerable desdemona. surely verdi took as a model for his ''otello'' rossini's final scene for desdemona, when she sings a ravishing ''willow song'' prominently accompanied by a filigreed harp (played here by grace paradise) and then sings a wistful prayer before going to sleep, miserable and confounded by her husband's anger.  the mezzo-soprano ruxandra donose was an earthy-voiced and beguiling desdemona. we first meet her in a melting duet with her confidante emilia, a significant role, here sung with lustrous tone and flair by the fine mezzo-soprano maria zifchak.  the surprise of the evening was the young tenor robert mcpherson, who brought a robust voice, agility and confidence to the major role of iago. though the bright-voiced tenor kenneth tarver as rodrigo had some shaky moments, he mostly sang with energy and lyricism. mr. ford sounded vocally weathered at times. still, this bel canto specialist sang otello with stylistic insight and honesty.  ms. queler's work with the orchestra and chorus (the oratorio society of new york) was often listless and sometimes careless. still, with limited rehearsal time, she managed to present an acceptable account of a difficult and unfamiliar score. and when the singing excelled, rossini's achievement came through vibrantly.  music review  