burmese daily at odds with democracy advocate   a state-run newspaper in myanmar on thursday accused the pro-democracy leader daw aung san suu kyi of tax evasion for spending the money she won for the 1991 nobel peace prize and other foreign awards outside the country.  the newspaper, the new light of myanmar, said the government was ''very considerate'' to keep her under house arrest rather than to jail her for life for what it said were many offenses.  mrs. aung san suu kyi, 61, has not left the country since 1988 and has been under house arrest for 11 of the past 17 years, including the year she won the peace prize.  the accusation by the paper is the latest, and one of the more imaginative, of periodic verbal assaults against her by the military government of myanmar, formerly burma.  ''she avoided paying taxes to the state by asking her family members abroad to spend all her cash awards provided by international organizations and honorariums presented for her works she had created abroad instead of spending the money in the country,'' said the newspaper, which is published in english.  ''it was very considerate of the government to put only restrictions on her, instead of punishing her in accordance with law for the acts she had committed,'' the newspaper said. ''if she is sentenced to prison terms for all the offenses she has committed, she will never get out of the jail in her life.''  the government regularly accuses her of collaborating with foreign governments and of undermining national unity.  thursday's attack on her followed the defeat last week in the united nations security council of a resolution sponsored by the united states that condemned myanmar as a threat to international peace and security.  ''on one level, it sounds ridiculous,'' said debbie stothard, coordinator of altsean-burma, a human rights group, referring to the accusation of tax evasion. ''but on another level it could actually hint at another onslaught against aung san suu kyi.''  ''the woman has been under such strict conditions of detention,'' she added, ''it's not as though she was free to go on a shopping spree.''  in 1992 mrs. aung san suu kyi said she would use the $1.3 million she won for the nobel prize to establish a health and education trust for the people of myanmar.  the junta came to power in 1988 when the military crushed pro-democracy protests. it refused to step down when mrs. aung san suu kyi's party won an election in 1990.  on wednesday, the newspaper set forth its theory for the united states' opposition to the junta and its support for mrs. aung san suu kyi.  ''it is quite clear,'' the newspaper said. ''it aims to set up its military bases, help its businessmen gain a foothold and monopolize the domestic business world, and enable its spies to meddle in the internal affairs of myanmar to make a mess of things in the region.''  