yes, tofu. yes, dessert. and yes, hell's kitchen.   have you run out of room for room 4 dessert? up to your eyeballs in chikaliciousness? then until p*ong and tailor -- the next two scheduled openings in this season of the dessert restaurant -- prove their merit, there's only one choice for a second meal of just desserts: kyotofu.  the place couldn't be a tougher sell. dessert restaurants are hard enough, but rallying your friends with the late-night cry of ''who wants to go to hell's kitchen for some tofu?'' really pushes it.  fortunately, the proof is in the (soy-based) pudding: anyone who detours to kyotofu will be rewarded with desserts executed with the precision one expects from a four-star kitchen. (before opening kyotofu, ritsuko yamaguchi worked in the pastry kitchen at daniel, which explains that precision and why her tuiles -- which crown almost every dessert -- look just like those at daniel.)  ms. yamaguchi's desserts also double as a master class in what can be done with soy. the original sweet tofu ($7) is a helping of quivering, creamy goodness: a glass of custardy tofu into which you dump a saucer of black sugar syrup.  it's not unlike tofu fa, a dessert you can buy on the street in chinatown, with fuller and more sumptuous flavors and a more regally creamy texture.  if the dead simple combination of soy and sugar sounds too dead simple for you, try the black sesame tofu ($8), another ethereal custard dish, paired with tea-flavored syrup.  if more overt decadence is the ticket, opt for the sansho pepper tofu cheesecake ($9). a sturdy square of it is thick and rich and spiked with japanese sansho pepper that imbues it with an appealing lemony pepper flavor. next to your cheesecake, a meticulously arranged ''fruit carpaccio'' -- impossibly thin slices of (unfortunately flavorless) plum, topped with grapefruit segments liberated from the pith -- continues the dessert's underlying citrus theme.  that cheesecake is much like many of the desserts at kyotofu: delicately but decisively flavored and light enough to eat comfortably after a full meal, but not so light as to leave you wanting more.  flashes of brilliance grace more than one dish -- the meltingly warm miso chocolate cakes that are one part of a $15 dessert sampler; the insanely rich scoop of maple-spiked soy mascarpone atop the toasted walnut vanilla parfait -- but the kitchen isn't flop-proof yet. anmitsu ($9), a jumble of gelatinous textures, could benefit from a little less jelly and a little more flavor.  and the savory dishes in the restaurant's slim selection taste as perfunctory as they appear, huddled together in an small-font eight-line pile on the menu. at kyotofu, dessert and drinks are the thing.  you might sip your first drink while waiting for a table in the front of the space, where you can watch ms. yamaguchi ply her trade in a beautifully tidy glassed-in kitchen. the owners -- nicole bermensolo and michael berl, both first-time restaurateurs -- chose to sneak the dining room into the back of the space instead of jamming their few tables against the wide glass window in the front, so when that table does open up, you feel all that much more removed from the hubbub of ninth avenue.  back there in the quieter, pseudo-futuristic back dining room, i felt like i was in the plush eating quarters of a japanese millionaire's spaceship: precisely lighted, nattily appointed, cozy but not cramped.  there are cocktails aplenty to sample while you're back there, and a well-put-together sake list, too, that includes a sweetish selection flecked with real gold flakes for $69.  there are better sakes on the list for less, but how can you say no to a bottle of golden sake when dining in a dessert-fueled spaceship? it felt so 2007.  kyotofu  705 ninth avenue (48th street), clinton; (212) 974-6012  best dishes -- sweet tofu; black sesame tofu; tofu cheese cake; toasted walnut-vanilla parfait.  price range -- savory dishes, $6 to $11; sweets, $7 to $15.  credit cards -- all major.  hours -- baked goods and light lunch, tuesday though sunday, noon to 5:30 p.m. dinner, 6 p.m. until 12:30 a.m. (limited menu after 11 p.m.) sunday, tuesday and wednesday; until 1:30 a.m. (limited menu after midnight) thursday, friday and saturday. closed monday.  wheelchair access -- all on one level. restroom is inaccessible.  $25 and under  