with each anthem sung, family's philadelphia legacy carries on   lauren hart, a philadelphia flyers fan for her entire life, plans to keep going to home games even though the team's season appears to be circling the drain. she has sung the national anthem at flyers games for 10 seasons and has no plans to quit now.  hart, 38, is the daughter of gene hart, the play-by-play announcer on flyers radio broadcasts from the team's inception in 1967 until 1995. gene hart, who died in 1999, became known as the voice of the flyers.  now, lauren hart is that voice.  her father did the broadcasts for both of the flyers' stanley cup victories in 1974 and 1975 and was inducted into the hockey hall of fame in 1997. lauren hart, a singer and songwriter, wishes she could be as much of a good-luck charm as her father.  ''i'd be paid more than the players on the ice,'' she said in a recent interview, laughing.  she will not say how much she is paid, but she says there have been plenty of benefits. she has become a local celebrity, performing concerts and briefly working as a host for a television show.  two years ago, the hockey news polled 41 hockey writers to see who was the best anthem singer in league history. she won, over montreal's roger doucet.  ''so maybe it's not the grammy award i was looking for, but it is still pretty special,'' she said. ''the only thing i try to do is sing it the best. i don't have any gimmicks.''  sometimes, she sings a duet of ''god bless america,'' with a video of kate smith playing on the big screens on the scoreboard. smith made the song a flyers institution, singing it live, and with thunder, before the flyers won their first stanley cup in 1974.  ''we don't do that too much for luck,'' hart said, explaining it was used more to excite the crowd.  sometimes, hart wears a personalized flyers jersey. almost every time she sings, she peers up into the press level at the wachovia center, the flyers' arena. that is where her father was seated when he prepared for broadcasts.  ''it's not a full-time, around-the-year job,'' she said, ''but as a struggling artist, it keeps me going, for sure.''  she is bathed with spotlights -- and cheers -- when the doors to the ice open and she walks out to sing. although flyers fans have not had much to enjoy this season, she is regarded as a local treasure.  ''it's really been such a unique experience,'' she said of singing for the flyers. ''i come back to how unique it is, how magical it is.''  she said her father was not so sure he wanted his daughter to sing at flyers games. as a high school student in cherry hill, n.j., a philadelphia suburb, she did it a few times.  she majored in music at temple, then moved away in 1990 to pursue her career. she said she lived in a ''bunch of places.'' one day, in 1996, she ran into charles barkley at a united states olympic basketball team practice.  hart knew barkley because he had played for the philadelphia 76ers. they started to talk about philadelphia. ''i really started to miss home,'' she said. at about the same time, her father became ill and she decided it was time to move back.  she has missed only a few games since she started singing the anthem in 1997. in 2000, she contracted non-hodgkin's lymphoma, and for two years, the only job she said she could do was performing the anthem at flyers games. she said she was in remission.  married and living in gladwyne, pa., hart has recorded several cds. although she did not appear on camera, she sang the national anthem in the movie ''miracle,'' about the gold-medal-winning 1980 united states olympic hockey team.  maybe the flyers will not win the stanley cup this year, or even make the playoffs. but she is grateful for a gig that has carried on her family's legacy. her flyers jersey carries the no. 68, her father's age when he died.  ''unless you're a big, huge rock star, there's not an opportunity to sing in front of 20,000 people every night,'' she said.  hockey  