wilting in the heat, sharapova pulls off a late escape   the temperature here had hit and passed 100 degrees, and it was as if someone had slowed down reality. maria sharapova, usually brisk about her business and eager to wield all that ferocious power, was creeping about rod laver arena between points at a koala's pace, her stomach tightening and her thoughts clouding.  what was supposed to have been a straightforward first-round match at the australian open against a petite french counterpuncher named camille pin on tuesday had evolved into a supreme test of character for the top-seeded sharapova.  sharapova won the first set comfortably, 6-3, but she would be out of her comfort zone the rest of the way. pin scrapped and hustled and slipped in brave forehands up the line to win the second set, 6-4. then, most unforgettably, she managed to erase a 0-5, 0-30 deficit to push sharapova deep, deep into the third set, which it appeared at times that she would not be able to finish.  but sharapova, whether you cater or not to her grunting and ubiquitous presence on the world's screens and billboards, is a fighter at heart. and though others might have staggered toward the chair umpire and called it a tournament, she soldiered on, seeking shade between points and unforced errors and eventually finding a way to advance, 6-3, 4-6, 9-7.  ''one of the toughest matches i've played,'' she said in her understandably brief postmatch remarks to the crowd. pin, ranked 62nd, served for the match at 7-6 in the third set and was two points from victory at 30-15. but sharapova, who had taken an injury timeout earlier in the set, came up with forehand winners on the next two points, then got back to 7-7 when pin double-faulted.  ''chapeau,'' pin said later, using a french expression for congratulations. ''i could sense an enormous determination on her side. it was a real battle of wills, and she really had to dig deep into her resources to pull out those two forehands.''  it was not all about sharapova. pin, a journeywoman who has never beaten a player of sharapova's caliber, certainly did not save her best for last. sharapova did not lose another point as she swept the final two games, which hardly felt like a sweep at the speed at which she was moving. by the end, there were times when pin, who stands a head shorter than the 6-foot-1 sharapova, was the one having to produce her own pace.  ''most important, i'm looking forward to recovery,'' said sharapova, who said she began feeling tightness in her stomach midway through the second set and was uncertain whether it was cramps or a reaction to drinking too much fluid.  it was a day out of central casting at the australian open, long known for its scorching weather and legionnaire's caps. though conditions on monday, the opening day of the tournament, had been mild, the temperature was already close to 90 degrees in the early morning tuesday, and the tournament implemented its extreme heat policy shortly after noon with sharapova trailing by 3-5 in the second set. the policy goes into effect when temperatures exceed 95 degrees and humidity also reaches a high level. though the policy stops further matches from being started on outside courts, it does not stop the matches already under way. nor does it permit the retractable roofs on the two show courts to be closed if a match is still in progress.  sharapova and pin played on, and when sharapova took her 5-0 lead in the third set, it appeared they would not have to play much longer. but pin, with her quick feet and flat strokes, rallied from 0-30 on her serve by winning four straight points, and she later fought off two match points in the eighth game to get back to 5-3 as sharapova began missing her targets with regularity.  the spectators, with their fans and programs fluttering in the heat, supported the trend, cheering for the underdog, and it was soon 5-5 and then 6-6 after pin saved a third match point on her serve when sharapova missed with a forehand.  sharapova, born in siberia after all, hunched over in distress and was so disoriented that in the next game, she lost the first point on her serve, then moved over to return, thinking they were playing a tie breaker. meanwhile, pin was bouncing along the baseline like arantxa sánchez vicario.  ''i really felt it was meant to be,'' pin said. ''to have come back from 0-5, to have neutralized her and see her so tired. that's why i had a lump in my throat at the end. this was supposed to be mine. that's why i came back all that way.''  even though she would break sharapova's serve to take the lead, she could not finish her off, and now sharapova still has a chance to win her first australian open. so does the eighth-seeded david nalbandian of argentina. nalbandian saved two match points in the third set of his match against the serb janko tipsarevic, then ended up celebrating as tipsarevic retired because of the heat with nalbandian ahead, 2-1, 40-0, in the fifth.  christophe rochus of belgium, suffering from breathing problems, also retired from his match against sébastien grosjean of france, who was ahead, 6-2, 4-1. but not everyone had to suffer. when the heat policy went into effect, ana ivanovic of serbia had already beaten vania king of the united states, 6-2, 6-0, at vodafone arena.  the next match up, between chris guccione of australia and rochus's brother olivier, was played under a closed roof. and shortly after sharapova had finished, the announcer at laver arena told the crowd that the roof would now be closing for the next match between rafael nadal of spain and robert kendrick of the united states. as the fans cheered the news, sharapova wearily raised both hands over head and applauded along with them.  it was much cooler monday night when serena williams brushed away enough of the cobwebs in her little-used game to defeat 27th-seeded mara santangelo of italy, 6-2, 6-1, in her first-round match. two american men produced first-round upsets, but the perspectives were hardly the same for sam querrey and mardy fish.  querrey, at 19, is on his way up; fish, at 25, is on his way back. ''you take it for granted the first time,'' fish said, wolfing down a sandwich after his 4-6, 7-6 (2), 6-4, 6-4 victory over no. 4-seeded ivan ljubicic. ''not anymore.''  in 2004, fish soared into the top 20, following the lead of his childhood friend andy roddick, and ended up with the silver medal at the summer olympics and a regular spot on the united states davis cup team. then came two operations on his left wrist, which dropped him to a low of 341st in the rankings last february. but now, less than a month into a new season, he has already beaten two croatian members of the top 10: mario ancic, on his way to the semifinals in auckland, new zealand, and now ljubicic, who has one of the best serves in the game if not a stellar record in grand slam tournaments (he has lost 15 times in the first round in 30 appearances).  querrey, who comes from thousand oaks, calif., was planning to attend the university of southern california on a tennis scholarship until last year. but the rapid development of his game caused him to reconsider and turn professional in june instead.  monday's 6-7 (2), 6-4, 6-1, 6-3 upset of the 27th-seeded argentine josé acasuso was the latest indication that querrey made a fine decision.  tennis  