a young woman's wish, entombed in gaza's isolation   during the midnight air raids over gaza last summer, when the shock waves shattered the terrace windows and woke her little brother shrieking, eman albelbeisi reached beside her bed for the comfort of her stack of college catalogues.  she lingered over the booklets from harvard and yale and georgetown, even kentucky state in some faraway town called frankfort, until she found one particular photograph. it showed two young women seated on the beds in their dorm room, each tapping away at her laptop. eman imagined those students as herself and her best friend, haifa el rekhawi, living their dream of a college education in america.  even in those terrifying moments of july and august, amid the war between israel and hamas, eman, 18, had reason to believe her fantasy would come to fruition. by september, her dozen years of diligent schoolwork and obsession with learning english from television had earned her a scholarship to the college of roanoke in virginia, beginning in the, hopefully, better year of 2007.  the scholarship offer was a delicate jigsaw puzzle of an arrangement, pieced together by an elderly palestinian-american scholar, fahim qubain. in his own childhood before world war ii, mr. qubain had attended the friends school in ramallah, and gone on to college and graduate school in the united states. he became a quaker, a pacifist who combined fervent palestinian nationalism with equal devotion to a peaceful two-state solution.  mr. qubain was essentially retired from a career in universities and research centers when he read an article in the late 1990s by the journalist and author geraldine brooks. it described her relationship with a palestinian boy whom she met after he threw a rock at her car while she was covering the first intifada. fascinated and touched by his ambition to study medicine, and by his fatalism that he would become a terrorist instead, she paid for him to attend college in bethlehem.  to mr. qubain, saving one life was admirable but painfully limited. he and his wife, nancy, who has a master's degree in middle east studies from harvard, formed a nonprofit group, the hope fund. putting in about $30,000 a year of their own money and services, they set about identifying worthy students in palestinian refugee camps and linking them to scholarships at american colleges, starting with those in the qubain family's home state of virginia.  starting just weeks after the sept 11. attacks, the work was never less than arduous. seeking to protect itself from suicide bombers, israel largely throttled all the border crossings out of gaza, making it virtually impossible for hope fund candidates to get to visa interviews at the american diplomatic stations in tel aviv and jerusalem. and in 2003, palestinian militants bombed a convoy of american embassy officials entering gaza in part to interview applicants for fulbright and hope fund scholarships.  but by the end of the 2005-6 academic year, mr. qubain had helped 10 palestinian students get to the united states, persuading colleges to put forward more than $2 million in financial aid. the day mr. qubain picked up one of them, mohamed haroun, at dulles international airport outside washington, the young man was surprised to drive three hours toward bridgewater college in virginia without being stopped at a single checkpoint.  no place was harder to crack than gaza, and no place needed cracking more. a stronghold of islamist sentiment, gaza had answered israel's unilateral withdrawal in august 2005 with missiles aimed at civilian communities. almost a year later, palestinian guerillas seized an israeli soldier, gilad shalit, across the border, and israeli retaliation and reoccupation propelled the limitless cycle of blood, grievance and vengeance.  a few months earlier, one of mr. qubain's talent scouts in gaza, anees abu hashem, brought eman to the hope fund's attention. she had an average well into the 90s in high school, and had taught herself english by watching cnn and writing down every word she did not understand. her notion of american college, so alluring, came from a videotape of ''legally blonde.'' to that fanciful version, mr. abu hashem added some actual catalogues.  eman and her friend haifa both applied for the one new scholarship that had been earmarked for a female from gaza. eman scored higher on the toefl, a standardized test for english fluency, and she said the girls' friendship ended late last summer with the realization there was room only for one dream.  or, as eman came to realize, early last fall, maybe not even for one. in the previous few years, with entry into israel through the erez checkpoint extremely difficult, mr. abu hashem had advised hope fund applicants to try to exit at rafah into egypt and have their required visa interview at the american embassy in cairo. even so, the wait could take weeks or months, followed by an equal amount of waiting in cairo.  by the time eman received confirmation of her offer -- travel expenses from the hope fund, annual tuition worth $21,000 from the college of roanoke, and $9,000 yearly for room, board, and health insurance from sam rasoul, a palestinian-american executive -- the war between israel and hamas had all but sealed rafah entirely.  the israeli newspaper haaretz reported in december that in the preceding month, just when eman needed to leave, the rafah gate was open for a total of 36 hours. (since the summer of 2005, the border crossing has been controlled by egypt, the palestinian authority and the european union.) gaza, as haaretz put it, was ''the most closed-off strip of land in the world -- after north korea.''  inside gaza, meanwhile, eman also had to persuade her father, omar albelbeisi, to let her go. a dentist in a public hospital, mr. albelbeisi had no money to help her go to egypt, having gone months himself without being paid because of the western economic embargo against the hamas government. he feared that if he accompanied her to cairo, he might be stranded there and would lose his job entirely. his wife, returning from a visit to her brother in germany, had been marooned in egypt for six weeks last summer.  beyond all that, eman said in a recent telephone interview, her father had more personal objections to the american scholarship offer, insisting she was too young and incapable of taking care of herself, especially outside a muslim society. e-mail messages from mr. qubain and mr. abu hashem show they were beseeching eman's father to meet with or speak to them so they could reassure him. in the end, they did not succeed.  by late december, administrators at the college of roanoke had to reassign the dorm space that would have been eman's, where she might have sat on her bed, tapping on a laptop, in her version of reese witherspoon at harvard.  one vanished opportunity in a part of the world with far more grandiose tragedies -- what does it matter? one might ask mr. haroun, now in his junior year at bridgewater college. he has been playing intramural soccer, tutoring classmates in physics, and serving in the student government.  ''it's changed me,'' he said by telephone recently. ''i'm much more open-minded now. much more willing to work for peace. most people in gaza see americans as immoral. and that's changed dramatically for me. that's changed big-time.''  as for eman, she said she cried ''for days and nights'' when the calendar neared jan. 15, 2007, the date on which she was supposed to start college. ''i'm mad at myself for spending six months dreaming about building my life,'' she said. ''i was thinking of how i'm going to comb my hair at college. i was thinking of how i'm going to spend every minute. i hate gaza. i hate everything around me. i can't believe i am losing my dream.''  on education e-mail: sgfreedman@nytimes.com  