shaky 'studio 60' is counting on romance to rouse ratings   aaron sorkin has a new pitch for all those viewers who did not fall in love last fall with ''studio 60 on the sunset strip,'' his behind-the scenes look at a late-night comedy show.  try it as a romantic comedy.  when the show returns monday with a two-month run of new episodes, ''we happen to be falling into a period where there's a lot of romantic comedy on the show,'' mr. sorkin said tuesday during a meeting with television journalists on the show's set at the warner brothers studio in burbank.  ''hopefully that is going to bring some people who wouldn't have otherwise been interested in the show,'' he added. the emerging interoffice romances will revolve around several of the show's main characters: matt albie, played by matthew perry, will rekindle his romance with harriet hayes, played by sarah paulson, while bradley whitford's character, danny tripp, will disclose his relationship with his boss, jordan mcdeere, played by the obviously pregnant amanda peet.  mr. sorkin, warner brothers and nbc -- not to mention the show's cast and crew -- are all desperately hoping that the budding romances will punch up the show's mediocre ratings. according to nielsen media research, the show has drawn an average of about 9 million viewers a week, roughly half of them the 18-to-49-year-olds that advertisers want to reach. that ranks the show 52nd over all and 39th among young adults, not bad, except perhaps for a show whose per-episode price tag is among the highest on television.  so much so that mr. sorkin, the show's creator and executive producer, said ''studio 60'' had already burned through much of its budget for the year. ''right now we're at a spot, it's hard to do the show,'' he said. ''we have to tighten our belts, and there's some things we can't do. we can't go on location as much as we'd like. we can't build new sets as much as we'd like.''  mr. sorkin said he recognizes that some aspects of his show might not have appealed to all viewers. ''i get it when people write that there's a smugness to the show, there's an arrogance to the show,'' he said. ''i get it when people write that the characters on the show take doing the television show too seriously.''  kevin reilly, the president of nbc entertainment, acknowledged on wednesday that the show ''has been polarizing'' but is changing. speaking to television correspondents in pasadena, calif., mr. reilly said that the show ''really was meant to be somewhat at its core a romantic comedy.''  ''aaron likes social relevance, pop culture references, political references, being smart on the fly,'' mr. reilly said. ''that's what fans of the show love. that's not going to end.'' but, he added, the emphasis on relationships could address ''a big chunk of the audience that maybe drifted a little bit and would be certainly open to coming back again.''  unlike on ''the west wing,'' mr. sorkin's previous show and a huge hit for him and for nbc, the dramas on ''studio 60'' often revolve around problems that are less consequential to the well-being of the country, like whether or not a joke was plagiarized.  ''in the end it's a tv show that they're doing,'' mr. sorkin said of his characters. ''doing a tv show is something i take seriously, and it's something everybody here takes very seriously. but it's something that the average person who, for lack of a better word, works a real job, resents slightly because it doesn't seem like a real job.''  thus, the emerging romantic comedy theme, something he said had always been present in the show but now is coming more to the fore. he does not apologize that his show does demand something of the viewer.  ''it isn't good background music,'' he said. ''you can't really watch it passively,'' while thumbing through a magazine or putting the children to bed. ''you have to watch it from beginning to end,'' he said.  despite the lukewarm ratings so far, mr. sorkin said he was confident that the show would be renewed for a second season. he noted that ''the west wing'' was not an immediate hit but rather gained viewers over the first summer, when reruns of the show helped build word of mouth.  ''i can tell you that we wouldn't be on the air if we weren't making money for the network,'' he said, ''and we are right now.''  