stock market in london fights nasdaq with buyback   clara furse, chief executive of the london stock exchange, wants to keep its unwelcome suitor, nasdaq, at bay -- and now she has put money on it.  on thursday, ms. furse and the london exchange pledged to buy back as much as £250 million ($493 million) in shares this year, an offer that would increase the exchange's debt enough that moody's has put the stock on watch for a possible downgrading.  ms. furse has said privately in recent weeks that she would prefer to keep the exchange independent, and promote its freedom from american regulators after the rival euronext pairs up with the new york stock exchange.  the london exchange also reiterated that nasdaq's offer of £12.43 a share was ''wholly inadequate.'' ms. furse said she was in talks with other exchanges, but would not specify which ones. the discussions, she said, were about ''cooperation'' and the ''opportunity to consolidate.''  since nasdaq formally made its hostile buyout offer for £2.7 billion ($5.3 billion) in december, ms. furse and the london board have refused to speak with their nasdaq counterparts and vehemently rebuffed the bid in public, leaving the market wondering whether they were bluffing to attract a higher price.  in december, she told advisers that her best hope was to fend off nasdaq, then use fear of the long arm of american regulation to pitch the london exchange to new buyers after euronext and the new york stock exchange merge, a person briefed on the discussions indicated.  whether ms. furse can hold off hedge fund investors, who are pressing the london market to cut a deal with nasdaq, is unclear. nasdaq, which already owns 28.8 percent of the london exchange, needs just over 50 percent to take control. short-term investors, including hedge funds and the corporate raider samuel j. heyman, own an estimated 30 percent of the stock and will be instrumental in any deal.  regulatory creep is a big worry for investors and public company executives as trans-atlantic tie-ins create more global markets.  john a. thain, chief executive of the big board's parent nyse group, has said that united states regulators would regulate only within their borders after the merger with euronext, and that euronext, a pan-european market group, would keep its french and dutch regulators.  but many european investors are skeptical. some express worry that the reach of the sarbanes-oxley act could create a situation where directors and company executives who list on any exchange allied with an american one would be vulnerable to lawsuits or tough securities and exchange commission rules with penalties that can include prison time.  in recent years, the london exchange has been a big draw for emerging-market participants who shied away from united states markets. mr. thain has been pressing for changes to sarbanes-oxley rules to make the new york stock exchange more attractive.  in response to the announcement by the london exchange, nasdaq criticized the market's ''lack of strategy,'' saying that it returned shareholder capital only ''when it needs their support.'' nasdaq also said that stockholders should tender their shares by jan. 26, because it cannot make any more changes to its bid after jan. 27.  analysts said they thought a last-minute white knight was unlikely. ''i don't think anything will happen in terms of partnerships in time for this to be tendered,'' said michael long of keefe, bruyette & woods in london. but, he conceded, ''a lot of surprising things could happen.''  