north korea and u.s. envoys meet in berlin   seeking to revive stalled negotiations to end north korea's nuclear weapons program, the united states held ''substantive'' talks with north korean diplomats here on tuesday and wednesday, said the chief american envoy, christopher r. hill.  the unusual one-on-one sessions, the first to be held outside beijing during the bush administration, were signs of progress since negotiations broke off in december after north korea demanded that washington lift financial sanctions against it.  ''it was a substantive discussion,'' mr. hill said in an interview on wednesday, though he refused to give details. ''the proof of the pudding will be when we all sit down together in the six-party negotiations.''  mr. hill briefed secretary of state condoleezza rice on his meetings upon her arrival in germany after a mission through the middle east and persian gulf. ms. rice said later that mr. hill's discussions ''should help to prepare the way for a more favorable atmosphere at the time of the resumption of the six-party talks, which we would hope would be soon.''  mr. hill, the assistant secretary of state for east asian and pacific affairs, expressed hopes that those broader negotiations -- which would also include china, south korea, japan and russia -- would resume by the end of this month in beijing, the traditional host for these talks.  an official in the north korean embassy here declined to comment on the talks, which are being led on its side by kim kye-gwan.  persuading north korea's leader, kim jong-il, to abandon his nuclear ambitions has seemed an increasingly hopeless exercise since october, when north korea tested a nuclear device and declared itself a nuclear state. the most recent talks, american officials said, foundered when the north korean negotiators proved unyielding on the most basic issues.  still, the united states was eager to try again, seizing on a visit to berlin by mr. kim to arrange a meeting with mr. hill, who was here ostensibly to give a talk at the american academy in berlin. american officials appeared encouraged by the tone of the discussions.  north korea, they noted, was open to talking despite declaring last month that it would not discuss disarmament unless the united states lifted penalties against the banco delta asia in macao, which held north korean assets.  the measures, which the united states said it imposed because of north korea's counterfeiting of american money and laundering of proceeds from drug running, cut off one of the north's valuable channels to international financial markets.  on wednesday, russia called on the united states to remove the measures. ''the united states should make some step towards the koreans by lifting the sanctions,'' the new russian chief negotiator, aleksandr lusyakov, said in an interview with a russian news agency, ria.  treasury officials have held their own negotiations with north korea to resolve this standoff, and plan to meet again next week, either in beijing or new york, according to mr. hill. but he suggested that the united states did not intend to ease the pressure on north korea's finances.  ''we've had to make it clear to the north koreans that as long as they are involved in nuclear weapons production, their international financing will come under scrutiny,'' he said.  because of the arcane way that washington and north korea communicate in their relationship as long-term adversaries and occasional negotiating partners, some brief language in a speech mr. hill delivered here wednesday provoked significant interest.  mr. hill issued what some heard as a tantalizing offer that the united states, within the obligations of a 2005 agreement emerging from the six-party talks, looked forward ''to establishing a normal relationship with north korea.''  ''obviously this is via a bilateral process, which will take a long time,'' he said.  north korea has long tried to push the united states into formal bilateral talks, as a means of seeking status and legitimacy as well as to decouple washington from its regional allies. the united states has insisted that formal talks with north korea be held only in the six-party format.  asked to clarify whether the united states was dangling a new relationship before the north koreans, ms. rice said late wednesday that united states-north korea ties would have to evolve within the six-party framework, and that washington was unwavering in demanding a complete and verifiable end to the north's nuclear program.  the 2005 statement signed by the six parties ''envisioned that the denuclearization of the north korean peninsula would lead to a bilateral -- a normalization of relations between the united states and the d.p.r.k.,'' ms. rice said, using the initials of north korea's official name.  by engaging north korea directly, outside china, the united states must tread carefully, a senior official involved in the talks said. american officials informed china of the meeting in berlin, and mr. hill is headed to beijing, as well as to seoul and tokyo, after he leaves germany.  though the six-party talks have been held exclusively in beijing, north korea has used berlin as a diplomatic venue in the past, for example during the 1990s for talks with the clinton administration. it maintains a large embassy here, a legacy of the days of east german communism.  ms. rice landed here after completing meetings with arab allies in the middle east and persian gulf, and she flew over iraq en route to berlin.  her trip also included talks in israel and the palestinian territories, an effort to push ahead stalled peace talks.  during an evening news conference here, ms. rice announced that the so-called quartet -- a group of negotiators that includes the united states, the european union, the united nations and russia -- will meet in washington in early february to help restart the middle east talks.  