muti takes the reins, a classicist at his core   the conductor riccardo muti grabbed international headlines in 2005 when he resigned as music director at la scala opera in milan, expressing displeasure with working conditions and attitudes. but this exacting 65-year-old maestro, one of the towering musicians of our time, has always worked well with the new york philharmonic. he is back with the orchestra for two programs over the next two weeks, and the first concert on thursday night was predictably excellent, though in unpredictable ways.  it's not easy to make a repertory chestnut like tchaikovsky's violin concerto come across as the audaciously original work it seemed at its 1881 premiere. but this is what mr. muti and his brilliant soloist, vadim repin, achieved. mr. muti is a classicist at his core, concerned above all else with textural clarity, sonority and structure, given to powerful expression but suspicious of emotional overstatement. tchaikovsky too, for all his wrenching romanticism, was a classicist at heart, something mr. muti might have been trying to suggest with this performance.  the introductory theme in the orchestra was laid out in beautifully contoured phrases. as the music built in restless anticipation of the violin entrance, there was crackling incisiveness in the playing, but no superficial theatrics. when mr. repin began the first solo phrase, he invested the music with calm nobility and burnished tone, as if to say to the orchestra, ''settle down, i am taking charge, at least for now.''  mr. repin, born in 1971 in siberia, is a proudly russian artist. yet at a time when the world is getting smaller, and national musical heritages are losing distinctiveness, i am not sure which aspects of mr. repin's playing can be deemed russian. his tone is plush and full-bodied, but also focused and at times affectingly cool. he seems the violinist equivalent of a pianist who plays with a minimum of pedal and does not indulge in too much rubato.  it was refreshing to hear this volatile concerto played with such apollonian vigor. even during the vehement outbursts of the first movement, he made every note speak. the slow movement was all the more poignant for the restraint and subdued intensity that mr. repin brought to it, abetted by mr. muti and the supple orchestra.  the finale, at breakneck tempo, would have seemed dangerous had mr. repin's playing not been so awesomely controlled, and had mr. muti not cued every off-beat orchestra chord with such unperturbed precision.  mr. muti then turned to one of scriabin's controversial orchestra works, the symphony no. 3, ''le poème divin'' (1902-4). scriabin, who was steeped in theosophy at the time, titled the three linked movements of this symphony ''struggles,'' ''sensual pleasure'' and ''divine play.'' but the philosophical trappings do not fight the impression that the composer simply lost control in writing this run-on score of more than 50 minutes.  yet by eliciting uncanny clarity and judiciously balanced sonorities from the philharmonic, mr. muti had this work -- which can seem like a long-winded mass of mystical mush -- sounding almost lucid. i still think the score could lose a good 10 minutes or more. but who could not have been captivated by the passages of ecstatic murmurings; shimmering, unhinged harmonies; ruminatively wagnerian lyricism? and you would have thought that mr. muti was the co-composer.  this program will be repeated tonight. mr. muti will conduct the philharmonic in another program on thursday, friday and next saturday at avery fisher hall, lincoln center; (212) 721-6500.  music review  