ahead | gem and mineral shows; celebrating the hard stuff   in 1955, a handful of mineral enthusiasts (o.k., call them rock geeks) from the tucson gem and mineral society got together to show off specimens from their personal collections at a local elementary school. from this small beginning, the annual tucson gem and mineral show has grown into the largest event of its kind in the country, a mega-celebration for rock lovers and a curiously mesmerizing attraction for spectators who don't know staurolite from styrofoam. as many as 25,000 people are expected at this year's show feb. 8 to 11 in the tucson convention center.  more than 125 exhibits will have rocks and gems from private collectors and from museums including the smithsonian institution, the museum of natural history in new york, the british museum and the mineralogical museum at harvard. there will be an opening reception, lectures, a micro-minerals room (where tiny crystals can be viewed through microscopes) and an educational ''mineral maze'' for children. and more than 300 vendors will hawk all sorts of mineral-related wares: piles of colorful gems and minerals, bits of meteorites, african beads, fossilized dinosaur dung (called coprolite), gold nuggets.  ''it's basically a giant museum exhibit that could never exist in an individual museum,'' said peter megaw, an organizer of the show. ''you're seeing stuff in one place that you'd normally have to log a lot of miles all over the world to see.''  the show draws mineralogy fanatics but also has a wider appeal. after all, as ed clark, the president of the ventura gem and mineral society in california, said, ''who hasn't seen a neat rock and picked it up and wondered why it looks the way it does?''  as the tucson show has grown, dozens of satellite shows have sprung up all over tucson to get in on the action. today they are grouped into a broad community event called the tucson gem, mineral and fossil showcase, running jan. 26 to feb. 11 this year. ''i think if you had to pick one word to describe the whole scene, it would be 'overwhelming,' '' said gene meieran, an avid mineral collector who lives in phoenix and will show off his collection of aquamarines (none for sale) in tucson. ''practically every hotel and gas station has made space for people to show and sell stuff. even if you spent 24 hours going around, you could not possibly see everything there is to see.'' of the ancillary events, he especially likes the arizona mineral and fossil show and the westward look mineral show. both feature museum-quality items for sale.  tucson has long been a mining center, but what made the gem and mineral show take off in the early days was the participation of paul e. desautels, a curator of the smithsonian's mineral museum, whose interest attracted other curators and collectors. before long, the show was the gem and mineral event of the year.  the timing doesn't hurt either: the show is always in february, when tucson has a distinct weather advantage.  mineral shows take place all over the country -- rock & gem magazine posts a list at www.rockngem.com -- and several others are scheduled over the next few weeks. the ventura society's show in ventura, calif., will include a demonstration of cutting stones into the rounded shapes called cabochons. in gaithersburg, md., new acquisitions by the smithsonian institution will be on display at the montgomery county show. jim fowler, an artist specializing in wrapping gem stones in wire for jewelry, will demonstrate his skill at the gemstreet usa show in cincinnati. and in spokane, wash., a lucky door-prize winner will walk away with a 200-pound piece of petrified wood.  ''going to shows is fun because you can learn so much about the world, and not only from the fossils and minerals,'' said vanessa galloway, a web and graphic designer in tucson who also has a business making and selling jewelry. ''there is so much cultural history surrounding antique beads, it's really interesting.''  but for most people, the shows are about buying objects that they find beautiful. and on that aspect, ms. galloway has a word of caution. ''you can spend every penny that your credit will allow,'' she said. ''so set a limit for yourself.''  details  tucson  what: tucson gem and mineral show, (520) 322-5773; www.tgms.org.  when: feb. 8 to 11, with related events jan. 26 to feb. 11.  cincinnati  what: gemstreet usa show, (216) 521-4367; www.gemstreetusa.com.  when: march 2 to 4.  ventura, calif.  what: ventura gem show, (805) 648-4051; www.vgms.org.  when: march 3 and 4.  spokane, wash.  what: rocks & minerals of the northwest; www.amfed.org/nfms/shows.  when: march 9 to 11.  gaithersburg, md.  what: gem, lapidary & mineral society of montgomery county show; rockhounder.tripod.com.  when: march 10 and 11.  ahead | gem and mineral shows  