jury spares driver in smuggling deaths case   the truck driver who carried 19 illegal immigrants to their deaths in his suffocating trailer in 2003 was spared execution on thursday and sentenced instead to life in prison without parole.  in a punishment verdict after five days of deliberations, the federal jury that last month convicted the driver, tyrone m. williams, on all charges in the nation's deadliest human smuggling case rejected the government's calls for the death penalty but meted out the stiffest possible life sentence.  mr. williams, who turned 36 on thursday, reacted with impassivity but was hugged by his lawyers. his lead counsel, craig washington, wept -- ''tears of joy,'' he later said.  the foreman of the jury of seven women and five men said outside court that the death penalty had not been a close call.  ''we felt as a consensus, as a jury, he didn't deserve it,'' said the foreman, an airline worker and one of three jurors who agreed to be interviewed afterward but insisted that their names not be disclosed.  the united states attorney in houston, don degabrielle, said prosecutors respected the verdict.  ''we did everything we could to encourage them to impose a sentence of death,'' mr. degabrielle said, adding that ''19 sentences of life imprisonment were not something to be disappointed about.''  on one count of conspiracy, the jury left it up to judge lee h. rosenthal to impose sentence. she set aug. 23 for a sentencing hearing.  the lead prosecutor, daniel c. rodriguez, presented anguished testimony of survivors and argued that mr. williams was the only one who could have saved the victims. but mr. washington repeatedly questioned why mr. williams, the only major african-american defendant among the ring of human smugglers, should be singled out for execution when co-conspirators made deals to testify for the government.  mr. williams was convicted on dec. 4 of all 58 counts of human smuggling. mr. washington said he would appeal.  a first trial ended in march 2005 with the jury's finding of guilty on 38 counts but deadlocking on 20 others, including some eligible for death. the incomplete verdict was thrown out by the united states court of appeals for the fifth circuit.  evidence in both trials showed that mr. williams, a milk trucker and small-time drug dealer from schenectady, n.y., was recruited to transport at least 73 illegal immigrants from harlingen past a border patrol checkpoint, where they were to be transferred to a van and a pickup. but the other vehicles were blocked, and mr. williams was told to drive toward houston.  with the passengers punching air holes in the sweltering trailer, mr. williams halted in victoria, about 100 miles southwest of houston, where he opened the trailer's doors, provided bottles of water and fled.  along with the bodies of 19 victims, two of whom died later in the hospital, rescuers found 54 survivors. some others may have escaped.  in his final prosecution arguments in the sentencing phase, mr. rodriguez said mr. williams had committed ''acts of violence'' by using what he called ''in essence an unplugged refrigerator to transport these people.'' he said mr. williams had been motivated by ''the oldest reason in the world, greed.''  mr. washington, in his closing arguments, portrayed mr. williams as concerned about his riders once he realized their plight.  ''i think the question is intent,'' he said, arguing that the government had not proved ''that tyrone intended to kill these poor souls.''  and he said of the smuggling ringleaders: ''why aren't they facing the death penalty? they're all part of the conspiracy.''  jurors said they began each session of deliberations with 19 seconds of silence -- one for each victim.  