when a generation that paid its dues is asked to make one more payment   there are plenty of fault lines in american life -- black versus white, rich versus poor, north versus south. the ones between the generations are the ones we are often least likely to see, precisely because the people on opposite sides are often just like each other except for age.  so maybe there's just a disagreement over club dues at a well-to-do country club in the unpleasant little contretemps playing out at the sunningdale country club in scarsdale. maybe there's a glimpse of a generational divide that mostly plays out in private but this time has bubbled uncomfortably to the surface.  at issue, on one level, is something of interest to no one other than club members: should sunningdale continue a policy it has had for two decades of granting honorary memberships -- free of annual dues -- to its most venerable members, those who are over 80 and have been members for more than 50 years?  for some members, this policy has raised issues of trust and responsibility, of respect for age in a society relentlessly focused on youth, and on whether this is another topic where the world war ii generation looks a good deal more noble than the baby boomers who followed in their wake. the economic issues may have a clear-cut answer. the broader ones almost certainly do not.  sunningdale dates back to 1913. in 1987, as a show of respect and gratitude for the generation of members who came back from world war ii, joined the club and stayed loyal during the 1960s and 1970s when clubs fell out of favor, members adopted the system of honorary memberships. in a club with about 400 members, a $100,000 initiation fee and annual dues of about $15,000, there are now 37 honorary members, with another 18 members eligible for that status between now and 2010.  last march, the club's 20-member board, citing the potential for a ''staggering'' increase in honorary members, voted unanimously to end the honorary memberships. instead, members in that category will be expected to pay a quarter of the regular dues this year and then 50 percent after that. (at age 90, it goes back to 25 percent.)  ''the board of governors, which consists of a cross section of the membership, engaged in detailed analysis for over a year, taking into account the interests of the entire membership, and determined this was the most equitable approach,'' said stephen karotkin, a board member. the board acted after discussing the proposal with some longtime members and after consulting with five past presidents, all of whom supported it, he said.  but for many longtime members, the decision came like a bolt from the blue -- and a cruel one at that. several members said they felt betrayed, some casting the divide as very much greatest generation versus baby boom generation. one asked if it was a moral and ethical failing by younger members or ''merely another manifestation of the mcmansion generation.'' he added, ''from my viewpoint, that greatest generation is getting kicked in the tail.''  another wrote a letter to the club's president, patti sumergrade, which was sent to other senior members. ''some societies turn their elderly 'out into the desert to die,' but i don't expect that sunningdale wants to be one of them,'' he wrote. he said that though he won't quit if the policy is upheld, others might.  he and other critics of the new proposal said the club was prospering and did not need to make the change. some say that under any economic analysis, the decision has dubious merit because the honorary members mostly use the club for dining, which they pay for.  he went on: ''the torch has been passed to a new generation, and it is unusual for the torchbearer to burn the passer.''  members, it turns out, will get a chance to review the decision. one member has proposed a compromise that would grandfather in existing honorary members and those who were members for 25 years as of dec. 31, 2005, and eventually reach 50 years of membership and 80 years of age.  no doubt it's complicated, with people living longer and with 80 the new 70 or 65 or whatever modern medicine can provide. board members were clearly noting that given current demographic trends, you can be an honorary member for a very long time. but critics say the values aren't complicated at all -- that the sense of respect and gratitude expressed 20 years ago should be as valid today.  either way, we will no doubt hear more of this sort of thing. after all, many boomers now have their aarp cards and their new knees or hips, and that early-bird special, once grist for seinfeld humor, no longer seems nearly so far away.  our towns e-mail: peappl@nytimes.com  