odd couple ponder bid for tribune   they seem an unlikely pair: eli broad, the straight-talking billionaire whose art collection and philanthropic efforts to revitalize downtown los angeles have put him happily in the public eye, and ronald w. burkle, the supermarket mogul, democratic fund-raiser and f.o.b. (friend of bill clinton) who tries -- usually unsuccessfully -- to avoid publicity.  by tomorrow, the two men will decide whether their unlikely partnership should go forward in serious pursuit of the tribune company, owner of two dozen tv stations, the chicago cubs and 11 daily newspapers, including the chicago tribune, newsday and -- most important to mr. broad and mr. burkle -- the los angeles times.  but it is a sign of how unpredictable the ailing newspaper industry has become that as recently as yesterday, two days before the bids are due, the team led by mr. burkle and mr. broad was still analyzing company data to determine whether it would make an offer. their deliberations highlight the difficulty tribune could face in attracting any bid it deems satisfactory.  mr. burkle and mr. broad are being advised by ubs securities and frank biondi, the former chief executive of universal studios and viacom. lawyers and accountants spent the weekend looking over the financial information made available to them by tribune and trying to figure out how the financing would work.  the tribune sale has attracted interest largely from private equity players like the texas pacific group, providence equity partners and thomas h. lee. david geffen, the entertainment mogul, has also expressed interest in the times. another possible alliance could involve the chandler family, tribune's single largest shareholder, joining forces with another bidder, perhaps with mr. broad and mr. burkle, or possibly goldman sachs, which is acting as an adviser to the family.  any buyer looking to spin off some assets faces a daunting task: selling papers at a time when the future of the media business seems so uncertain. as a result, it is not clear how many or what kind of bids tribune will receive tomorrow.  ''you could make the case that trying to sell now is like selling condos in miami,'' said a tribune investor who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he did not want to criticize management. ''nobody wants to bid now because everyone thinks the price will be lower next week.''  at the times, several reporters have said privately that they prefer the idea of mr. geffen as the ultimate owner but that mr. broad and mr. burkle would most likely be preferable to a buyout firm that might cut costs further. still, reporters and editors are generally nervous about any new buyer, even billionaires who say they want to maintain high quality.  ''no gazillionaire got to that place without having sharp elbows and a big agenda,'' said one times reporter who spoke on the condition of anonymity because he did not want to offend any potential owner.  exactly what the agendas of mr. broad and mr. burkle might be -- and where their elbows might fly -- is difficult to measure. neither would comment. both have expressed interest in owning the times as a civic duty. but some people who know both men wonder whether they will be able to work together. mr. broad and mr. burkle have very little in common, they say. ''they are both interesting men, but they are from different worlds,'' said richard riordan, the former los angeles mayor. he has traveled with both men on a yacht leased by mr. broad in italy and greece.  neither man is part of the traditional hollywood studio crowd. when asked about the two, several studio executives said they did not know them or did not know them well.  in those circles, mr. burkle, 54, is best known for his friendship with stephen bing, the film producer who fathered a child with both the actress elizabeth hurley and kirk kerkorian's former wife, lisa. mr. burkle is also a political ally of mr. clinton and has allowed him to use his jet.  mr. burkle, say friends, strives for an everyman quality. he eschews fancy suits and instead opts to wear blue jeans and a polo shirt. he allows his mansion in beverly hills to be used for political fund-raisers and other events, including parties for entertainment executives.  mr. broad, by contrast, has few close friends, although mayor riordan said he and mr. broad have dinner often and talk weekly. he is more formal, wearing a suit and tie to meetings at his philanthropic foundation and other events.  mr. broad is plainspoken and direct. he made his first fortune with kaufman and broad -- now kb homes -- developing suburbs and his second one with sunamerica, the financial company he founded that is now part of the american international group.  mr. broad is a fine art collector and now engaged mostly in civic endeavors. he is also a trustee at the los angeles county museum of art.  mr. broad, 73, is older than mr. burkle and focused on the kind of legacy he wants to leave behind, said friends who know him. he does have some ties in the entertainment world. in the summer of 2005, mr. biondi and his wife, carol, joined mr. broad and his wife, edythe, on a yacht that visited greece and stopped in tel aviv, where william friedkin, who is now directing operas, was directing ''samson and delilah.'' mr. friedkin is married to sherry lansing, the former paramount chairwoman, with whom mr. broad is also friendly.  just what their ownership would mean for the los angeles times is unclear. they have said that they believe it is beneficial to have the times owned by more than a single owner, as mr. geffen would be. but beyond that they have given few clues about their strategy.  and mr. burkle recently had a highly publicized run-in with a reporter at the new york post. after getting no response to his complaints to the post's owner, rupert murdoch, about gossip on the paper's page six, mr. burkle videotaped a reporter, jared paul stern, in what mr. burkle described as an attempt to extort money from him to stop the stories. mr. stern was dismissed and is under federal investigation but has not been charged.  in other ways, mr. broad and mr. burkle have some complementary skills, especially when it comes to unionized employees. while the newsroom of the times is nonunion, its press operators voted earlier this month to be represented by the teamsters. mr. broad, in running his educational foundations, has publicly battled the teachers' union on issues like merit pay and school governance. mr. burkle, on the other hand, has an unusually strong record for working well with the unions. and he is a director of yahoo, suggesting he has more familiarity with the internet in an era when newspapers are trying desperately to migrate their content profitably to the web.  barry munitz, a trustee professor at california state university who also sits on the boards of several of mr. broad's foundations and was on the yacht trip in 2005, believes that the two men could work together. ''ron brings retail and technology skills to the table and eli has a strong financial network,'' mr. munitz said in a telephone interview on sunday. but those attributes may not be enough for the men to bid.  one big concern is that buying the tribune company, then splitting up the assets could mean an enormous tax burden. an executive working on the bid said lawyers and accountants for the two think they are close to working out the parameters.  there is a possibility, however, though that they will not make any offer or wait to see what the other bids are before making a decision.  ''they could bid at the last minute,'' said another executive involved in the talks between mr. broadand mr. burkle. ''but the question is, are people going to be interested in bidding at all?''  