two backs, one ball, no problem for saints   like many landmark moments in the history of this city, the phone call came just after the minestrone soup and just before the redfish.  caught between his appetizer and his entrée, sean payton answered the phone in the middle of emeril's restaurant last april 27. when he hung up, he simply pulled out a pen and started doodling on a cocktail napkin.  any of the patrons eating at emeril's that night could have peeked over at payton's napkin and seen the opening chapter of the new orleans saints' playbook.  payton, the saints' rookie head coach, had already diagrammed plays for one star tailback. but the phone call changed everything. now he had to diagram plays for two.  the dinner at emeril's has become part of saints' lore. it was there that payton first learned that the houston texans were passing on reggie bush in the draft, and it was there that payton first scribbled plays with both bush and deuce mcallister on the field.  no plays have been more important to the saints this season. with mcallister thundering through the middle of the field and bush bouncing from one sideline to the other, new orleans is heading to its first n.f.c. championship game sunday in chicago.  ''it's been very special,'' bush said. ''but it could have easily gone the other way.''  football teams with two top quarterbacks, two top tailbacks and two top receivers are often doomed. so last april 28, the day of the n.f.l. draft, as most of new orleans rejoiced in its sudden good fortune, bush and mcallister did not.  bush, one of the most celebrated draft picks in years, wondered about his playing time. mcallister, one of the most beloved players in saints' history, wondered about his job security. they were equally paranoid.  ''the first question you ask yourself is, 'what is going on?' '' mcallister said. ''why are the saints taking another running back?''  mcallister posed that very question in an off-season meeting with payton and general manager mickey loomis. he wanted to know how two tailbacks could co-exist. payton, a former offensive coordinator, answered in three words: ''everything can work.''  payton was busy studying the 2005 u.s.c. trojans, who managed to split one football among bush, tailback lendale white and quarterback matt leinart. at the end of the season, the players were all still friends, and they all became high draft picks.  payton already had quarterback drew brees as his leinart. he was going to use mcallister the same way southern california used white. bush, naturally, would play bush. n.f.l. coaches do not generally copy college teams, but the 2005 trojans were no ordinary college team.  ''it was very similar and very easy for me to adjust,'' bush said. ''deuce is a big bruiser-type back and i'm more of a scat back -- with some power.''  bush and mcallister had already learned to share. at u.s.c., bush often deferred to white. at ole miss, mcallister deferred to tailback joe gunn. when mcallister was drafted by the saints in 2001, he initially had to play behind ricky williams.  meeting bush for the first time, mcallister reflected on his experience with williams. mcallister is quiet by nature, but he did not want to treat bush the way williams had treated him. he did not want to seem aloof.  ''i didn't want reggie to feel the way i did as a rookie,'' mcallister said. ''ricky was hard to read. he was hard to get to know. i can't say he didn't teach me a lot, but it wasn't enough. there was so much more i had to learn on my own.''  this season, mcallister has come back from knee surgery, preserved his starting job and become a private tutor for bush. they are not necessarily the kind of friends who go out together, but they are the kind of friends who constantly exchange advice.  the saints are most exciting when both of them are in the game at the same time -- mcallister in the backfield and bush either in motion or in the slot or split out wide. one serves as a decoy for the other, just as one's success benefits the other.  when mcallister is pounding the line of scrimmage, exhausting the defense, it is easier for bush to break off one of his long sideline runs. and when bush is getting to the outside, spreading the defense, it is easier for mcallister to find running lanes between the tackles.  the best evidence came in the divisional playoff game saturday night against philadelphia. mcallister's signature play was a 5-yard touchdown run in which he carried about half the defense into the end zone. bush's signature play was a 25-yard run in which he ran completely across the field, taking advantage of a weary opponent.  ''the running back position is one in which you want as many touches as you can have,'' payton said. ''but what's most important is to find guys who want to win, whether it's 5 carries or 25 carries.''  by design or not, payton keeps the tailbacks equally involved. this season, mcallister has touched the ball 300 times; bush has touched the ball 289 times. mcallister has 1,418 total yards and 12 touchdowns; bush has 1,618 total yards and 10 touchdowns.  no one in the n.f.l. really doubted that bush could run outside, catch passes and return punts. what he has proved during these playoffs, though, is that he can come back from the kind of hit he never had to take at u.s.c.  on the second snap of saturday's game, bush was laid out by philadelphia's sheldon brown with one of the most vicious blows of the season. bush tried to get up, fell to his knees and crawled across the superdome floor.  for a moment, the bonus baby from southern california looked as though he might ask out. then he got up for good.  ''there have been a few times this year that reggie has done something big and i've looked over at deuce right afterward,'' said mike karney, the saints' fullback. ''he's always cheering.''  pro football  