new questions raised in bonds investigation   in december 2003, barry bonds testified before the grand jury investigating the balco steroid scandal. that grand jury expired without indicting him. bonds's case was hauled over to a second grand jury, which focused on whether he had perjured himself before the first grand jury. in july 2006, that grand jury also expired without an indictment. a third grand jury continued the investigation.  now the sudden resignation of kevin v. ryan, the united states attorney for the northern district of california, raises questions of what this will mean for bonds.  luke macaulay, the spokesman for the united states attorney's office here, would not comment on a specific case, but he wrote in an e-mail message, ''the u.s. attorney has established an infrastructure with institutional knowledge that should allow for the office's cases to continue moving forward.''  bonds's lawyer, michael rains, however, said he was optimistic. ''it's almost a forgone conclusion that the scope of the balco case will change dramatically,'' he said. ''it bodes well for barry.''  it was announced tuesday that 5 to 10 federal prosecutors are being removed by the justice department. a conservative republican who has been criticized for poor managerial skills, ryan has not announced when his resignation will take effect.  the balco investigation has been a high-profile case for much of ryan's four-year tenure as united states attorney. last year, four men involved in steroid distribution pleaded guilty and were given what were considered light sentences. but bonds's former trainer, greg anderson, who pleaded guilty and was sentenced to three months in prison, remains jailed for his refusal to talk about bonds.  mark geragos, the lawyer for anderson, said, ''one would hope that a new u.s. attorney would take a fresh look and recognize it's an exercise in futility because he's never going to talk.'' geragos said that anderson's imprisonment ''is nothing but punitive.''  robert weisberg, a professor of law at stanford university law school and head of its criminal justice center, said, ''i don't think anybody could describe what's happened in the balco case as efficacious.''  a new prosecutor may question how many more years and how many more resources would be required to indict bonds. weisberg said prosecutors may avoid an indictment by coming up with a social solution, a quiet bargain that would preserve hank aaron's career home run record: if the federal government drops its investigation of bonds, he would agree to retire.  ''that office has too much invested in balco,'' said peter keane, dean of the golden gate university school of law here. ''i think balco will continue pretty much in the same way it's been going.  ''balco will be bopping around for quite awhile.''  pirates trade for laroche -- the pirates' two-month wait to try to acquire atlanta first baseman adam laroche ended wednesday when they agreed to acquire him from the braves for the left-handed closer mike gonzalez and another player.  the trade will be announced after physicals are completed, according to a baseball official familiar with the negotiations who requested anonymity because the deal was still being completed. the teams will also exchange minor leaguers who played in class a last season.  the 27-year-old laroche hit .285 with 32 homers and 90 runs batted in last season. gonzalez, who will be 29 in may, was 3-4 with a 2.17 earned run average last season and was 24 for 24 in save conversions until missing the final five weeks of the season with a sore left elbow. (ap)  rangers offer sosa contract -- texas has offered a minor league contract to the free-agent outfielder sammy sosa.  the rangers said they offered sosa a one-year, $500,000 deal and ''significant incentives'' and were waiting for a response from sosa's agent, adam katz. (reuters)  baseball: roundup  correction:  january 20, 2007, saturday  a report in the baseball roundup on thursday about the status of the bay area laboratory co-operative steroids investigation misstated the number of men who have pleaded guilty and been sentenced in the case. it is five, not four. the article also gave an outdated academic position for peter keane, who commented on the outlook for the case. he is a law professor at golden gate university school of law in san francisco; he is no longer the dean of the law school.  