the kids are all hype, and hope   there is an insatiable public curiosity for teenage prodigies who can convincingly play dress-up as adults and schedule play dates with david beckham or ernie els.  freddy adu and michelle wie are only 17, but they have been attracting attention for years, outlasting bennifer and vanilla coke and the hummer, all while cashing in on society's youth culture currency.  their gold rush to adulthood has been unsettling, if perfectly understandable, because sizzle factor does not age well in the era of adolescent powerball.  but how long does the window for little darlings remain open?  as the soccer player who arrived to rouse the american game at age 14, adu became a teenage millionaire before he was knee-high to a header. he would be the face of american soccer. everyone said so.  with a 300-yard golf swing ideal for clearing forests, wie captured everyone's imagination when she materialized as a 13-year-old in bangle earrings, a fairway gender bender of dogleg proportions. she was destined to change everything. everyone said so.  right now, adu is on his second major league soccer team, real salt lake, after grousing over playing time in d.c. and sparring with his coach. when he turns 18, he may bolt the beckham-dizzy m.l.s. for europe in a vamoose, potentially vanishing from the american landscape before his first bar tab.  he wouldn't exit as a victim of burnout, but as a casualty of impatience. wie is in a much more precarious position. her impatience could lead to burnout.  impetuosity is a wie family trait. wie could fan a poker hand out of the caddies she and her father, b. j., have fired over the past three years. she is on her second executive handler at the william morris agency. and, as she enters her second pro season with off-the-course earnings projected to be about $20 million, she has been barnstorming the world on a lucrative appearance schedule that has left her weary, ailing game in regression.  she is farther away from the men on the pga cut line than ever after finishing near the bottom at last weekend's sony open on her home course in hawaii.  ''it is very natural that some sports and golf reporters want to write about michelle's recent struggles in golf and try to identify what has gone wrong with michelle, her management team and her career path,'' b. j. wie wrote in an e-mail message last night from melbourne, australia, where the family is on vacation at the australian open. ''unfortunately, she has struggled in most of the men's tournaments she has played in over the last year, except the sk telecom open and u.s. open qualifying in 2006. but i can assure that her poor performance has nothing to do with either time commitments for her sponsors or her management team.''  he didn't specify an alternative explanation for her six-month swoon, but it is not unreasonable to question michelle wie's bottom-line choice: her decision to continue playing against men right now.  this is not about surrendering her dream, but about wie's persevering confidence in a sport that leaves divots in players' self-esteem. psyche is everything on a tee box. and with every bogey at a men's event, the scrutiny on wie increases and fickle bloggers sharpen their keystrokes.  ''everyone needs to back up and give her a chance to breathe,'' said jill smoller, head of the sports marketing team at the william morris agency. ''allow her to grow.''  there is no doubt wie deserves a margin for error -- she's a wonderful talent, with a refreshing personality -- but her schedule selection is curious.  playing against men has made wie distinct, famous and wealthy. is she afraid of losing any part of that if she disappears on the stanford campus or becomes a steadier fixture on the l.p.g.a. tour?  as it is, the pga novelty has worn thin around wie, not for the adoring galleries, but for her male peers. they don't utter a word of disdain anymore, just indifference.  ''it used to be, you know, when she was 14 and she got in this event for the first time, it raised eyes and you heard guys grumbling and it was such a bigger deal,'' jim furyk told reporters at the sony open, adding: ''i don't hear guys talking about it anymore. there's not like a buzz in the locker room, 'what's she shooting?' or anything like that.''  apathy is the enemy of celebrity superstars. and like most, wie likes attention. her family did not pick an athlete rep but a hollywood talent factory when it chose william morris, which has a historic client list that includes everyone from clark gable to john travolta.  serena williams is also one of its clients. if wie watched williams at the australian open this week, she witnessed a cautionary tale of a player who rushed to have it all, craving celebrity as much as victory.  three years ago, when it was suggested to williams that almost anyone would find difficulty living on a hollywood lot and in tennis reality, she responded as only she would: ''first and foremost, i am not most people.''  wie seems to believe she can do it all, too, if in a very different way. she isn't into the hollywood scene, but she is all about defining her fame against men. she can't wait to play another pga event. everyone can respect her goal to play among men, but let's hope impatience doesn't burn out brilliance.  sports of the times e-mail: selenasports@nytimes.com  