potential jurors queried on views of bush administration   the perjury trial of i. lewis libby jr. began tuesday with his lawyers trying to eliminate as jurors anyone who might have strongly negative feelings about the bush administration in general and vice president dick cheney in particular.  mr. libby, who was the vice president's chief of staff, is facing five felony counts charging that he lied to f.b.i. agents and to a grand jury investigating who leaked the name of a central intelligence agency operative and why. judge reggie m. walton, who is presiding over the case in federal district court, has said he hopes to have the jury in place for opening statements on monday.  the first day of jury selection on tuesday went slowly, with only nine potential jurors interviewed. two of them were excused by judge walton after they made it clear they were critics of the administration and mr. cheney.  one woman lasted barely 40 seconds on the witness stand before she was dismissed. she said ''nothing that could be said here'' would make her believe anything good about the administration. another man, after about 15 minutes, acknowledged that his low regard for mr. cheney might figure into how he evaluated his testimony if it was in conflict with other witnesses.  mr. cheney is expected to be one of the star witnesses for the defense.  mr. libby's lawyers, theodore v. wells and william h. jeffress jr., also explored whether potential jurors were open to one of their main lines of argument: that if mr. libby gave incorrect answers to the federal bureau of investigation and the grand jury, it could have been a simple case of faulty memory.  they asked the potential jurors if they ever had the experience of believing something had happened only to learn later that they had remembered it incorrectly. they also asked if two people gave ''different accounts of a conversation they had,'' did that necessarily mean one of the participants was lying.  after the name of the c.i.a. officer, valerie wilson -- who was known by her maiden name, valerie plame -- appeared in a column by robert d. novak in july 2003, patrick j. fitzgerald was named as a special prosecutor to investigate the leak.  mr. fitzgerald looked into who leaked ms. wilson's name, whether it violated the law against disclosing the identities of c.i.a. officers and whether the disclosure was devised to punish her husband, joseph c. wilson iv. days before the column appeared, mr. wilson, a former ambassador, asserted in a commentary in the new york times that the administration had knowingly distorted intelligence about saddam hussein's efforts to obtain nuclear material to help the case for going to war in iraq.  the indictment of mr. libby charges that he lied when he said he did not discuss ms. wilson's identity in conversations with two reporters. the two reporters, judith miller, formerly of the new york times, and matthew cooper of time magazine, testified that mr. libby had, in fact, discussed ms. wilson and her employment at the c.i.a.  mr. libby's defense is that those two reporters' memories of their conversations may not be accurate. and, even if they were, mr. libby, also mr. cheney's national security adviser, was preoccupied with far weightier issues than ms. wilson's identity.  potential jurors were also asked if they believed that the administration distorted intelligence to bolster the case for war with iraq.  