crew sensed trouble seconds before crash   seventeen seconds before the crash last august of a comair flight that took off from the wrong runway in lexington, ky., the co-pilot made an odd comment, the first indication that the crew knew something was wrong.  ''dat is weird with no lights,'' said the co-pilot, james m. polehinke, according to a transcript from the plane's cockpit voice recorder released wednesday by the national transportation safety board.  ''yeah,'' replied the captain, jeffrey a. clay. but at that point, the plane was approaching 115 miles an hour as it accelerated down the runway.  in the predawn darkness, the pilots of the regional jet had taxied onto runway 26, which is 3,500 feet long and was closed except for daytime operations by private planes; it should have been on runway 22, which is 7,000 feet long. the co-pilot had confirmed the runway assignment to the tower controller about four minutes earlier.  the main runway was lighted at the sides and in the center; the lights on runway 26 were off.  the safety board is months away from reaching formal conclusions about what led to the mistake that killed 47 passengers, the lone flight attendant, and captain clay. (mr. polehinke suffered brain damage and other major injuries, and has said he does not remember the takeoff.)  one possibility is that the pilots did not get enough sleep before the 6 a.m. flight; the transcript notes that some comments recorded in the cockpit were spoken in ''yawning'' tones. the men were due at the airport at 5:15 a.m. that sunday; cellphone records show a call by the co-pilot before 9 on saturday night, and by the captain before 9:30. they had arrived at the hotel in lexington about 2:10 a.m. saturday.  the co-pilot ordered two beers with dinner at 6:30 p.m. saturday, in violation of the 12-hour limit required by the airline, but he tested negative for alcohol after the crash.  during the takeoff, right after mr. polehinke, at the controls, made his comment, captain clay followed the normal takeoff routine. he noted when the plane's speed reached 100 knots, or 115 miles per hour. then he said, ''rotate,'' the signal for mr. polehinke to begin liftoff.  then, less than 16 seconds after the ''weird'' comment, the captain said, ''whoa.'' less than a second later, he used an expletive. the sound of the crash came less than two seconds later.  the plane was still on the ground when it reached the end of the runway; it hit a berm and became airborne until it hit trees, the report said.  aside from pilot fatigue, another issue is control tower staffing; only one controller was on duty. in a handwritten statement released wednesday, the controller said that he had watched the plane, a bombardier crj-100 operating as a delta connection flight, taxi toward the runways but did not see which one it came to because he had turned around to complete some paperwork.  the federal aviation administration has been seeking to cut its labor costs and align controllers' work schedules more closely to traffic patterns. this controller had more duties assigned to him than the agency's policy allows.  both pilots had been to lexington before, but because of construction there were changes to the taxiway.  