marbury is the patron saint of sensible sneakers   went to the mall this week and purchased my first pair of starburys, white low tops with many air holes in the front, paper balled up inside, the nickname of a wealthy n.b.a. player printed in the arch, and all for the unbelievably discounted price of $9.98.  ''thought they were $15,'' i said to the sales clerk at steve & barry's, the manufacturer and exclusive seller of the starbury one brand.  ''that's the basketball high tops,'' she said. ''you've got the crossover.''  which presumably means i can use my starburys to continue hitting backhands into the net, read paul krugman and maureen dowd on the lifecycle at the y or to make a fashion statement tonight when my new sole man, stephon marbury, and the knicks welcome jason kidd and the nets to madison square garden.  the knicks dropped a heartbreaker in washington on wednesday night, and marbury missed 75 percent of the shots he took. but his defense on gilbert arenas, the wizards' scoring magician, was intense, and he had 8 assists and banked in a layup in the final minute. his resurgence and improved commitment to team increasingly acknowledged, i'm confident i can wear my starburys around without having to drape a towel over my head.  of course, it was before a showdown with kidd two years ago that marbury, never what you would call news-media savvy, made himself a public piñata by declaring, ''i know i'm the best point guard in the n.b.a.'' in first place at the time, the knicks lost 18 of 21 games, lenny wilkens departed as the coach, larry brown eventually arrived and marbury sank deeper into his grand starbury delusion.  even when he deserved the garden booing that was as automatic as the national anthem, i found myself pulling newsprint punches, having once sat with marbury when he was a skinny lincoln high school freshman, listening to him promise to lift his family from grinding coney island poverty after three older basketball-playing brothers could not. who wouldn't grow up chronically sullen under such family pressure?  maybe that's why he continued to extol himself even when personal and team performance screamed failure. you want credibility, bud? the bottom line is in the bank.  but these days, more than a star, marbury has the aura of a survivor -- of the projects, of brown and, most of all, of himself. he was once promoted with the n.b.a. elite, owning a lucrative deal with and 1, endorsing high-end sneakers in the image of the godfather, michael jordan. now marbury is working on commission, according to andy todd, the president of the steve & barry's chain.  ''his message is that kids should not equate self-worth with the price of a sneaker,'' todd said in a telephone interview, casting marbury as the basketball ralph nader.  his social statement was borne of reduced q-score reality, but many of the people apparently hearing him don't know that or care. according to todd, the initial month's supply of the starbury sneakers sold out in three days and did a brisk holiday business. grandmothers hugged marbury on the promotional tour. lines snaked outside stores.  confirming that the sneakers struck a chord, created a buzz, was neil weilheimer, the executive editor of the weekly footwear news trade magazine, which named the starbury one brand its launch of the year last month. weilheimer said in an interview: ''because steve & barry's is a private company, it doesn't release actual sales numbers. but industry sources told me that they sold about a million pair with a relatively small -- $550,000 -- promotional budget.''  what do the numbers mean? ''a million sold sounds a little high to me, but in a $16.7 billion business, even $15 million from the starbury brand would be a drop in the ocean, frankly, a nonevent,'' said matt powell of sportsonesource, a firm in princeton, n.j., that studies the sporting goods industry. ''by comparison, air force one from nike is about to celebrate its 25th birthday, and it sells more than 10 million a year at $85 a pair.''  but what if this is simply the start of what todd and the steve & barry's people wishfully call ''the movement''? this week, dallas's maverick owner and business maven, mark cuban, told the new york post that convincing young people that it's hip and cool to buy an inexpensive sneaker would amount to a groundbreaking ''cultural change.''  todd said that the success of the sneaker wasn't necessarily tied to performance; it sold last summer and fall, when marbury's basketball reputation had more or less bottomed out. but he agreed that it wouldn't hurt if marbury (who wears his brand of shoe or, as powell surmised, some enhanced version) demonstrated long term that he finally got the point guard credo, as practiced all these years by the greats of the game -- kidd, for whom marbury was traded by the nets, and by steve nash, who replaced marbury in phoenix and who will be at the garden on wednesday.  kidd and nash are the ones who understand, as marbury's coach and confidant, isiah thomas, recently said, ''that if you truly want to win, then you can accept not always having to be the main reason when you do.''  can marbury happily grow older feeding eddy curry in the post, deferring as he has in recent weeks to other hot hands while getting his shots in the flow?  can starbury thrive not being the one?  if he can, then maybe, as powell said, ''they'll ask, like mars blackmon, 'is it the shoes?' '' at those prices, we would be tempted to say, yes it is.  sports of the times e-mail: hjaraton@nytimes.com  