unlikely pairing, on and off court, helps energize nets   mikki moore and hassan adams are separated by nine years in age, eight inches in height and eight seasons in n.b.a. experience. they were born on opposite coasts of the united states.  what they share, however, trumps those differences.  each time they step onto the basketball court for the nets, moore, 31, and adams, 22, display a similar brand of athleticism, grit and energy, qualities that have created a mutual admiration between them and have been the foundation for their good friendship away from the game.  in addition to discussing basketball, moore and adams play video games (mostly the ''shoot-em-up'' kind, moore said), discuss their musical tastes (moore favors dirty south rap, while adams likes the west coast sound) and hang out at nightclubs.  moore described their relationship with a phrase from the urban lexicon. ''real recognize real,'' he said. ''hard workers recognize hard workers.''  adams said: ''mikki's personality, what he brings to the court, is similar to me. so i try to feed off him because he's a vet. he cares about me, he cares about my best interests.''  this tandem has infused the nets with energy during times when the team has appeared flat. they are perhaps the two surprise players of the season for the team.  ''he's trying to prove that he deserves to be here, because he's young,'' moore said of adams. ''i'm trying to prove that i deserve a multiyear deal.''  adams, a 6-foot-4 swingman from inglewood, calif., was the 54th pick in last summer's n.b.a. draft, but one could make the argument that he has been as important to the nets as their two first-round picks, marcus williams and josh boone. adams is seventh among rookies in points per 48 minutes.  adams may have reason to feel slighted for falling so deep in the draft. his offense is more developed than some may give him credit for. he was third in the pacific-10 in scoring at 17.5 points a game during his senior season at arizona. he also led the conference in steals.  adams's off-the-court problems may have scared away some teams. in 2005, he was charged with a misdemeanor for disorderly conduct. and last march, he was arrested and charged with drunken driving and speeding. he was found not guilty.  as a net, adams is anything but a primary scorer. his points usually come off plays that have broken down or in transition. he often throws down emphatic dunks. adams seems to understand that he is not a first option and that there are games when he may not play.  ''one thing we was talking about was some guys can't handle being the man in high school, being the man in college, and then coming to the n.b.a. and having to start all over again,'' moore said. ''but he understands that.''  moore, a native of orangeburg, s.c., is a credible source for advice on making it in the n.b.a. few players have experienced a blue-collar journey like his.  after playing at nebraska, moore began his professional career by getting cut from the minnesota timberwolves in training camp. he spent two seasons in the continental basketball association and a season playing in greece.  he then played sparingly with the detroit pistons for four seasons, before stints in boston, atlanta, new jersey (he is in his second stint with the nets), utah, the los angeles clippers and seattle.  moore had left the pistons during the 2001-2 season by paying $500,000 to get out of his contract, allowing him to spend a part of each of the next two seasons with the roanoke dazzle of the developmental league. it was a turning point, moore said.  ''at the time, i wasn't playing, i was just getting paid,'' he said. ''that's when i found out money isn't what i'm playing for. i went to the minor leagues and those were the two happiest years in my life because i had the green light. i got to do whatever i wanted to do on the floor and i made other players better. i built up that confidence again.''  ever since the nets' starting center, nenad krstic, went down last month with a torn anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee, moore has been making his case for the most improved player award. he has tied or surpassed his previous career high of 18 points three times this season. his scoring, rebounding and minutes played this season are well above his career averages.  coach lawrence frank said that adams could learn from moore.  ''what mikki has done is, through work, his skill level has increased every year, and that's what hassan will have to continue to do,'' frank said.  adams already seems to have taken notice of moore's mantra.  ''stay hungry, that's the biggest thing he always tells me,'' adams said. ''you can tell that he loves the game, he loves to win. he likes to give maximum effort.''  pro basketball  