williams shakes off rust and fifth-seeded petrova for a fourth-round visit   it was an unexpected joy ride on the relearning curve for serena williams in the third round of the australian open.  after struggling to sustain an extended rally in the opening set against the fifth-seeded nadia petrova of russia, after falling behind by 3-5 in the second, williams summoned the controlled power and belief of grand slams past with some help from an edgy petrova and roared back to win, 1-6, 7-5, 6-3.  it was as if you could see the rust dissolving, as williams, who has played only two tournaments in the past five months, found her feet and her range on the court where she won the australian open in 2003 and 2005.  ''i wasn't surprised,'' williams said. ''i think if you put your mind to it, you can do anything. i was just out there and playing my game. like i always said, if i play my game and play the way i know i can, then it's tough to beat me.''  she is now back in the fourth round, where she will face 11th-seeded jelena jankovic of serbia, a 6-3, 6-4 winner over victoria azarenka of belarus.  once the world's dominant and most intimidating player, williams has slumped to 81st in the rankings and was knocked out of a warmup event in hobart, tasmania this month by the undistinguished austrian sybille bammer in the quarterfinals.  but williams, even overweight and very short on matches after an emotional off-season, can still generate world-class pace with her serve and groundstrokes. the surprise, for anyone who saw her spraying forehands and breathing hard between points in the early going, was that she was able to control that power and cover the court effectively in the final hour of the match against one of the world's top players.  ''well, i really had no other option than for my game to go up,'' williams said. ''i was down, 3-5, and on the verge of being out of the tournament, and i obviously didn't want that to happen. i felt like i was playing well. i felt like i just wasn't making my shots or just barely missing them. i told myself just to stay in there, and it would come together, sooner hopefully than later.''  the defending women's champion, amélie mauresmo, also advanced to the fourth round on friday with a 6-3, 6-1 victory over eva birnerova. third-seeded svetlana kuznetsova defeated maria kirilenko, 6-1, 6-4.  on thursday, the unseeded american ashley harkleroad surprised no. 17 anna-lena groenefeld of germany, 6-2, 6-2, to reach the third round. another american, robby ginepri, earned a third-round match with his good friend james blake by defeating the german qualifier mischa zverev in straight sets. rafael nadal of spain had to hustle and improvise until 1:30 a.m. before winning, 7-5, 6-3, 4-6, 6-2, against the german philipp kohlschreiber, who hardly looked intimidated against the world's no. 2 player, nailing two short passing shots straight at nadal's head.  petrova, who has won only one of her seven matches against williams, was hardly deferential to the williams sisters on the eve of her match, telling foxsports.com that the good players no longer feared them and that, ''it looks like everything is leading to the end of their career because they are quite busy; they have talks shows, books, and clothing lines.''  but it is williams who will be busier with tennis here now. playing in cool conditions under a closed roof in rod laver arena helped her cause (it was raining outside), but williams also helped herself with aggressive returning and effective serving. after putting 53 percent of her first serves in play in the opening set, which she lost in just 29 minutes, she was over 60 percent the rest of the way and finished with 11 aces, three in her final two service games.  ''they've always been tough competitors, her and her sister,'' said petrova, striking a radically different post-match tone. ''i also find that they usually have a bit of a struggle in the first rounds against average players. whenever they have to play a tough opponent, they are raising their game, and they feel a bit more free and are going for the shots.''  those who believe williams no longer cares about tennis, with all her outside interests and questionable practice habits, should review video of the final two sets as she flexed her biceps, growled as she chased down drop shots and shrieked with delight that looked more like release. one can only imagine how well she might cover the court if she could return to her ideal playing weight.  ''i'm definitely getting closer,'' williams said. ''i feel like there's some more balls that i would like to get, but i feel like i'm definitely moving a lot better. my legs are feeling a lot better, so i'm not worried.''  it has been a long time since williams, the perennial favorite, pulled off an upset, but this victory qualifies, even if she held a 5-1 career edge on petrova coming into the match. williams had not beaten a top 10 player since beating lindsay davenport in the 2005 final here. ''has it been that long?'' williams said. ''that's a terrible stat. my god.''  petrova won five tournaments in 2006, rising as high as no. 3 in the rankings, as williams made a part-time return to the tour after health and motivational problems. but the powerful, cosmopolitan russian, who spent part of her childhood in egypt, had an inconsistent season in grand slam events, with her best result coming with a run to the quarterfinals here.  a fluid athlete with a technically sound serve and an all-court game, petrova remains emotionally volatile, as she underscored by failing to serve out the match at 5-4 in the second set and then double faulting to lose her serve and the set.  she had rallied from a 0-3 deficit to reel off five straight games before williams recovered. williams maintained her high level in the mood-swinging final set, in which the players exchanged early breaks of serve before williams took control of the match with petrova serving at 2-3.  at deuce, petrova pushed forward and hit a weak approach shot that williams pounded for a backhand winner, leaving petrova pounding the side of her head with her racket strings. on break point, williams hit another backhand passing shot winner off a much more convincing shot, then celebrated by leaning back from the waist, screaming, with her right fist clenched and neck muscles bulging.  ''stay focused, stay focused,'' williams said to herself in the next game, and she did, finishing off her post-match fete by saying, ''hi dad! call me!'' into the camera to her father, richard williams.  ''i haven't been able to reach him for a few days,'' williams said later. ''i know he's watching.''  tennis  