in new jersey, a collision between water, money and politics   by his own admission, michael natale is just a small-time homebuilder who wants to get back the nearly $3 million he paid for 112 acres of land in sparta, about half an hour from here.  the trouble is that less than a year after mr. natale bought the property in 2003, the state passed a sweeping law, the highlands water protection and planning act, aimed at protecting the watershed in northern new jersey.  and it turns out that sparta, in sussex county, is partly in the preservation area, where building has been severely curtailed, making it impossible for mr. natale to build 20 new houses on his land as he had planned.  ''i'd move on if i could be compensated,'' mr. natale said last week at a public hearing to review the proposed highlands master plan. ''all i'm doing is running in place now.''  mr. natale, who wore a shirt that said ''families need homes'' at the hearing, is one of hundreds of thousands of new jersey residents caught in this collision between water, money and politics -- a familiar face-off being played out in other parts of the country. in deciding to preserve the watershed and the water supply, new jersey lawmakers made choices that were bound to reduce the value of some privately held land.  the highlands council, a 15-member body created by the act, is now putting the final details on the development guidelines for the 859,000 acres in the area, which covers one-ninth of the state. the council has promised to compensate owners whose land has lost value from the rezoning through a program that allows them to trade their development rights, but so far, no redress program has been created and no money has been set aside.  developers, farmers and large landholders said they were not opposed to protecting the environment but argued that they were being asked to shoulder a disproportionate share of the cost because they had the misfortune to buy their land before the act passed in 2004 and were now unfairly restricted in what they could do.  preservation debates like this one are raging across the country as sprawling cities and suburbs gobble up more farmland, woodlands and water basins. but rarely have the stakes been as high as in new jersey, the country's most densely populated state. recent droughts have heightened the urgency for watershed protection, especially with the state expected to add 600,000 residents this decade.  ''you won't find anything larger in proximity to a growing metropolitan area,'' said robert j. pirani, the director for environmental programs at the regional plan association, a nonprofit group that studies development and transportation issues. ''the highlands are the fault line between the water supply and other critical infrastructure, and development and housing.''  other states like new york have been more aggressive than new jersey in preserving their water supplies. indeed, the debate over protecting the highlands in new jersey started a century ago but regulation had been put off repeatedly.  lawmakers had dragged their feet partly because the atlantic highlands, which stretch into new york, pennsylvania and connecticut, are so vast. in new jersey, the region supplies water to more than 5 million people, or 65 percent of the state's residents, as well as some of its biggest employers, including merck and prudential financial.  five towns are entirely in the preservation area, where development has been largely halted. portions of 47 other towns, including sparta, also fall in the preservation area. another 36 towns are in the so-called planning area, where town government officials can choose whether to conform with the master plan. many towns are grappling with new environmental standards that, in some cases, will require them to rewrite their zoning laws.  while more than half the land in the highlands is already developed or protected under older environmental laws, developers, homeowners and environmentalists are struggling over the 300,000 acres that is still undeveloped or unprotected. environmentalists who spoke here last week, some wearing stickers with phrases like ''got water?'', said the draft of the highlands master plan released in november did not go far enough to preserve the land.  indeed, thanks to exemptions in the current plan, about 50,000 more homes could go up in the highlands, the regional plan association said.  ''development, development and more development is no way to protect the water supply,'' said mike herson, highlands issues coordinator for the new jersey chapter of the sierra club. ''we already live on top of the water supply in new jersey.''  curtailing development, though, comes at a cost. big builders also oppose the highlands act because it limits where they can build and could lead to fewer construction jobs. still, those companies have the resources to find land elsewhere.  individual landowners and independent developers like mr. natale, however, have far smaller financial margins for error. in some cases, they say, the zoning changes could drive them out of business.  kurt alstede, a member of the highlands council, is sympathetic to their plight and voted against the master plan because it did not do enough to compensate the landowners. ''you can't expect people who have been here to bear the cost of changing the rules,'' he said. ''the plan was thrust on them.''  until the council finds a way for landowners to recoup the development value on their property, they will have little recourse except to sell their property on the open market or to a conservation group -- in all likelihood, for less than they paid for it. some landowners are now talking about suing the state, arguing that the law is unconstitutional because it has so diminished their property value that it amounts to an uncompensated ''taking.''  the legal principles of eminent domain in cases where private land is taken outright by a state are relatively clear. but in the highlands case, the state is not taking title to the land. as a result, courts are likely to rule that while some land prices may have fallen in the preservation area, property holders still retain some value, so the state is not obligated to repay them in full, according to armando carbonell, the chairman of the department of planning and urban form at the lincoln institute of land policy, a nonprofit research group in cambridge, mass.  the highlands council members regularly hear heartbreaking stories from landowners and admit that some people are bound to lose money as a result of the law.  ''anytime there's change and uncertainty, people are nervous,'' said dante di pirro, the executive director of the highlands council.  but mr. di pirro said the council hoped to establish a program that would allow property owners to transfer development credits from their land to builders elsewhere, like programs already in place in southern new jersey and on long island, where the credits have become increasingly valuable. in the pine barrens on long island, for instance, some credits have jumped fivefold during the past decade, according to ray corwin of the central pine barrens commission.  there is no money yet to start such a program in the highlands.  even so, the act states that for the purposes of compensating landowners, property must be assessed at pre-act prices. but that is only a starting point for negotiations.  the regional plan association estimates that new jersey will need to find an additional $1 billion to pay for development rights and land acquisitions between now and 2014, a large amount in a state with big fiscal problems.  to help bridge that gap, the sierra club has suggested that residents outside the highlands who get their water from the watershed -- including those in newark and elsewhere in northeastern new jersey -- pay a water tax to help compensate those affected by the rezoning.  in the meantime, douglas medaugh, who in 2000 bought 14.5 acres of land in rockaway township, which is partly in the preservation area, said he may be prohibited from breaking up his land into smaller plots to build a second home for his son.  ''i'm not a polluter and i like clean water, too,'' mr. medaugh said. ''but i would think with 14.5 acres, i should be able to subdivide, too. my life is on hold.''  