arts, briefly   historians appeal 'da vinci code' case  the two historians who lost their plagiarism case against the british publishers of the best seller ''the da vinci code'' by dan brown, above left, turned to the court of appeal in britain yesterday in an effort to reverse their loss in a case that also saddles them with a legal bill of more than $2 million, the associated press reported. lawyers for the historians, michael baigent, center, and richard leigh, argued that the ''vast amount of skill and labor'' they expended in writing their book ''the holy blood and the holy grail,'' first published in 1982, is ''protectable.'' they contend that mr. brown stole significant parts of it for his novel. both books are based on the theory that jesus and mary magdalene married and had a child, and that the bloodline continues to this day. in april, justice peter smith ruled that random house had not breached the copyright of ''the holy blood and the holy grail,'' and mr. baigent and mr. leigh were ordered to pay 85 percent of random house's legal bill, estimated at $2.6 million. in a statement, random house expressed regret ''that more time and money is being spent trying to establish a case that was so comprehensively defeated in the high court.''  new life for prokofiev's 'romeo and juliet'  prokofiev's ballet ''romeo and juliet,'' featuring that composer's original score and scenario and danced to new choreography by mark morris, below, will be given its world premiere at the bard college 2008 summerscape festival. an announcement yesterday from the college and the mark morris dance group said the production, described as the first according to the composer's instructions, would be based on documents brought to light from the russian state archive of literature and art in moscow by the princeton university musicologist simon morrison. the new ''romeo and juliet,'' commissioned by the fisher center at bard college to be performed by the mark morris dance group and the american symphony orchestra, led by leon botstein, will include six new dance numbers, 15 minutes of new music and a radically different ending to the ballet, which was conceived in 1935 and changed to meet the demands of soviet cultural officials.  settlement reported in london art fire  tens of millions of dollars in secret payouts have been made to artists, collectors and insurance companies by momart, the company that operated a london art-storage warehouse devastated by fire in 2004, the guardian of london reported. the payments were made in an out-of-court settlement reached last summer in response to a class-action lawsuit that contended that momart had been negligent. among the works destroyed were dozens by emblematic young british artists like damien hirst, tracey emin, chris ofili and jake and dinos chapman, as well as many by patrick heron, one of the most important 20th-century british painters. mark dalrymple, the loss adjuster for momart, said he could not comment on the settlement, and momart also refused to comment, the guardian reported.  dupont-columbia awards  reports on bob dylan, hurricane katrina, international traffic in nuclear secrets and casualties of the war in iraq are among the winners of the 2007 alfred i. dupont-columbia university awards for broadcast journalism. the 14 winners, chosen from 526 radio and television news entries that were broadcast from july 1, 2005, to june 30, 2006, are to receive silver batons in ceremonies tonight at columbia university. american masters and wnet new york won for ''bob dylan: no direction home,'' a four-hour pbs documentary directed by martin scorsese, above. nbc news, the only network news operation to win an award, was honored for coverage of hurricane katrina by its ''nightly news with brian williams'' and ''dateline.'' the discovery times channel, canadian broadcasting corporation and the new york times won for ''nuclear jihad: can terrorists get the bomb?,'' a report on how the pakistani scientist a. q. khan changed the balance of international nuclear weaponry. hbo and the filmmakers jon alpert and matthew o'neill were honored for ''baghdad er,'' a documentary about a war hospital. other winners included reports on the aids crisis, arab-israeli peace negotiations, north korean refugees and poverty on cape cod in massachusetts.  footnotes  the bass-baritone thomas quasthoff, below, suffering from a bronchial infection, has been forced to cancel his appearance at carnegie hall with the philadelphia orchestra on tuesday, carnegie hall has announced. mahler's ''kindertotenlieder'' will no longer be performed, but bruckner's symphony no. 9 remains on the program. remaining repertory is to be announced. the irish poet and nobel laureate seamus heaney has been named the winner of the t. s. eliot prize for poetry. in london, mr. heaney, who received a check for $13,000 from eliot's widow, valerie eliot, was honored for his latest collection, ''district and circle.'' a george harrison manuscript bearing his handwritten lyrics for ''while my guitar gently weeps'' sold for $300,000 at an auction of rock 'n' roll memorabilia in scottsdale, ariz., on monday, agence france-presse reported. john lennon's military band tunic sold for $350,000.  