the suspect in 3 murders and 8 rapes blended in   the man sitting at table 35, a booth in the back of the restaurant, made the same impression on rebecca klauk last saturday that he had left on countless other people who encountered him over the years: respectable but wholly unremarkable. he just blended in.  short and bald, he wore a sensible plaid shirt and had good posture, ms. klauk noticed. at one point, he started rearranging the tableware in front of him -- somewhat compulsively, she thought. but ms. klauk, the manager of the restaurant, a latin american spot called solé, was trying not to stare.  three undercover detectives were at the bar watching the man, altemio sanchez, who the authorities suspect is the so-called bike park rapist, responsible for three murders and at least eight rapes in the buffalo area since 1981. one of the detectives showed ms. klauk his badge and instructed her not to touch anything on the table mr. sanchez shared with a woman who matched the description of his wife, kathleen.  but the empty plates could not just sit there, so a busboy cleared them, leaving mr. sanchez's water glass and two others as the couple departed solé about 6:15 p.m. and they left a good tip.  for decades, mr. sanchez had led an outwardly ordinary life, raising children he bragged about, playing golf and working steadily as a machinist at a factory on the outskirts of town. but officials say mr. sanchez, 48, was also the reason ms. klauk's father and other parents in this area had for years warned their daughters not to walk forested paths alone.  prosecutors are expected to bring charges to a grand jury on thursday in the 1990 rape and strangulation of linda yalem, a sophomore at the state university at buffalo, who was jogging on a bike path just off campus. in 1996, mr. sanchez was among the 1,548 people who entered the linda yalem memorial run, an annual 3.1-mile race that the police regularly videotaped for clues.  he has already been arraigned on murder charges in the slaying of majane mazur, a 32-year-old prostitute found strangled in a field near some railroad tracks in 1992, and prosecutors contend that he also killed joan diver, a nurse and a mother of four, on sept. 29, the 16th anniversary of ms. yalem's death. dna samples taken from ms. diver's car match mr. sanchez's dna, the authorities said, but prosecutors are not expected to present that case to the grand jury immediately.  in addition, the authorities say mr. sanchez raped at least eight other women between 1981 and 1994. dna evidence links him to five of those attacks, they say.  mr. sanchez's lawyer, andrew c. lotempio, has said he is not guilty of any of the allegations, and suggested he would seek a change of venue out of concern his client could not get a fair trial in erie county.  ''there is no history of violence in his house,'' mr. lotempio said. ''if this guy fits the profile, then so does everybody's uncle.''  to his neighbors in suburban cheektowaga, a five-minute drive from solé, the restaurant where he left his dna on a glass after that fateful dinner on saturday, mr. sanchez was friendly and thoughtful, offering his generator after a storm, or help installing heated gutters. he worked at the same job for 23 years, and seemed obsessive only about his gardening. as ordinary as they come.  the bike path rapist often attacked in the morning, as his victims jogged or strolled outdoors. he often prepared a spot in advance to commit the crime, perhaps leaving a roll of duct tape there, to tape eyes shut. he attacked women from behind, strangling them with electrical wire or drapery cord, leaving two long marks on their necks.  there are only glimpses of the moments where these two characters, the outward mr. sanchez and the killer sketched by the police, might have intersected, like the two times mr. sanchez was arrested for soliciting a prostitute, in 1999 and 1991. twice more, he eluded capture by detectives on his trail: in 1990, the police questioned mr. sanchez and took his fingerprints after a co-worker reported him lurking on a bike path, and in 1981, officers interviewed his uncle after a rape victim thought she spotted her attacker in the uncle's car at a shopping mall. (the uncle failed to tell the police his nephew had borrowed the car until this month.)  ''i still have this little hope in my heart that this all was his evil twin,'' said joyce heath, a neighbor and friend of mr. sanchez.  altemio sanchez was born on jan. 19, 1958, in san sebastian, in puerto rico's northwest corner, according to his aunt, margarita torres. his mother, lucy, had four children, two boys and two girls, and when mr. sanchez was 2, the family moved to the united states mainland. mr. sanchez did not know his father, his lawyer said, and grew up for a time with his mother, who died several years ago, and an elderly stepfather. he lived in florida and around buffalo.  ''he was a nice kid, a serious kid,'' said ms. torres. ''a quiet kid.''  mr. sanchez was 23 at the time of what prosecutors contend was his first attack, the 1981 rape, a crime they have not charged him with in part because the statute of limitations long since expired. two years later, mr. sanchez started a job he held until his arrest on monday, at a brass factory north of downtown buffalo. mr. sanchez mostly worked the off-shifts: 3:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m., or midnight to 7:30 a.m., most recently as a machine operator, moving the sheets of copper alloy that the plant produces.  ''i was not aware of any performance issues in the time he worked here,'' said jack b. alonge, the factory's director of human resources. ''everyone here was shocked.''  his lawyer said that mr. sanchez met his wife, who now works for a marketing company, at buffalo state college. the year his wife graduated, 1991, mr. sanchez was arrested after trying to solicit an undercover police officer in a prostitution sting.  ''are you looking for some action?'' mr. sanchez, who was driving a white 1988 pontiac, asked the officer, according to court records. he offered her $25 for intercourse, using a coarser word, and ended up paying a $75 fine instead.  by then, the sanchezes and their two young sons had moved to the two-story cape cod on allendale street in cheektowaga, a house he lovingly cared for, impressing his neighbors. the children went to good schools; mr. sanchez coached their basketball team.  everyone brought a dish to the sanchez summer garden parties, a mix of the couples' work friends and neighbors, said nadine donohue, who has lived on the street for 28 years with her husband, jerry. ''the scary part is, he's the nicest person you'd ever want to meet,'' jerry donohue said. ''this is what's so upsetting. he never made any sexual remarks about a woman, never swore. you'd go to his parties and have a beer or two with him.''  by the time mr. sanchez sat down at solé on saturday about 5 p.m., the police had been watching him for days, said the erie county sheriff, timothy b. howard.  the surveillance started because of a lucky confluence of events. at almost the same time that investigators determined that dna from the bike path rapist most likely belonged to a hispanic man, an f.b.i. profiler said the suspect probably solicited prostitutes. another investigator, reviewing old cases, happened upon mr. sanchez's uncle and the episode with the car.  all of which led the police to knock on the sanchezes' door last week, on the pretense of recovering an unlicensed gun in hopes of obtaining a sample of his dna. mr. sanchez had lost his gun license because of his prostitution arrest, but never turned in the weapon; the police took the .22-caliber pistol from his closet last week, but were unable to retrieve dna. so they kept trailing him.  after mr. sanchez left solé, the detectives moved quickly -- so quickly, in fact, that ms. klauk, who left the restaurant for a few minutes, did not see them gather the glasses and other utensils before following mr. sanchez to a bookstore and taking his coffee cup from there as evidence.  the dna results came back sunday night, and mr. sanchez was arrested the next morning as he drove home from work.  ms. yalem, 22, was from california, and was found in thick brush off the ellicott creek bicycle path. ms. diver, trained as a nurse, frequently traveled back to utah, where her family has a cabin in the woods. a family picking wildflowers stumbled upon ms. mazur, who was originally from south carolina. christine mazur was 5 when her crack-addicted mother was killed. now 19, she lives in south carolina and is studying to be a teacher.  ''he can't ruin anybody else's life now,'' ms. mazur said of mr. sanchez's arrest. ''i never had anybody here for my prom, or my first date, or any of the other things your mother should be there for.''  