overhaul of schools would let teachers rate principals   pressing the case for mayor michael r. bloomberg's latest round of changes to the city school system, chancellor joel i. klein detailed yesterday how the new powers being granted to principals would be accompanied by new evaluations of them: teachers for the first time would rate their supervisors.  mr. klein outlined the change in a speech to the partnership for new york city, a coalition of top executives from the city's leading corporations, a day after mayor bloomberg outlined a sweeping overhaul of the school system.  the mayor's plans include giving more power and autonomy to principals, requiring teachers to undergo rigorous reviews before earning tenure and changing the financing formula for schools. the administration is eliminating the current 10 regional superintendents and creating a wider role for private groups in supporting schools.  allowing teachers to help evaluate principals has been a longstanding request of the teachers' union, and mr. klein seemed to be going out of his way to praise teachers a day after the mayor announced that the education department would rigorously review teachers during their three-year probationary period rather than letting most of them earn tenure automatically.  ''because of our deep respect for our teachers, we're looking for other ways to make sure that their wisdom becomes yet a more important part of each school's culture,'' mr. klein said. ''their views on how a school is being run are critically important, and we need to formalize the process by which those views are expressed and properly considered.''  even as the teachers' union president, randi weingarten, praised the chancellor's announcement, she complained about changes being made by public fiat. ''even though this is something that we have urged very rigorously, unfortunately this policy by announcement has to stop,'' she said. ms. weingarten also said the chancellor should have negotiated the new review process with the principals' union. the last principals' contract expired in 2003.  the principals' union, the council of school supervisors and administrators, said it had been told nothing of the plans.  in a separate speech to principals and other educators last night, mr. klein emphasized the changes on tenure and the added authority for principals but did not discuss the plan to let teachers review principals.  after that speech, at la guardia high school in manhattan, mr. klein received a standing ovation from about half the audience. but he got his biggest applause when he made a reference to the delay in a new principals' contract, saying: ''yes, i look forward to increasing the salaries of administrators.'' smiling, he added, ''it struck me as an easy applause line.''  the school system, which has more than 80,000 teachers, more than 1,400 principals and nearly 1.1 million students, struggled yesterday to absorb the news of yet another reorganization, the most sweeping changes since mr. bloomberg's initial restructuring in 2003.  in his speech to corporate leaders, mr. klein announced that 4 of the 10 current regional superintendents -- kathleen m. cashin of brooklyn and queens, judith chin of queens, marcia lyles of brooklyn and laura rodriguez of the bronx -- would stay on to create four new organizations in the education department that will support schools.  under the mayor's new plans, principals can choose to be supported by one of the four former superintendents, or by a private group hired on contract. alternatively, they can choose to become a so-called ''empowerment'' school, which gives principals greater power in exchange for an agreement to meet performance benchmarks.  principals said yesterday that they did not have enough information to form an opinion. ''i don't know enough,'' said randy asher, the principal of brooklyn tech, which is already an empowerment school. ''i need to know more about it.''  while there was palpable relief in the four regions whose superintendents will keep jobs and presumably be able to retain most of their staff, there was shock and uncertainty in the six other regions. in some offices, officials described staff members as virtually paralyzed over the question of whether they would have jobs in september.  ''there is a sense of anxiety as to next steps as well as a lack of clarity about how this will benefit schools,'' said one veteran city educator, who would speak only on the condition of anonymity, because of the uncertain job situation.  there was also uncertainty among the private nonprofit groups already helping to run dozens of city public schools over the contract terms under which the education department plans to expand their role. the chancellor's office has yet to release any details.  in his earlier speech, mr. klein insisted that teacher tenure should be a ''well-deserved honor, not a routine right,'' and he said that a small team of retired principals would be hired to help make tenure decisions in a more rigorous fashion.  he also defended the need for change. ''how can we be anything other than bold,'' he asked, ''when 140,000 of our students between the ages of 16 and 21 years old have either dropped out or are about to drop out, when more than 60 percent of our eighth graders are not reading or doing math at grade level?''  calling the failures of school systems ''the shame of this nation,'' mr. klein denounced the ''incrementalism'' that he said had characterized most efforts at education. ''we must move forward with resolve,'' he said.  