intel's fight for share in chip market cuts its margins   intel reported yesterday that fourth-quarter profit fell 39 percent as the company continued to fight for market share and to absorb the high cost of its corporate overhaul.  the company, the world's largest chip maker and a closely watched indicator of the overall strength of the technology industry, reported slightly higher sales than wall street predicted, although they were still down 5 percent from the period last year.  but on the critical measurement of gross profit margin, intel clearly disappointed, indicating the price war with its smaller rival advanced micro devices continued to take a toll.  intel projected that its gross profit margin would be about 49 percent during the first quarter of 2007, down from 49.6 percent during the fourth quarter of 2006. intel estimated that gross profit margin would be only about 50 percent for all of 2007. that compares with a gross profit margin of 61.8 percent in the fourth quarter of 2005.  ''these results were clearly mixed,'' said adam parker, an analyst with sanford c. bernstein & company. ''people wanted to see that gross margins had reached the bottom in the fourth quarter, but they didn't.''  the report was released after the market's close yesterday, but investors reacted strongly to the forecast of a lower profit margin, sending shares of intel down 88 cents, or nearly 4 percent, in after-hours trading. earlier in the day, intel shares rose 17 cents, to close at $22.30 in regular trading.  intel's net income for the fourth quarter was $1.5 billion, or 26 cents a share, including the cost associated with stock option expenses. in last year's fourth quarter, the last quarter in which it expensed stock options, intel posted net income of $2.45 billion, or 40 cents a share.  the company's revenue declined 5 percent, to $9.69 billion, from $10.2 billion last year, at the top of the range of $9.1 billion to $9.7 billion the company had forecast.  analysts were expecting earnings of 25 cents a share on $9.44 billion in revenue, according to a survey of analysts by thomson financial.  for 2006, intel, which is based in santa clara, calif., posted revenue of $35.4 billion, while its net income was $5 billion, or 86 cents a share.  closing what he called ''a very tough pricing year,'' andy d. bryant, intel's chief financial officer, indicated that intel would continue to price aggressively this year. ''we're going to have to fight to win orders,'' mr. bryant said in a conference call with analysts.  the brightest spot for intel was that it sold record numbers of its highest-priced microprocessors, those used in computer servers. sales of those chips helped drive up intel's average selling price during a period in which intel was continuing to cut prices on older products.  paul s. otellini, intel's chief executive, described 2006 as a unique year in which the company introduced 40 new products. ''we've never had that broad a base of new products all at once,'' mr. otellini said in the conference call.  intel's report of higher selling prices on server chips was in stark contrast to news from a.m.d. last week. that company, which is scheduled to issue its earnings report on jan. 23, warned last week that its fourth-quarter revenue would miss wall street forecasts because of lower unit prices.  a.m.d., based in sunnyvale, calif., said that it expected fourth-quarter revenue to be about $1.37 billion, or only about 3 percent above the third-quarter level. the news sent shares of a.m.d down $1.92, to $18.26, on friday. yesterday, a.m.d. shares declined 23 cents, or about 1 percent, in after-hours trading, after declining 13 cents, to close at $18.13, during the regular session.  intel said it was also facing the high cost of its transition to a major new manufacturing process, a transition that occurs roughly every two years. mr. bryant said the bulk of the costs of the manufacturing changes would occur in the first half of 2007.  looking ahead, intel said first-quarter revenue would be $8.7 billion to $9.3 billion, in line with analysts' forecast of $8.93 billion. mr. bryant declined to provide a full-year forecast.  in september, the company announced a major revamping, including the elimination of 10,500 positions. intel ended the fourth quarter with 94,100 employees, down more than 6,000 from the second quarter. costs associated with layoffs decreased earnings by about 1.5 cents a share in the fourth quarter, the company said.  