paid notice: deaths   timberlake, craig allison   timberlake--craig allison, of ogunquit maine (formerly of new york city), passed away december 31, 2006, at the age of 86, at mercy hospital, oklahoma city, oklahoma while visiting his sister and brother-in-law, dodee and jack moncrief. craig was born in oil city, pennsylvania october 30, 1920. he was preceded in death by his parents james craig timberlake and alberta savage timberlake, and his older sister maxine timberlake mcconnell tobin and her husband charles e. tobin. he is survived by his sister dorothy (dodee) timberlake moncrief and jack b. moncrief of oklahoma city, oklahoma; five nieces, their husbands and families. craig is a world war ii veteran retired as a lt. colonel in the air force reserve. he was a professional actor, singer, author, as well as a retired professor emeritus of teachers college, columbia university. he received his ba degree at southern methodist university in dallas, texas and hisma and doctoral degrees from columbia university. he was a member of phi beta kappa. craig timberlake has appeared in over 100 plays, operas and musicals throughout the united states, canada and mexico. one of craig's early roles was professor higgins in my fair lady with the 1964 touring group. he joined katherine hepburn's touring group in ''as you like it''. recognizing his great artistry, many composers have sought craig to premiere their compositions. dr. timberlake appeared on all major radio and tv networks and was the soloist, choral consultant, and director for abc tv public affairs division. he prepared the chorus for the first oratorio written for television, revelation, by the noted pianist, earl wilde. dr. timberlake was the author of the bishop of broadway, david belasco, his life and work. craig's articles have appeared in music educators journal, the review of education, the bulletin of the council of research in music education, teachers college record. he was a noted adjudicator, vocal coach and teacher. at teachers college, columbia university craig was a former chairman of the department of music and music education, former chairman of the american academy of teachers of singing and past president of the new york singing teachers association. after his retirement from teachers college, columbia university, craig taught at master schola in 1991, and was producer and music consultant for 13 cd recordings of the touring choir from the community of jesus, orleans, ma. in memory of dr. craig timberlake, donations may be made to the community of jesus, p.o. box 109 orleans, ma 02653, or teachers college fund, columbia university. a memorial service will be 10:00am january 18, 2007 at woodlawn cemetery in elmira, ny.  