pap test, a mainstay against cervical cancer, may be fading   the big news in the war on cervical cancer is the new vaccine recently approved to prevent the disease. but another major change that will affect millions of women is also under way, though more slowly and quietly.  the pap smear, an annual ritual for many women and the mainstay of cervical cancer prevention for more than half a century, may start to fade in importance.  it will not disappear for many more years, if ever. but a newer genetic test that detects human papillomavirus, or hpv, which causes cervical cancer, is starting to play a bigger role in screening. and other genetic tests are being developed. at the least, some experts say, women will no longer need pap smears as often.  ''we can potentially change the entire cervical screening paradigm,'' said dr. thomas c. wright, a professor of pathology at columbia university medical center who is also a consultant for roche, which is developing a genetic hpv test.  the new vaccine could also deal a longer-term blow to pap testing, which works by detecting abnormal cells from the cervix that could be on their way to becoming cancerous. it is not that women would no longer need screening because they had been vaccinated. the vaccine, approved only for girls and women 9 to 26 years old, does not protect against all strains of hpv that cause cancer.  if a precancerous lesion is present, the pap test will detect it only 50 percent to 80 percent of the time. pap testing is effective only because it is done often; a lesion can take 10 years to turn into a cancer, so a yearly test will probably find it in time.  as more women get the hpv vaccine, however, the number of lesions will decline, making the pap test more costly per cancer case detected. and with fewer problems to detect, said dr. eduardo l. franco, a professor of epidemiology and oncology at mcgill university, the technicians who read pap smears may lower their guard -- and their accuracy.  pap testing ''is going to break down in a world in which vaccination decreases the prevalence of lesions,'' said dr. franco, who said he had done some minor consulting for genetic test developers. referring to the accuracy of pap testing, he added, ''it's already bad enough, and it's going to get worse.''  but pap testing has its strong defenders, who question the value of the genetic test for hpv. some gynecologists say having women come for annual pap testing brings them in for other needed examinations. and there is a huge industry built up to provide the screening.  ''the perception is that the annual pap smear drives volume,'' said dr. walter kinney, a gynecological oncologist at kaiser permanente, the health maintenance organization. ''i don't see anyone raising their hand volunteering to give that up.''  at kaiser, where doctors' pay does not depend on customer volume, the genetic hpv test is offered with pap testing to every woman 30 and older. if both tests are negative, a woman does not come back for further screening for three years. the savings from less frequent screening more than pay for the extra cost of the hpv test, dr. kinney said.  kaiser's testing laboratory in berkeley, calif., processes 300,000 to 500,000 cervical specimens a year. a robotic arm rapidly retrieves particular specimens from cold storage for testing and disposes of others when they are no longer needed.  the most recent guidelines from the american college of obstetricians and gynecologists, issued in 2003, suggested that some women over 30 do not need annual pap tests, but many doctors and patients have resisted that idea.  ''sometimes you advocate that strategy, but the woman comes back the next year almost demanding the pap smear,'' said dr. juan felix, a professor of pathology and of obstetrics and gynecology at the university of southern california. ''women have been sort of mentally trained to come to get their annual test.''  pap testing is named for dr. george n. papanicolaou, who developed the test at cornell medical school. it started to become widely used in the 1950s.  cells are scraped from the surface of the cervix, spread on a microscope slide and examined for abnormalities that could indicate a precancerous lesion. if found and confirmed by further examination, the lesions can be removed by any of several techniques.  pap testing has cut cervical cancer rates by 75 percent or more in nations with thorough screening. in the united states, there are now about 10,000 cases of cervical cancer each year and 4,000 deaths. more than half the cases are in women who do not undergo screening.  ''it is one of the greatest public health interventions in terms of sheer success and lives saved,'' said philip e. castle, an expert on cervical cancer screening at the national cancer institute.  but while successful, dr. castle said, pap screening is ''not very efficient,'' costing billions of dollars a year. and it does miss cancer cases. a study of women with cervical cancer, conducted among members of seven health plans and published in the journal of the national cancer institute in 2005, found that 32 percent had had one or more normal pap tests in the three years before the diagnosis.  b. k. cockrell, 57, a homemaker in troup, tex., was one woman who got cancer despite a series of normal pap tests. in 2005, her gynecologist, dr. a. jay staub of dallas, also began giving the hpv genetic test, which gave a positive reading. further examination showed that ms. cockrell had cancer, which was caught early enough to be removed by a hysterectomy without the need for chemotherapy or radiation.  ''i believe i would be extremely ill today'' if not for the hpv test, she said.  a newer form of pap testing called liquid cytology, which spreads the cells more evenly on a slide, is said by some cytologists to be more sensitive, though some published studies contradict that.  but pap testing has other problems as well. of the 50 million to 60 million tests done in the united states each year, as many as two million are classified as ambiguous, possibly a lesion and possibly not. such results require further testing, like colposcopy, an uncomfortable procedure in which the cervix is examined with a magnifying device, and biopsy, which can be painful.  the hpv genetic test looks for the dna of 13 of the cancer-causing strains of the virus. experts say this test can detect more than 90 percent of precancerous lesions. it is also easier to automate and far less likely to produce ambiguous results.  the samples are taken the same way as for a pap test, meaning women still need to get into stirrups. but since the genetic test is less prone to error, experts say it is possible that in the future women will be able to take their own samples.  the test was first approved by the food and drug administration in 1999, and its use has grown steadily, partly spurred by advertising by the test's manufacturer, digene. the company, based in gaithersburg, md., says about seven million americans are getting the test each year, which is one-fifth of those it believes would be eligible. with merck now calling attention to the role of hpv in its advertisements for its new vaccine, digene executives expect interest in their test to grow.  some experts say that since the hpv test catches more lesions than pap, it would be cost-effective to make it the primary test, with pap testing used only on the women who test positive for the virus.  ''hpv testing as the stand-alone primary screening technology represents the scientifically obvious next step,'' f. xavier bosch of the catalán institute of oncology in barcelona, spain, wrote last august in a supplement of the journal vaccine on the future of cervical cancer prevention.  but some experts say the hpv test is not ready for that.  one problem is that hpv testing costs $50 to more than $100, compared with as little as $20 for a pap test. more significant, many, if not most, sexually active women will be infected with hpv at some point. but in most cases, particularly for younger women, the immune system dispenses with the virus.  that is why even those who advocate using hpv testing as the primary screen, or using it alongside pap testing, do so only for women over 30 or 35, when the viral infection is less likely to be transient. (the hpv test is approved for two uses: to help resolve an ambiguous pap test or to use in conjunction with pap screening for women 30 and over.)  dr. george sawaya, an associate professor of obstetrics, gynecology and reproductive sciences at the university of california, san francisco, says about 2,500 to 3,000 cervical cancer cases in the united states each year are in women with normal pap tests. while use of the hpv test instead of the pap as the primary screen may further reduce that number, ''we have to make sure we are not dragging along tens of thousands of women who will have positive tests but no disease,'' he said.  some of those women would be subject to unnecessary biopsies and even to removal of lesions that would never turn cancerous, he said. the removal operations have risks of their own, he added, potentially raising the chances a woman will have premature deliveries in the future.  wider use of hpv testing would also mean telling millions of women that they have a sexually transmitted disease, causing unnecessary stress. ''everybody presumes they are dirty when they are told they have something like this,'' said dr. abbie roth, an obstetrician and gynecologist at northwestern memorial hospital in chicago. ''everybody universally cries when they get that information.''  digene says it hopes that european countries, which place more limits on medical spending than the united states, will make hpv testing the standard in place of the pap. european experts disagree on whether that will happen.  but pap testing is likely to be displaced in developing countries, which account for more than 80 percent of the roughly 500,000 new cases of cervical cancer and 275,000 deaths each year. those countries cannot do efficient pap screening for lack of laboratories and technicians and difficulty in getting women, who might have to walk miles to a clinic, to come for testing every year.  in the developing world, pap testing has had ''basically no impact on cervical cancer rates in any country, ever,'' said jacqueline sherris, a strategic program leader for reproductive health at path, a nonprofit organization in seattle.  path is working with digene to develop a simpler and cheaper version of the hpv test for developing countries. women might be tested only once or twice during their 30s but would get fairly good protection, ms. sherris said.  still other tests are in development. one would determine the specific strain of hpv infecting a woman. types 16 and 18 account for most cancers (and are the cancer-causing types targeted by the new vaccine). so having one of them would be considered more worrisome.  yet another test would look for the activation of two genes, called e6 and e7. such activation is believed to be required for a precancerous lesion to turn into cancer.  ''looking forward,'' said dr. wright of columbia, ''the molecular tests are becoming so good that we can see a time when cytology is no longer used as the primary screening test.''  