after 20 seasons, testaverde has a shot at first super bowl   foxborough, mass., jan. 18 -- if the new england patriots beat the indianapolis colts and advance to the super bowl, it will be a milestone for their 43-year-old backup quarterback, vinny testaverde, who has never reached the super bowl in 20 n.f.l. seasons.  "every year i watch it, i think, 'got away from me again,' " testaverde said. "hopefully, this year will be a little different."  the chance to win the super bowl, and another chance to play for bill belichick, lured testaverde out of a brief retirement when he signed with the patriots on nov. 14 as a backup to tom brady. testaverde's main role is to offer advice and encouragement as a stable presence in a locker room already loaded with experience.  the quarterback duel between brady and peyton manning will be a dominant theme during sunday's american football conference championship game, and brady has the upper hand, with three super bowl titles and two playoff victories over manning.  because of those losses, and his failure to reach the super bowl, manning has been targeted for criticism despite a brilliant career. but testaverde finds it hard to fathom that manning does not have the makeup to lead a team to a championship,  "i don't know peyton personally as well as i do tom, but i think from what i've seen, he has a lot of the same instincts and ability as tom does," testaverde said. "he's obviously one of the best. a lot of people don't give him as much credit as he deserves, because he hasn't won the big game yet. it's more than one player when it comes to winning in this sport. a guy as good as he is, sooner or later, he's going to get one, he's going to get a ring."  though testaverde barely played this season, a personal high point occurred dec. 31, when he threw a touchdown pass to troy brown during the patriots' 40-23 victory over tennessee. the pass was completed with less than two minutes left in the game, and some titans were not happy. but belichick wanted testaverde to become the first n.f.l. player to throw touchdown passes in 20 consecutive seasons, and testaverde appreciated the opportunity.  "i didn't expect to go in the game at that point, and then when i did, i really didn't think we were going to be throwing the football," testaverde said. "that situation shows that he does have a sense of history. he lets the team know the accomplishments of certain guys, because guys are proud to be a part of it, too."  even if the patriots win the super bowl, testaverde did not guarantee that he would retire -- again.  "this is what i love to do," he said. "i can't think of anything better, and this is a great situation."  four patriots are ailing at least four patriots had flu symptoms thursday, three days before new england takes on indianapolis in the a.f.c. championship game.  receiver troy brown, linebacker tedy bruschi, offensive tackle ryan o'callaghan and defensive tackle mike wright were ailing, but all were expected to be available for sunday's game.  the hard-hitting safety rodney harrison, one of new england's key defensive players, was on the field at the beginning of thursday's practice, although he missed the previous two playoff games with a knee injury. his status for sunday was uncertain. only the beginning of practice was open to the news media, so it was not known how much harrison participated.  