democrats say house energy bill will pass   house democrats, brushing aside objections from the bush administration, said on wednesday that they had ample votes to pass a bill on thursday that would eliminate $14 billion in subsidies and tax breaks for oil companies and channel the money to renewable-energy projects.  in a sign of how political sentiment on energy issues has shifted, lawmakers in both parties expect the bill to draw considerable support from republicans, many of whom voted in favor of the tax breaks three years ago.  on wednesday, the white house said it ''strongly opposes'' several provisions in the bill but only hinted at a possible veto if the bill increased overall government spending in 2007 above limits that mr. bush set last year.  few lawmakers expect mr. bush to resort to a veto, if only because the energy bill would lead to a tiny increase in revenue in its first year.  much of the criticism involves two provisions, one that would repeal a major tax break for oil and gas drillers and a second that would pressure oil companies to renegotiate certain offshore leases. the leases allow them to avoid billions of dollars in royalties on oil and gas produced in publicly owned waters in the gulf of mexico.  in a statement of the administration's position, the white house said the bill would unfairly single out the oil industry by making it ineligible for a tax break offered to ''domestic manufacturers.'' the tax break was created in 2004, mainly to compensate manufacturing companies that had been forced to give up a separate tax break for exporters. oil companies had never qualified for the export tax break, but were included in the definition of ''domestic manufacturing.''  the administration also reiterated its opposition to a provision that would pressure oil companies to renegotiate the offshore drilling leases.  the bill, which would also repeal several smaller royalty incentives that congress passed in 2005, would raise about $6.3 billion over 10 years in additional royalties from oil and gas companies. the provisions that repeal several tax breaks would raise about $7.6 billion over the same period.  in its statement, the administration said it agreed that drilling companies had no need for federal incentives. but it opposed what it said was an effort to force companies into renegotiating contracts that the government had signed.  the measure would pressure companies to renegotiate leases they signed with the federal government in 1998 and 1999, when the interior department inadvertently allowed them lucrative royalty incentives regardless of how high oil and gas prices might climb.  the measure would punish companies that refuse to accept ''price thresholds'' -- clauses that were included in leases for other years that eliminated the royalty incentives if oil prices rose above about $34 a barrel. companies that refuse to change their leases would be required to either pay a ''conservation fee'' of $9 for each barrel of oil they produce on the leases or give up their right to acquire any additional leases.  the oil industry has criticized the proposals, saying they signed the leases in good faith and should not be forced to change them because the government made a mistake.  the bush administration has echoed those concerns, saying that the leasing errors occurred during the clinton administration and that it is trying to persuade companies to make voluntary changes. so far, five companies that own about 20 percent of the leases have agreed to alterations. but many of the biggest players in the gulf, including chevron and exxon mobil, have refused.  senate democrats are expected to support the royalty provisions of the house bill. on wednesday, senate democrats on the joint economic committee argued that the government spends billions of dollars on royalty incentives for offshore drillers yet gets little in the way of increased production.  senator charles e. schumer of new york, chairman of the joint economic committee, said he would seek the elimination of all royalty incentive programs.  