diagnosis: acute case of broadway melodium tremens   when a sitcom in the sixth year of its run starts talking about presenting an all-musical episode, it usually means one thing: grab the remote, because the writers have run out of ideas.  but for ''scrubs,'' the long-running and often unappreciated series on nbc, a new musical episode has energized a cast and crew that, at a point when most situation comedies are sputtering along or dead, have recently been doing some of their best work.  and while it may not be apparent, musical theater is never far from the hearts of many on the set.  ''most comedy writers are tall, jocky types,'' said bill lawrence, the creator of ''scrubs.'' ''but they don't like being stuck in the comedy closet. secretly they have arguments about sondheim.''  ''scrubs: my musical,'' scheduled to be broadcast on thursday night, has a pedigree that would make many broadway producers envious. rather than go the cheap route with pedestrian music and lyrics, the show's producers enlisted jeff marx and robert lopez, the creators of ''avenue q,'' the tony award-winning musical featuring puppets singing about internet pornography and other perplexities of life.  but much of the conception and execution of the episode was home-grown. mr. lawrence, who grew up being toted to broadway shows by his parents from their home in connecticut, had long said he wanted to do a musical episode. from the show's earliest days, he has made music a longstanding presence, with one early episode a parody of ''west side story.''  debra fordham, a supervising producer on the show who says her ipod is filled with broadway cast recordings, took to heart mr. lawrence's suggestion that this could be the year for the musical episode. his one condition, however, was that the music and songs had to be integral to the show, not simply an overlay of songs bridging patches of dialogue.  working with one of the series's medical advisers, dr. john doris, ms. fordham built a story around a patient who is found to have an aneurysm that causes her to hear music. she sketched out a story and some lyrics -- ''mostly as a guide to the composers,'' she said. but when she got the work back from the composers, she was shocked to find that many of her lyrics had remained intact.  ''she's really a talented librettist and lyricist,'' mr. lopez said. the composers, for their parts, had never heard of ''scrubs'' when they were approached with the idea. after viewing some episodes on dvd, however, they became hooked.  ''we thought they might be expecting us to come up with the whole kit and caboodle,'' mr. lopez said. ''but when we got the script, there was already a draft of a complete set of lyrics. we really didn't have to change a whole lot.''  they made additions and changes to some rhymes, tightened some of the jokes, added introductions to some of the songs and wrote the music for four numbers. four other songs were written by ms. fordham and paul f. perry, who has previously arranged music for ''scrubs,'' and one is the work of ms. fordham and jan stevens, a composer for the series.  in total, 19 of the show's 23 minutes are musical, and the musical styles have been made to fit each character, from the gilbert-and-sullivan-like patter sung by john c. mcginley, who plays dr. perry cox, to the heartwarming ''guy love,'' sung by zach braff and donald faison, whose characters, j. d. and turk, are the best-friend physicians at the center of the show.  mr. lopez and mr. marx have done some writing for television before: mr. lopez for ''the wonder pets,'' an animated musical show for preschoolers, and mr. marx for some disney channel projects. never have they had to delve so deeply into the world of medicine, however, to come up with descriptions of just how close two people are, as in the show's finale, a ''grease''-like number:  we're as close as  the vena cava and the aorta,  we go together  like diverticulitis and a barium enema.  this being medicine, of course, the lyrics could not help concerning themselves to some degree with the diagnostic value of bodily functions.  most amazing to the composers was the speed at which the production came together. ''it took us five years to write 'avenue q,' '' mr. marx said. ''there were a million readings and previews and staged readings. with this thing, we wrote the songs in a week. they rehearsed for a week. they filmed it in a week, and it was done. it was liberating, and a collaborative effort that created a much more feel-good way of working.''  nbc gave its approval for the episode, mr. lawrence said, and touchstone television and its parent, disney, spent nearly twice the normal amount to produce the episode, including hiring a 50-piece orchestra to punch up the musical numbers.  mr. marx was so enamored of the process, in fact, that he has decided to move to los angeles. during a telephone interview last week, he said he was packing his things, giving up his new york rental apartment and dreaming of more television song-and-dance numbers.  he is nothing if not confident. ''i got a one-way ticket,'' he added.  