bush's reversal on wiretapping   to the editor:  re ''court to oversee u.s. wiretapping in terror cases'' (front page, jan. 18):  the bush administration's sudden desire to embrace the legal requirements of the domestic wiretapping law would be more laughable if it were not also emblematic of the feckless character of our executive branch.  when they could hide behind a republican-dominated congress, president bush, vice president dick cheney and attorney general alberto r. gonzales were condescending, mocking, rude and dismissive toward congressional critics and the public in general on this issue.  now that the voters have had their chance to speak at the midterm elections and the president and his associates no longer have their republican safety net, they're obviously trying to pre-empt any democratic efforts to delve deeper into the issue.  i, for one, remain deeply outraged at the constant attacks on our constitution and civil liberties by this administration and urge strong bipartisan efforts by congress to fully investigate the true nature of these unsupervised wiretaps and their potential violations of federal statutes.  kevan v. olesen  rowayton, conn., jan. 18, 2007  to the editor:  it is encouraging to hear that the administration has agreed to abide by the foreign intelligence surveillance act in pursuing suspected terrorists. there remains, however, the difficult question of what to do about the illegal wiretaps that took place since 2001.  will there be any legal action against or, at the very least, congressional censure of the president and his attorney general? or, since the president and his men now promise to obey the law, are we to treat this as a case of ''no harm, no foul''?  louie ludwig  new orleans, jan. 18, 2007  to the editor:  the fact that from this day forward the warrantless spying program will operate within the law should not excuse the fact that for the last six years the administration may have been breaking the law and violating the constitution. this should not  be retroactive.  the fisa court should not have the authority to excuse six years of possible lawbreaking. the program's past legality should be decided in the regular courts.  two of the three branches of our government have been ''republicanized'' over the last six years (the executive and the judicial). now we will find out if that includes the fisa court.  jeff morris  saugerties, n.y., jan. 18, 2007  to the editor:  why should anyone believe george w. bush or anyone in his administration about the wiretapping program? he may be setting up a procedure that will ignore the real intent of the constitution, or he may have issued a retroactive ''signing statement.''  in light of his record and actions, i can't think of any reason to believe the man.  paul hosman  kalamazoo, mich., jan. 18, 2007  to the editor:  re ''a spy program in from the cold'' (editorial, jan. 18):  your editorial may be a start, but what is the normal societal response to evidence of persistent defiance of law and the constitution? why not say the words ''grand jury investigation''?  illegal wiretapping by the bush administration is just the tip of a glacier of deception (leading to the deaths of thousands and waste of billions), obstruction and corruption.  the congressional oversight hearings just beginning should become the prelude and backdrop to an era of national cleansing, resulting two years from now in multiple grand jury investigations.  as a nation we cannot allow such a national catastrophe to recur. at least we can hope that enough republican elected officials finally recognize that they have an obligation to act responsibly.  james ponsoldt  athens, ga., jan. 18, 2007  