old hat? not on a young head   brad pitt may be striving mightily to downplay his heartthrob image -- he even sported gray stubble and crow's feet in ''babel'' -- so this probably is not going to help. the truth is that probably no male star today has the power to ignite a fashion trend like mr. pitt can. with the help of the trend-setting costume designer michael kaplan, he did it with the retro-70s hip-length leather jacket in ''fight club.'' now he has done it with the fedora.  of course, black hip-hop stars and actors, from run-d.m.c. to jamie foxx, have long dallied with the old-school chapeau. and lately entertainers like jack white, pete doherty and justin timberlake have tried on the look. but it took off with a wider (that is, whiter) spectrum of stylish men only after july 2005, when mr. pitt, alongside his new flame, angelina jolie, appeared in a 60-page shoot in w magazine shot by steven klein and styled by mr. kaplan. in it mr. pitt wore several deeply stylish straw fedoras.  since then, as several of the coolest hatters report, sales of fedoras have snowballed with hip, younger customers. marcia akins, the owner and designer of the makins line, said sales of her hats had more than doubled in the 18 months since the article ran.  orlando palacios, the worth & worth owner and designer, also credited mr. pitt's style with jump-starting a remarkable uptick in business in the last two years. ''brad loves his lids,'' he said. ''i've had a lot of younger guys coming in, wanting something so they can look a little more contemporary.''  fedora -- contemporary? is this the same hat famously given the heave-ho by president kennedy almost 50 years ago as a dinosaur of prewar dress and manners? well, in the first place, there is little difference between contemporary and old hat at a time when half the clothes sold look as if they were designed for time travelers from another decade, whether the '30s or '70s. second, two things make the fedora modern: how it is now made, and how it is now worn.  as mr. palacios pointed out, the fedoras that younger men gravitate to are what the british call a trilby, with a narrower brim. they are about two and an eighth inches wide rather than a more traditional two and a quarter inches.  and as the selection of hand-blocked hats from makins, worth & worth and rod keenan make clear, the usual fedora palette of gray, black and brown are a figment of the film noir era. popping in crimson, yellow, blue and white and tricked out with crystals, feathers and hatbands made of crocodile or contrasting ribbon, today's fedoras would look at home on any villain in a '70s pam grier movie -- but executed with more finesse, and with a price tag to match -- from $300 to $1,500.  ''we kick it up with our trims,'' mr. keenan said, adding that he makes many styles, and one-of-a-kind pieces, because his customers like owning something unique.  but the new fedora wearers do not pander to a '70s pimp-style costume instinct. these stingy brims and sky pieces (vintage terms for natty hats) are not meant as the crowning glory of a full-dress look. rather, they top off more ordinary, but still snappy, modern styles: a hoodie, a crisp suit, a polo shirt, a shirt and tie.  mark roberts, a filmmaker in los angeles, started wearing mr. keenan's hats to give a punch to his wardrobe of gap shirts. ''since i'm a bald man, they fight against skin cancer,'' he said. ''but from a style point of view, well, i just thought it was a cool time when all men wore hats. each one has its own personality. that's why they've become addictive. it's like having all these different personalities to put on your head.''  ant rich, a manager of a & r at jive records in new york, has been a hat fan for a few years now. ''it goes back to, like, '02, when the hip-hop industry started dressing up a little bit,'' he said. but when a friend got him fitted for a custom hat at mr. keenan's harlem studio as a birthday present, he became a staunch convert.  ''a fedora goes with a lot of different styles, which is the way i dress,'' mr. rich said. ''if i am being conservative, it can make me look cool. or you can have on a white button-up shirt and some plain jeans and sneakers, but if you have on a rod hat, you're going to stand out. it's hip-hop and rat pack all rolled into one.''  so it is a waste of hand-wringing to mourn the days when a fedora was an expected note of polish. now it can do something even more charming: that is, strike an unexpected note.  dress codes  