decorative tradition, laced with bursts of eccentricity   art fairs can put some fairly magnificent obsessions on display, where they function like traps. step into a booth, and an unfamiliar area of visual culture suddenly exerts an irresistible force, changing your life.  few art fairs do this as seductively as the american antiques show, which is ensconced in the metropolitan pavilion in chelsea through sunday. the fair is manageable in size -- 44 dealers this year -- and relatively precise in focus. nearly everything on view is american, made either by american indians or settlers and dating from about 1750 forward. the prevalence of objects made by the people and for the people with plain-spoken modesty and simply handled materials gives it a very satisfying coherence.  here you can gain an in-depth exposure to widely practiced traditions yet be regularly jolted by eccentric one-of-a-kind objects. it is like listening to a large chorus singing classic folk tunes while enjoying interruptions from solitary minstrels with unusual voices and penchants for improvisation.  chorus-wise, a great time can be had ferreting out painted blanket chests and savoring the way that artists of the late 18th and early 19th centuries riffed on the idea of wood grain or floral peasant motifs. at rjg antiques, a pale yellow chest is festooned with hallucinatory loops in gray brown -- wood grain writ large. across the aisle, at jewett-berdan, a red two-drawer chest is loosely feathered with trees as brushy as fly whisks. at raccoon creek antiques the black-red painting on a tall clock hews more closely to wood grain, while, back on a blanket chest, a dark-red floral motif achieves a fuzzy-edged monumentality, as if mimicking the more demure stenciled leaves on a nearby painted mantel.  from here you might want to detour for clocks, taking in the large, shell-covered wall clock at odd fellows, or the more classic, extremely rare musical tall clock at nathan liverant & son. dated 1817, it plays seven songs and counts off the seconds with a coiled serpent. also at liverant, two unattributed paintings of the cluster of clapboard buildings that was grafton, n.y., in the mid-19th century, are distinguished by a tender and effortless mastery of atmospheric and linear perspective. other noteworthy paintings include a chinese-inflected naturalist mural at allan katz and three eerily hyper-real family portraits attributed to henry walton at joan r. brownstein.  back on the blanket chest trail, delicate pinwheel patterns create an almost futuristic spin on the examples at the herrs booth, as well as at john keith russell, elliott & grace snyder and rjg, while one at garthoeffner has a stamped textilelike pattern. painted wood grain peaks in the fourth aisle with a pair of imposing two-part pennsylvania dutch cupboards in the woody orange tone called salmon. the one at kelly kinzle, from around 1830, is festooned with competing grains, including polka dots, that the label justly calls ''whimsical.'' a more restrained version at greg k. kramer, made by one john liedy of berks county, pa., in 1851, is almost unnervingly fresh. it appears never to have been used; the label refers to its condition as ''one of the all-time best'' of its kind.  i recommend similar traverses in pursuit of ceramics, quilts, game boards (especially parcheesi) and pictorial hooked rugs. one-stop immersion is available at m. finkel & daughter, where nearly all the space is devoted to needlework, including a garden of eden scene on the green linen-wool called linsey-woolsey made by a mary jones of new york city in 1801. s. scott powers is all about burl bowls and ladles, mostly american indian. at clifford a. wallach tramp art rules absolutely, most unusually in a large cupboard that has the mass of a dutch kast armoire and is painted light green.  the show's lone voices include the weathered carved-wood dog that anchors the sculptural tumult at american primitive; the salvaged remnants of a garden shrine covered with small plastic crosses that cast their odd spell at carl hammer; the unusual flying mallard duck decoys at stephen b. o'brien jr.; and a small carved-stone relief at samuel herrup that depicts 16 members of the faculty of oberlin college in yearbook-page formation. it compares favorably to the work of the folk modernist wiliam edmonson, who is represented by a marvelous horse at fleisher ollman.  at hill numerous carvings bristle with a one-of-a-kind aura, including a wood figure made of zodiac signs and a small green marble memorial to a beloved dog. it shows the animal tunneling up through a bed of roses, bordered by small vignettes from its life. harvey art has a clutch of small papier-mâché heads and fabric hands salvaged from a set of marionettes as well as a rigorously abstract african-american quilt. at ricco/maresca the new material includes the proto-pop gouache designs for some of new york's first electric-light signs drawn in the 1910s by h. c. williamson of the federal sign system electric company.  an especially rewarding circuit of the booths at brant mackley, marcy burns and david cook will take you deep into american indian material. one of the fair's most beautiful displays is trotta-bono's, where the standouts include three penobscot indian clubs that contrast expressionist faces with intricately carved handles. but pride of place is accorded a set of omaha maple burl avian effigy bowls and horse effigy ladles that come with their own small trunk made of hardened animal hide. distinguished by elegant distillations of the animal forms and a beautiful patina, the ensemble exudes the instinctive sophistication that, over all, gives the american antiques show such a high rate of revelation.  art review  