ex-convict testifies in sentencing trial of detectives' killer   at 27, shabucalik geralds can recall nine years in and out of federal prisons, selling drugs on probation a month after his release, firing guns at people 8 or 10 times and ordering two other shootings. many of his crimes have gone without punishment, for he has proven more valuable to prosecutors as a serial cooperator.  asked in federal district court in brooklyn yesterday to recount any other violent acts, he required some prompting.  ''were you involved in a stabbing?'' a prosecutor, jack smith, asked.  ''oh,'' said mr. geralds, who is known as shaboo. ''yes.''  the point of his testimony, provided in exchange for a letter to his sentencing judge in a drug case, was to convince jurors of the continuing threat posed by the staten island man whose fate they were deciding, ronell wilson, 24. mr. wilson, convicted of shooting two undercover officers in the head on staten island in march 2003, could be sentenced to death if prosecutors demonstrate their underlying theme: some crimes are worse than others.  mr. wilson, too, has a long criminal record. to show his pattern of violence in jail, the prosecutors called correction officers to the witness stand to recount accusations including threatening and assaulting jail employees, the destruction of city property, fighting, refusal to stop fighting, tampering with security devices, inciting to riot and disrupting institutional programs. mr. wilson's lawyers, who will present their own case against the death penalty later, questioned the credibility of the prosecution witnesses.  but to explain how mr. wilson's violent reach could extend beyond prison walls, prosecutors required a compromise with mr. geralds, who has not been charged in any of the shootings he described.  in addition to a detention center unit and an exercise yard, mr. geralds said, he and mr. wilson shared membership in the bloods street gang. during their time together in a federal detention center in manhattan, mr. wilson spoke of a desire to elevate his ranking, mr. geralds said. from low to high, bloods are ranked soldier, general, superior and o.g., for original gangster.  ''it depends on the work the person puts in,'' mr. geralds said.  the prosecutor asked whether killing two detectives would be considered work. mr. geralds said it would.  mr. wilson, he said, was displeased by a recent revision to the gang oath and suspected a certain high-ranking member of disloyalty. the penalty for that, mr. geralds said, was ''death to all those that go against bloods.''  to enforce the code, mr. geralds said, orders could be conveyed outside prison by sending letters for family members to forward to gang members. he also recounted his own experience speaking to other bloods by telephone from prison.  ''they speak in codes, or they speak in blood dialogue,'' mr. geralds said. ''i wouldn't tell them directly what to do, but i'd give them hints.'' on cross-examination, mr. geralds said he had agreed to cooperate with prosecutors, despite the threat from former gang associates, ''for my kids.''  he also provided a letter from mr. wilson, describing a plan to transcend something more than prison walls.  ''yo what's popping with shorty?'' mr. wilson had written, referring to a woman he did not name. ''is she willing to have a baby for me? all she would have to do is have it, and my family will take the baby if she doesn't want to be held down by the baby. i just need a baby before the pigz try to take my life. i need to have something behind.''  to his friend shaboo, mr. wilson signed off, ''110% love.''  