time inc. cutting almost 300 magazine jobs to focus more on web sites   in a broad retrenchment, time inc. announced yesterday that it would cut nearly 300 employees at its top magazines, including the most profitable publication, people, as it moves to invest more in its web sites.  the number of cuts -- 289 in total -- were deeper than expected, with 172 of them coming from the editorial side and 117 from the business side, a company spokeswoman said. the moves were announced at each magazine individually yesterday.  time magazine is losing close to 50 people and is shutting its bureaus in los angeles, chicago and atlanta. it plans to keep three ''laptop'' correspondents in los angeles who will work directly with editors in new york. seven jobs will be cut in the magazine's washington bureau, including four correspondents. sports illustrated is losing about 30 people.  people, perhaps the most successful magazine in history, is laying off about 44 editorial workers, though it is also creating seven new correspondent jobs around the country for a net loss around 37. it is shutting its bureaus in washington, miami, chicago and austin, tex.  like other publishing companies, time inc., the nation's biggest magazine publisher and a unit of time warner, is trying to cope with the movement of readers and advertisers from print to the web. the company, which has a profit margin around 18 percent, is streamlining its publications to bolster its presence online, especially sites associated with its marquee magazines.  employees at people's soon-to-be-shut bureaus said they felt shell-shocked yesterday as larry hackett, people's managing editor, delivered the news by speakerphone from the magazine's new york offices. the four bureaus have about 20 people combined.  mr. hackett told employees that the cuts were ''brought upon us by some real cold hard facts when it comes to how this business is run, and how media is changing.'' he said that he regretted the cuts, but that they were necessary for ''the health of the magazine'' as the company addresses the ''needs of the web site, specials and other technologies that will be emerging.''  ann s. moore, time inc.'s chief executive, said in a statement that many company web sites had ''matured into strong and popular brand vehicles while others are relaunching new designs with fresher content.''  but, she added, ''we need to continue to evolve to meet the cost pressures and challenges presented by our rapidly shifting industry.'' the layoffs, she said, ''are part of a restructuring necessary to sustain our progress.''  people magazine's investments in its web site, for example, appear to be paying off. after the golden globe awards this week, people.com broke its own record for traffic in a single 24-hour period, with 39.6 million page views. its previous record was for tom cruise's wedding in november, with 28.3 million page views.  the 172 editorial job losses account for more than 5 percent of time inc.'s 3,300 editorial employees worldwide; the total 289 losses account for about 2.6 percent of the company's 11,300-member staff.  time inc. is also selling 18 of its smaller niche magazines, including field & stream and parenting, which employ 530 people. when those transactions are completed, the company's total work force will drop to about 10,500. it cut about 600 people last year.  john huey, editor in chief of time inc., said in a memo that the cuts were being made to help ''move quickly into a future of flexible, multiplatform content.''  the company is ''changing much of what we do and how we do it,'' mr. huey said, adding that the cuts did not mean the company would sacrifice journalistic integrity ''or that we are getting out of the print business.''  of the 172 editorial employees to be let go, 86 nonunion workers are being dismissed outright, effective feb. 1. the identities of the other 86, who are in positions covered by the newspaper guild, is not yet certain, and the numbers remain somewhat fluid.  the company is asking for volunteers to resign, seeking 23 from sports illustrated, 24 from people and 31 from time and others elsewhere (the numbers do not add up to 86, giving the company some flexibility in who leaves). volunteers have two weeks to come forward.  employees said yesterday that many of their colleagues were now inquiring about how much they would be paid if they left and were considering their options. if volunteer resignations fall short, time inc. can then dismiss enough people to reach its goals.  in her statement, ms. moore said, ''i know this is a difficult time for all of us -- it's never easy to see talented colleagues leave.'' she said the company had ''enormous potential for innovation and growth.''  