best burger? in new haven, the claim is first burger   jeff lassen, the fourth-generation owner of a legendary hole in the wall here called louis' lunch, can recite the history with ease.  his great-grandfather was looking for something to do with the trimmings from steak, and sandwiched it between sliced bread, pleasing customers and increasing profits. his father has affidavits dating to the early 1900s showing that the family was the first to grind meat and serve it as a meal known as a hamburger sandwich. they secured a place in the library of congress several years ago.  so when a texas lawmaker introduced a bill recently to codify the claim that a town she represents, athens, was the original home of the hamburger, mr. lassen bit. hard.  ''look, this is not about business,'' he said on tuesday, standing over the cast-iron oven where the burgers are placed between blue-hot flames. ''we're not going to make any more or less money. we'll still serve hamburgers. but it is our family. it's history. and we know we're right.''  the legend of louis' (pronounced louie's), founded in 1895, captivates the hearts and stomachs of residents in and around new haven, who have come to accept the notion as fact that the tiny downtown restaurant is the birthplace of the burger.  ''i don't even think texas has been around as long as this place has been serving hamburgers,'' said david ellner, 39, an east haven native who has gobbled more burgers than he can count at louis'. ''no way were they first. no way should we let them take this away from us.''  but the lawmaker, betty brown, a four-term member of the texas house of representatives, said that athens residents, too, have long labored under the belief that a man from their hometown took the hamburger to the 1904 world's fair in st. louis. when a group of businessmen asked her to submit a resolution declaring athens, which is about 70 miles from dallas in northeast texas, ''the original home of the hamburger,'' she happily obliged.  after news of the bill appeared in the new haven register last weekend, a bit of food pandemonium hit. officials in connecticut said that they would do whatever it took to defend louis' honor and claim to the title, telling the texans to ''get over it.''  ''of course, when i introduced it i had no idea it would be so controversial,'' ms. brown said in a telephone interview. ''we certainly weren't trying to wrest away the title from somebody else. people around athens have taken for granted for a long time that a man there invented the hamburger.''  the rift over the ground meat between two pieces of bread is almost as old as the hamburger itself. food connoisseurs and history buffs have battled over who was first to serve one. some tales have it that the hamburger was first sold at the world's fair by fletcher davis, a resident of athens who owned a luncheonette.  last year, at the national hamburger festival in akron, ohio, a panel of five judges called the burger commission was given the task of deciding just who invented the hamburger.  when commission members could not reach a consensus, the decision was put to an online vote: charles nagreen, who reportedly served his burger at the 1885 seymour fair in wisconsin, captured nearly 40 percent; another burger maven who apparently served the sandwiches at an 1885 fair came in second, followed closely by louis'. the man from texas lagged behind, getting only 3.7 percent of the unscientific vote.  but history is not determined by democracy. george motz, who produced ''hamburger america,'' a 2005 documentary that included a segment about louis', said it is ''practically impossible'' for anyone to say with precision where the modern-day hamburger originated. and as it turns out, louis' takes pride in being a bit different. the hamburgers are served on bread, not buns, and never with mustard or ketchup. asking for the red stuff there is akin to asking for a bible at a gathering of atheists.  one of the many legends of louis' is that when lassen family members moved their restaurant in 1975, to make way for a new part of a hospital, they picked up the building brick by brick to go to louis' current location on crown street.  ''they are, without a doubt, the oldest continuing operating hamburger restaurant in america, isn't that impressive enough?'' asked mr. motz, who is now working on a state-by-state guide of burger joints. ''and they serve a really good burger.''  but that is not enough to quiet the controversy, at least for the politicians. john destefano jr., the mayor of new haven, and representative brown of athens were expected to debate the issue on wednesday morning on the nationally televised ''fox and friends'' program. mr. de-stefano said he was considering sending a letter to texas officials to try to block the resolution.  asked what steps should be taken to solve the matter, mr. motz demurred.  ''that's a really loaded question,'' he said. ''but it sure is fun to watch.''  