former chief of u.n. effort faces charges of corruption   federal prosecutors announced charges yesterday against the former head of the united nations oil-for-food program, accusing him of receiving $160,000 in kickbacks from sales of iraqi oil under the government of saddam hussein.  the seven-count indictment, unsealed in federal district court in manhattan, was brought against benon v. sevan, 69, a cypriot who served as executive director of the $64 billion aid program from 1997 until mid-2003. he was accused together with ephraim nadler, 79, a naturalized american citizen born in egypt, of taking illegal commissions from an egyptian oil trader in exchange for helping him secure contracts to purchase iraqi oil. both were charged with conspiracy and wire fraud.  mr. sevan has known for some time that he was under federal investigation. the charges echo an aug. 8, 2005, report by a commission headed by paul a. volcker, a former federal reserve chairman, which found that mr. sevan had profited from illicit transactions with the trader, fakhry abdelnour.  the indictment highlights the lingering corruption scandals at the united nations in the first weeks of the term of a new secretary general, ban ki-moon, a south korean. the volcker commission concluded that the united nations needed ''thoroughgoing reform'' of its management. so far mr. ban has not made clear if he intends to carry out sweeping change.  mr. nadler is the brother of leia boutros-ghali, the wife of the former secretary general of the united nations, boutros boutros-ghali. mr. abdelnour is also related to mr. boutros-ghali, who is from egypt. there is no mention of mr. boutros-ghali in the new charges.  mr. abdelnour was the president of a small company, african middle east petroleum company, known as amep, and the volcker commission said mr. nadler was its treasurer. the indictment describes an august 2001 transaction in which it says mr. abdelnour arranged to purchase one million barrels of oil from iraq, paying a secret surcharge to saddam hussein's government. the charges assert that mr. nadler had helped mr. abdelnour obtain the contract. (mr. abdelnour appears in the indictment as an unidentified co-conspirator, but was identified in the volcker report.)  soon after, the indictment says, mr. abdelnour transferred $50,000 to a geneva bank account belonging to mr. nadler. at a meeting in geneva in late august 2001, mr. nadler made cash payments of as much as $40,000 to mr. sevan, the indictment says.  mr. sevan's lawyer, eric l. lewis, called the allegations ''ludicrous.'' he said mr. sevan had received cash payments in that period from an elderly aunt who was giving away her assets. mr. sevan fully declared the gifts in his united nations financial disclosures, mr. lewis said.  ''whatever arrangement mr. nadler had with mr. abdelnour, mr. sevan had no knowledge,'' mr. lewis said. he said the government was trying to distract attention from ''financial fraud and ineptitude by the united states in iraq on an unprecedented scale.''  the united nations program was set up to ease the impact on iraqi citizens of international sanctions by allowing iraq to sell oil and use the proceeds to purchase food and medicine. mark j. mershon, the assistant director in charge of the f.b.i.'s new york office, said mr. sevan's management of the program ''was marked by profiteering and profligacy.''  after leaving the program, mr. sevan remained at the united nations on a salary of $1 a year while mr. volcker's investigation was underway. on aug. 7, 2005, one day before mr. volcker's report was released, mr. sevan resigned and moved back to cyprus.  federal prosecutors said they would seek his extradition. if found guilty, he faces a maximum of 50 years in prison. mr. nadler is also out of the country, but prosecutors did not say where.  