pentagon revises its rules on prosecution of terrorists   the pentagon on thursday unveiled its new courtroom rules for prosecuting prisoners held as terrorists, allowing military tribunals to consider hearsay evidence and testimony obtained through coercion, but not torture.  pentagon officials said, however, that the new policy more closely resembled courts-martial governed by the uniform code of military justice than the previous procedures used to prosecute terrorist suspects.  under legislation signed into law last year, the government is poised to restart tribunals that the supreme court halted last summer. pentagon officials said military prosecutors had determined there was sufficient evidence to bring war crimes charges against 60 to 80 of the 395 prisoners detained at the military prison at guantánamo bay, cuba.  the pentagon detailed the new procedures in a 238-page manual released thursday.  the new procedures follow the guidelines congress set down in the military commissions act late last year.  representative ike skelton, the missouri democrat who became chairman of the house armed services committee this month when control of the house changed hands, pledged to scrutinize the new procedures so that they did not ''run afoul'' of the constitution.  the new manual explicitly forbids military prosecutors from using evidence obtained through torture. at the same time, it makes a distinction between torture and coercion, allowing testimony that came as the result of coercive techniques used by military and intelligence officials until late 2005, when congress passed a law banning cruel and inhumane treatment of prisoners.  in order for coerced testimony to be used in military commissions, a military judge would have to determine that it was both reliable and relevant to the case. the matter is particularly important because the pentagon is planning for the trials of 14 ''high value'' detainees, who until they were moved to guantánamo bay in september were kept elsewhere in secret prisons run by the central intelligence agency.  the prisoners detained at those sites, including khalid shaikh mohammed, the accused mastermind of the terrorist attacks of sept. 11, 2001, are believed to have been subjected to particularly harsh interrogation methods like ''water boarding,'' which induces a feeling of drowning.  daniel j. dell'orto, the pentagon's principal deputy general counsel, told reporters on thursday that the new procedures followed the guidelines of the military commissions act and ensured that detainees receive, as called for by international law, ''all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by civilized people.''  pentagon officials said that none of the most significant prisoners would be among the first group to stand trial before the military commissions.  ''those cases are going to have to be developed carefully, and it's going to take some time, because they are extraordinarily complex,'' said brig. gen. thomas l. hemingway, a pentagon official who helped draft the new guidelines.  the bush administration established the military commissions in the months after the sept. 11 attacks to prosecute ''unlawful combatants'' captured during counterterrorism operations around the globe, many of them in afghanistan.  last summer, the supreme court struck down the commissions as unconstitutional, forcing the white house and congress to develop new guidelines.  human rights groups on thursday criticized the new procedures for straying from the military's traditional rules for courts-martial. among other things, the rules allow too much leeway for government lawyers to keep defendants from viewing classified evidence, they said.  ''classified sources and methods are protected,'' said jennifer daskal, a lawyer at human rights watch. ''this creates the possibility that the defense will not learn the ways in which the evidence was obtained, which could have been through coercive techniques like water boarding and sleep deprivation.''  mr. dell'orto said that while defendants would not be allowed to see classified evidence, defense lawyers would be given an unclassified summary of the material.  there are currently 395 detainees held at guantánamo bay, but it is likely that only a fraction of those will be prosecuted before military commissions. even if prisoners are not charged, officials said, the united states still has the right to detain them indefinitely or hand them over to their native governments.  ''it doesn't mean that they are not unlawful combatants. it doesn't mean that they shouldn't be detained,'' said bryan whitman, a pentagon spokesman.  besides mr. mohammed, according to the government, the former c.i.a. detainees currently at guantánamo bay include senior members of al qaeda believed to be responsible for the bombing of the united states destroyer cole in 2000 in yemen and the 1998 attacks on american embassies in kenya and tanzania.  the prosecutors for the trials of those men will be a mix of military and civilian lawyers.  threats and responses  correction:  january 23, 2007, tuesday  an article on friday about the pentagon's new rules for military commissions to try prisoners held at guantánamo, cuba, on terrorism charges, misstated the reasons cited by the supreme court when it struck down the bush administration's original plans for the commissions. the court ruled last year in hamdan v. rumsfeld that the initial procedures established for the commissions were unconstitutional.  correction:  january 24, 2007, wednesday  an article on friday about the pentagon's new rules for military commissions to try prisoners held at guantánamo, cuba, on terrorism charges, misstated the reasons cited by the supreme court when it struck down the bush administration's original plans for the commissions. and a correction in this space yesterday repeated the error. the court ruled last year in hamdan v. rumsfeld that the initial procedures established for the commissions were unauthorized by federal statute and violated international law. it did not rule that the commissions themselves were unconstitutional.  