unions endorsing republican for an open senate seat   several major labor unions are rallying around the republican candidate for an open state senate seat in nassau county, in a sign of the obstacles that labor could present for gov. eliot spitzer's efforts to capture the seat for democrats next month.  after democrats swept all of the top state posts in the november election, the senate was left as the republican party's last statewide power base and one seen by some labor leaders as a potential ally against budget cuts that the new governor has been promising to deliver.  mr. spitzer has been campaigning actively for the democratic candidate, craig m. johnson, a nassau county legislator. the seat became open after mr. spitzer appointed senator michael a. l. balboni, a republican, to be his top public safety adviser. that move set off a fierce political battle for mr. balboni's seat, since democrats need to pick up just three seats to gain control of the senate.  on tuesday, 1199 united healthcare workers east became the latest union to endorse the republican candidate, maureen o'connell, a county clerk and former assemblywoman and a former nurse.  ''ms. o'connell knows firsthand the daily struggles health care workers face to provide the highest quality of patient care,'' dennis rivera, the president of 1199, said in a statement. ''during these troubled times for the future of the new york state health care industry, we need a registered nurse with the experience and know-how to navigate albany's complicated medicaid system,'' he added.  the union has assiduously courted the support of senate republicans -- the e-mail version of the press release endorsing ms. o'connell was a computer file that was an edited version of a previous press release endorsing nicholas spano, a westchester senator who was defeated in november. the editing changes could be viewed by people who received the release.  the special election is scheduled for feb. 6.  last week, the civil service employees association also endorsed ms. o'connell, calling her ''a fair and responsible leader,'' according to danny donohue, the union president. ''just as important, her background as a nurse offers outstanding perspective on both health care issues and the struggles that working people face every day,'' he said.  mr. johnson, the democrat, has also received some amount of union support himself -- he has been endorsed by the labor-backed working families party, which is working in the field for his campaign, and by individual unions like the communications workers of america.  ''i'm proud of my union support, but i'm even prouder of my support from rank-and-file teachers, police officers, nurses and thousands of working families who are hungry for lowering property taxes, making health care more affordable and changing albany,'' mr. johnson said in a statement.  some unions have yet to take sides. the a.f.l.-c.i.o. has not yet endorsed a candidate because of a split in support among its member unions.  ''the state a.f.l.-c.i.o. needs two-thirds support for any candidate in any race to give an endorsement, and at this point neither candidate has reached that threshold,'' said mario cilento, a spokesman for the union.  if nothing else, the race will be an expensive one. ms. o'connell, in her first campaign finance filing yesterday, reported receiving $330,000 from the senate republican campaign committee, which was spent on her media consulting firm.  