digital music up 80% but shy of lost revenue   sales of digitally distributed music rose about 80 percent worldwide in 2006 but failed to make up for falling sales of compact discs, a trade group said wednesday.  the record industry generated nearly $2 billion in revenue from online and mobile device sales last year, up from $1.1 billion in 2005, according to the international federation of the phonographic industry. but the pace of growth slowed from 2005, when digital sales tripled.  john kennedy, chief executive of the group, which is based in london, stuck with a previous forecast that digital sales would make up 25 percent of the industry's revenue by 2010. but his prediction a year ago that digital sales would cover the decline in cd sales in 2006 fell slightly short. overall music revenue probably declined by about 3 percent last year, he said.  ''this is a market combining evolution and revolution, where the learning curve is changing direction on a regular basis,'' mr. kennedy said.  record companies are embracing new digital business models they previously rejected, including free advertiser-supported music services. they are also placing hope in mobile phone distribution, which represents about half of digital sales worldwide, although far less in the biggest market, the united states.  ''the labels now get it, '' said dan cryan, an analyst at screen digest, an audiovisual media research and consulting company based here, ''and they realize that the digital picture will not just be a reproduction of the classical models that have served them well in the past.''  mr. cryan said the goal of deriving a quarter of sales from digital sources in 2010 should be achievable, in part because sales of compact discs will continue to fall. sales of cds fell 23 percent from 2000 to 2006, and the effect continues.  one major music company, the emi group, dismissed the top two executives at its recording division last week as it announced that the unit's revenue was likely to fall 6 to 10 percent in the current fiscal year.  mr. kennedy said that in the united states, britain and japan, digital sales were close to filling the gap left by falling cd sales last year. this balancing out could occur in 10 or 12 markets this year, he said.  but other countries, like germany, are still causing big headaches for the industry. the number of single music tracks downloaded in germany rose 26 percent last year, to 24 million, from 19 million the year before. in the united states, by contrast, 582 million tracks were downloaded, up from 353 million a year earlier, a 65 percent increase.  south korea most strongly embraced digital music; 57 percent of industry revenue there was generated from online or mobile sales in 2006, according to the federation. the high percentage is accounted for in part by the widespread nature of piracy there; the market for legitimate cd sales has been practically wiped out, with total annual music sales only about $80 million.  mr. kennedy promised to press the industry's legal attack on digital pirates this year. action was taken in 2006 against more than 10,000 users of file-sharing systems in 18 countries. the record companies also won important legal victories against peer-to-peer networks like kazaa.  mr. kennedy said that this year the music federation would step up the pressure on internet service providers to take action against customers who use their connections to violate copyrights. ''there will be litigation in 2007,'' he said.  in some countries, service providers or privacy advocates have resisted attempts to monitor individuals' internet use, complicating the music industry's campaign.  