warriors and pacers look for lift from trade   it is halfway through the season, and just the right time for struggling teams to reinvent themselves.  when the indiana pacers and the golden state warriors combined for an eight-player trade yesterday to jump-start their playoff chances, the past was as much a significant factor as the future. the pacers unloaded two starters, stephen jackson and al harrington, to achieve equilibrium on and off the court. in return, the pacers received the high-priced backup forwards troy murphy and mike dunleavy.  indiana also sent point guard sarunas jasikevicius and the second-year forward josh powell to the warriors, while golden state sent the veteran backup point guard keith mcleod and the second-year forward ike diogu to indiana.  jackson, the pacers' sharp-shooting small forward, had a prominent role beside ron artest in the team's brawl with the detroit pistons two seasons ago, and he is facing trial next month for having fired a gun outside an indianapolis nightclub in october. jackson could not escape the boos, and his frustration had led to a clash with coach rick carlisle last month.  ''let's put it this way, it will be good for him to leave this town and it will be good for us as well,'' donnie walsh, the pacers' chief executive, said yesterday in a telephone interview. ''what's going on here with jax has jaded the way he is received here. it was just a cloud hanging over his head and over the team's.''  walsh was far more reluctant to let harrington go. but after re-signing with his former team last summer, harrington was not meshing offensively with the pacers' franchise player, jermaine o'neal.  the golden state warriors had coveted the versatile 6-foot-9 harrington -- whom walsh described as the human mismatch -- last summer, and were thrilled to get a player who fits coach don nelson's unconventional style, which tries to exploit mismatches.  nelson, who has made a career out of reinventing his teams, had not been shy of his disappointment in murphy and dunleavy and had played the bruising diogu sparingly.  within one trade, three first-round picks that chris mullin, the warriors' executive vice president of basketball operations, had supported were history. in discussions with nelson, mullin's former coach, it became clear that none of the three meshed with nelson's up-tempo, small-ball game, but would be a better fit in indiana's more deliberate offense.  ''al is a guy we looked at for a while,'' mullin, thrilled with harrington's post-up talent, said in a conference call. jackson, 28, will be playing for his fifth team, and mullin said he had no concern about his character issues.  ''we feel strongly that a lot of those things are behind him, he's looking to come here and get a new start,'' mullin said.  the warriors (19-20) started the night in ninth place in the western conference, and the pacers (20-18) were in seventh in the east.  ''we've come through the most difficult part of our schedule, and while i'm not displeased with our record, i didn't feel that we were improving,'' walsh said.  murphy, who played up the road at notre dame, will give the pacers a double-double presence in the paint, while walsh said he considers dunleavy, the fifth-year forward out of duke, a multi-talented forward. the move will allow o'neal to return to his natural position, power forward, and could alleviate the frustration that caused him to criticize the direction of the pacers two weeks ago.  none of the traded players were to be in uniform immediately for the warriors or pacers last night. the pacers will have their new roster ready for saturday's game against the knicks.  the pacers should have enough depth to cover the loss of two starters, even as they contemplate miami center shaquille o'neal's possible return tonight from knee surgery that forced him to miss the past 33 games.  ''we don't have anybody to guard shaq anyway,'' walsh said with a laugh.  pro basketball  