a talking head meets his comic doppelgänger, and sparks fail to fly   the exchange was billed as the ultimate cable news vs. fake news smackdown: stephen colbert, who pretends to be a bill o'reilly-esque television pundit on his comedy show, ''the colbert report,'' was a guest on mr. o'reilly's show on fox news last night, and mr. o'reilly appeared on mr. colbert's mock talk show on comedy central.  and mr. o'reilly deserves credit for being a good sport, because his was the thankless role. the imitation was a lot funnier -- and sharper-edged -- than the real thing.  when a few members of stephen colbert's studio audience booed mr. o'reilly as he walked on to the set, mr. o'reilly joked that they must be plants sent by his tormentor on comedy central, jon stewart.  mr. colbert, in character as a media-elite-hating archconservative, dismissed mr. stewart as a ''sexual predator.'' he paused for a beat, then said to his guest, ''you have no idea what that's like.'' it could have been an innocuous joke, of course, but it sounded like an oblique reference to the sexual harassment suit that a former producer on ''the o'reilly factor'' filed against her boss in 2004 and settled out of court.  and mr. colbert was also cheeky as a guest on fox news, veining his mock adoration for the man he called ''the master'' with sly jabs at mr. o'reilly's expense. when mr. o'reilly asked him why he does his comedy show, mr. colbert replied, ''i want to bring your message of peace and love to a younger audience, people in their 50s and 60s, who don't watch the show.''  he also needled the wealthy and successful mr. o'reilly for his on-air populism. ''you and i have taken a lot of positions against the powers that be, and we've paid a heavy price,'' mr. colbert said to his host. ''we have tv shows, product lines and books.''  on his own show, mr. colbert held up mr. o'reilly's latest best seller, ''culture warrior,'' only on his copy there was a huge discount sticker concealing the cover photograph of mr. o'reilly. mr. o'reilly teased back, accusing the comedian whose name is pronounced col-bear of being french. ''every left-wing critic loves you,'' mr. o'reilly said. ''is it because you're french?''  he also chided mr. colbert by noting that his success was entirely due to him.  his lines weren't very funny, but mr. o'reilly remained good-humored throughout, and that was perhaps the real point.  the fox news commentator is famously thin-skinned and bellicose. last year, his feud with his would-be rival at msnbc, keith olbermann, became so heated that it drove up the ratings of ''countdown with keith olbermann.'' (mr. olbermann frequently took on mr. o'reilly in the ''worst person in the world'' segment of his show.) mr. o'reilly has also had well-publicized dust-ups with mr. stewart, and other personalities he regards as part of the liberal media elite.  after mr. colbert's appearance, mr. o'reilly asked fox news contributors to explain the success of satirical shows like mr. colbert's. jane hall, a media expert, assured the host that he was ''generous to fraternize with the enemies of the culture war and have him on.''  but his time with mr. colbert provided mr. o'reilly with a chance to show that he has a sense of humor. mostly, he proved he could take a punch.  on comedy central, mr. colbert suggested that mr. o'reilly was a bit of a brawler. mr. o'reilly demurred with a joke. ''i'm effete,'' he protested. ''this is all an act.''  mr. colbert leaned forward and said in a deep, dramatic voice, ''if you're an act, then what am i?''  the tv watch  