arts, briefly   china denies admission to 'the departed'  mainland china will ban the acclaimed martin scorsese film ''the departed'' because it mentions a chinese plan to buy military equipment, reuters reported yesterday, citing unnamed government officials. ''there is no chance 'the departed' will be shown in mainland cinemas because the u.s. side declined to change a plotline describing how beijing wanted to buy advanced military computer hardware,'' said an official who spoke on condition of anonymity because he does not have permission to speak to foreign news media. ''that part of the plot is definitely unnecessary. the regulators just cannot understand why the movie wanted to involve china.'' an executive in hong kong at media asia, which has the distribution rights for ''the departed,'' said the film had not passed the chinese censor but declined to comment further. ''the departed,'' a crime thriller starring jack nicholson, leonardo dicaprio and matt damon, is based on the hong kong hit film ''infernal affairs.''  the big easy beckons  brad pitt and angelina jolie have decided to settle in new orleans, us weekly reported. ''we love it there,'' ms. jolie said at the golden globe awards on monday. ''the kids are going to go to school there. we're really looking forward to it.'' the children are maddox, 5, adopted by ms. jolie from cambodia; zahara, 2, adopted by ms. jolie from ethiopia; and shiloh, born last year to ms. jolie and mr. pitt, who also became the adoptive father of the other children. according to the magazine, the couple moved to new orleans on jan. 11 and bought a $3.5 million, six-bedroom mansion in the french quarter.  keith urban out of rehab  keith urban has ended three months of treatment for what his publicist said was alcohol addiction and is planning a world tour to promote his latest album, ''love, pain & the whole crazy thing'' (capitol), reuters reported. in a statement, his press representative said mr. urban, 39, left, who has a history of drug and alcohol abuse, would begin his tour in april with a few dates in britain and germany. he is to appear at arenas in australia in may and begin the north american leg of the tour in june. mr. urban entered rehabilitation just before the album was released on nov. 7. it entered the pop charts at no. 3 and now stands at no. 30.  judge and foxy brown exchange report cards  the rapper foxy brown was smiling yesterday when she left criminal court in manhattan after hearing probation officials render what she called an ''excellent'' report on her progress, the associated press reported. in october, foxy brown, 26, right, whose real name is inga marchand, was sentenced by judge melissa jackson to probation and anger management after she pleaded guilty to misdemeanor assault in an argument over payment for a manicure in a nail salon. saying ''probation forces you into structure,'' ms. marchand added: ''it is making me grow up. i have matured a lot since i started anger management.'' she went on to compliment the judge, who ordered her to return to court on march 15. ms. marchand, who had clashed with the judge on several occasions before sentencing, said, ''this is only the first time in two years that i'm pleased with judge jackson.''  