49-yard kick gives chicago reason to exhale   by the time robbie gould lined up for sunday's game-winning field goal in overtime, some of his teammates were more nervous than he was.  ''i didn't want to watch it,'' chicago bears quarterback rex grossman said. ''i didn't see the hold or anything.''  what happened next sent chicago into celebration. thanks to gould's 49-yard field goal, the longest in bears postseason history, chicago edged the seattle seahawks, 27-24, and will play host to the new orleans saints next sunday for the national football conference championship.  gould's kick, which came 4 minutes 58 seconds into overtime and equaled his career long, did more than just win a playoff game. it lifted a psychological burden from the bears, who had been beaten at home during their previous two playoff appearances and had not won a playoff game since jan. 1, 1995. had the bears lost this game, it would have cheapened their 13-3 regular season and their n.f.c. north title, sending them into another off-season feeling as if they had underachieved.  instead, chicago has a chance to reach the super bowl for the first time in 21 seasons. the bears were far from dominant against the seahawks, allowing running back shaun alexander to rush for 108 yards, and falling behind, 24-21, in the fourth quarter. but when it mattered, gould delivered. he kicked a 41-yard field goal in the fourth quarter to tie the score, then followed with his game-winner.  the bears mobbed gould afterward, knowing that his kick had liberated them from heavy criticism.  ''we didn't play good the whole game, we played good enough to win,'' bears linebacker brian urlacher said. ''it's like a monkey off our back. that was a good big kick -- bad field, 49 yards, windy. that's why he's first-team all-pro.''  gould has been a clutch performer for the bears all season, making his first 24 field-goal attempts, and 32 of 36 over all during the regular season. on dec. 17, gould kicked a 25-yard field goal to defeat tampa bay in overtime.  despite the pressure and the importance of sunday's kick, he tried to treat it as routinely as possible.  ''it wasn't an easy kick, but you want the opportunity,'' said gould, in his second season with the bears since going undrafted out of penn state.  ''this is obviously a big win for our team, keeping our season alive.''  for chicago, it was a narrow escape. gould's winning field goal completed the bears' first possession in overtime, after seattle won the overtime coin toss but stalled on its drive. seahawks punter ryan plackemeier muffed a punt that traveled only 18 yards, giving the bears a first down on their 34-yard line. moments later, grossman (21 for 38, 282 yards, one touchdown, one interception) completed a key 30-yard pass to rashied davis, and the bears eventually drove to seattle's 32, setting up gould's winning kick.  the bears will play in the conference championship game for the first time since the 1988 season.  most of the pregame focus was on grossman's inconsistent play all season, but this game was about all of the bears. after last season's playoff loss, 29-21 to carolina, the bears came back strong, finishing with the best record in the conference. but another one-and-done playoff experience would have been more anguishing.  ''last night i talked to the team about finishing,'' bears coach lovie smith said. ''last year we were in this position, and we weren't able to finish the season the way we wanted. we talked about all we've gone through this year, how it would be a shame not to finish the game on a high note.''  the seahawks did not go easily. trailing by 21-14 at halftime, seattle scored 10 consecutive points to take its first lead. after a 40-yard field goal by josh brown cut seattle's deficit to 21-17, the seahawks put together a seven-play, 51-yard touchdown drive. on third-and-10 from chicago's 13-yard line, alexander found a gaping hole in chicago's defensive line and rumbled into the end zone, putting the seahawks ahead, 24-21, with just under five minutes left in the third quarter.  one could almost hear the doubt creeping into soldier field when seattle took the lead, but the bears showed their resiliency. grossman's pass was intercepted by pete hunter deep in seattle's territory to end a drive early in the fourth quarter, but the bears did not panic.  chicago almost took the lead a few minutes later, but an apparent 66-yard punt return for a touchdown by devin hester was nullified because of an illegal block in the back. once again, the bears responded, driving 48 yards to seattle's 23, setting up gould's 41-yard field goal into the wind that barely sneaked over the crossbar with 4:24 left in regulation, tying the score.  the seahawks had chances to win in regulation, but they were thwarted on their final two fourth-quarter possessions. just after the two-minute warning, seattle had fourth-and-1 from chicago's 44. seahawks coach mike holmgren elected to go for the first down, but the play's timing was thrown off after matt hasselbeck bobbled the snap. when alexander finally received the handoff from hasselbeck, he was thrown for a 2-yard loss by linebacker lance briggs.  after stopping the bears and getting the ball back, the seahawks threatened again, driving from their 20 to chicago's 45 with 30 seconds left in regulation. but chicago defensive tackle tank johnson, who was arrested last month on misdemeanor weapons charges, sacked hasselbeck for a 9-yard loss with 24 seconds to play in regulation.  ''we know what tank is as a football player,'' urlacher said. ''it was a big play.''  time expired in regulation, and after the bears stopped seattle and got the ball in overtime, grossman set up gould's kick with his 30-yard completion to davis.  ''the pattern was open all game,'' davis said. ''rex was waiting for a big play to come my way. i'm just elated.''  all the bears were elated, because their season was still alive.  pro football  