all japanese, and very naked   i have seen the glorious future.  it wasn't wearing any clothes.  the future (or at least the three naked men claiming to represent it) arrived courtesy of the annual japanese contemporary dance showcase, which hit the joyce theater on tuesday, having outgrown the japan society. the dance group noism 07, along with kim itoh and the glorious future, performed program a on opening night; program b features leni-basso and pappa tarahumara.  this popular sampler is in its 10th year, and it has become a cliché to describe the weird assortment of alien visions it offers up. (''what will those wacky japanese think of next?'') these days there seems to be a depressing sameness to the strangeness of japanese dance, or at least to much of what finds its way here. it's as if choreographers were adhering to a style rather than responding to individual artistic imperatives. this sameness is particularly problematic, given the existential nature of many of these dances; if you're going to go all deep and ineffable on an audience, you'd better mean it.  kim itoh and the glorious future's ''dead and alive -- body on the borderline'' began with mr. itoh crumpled on the dimly lighted stage as the naked men slowly organized themselves on a diagonal. hands covering their crotches, they posed and simpered and writhed, muscles clenching and jiggling; jerry seinfeld's famous distinction between ''good naked'' and ''bad naked'' came to mind.  as unidentified classical music played, the dancers continued their contortions. the juxtaposition highlighted the age-old gulf between man's lofty consciousness and the physical body's earthly preoccupations. all bodies tire, of course, and the second half consisted of a solo for mr. itoh, seemingly representing the lofty with his demure white shift and searching, sinuous limbs.  then it was over, and everyone came back for bows, the members of the glorious future still naked and clutching themselves. it was all very cute, a wink-wink retreat from the big questions. who needs answers when you've got showbiz?  title aside, there was nothing cute about ''nina materialize sacrifice -- 1st part.'' choreographed by noism 07's director, jo kanamori, and set to ton that an's layered, compelling score, it offered a stark vision of the sexes in which five women portraying female mannequins are manipulated by sinister men in dark suits.  mr. kanamori has devised captivating movement, especially for the women. but again, the dark-and-repressively-rigid-society idea seems about played out. new yorkers hardly need look overseas for choreographic automatons.  program a will be performed twice today and program b twice tomorrow at the joyce theater, 175 eighth avenue, at 19th street, chelsea; (212) 242-0800 or joyce.org.  dance review  