a trip off the beaten path (for everyone involved)   with broadway and theater row and the villages beckoning, sometimes new york theatergoers need to remind themselves: it's not the location, it's the writing and the acting. west 21st street may not be a theater hot spot, but ''the dirty talk,'' a delicious two-hander playing at center stage there, is as rewarding a trip off the beaten path as you'll make.  michael puzzo, the playwright, gives us two men who have just met and are stranded in a hunting cabin. how they came to be there gradually and hilariously becomes clear. the internet was involved, but it's not what you think, except that it is, sort of. more explanation than that would ruin the fun of the show, a graduate of the 2005 new york international fringe festival and staged here by spare change productions.  sidney williams plays mitch, a man so tightly wound that within the play's first minute -- a battle with an unruly umbrella is involved -- you're scanning the audience for potential doctors, in case the fellow goes into cardiac arrest. his unresolved issues, which include a failed relationship and an overbearing father, may be familiar, but mr. williams's hurricane delivery is irresistible.  it's so dominant, in fact, that it takes a while to realize what an exceptional performance his sidekick, kevin cristaldi, is giving as lino, a milquetoasty man who has found in the internet a way to escape his own limitations. lino is at the cabin under ludicrously false pretenses, but in between absorbing mitch's verbal assaults he quietly makes the case that there is more than one liar in the room.  ''i wasn't mr. 'honey, move out of the way, i'm watching the game' like my dad,'' mitch confesses in one of his calmer moments, ''but maybe that's what i am. i don't know.''  padraic lillis, the director, has the two actors in perfect sync. an unintended suspense builds as mr. puzzo makes his points about honesty and identity: will the playwright, having begun with a dandy premise, lose control of it? happily, he doesn't; the final stage picture is the best of the night.  ''the dirty talk'' continues through feb. 4 at center stage, 48 west 21st street, flatiron district; (212) 352-3101.  theater review  