treasury bills scheduled for this week   the treasury's schedule of financing this week includes today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills and an auction of four-week bills tomorrow.  at the close of the new york cash market on friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 5.08 percent. the rate on the six-month issue was 5.13 percent, and the rate on the four-week issue was 4.95 percent.  the following tax-exempt, fixed-income issues are scheduled for pricing this week:  tax exempt  tomorrow  new mexico capital projects, $143.1 million of general obligation bonds. competitive.  pima county, ariz., $95 million of general obligation bonds. competitive.  pima county, ariz., $50 million of revenue bonds for sewer revenues. competitive.  plano, tex., independent school district, $75.4 million of general obligation bonds. competitive.  round rock, tex., independent school district, $103.1 million of general obligation bonds. competitive.  wednesday  mecklenburg county, n.c., $102 million of general obligation bonds. competitive.  truckee meadows water authority, reno, nev., $218.5 million of revenue bonds. competitive.  thursday  fairfax county, va., $232.7 million of general obligation bonds. competitive.  tax exempt  one day during the week  alaska housing finance corporation, $89 million of debt securities. merrill lynch.  anaheim, calif., public finance electric system, $203.3 million of debt securities. citigroup.  cape girardeau, mo., industrial development authority, $104.4 million of health facilities revenue bonds for southeast missouri state university. ubs.  chicago, $353 million of debt securities. siebert brandford shank.  cypress-fairbanks, tex., independent school district, $300 million of debt securities. merrill lynch.  grayson county, tex., $65 million of toll revenue and limited tax bonds. first southwest.  hospital authority of valdosta-lowndes county, ga., $55 million of revenue certificates. bank of america.  irving, tex., independent school district, $109 million of unlimited tax refunding revenue bonds. first southwest.  maryland health and higher education facilities authority, $142 million of debt securities for medstar health. citigroup.  montana board of housing, $86 million of single-family mortgage revenue bonds. ubs.  new york state dormitory authority, $175 million of debt securities for university of rochester. lehman brothers.  new york state environmental facility corporation, $186.1 million of state personal income tax revenue bonds. first albany capital.  new york state mortgage agency, $56 million of debt securities. citigroup.  ohio state university, $290 million of debt securities for university hospital. citigroup.  richmond county, ga., board of education, $134 million of debt securities. citigroup.  southwest higher education authority inc., $95 million of higher education revenue bonds for southern methodist university project. lehman brothers.  springfield, mass.,, $140 million of general obligation bonds. ubs.  waxahachie, tex., independent school district, $59.3 million of unlimited tax school building revenue bonds. first southwest.  winchester, va., industrial development authority, $88 million of debt securities for valley health hospitals. merrill lynch.  