some tv contestants feel more equal than others   it began predictably enough as yet another television plunge into the choreographed world of faded celebrity, a familiar cocktail of the incompatible and the incorrigible, lubricated with booze and braggadocio, on ''celebrity big brother.''  but, no doubt to the glee of its ratings-driven promoters, it has led britons somewhere else -- into a moment of national introspection about race, class and social envy, magnified not only by front-page newspaper coverage but also by complaints to parliament and the police. it has become almost an international incident.  at the center of this manufactured maelstrom is the preternaturally beauteous figure of shilpa shetty, 31, a bollywood movie star from india whose treatment by british contestants in the so-called reality show on television here has provoked more than 16,000 viewers to complain to regulators that she is the victim of racist bullying.  the number of complaints to regulators is the highest on record, surpassing those about the bbc's showing ''jerry springer: the opera.''  ''this is what 'big brother' is for,'' said the novelist hari kunzru. ''it holds a mirror up to national attitudes. if we don't like what we see, we ought to change.''  the newspapers, even the serious ones, have filled with images of the distressed ms. shetty aghast at criticism and then sobbing, ''why does everyone hate me?'' but the issue is not simple. as the feminist author and television personality germaine greer argued in the daily guardian, ms. shetty is ''a very good actress,'' adding, ''everyone hates her because she wants them to.''  that might well be part of the deeper manipulation that is at the heart of ''celebrity big brother.'' ms. greer is well qualified to detect such ploys, since she took part in an earlier ''big brother'' contest, quitting prematurely in january 2005 and complaining of bullying.  the program coops up contestants in ''big brother house,'' where they are on camera 24 hours a day. the person who survives a series of evictions from the house is the winner. from the point of view of those who produce it, it works best on conflict, flamboyance and oddity.  earlier contestants included pete bennett, a young man suffering from tourette's syndrome, and george galloway, a maverick legislator.  this time, such american notables as dirk benedict of ''the a-team'' and jermaine jackson joined the house. but the headline-grabbing clash has been between ms. shetty and three british women: jade goody, a former ''big brother'' runner-up; danielle lloyd, a former beauty pageant contestant; and jo o'meara, a former pop group member. the frequency of the word former offers a clue as to the motives of some contestants.  the three have been caught on camera criticizing ms. shetty's cooking and her personal mannerisms. ''she wants to be white,'' ms. lloyd was heard remarking to ms. goody. in another episode, ms. goody's mother, jackiey, asked ms. shetty if she lived in a house or a shack.  the exchanges prompted a labor legislator, keith vaz, to complain about the show in a formal note to parliament demanding that the trio be expelled from the contest. ''we would stamp on this behavior if it was at a football match'' he said, ''so why not here?''  the flap even embroiled the indian government, with the junior foreign minister, anand sharma, telling journalists that the government was awaiting details of what had transpired on the show. ''the government will take appropriate measures once it gets to know the full details,'' mr. sharma said. ''racist remarks have no place in civilized society.''  it also clouded a visit to india by britain's prime-minister-in-waiting, gordon brown, who told reporters in bangalore, ''i want britain to be seen as a country of fairness and tolerance.'' prime minister tony blair was obliged under questioning in parliament to reaffirm britain's opposition to racism.  back home, though, his point seemed a stretch for those like ms. greer, who argued that britain ''is a racist country.''  of course, there is a commercial undertow to all this. ''until this week the show was dying on its backside, but now, thanks to a bit of asian-baiting, it is back in the news,'' a columnist, carol midgley, wrote in the times of london.  beyond that, though, there is a class issue. ms. shetty displays the manners of the indian middle class, said mr. kunzru, the novelist, while her antagonists seem to come from a different social milieu -- at least in the eyes of columnists, who are themselves writing for a largely middle class british audience.  ''one of nature's aristocrats, she has poise, intelligence, a moral code and occasionally diva-like ways,'' the columnist allison pearson said of ms. shetty in the daily mail. ''that can make her deeply irritating to a group of brainless girls who think that class is drinking champagne from a glass instead of a bottle.''  ''still there's no doubt that shilpa's presence in the big brother house has exposed a seam of low-level racism born of insecurity and stupidity,'' ms. pearson wrote. in the times, ms. midgley labeled the show ''pit bull versus pedigree.''  that remark in itself revealed the unspoken sense of hierarchy that permeates society from the articulate and chattering classes to those of less social and educational polish.  but there is another element, that of bullying, that seems to fascinate viewers. bullying worries parents of british schoolchildren, but it has leapt from true reality to reality television as a spectator sport.  bullying, ms. greer wrote, is the ''really vicious and corrupting'' factor that ''supplies the motive force for everything that happens in the big brother house.''  the producers of the show, a company called endemol, have refused to intervene, saying in a statement that ms. shetty has not ''voiced any concerns of racial slurs or bullying against her,'' adding, ''matters of bullying or racial abuse are taken extremely seriously.''  the show is to run for two more weeks, but bookmakers are offering odds about whether it will complete its run. they have also made ms. shetty the 6-4 favorite to win.  memo from london  