antiques dealer sues to bar homeless from sidewalk   a manhattan antiques dealer has filed a lawsuit against a small group of homeless people claiming that they are disrupting his business by using the sidewalk outside his high-end east side store as a urinal, a spittoon and an occasional dressing room, according to the suit and the dealer's lawyer.  the dealer, karl kemp, who owns karl kemp & associates at 833 madison avenue near 69th street, says he has put up with the group, in particular one bearded homeless man and his ''island'' of filthy belongings, for more than two years and hopes the suit will compel the city to have them removed from the area.  besides seeking $1 million in damages -- the dealer's lawyer said he put in a figure for legal reasons -- the suit also asks for a restraining order requiring them to stay at least 100 feet from the store. the suit notes that the antiques dealer is located ''within the heart of new york's most exclusive madison avenue shopping district,'' with neighbors like gucci, chanel and prada.  mr. kemp says that the dress and behavior of the homeless people has discouraged some people from going into his store. the suit, which was filed in state supreme court in manhattan on tuesday and was first reported in the new york sun, identifies the homeless plaintiffs only as john smith, john doe, bob doe and jane doe.  the suit says that the group ''can often be found sleeping on the sidewalk,'' ''consuming alcoholic beverages from open bottles, performing various bodily functions such as urinating and spitting,'' and ''verbally harassing or intimidating the plaintiff's patrons and prospective customers.''  mr. kemp, who also has a downtown store on east 10th street, says he has complained about the homeless people in front of the uptown store to the police and to the local merchant association, to no avail.  ''my concern is the health of the man,'' mr. kemp said in a telephone interview, referring to the homeless man with the beard he described in the suit. ''sometimes he's out there in blizzard conditions, and you and i pay taxes in new york city and some of that is to maintain decent shelters. and he should take advantage of that.''  allan schiller, mr. kemp's lawyer, said the lawsuit was a last resort by mr. kemp in an effort to resolve something he had been dealing with for two years.  mr. kemp, mr. schiller said, has even asked the owner of the building that houses the store to remove or reroute the heating duct outside the building to deter the homeless from seeking its warmth. but nothing has worked, mr. schiller said.  shelly nortz, deputy executive director for policy for the coalition for the homeless, said mr. kemp's legal action was mean-spirited and that in her 25 years of working as an advocate for the homeless, she had never heard of a similar suit by an individual against a homeless person.  ''i think it's preposterous,'' she said. ''until we see to it that every single homeless individual has a place to stay, this is our reality.''  ms. nortz also questioned the legitimacy of the lawsuit. ''what law is it that these homeless individuals have violated?'' she asked. ''it's not spelled out here. the complaint that they somehow occasionally occupy a space that is also home to gucci and chanel doesn't mean that they're breaking any law.''  mr. schiller, the lawyer, said: ''they're not really breaking any law besides being vagrants, and it's my understanding that vagrancy really isn't a reason to pick anyone up anymore. the fact is, they are creating a nuisance by standing in front of you constantly. you are not my guest. i did not invite you here. and they have attached themselves to my client's property.''  jose perez, who works at cesare paciotti, a shoe store next to mr. kemp's shop, said the bearded man who seemed to be the focus of mr. kemp's complaints never bothered any of his store's customers. ''he has a very bad smell,'' mr. perez said. ''but besides that he causes no problem. we never asked him to leave.''  