parents held in baby's death after saying they shook him   the parents of a 2-month-old harlem boy who died on saturday were charged with murder yesterday after they told detectives they had shaken and hit him to stop his crying, the police said.  when the boy, sebastian flores, finally fell quiet, his parents believed he had fallen asleep, according to a complaint filed by the district attorney's office. hours later, they awoke to discover he was not breathing, and called 911. he was pronounced dead at st. luke's-roosevelt hospital center.  ''this was a tragic, violent murder,'' said robert hettleman, an assistant district attorney who appeared last night at the arraignment of the parents, teresa flores, 20, and rufino bedoya-flores, 30, in manhattan criminal court. he said both had abused the child, the product of an unwanted pregnancy. they were charged with second-degree murder, reckless endangerment and endangering the welfare of a child.  they had been living with sebastian -- whom the police first identified as demetro flores -- ms. flores's 1-year-old daughter and several other people in an apartment on west 135th street.  james mcqueeney, a lawyer for mr. bedoya-flores, described both defendants as ''hard-working, poor people,'' adding, ''i think they cared deeply about the child who died.''  ms. flores's daughter has been taken from the home by child welfare officials, who were trying to locate her father, the authorities said.  last night the precise cause of the baby's death had not been determined, said ellen borakove, a spokeswoman for the chief medical examiner.  around 4:30 a.m. saturday, ms. flores, awakened by the infant's crying, hit him and shook him forcefully, according to the district attorney's complaint. she placed her hand over his nose and mouth and pressed a bedsheet hard against his neck, according to the complaint.  ms. flores screamed at the baby, the complaint said, before mr. bedoya-flores took him from her, hitting and shaking him hard.  