s.m.u. chief says bush library would be a boon for the campus   the president of southern methodist university told professors on wednesday evening that the university would benefit if it became the site of president bush's presidential library.  the university president, r. gerald turner, spoke at the spring faculty meeting and addressed questions posed by professors after southern methodist learned on dec. 21 that it had emerged as the sole finalist for the library.  many professors, including some who want the library on campus, are concerned about the relationship between a proposed bush policy institute and the library and the effect the institute might have on the university's academic independence.  but dr. turner said the library and the institute would raise the national profile of the private university, spur economic development in the community, and most importantly, enhance academic resources and professional interaction.  ''this presidential library will obviously contain a treasure trove of documents and artifacts that describe one of the most intense and controversial periods in our history,'' he said. ''any real or perceived fears about the institute or the library in any way inhibiting this institution's history of academic freedom are unfounded.''  what's more, southern methodist stands to lose prestige and donor support if it were to fail in its bid for the library at this stage, he added. ''it would raise questions of donor confidence in our ability to compete for this tremendous asset,'' he said.  both the interim provost and the president of the faculty senate cautioned ''outsiders'' not to mistake vigorous academic debate for widespread opposition. but several faculty members said wednesday that they believed there was deep opposition to the plan on the faculty, particularly to the bush institute.  a history professor, kathleen wellman, said she did not want the institute on campus. ''i think it will generate what i consider to be political propaganda and overshadow much of the other work done at s.m.u.,'' she said.  an art history professor, janis bergman-carton, said, ''i am afraid we are mortgaging our reputation and our students, actually and symbolically, to an administration that 70 percent of this country thinks is incompetent and unethical.''  benjamin johnson, an assistant professor and scholar of modern american and texas history, asked, ''how can it be a good thing to turn over the public faith of this university to the cronies of one of the most divisive, partisan and unpopular administrations in american history?''  students returned to class on tuesday, and interest in the issue has so far been muted. but students tend to be more conservative and supportive of the idea than the faculty, said the student body president, taylor russ.  ''if the institute brings politics to the campus, i think all students, whether or not they agree with president bush, see that it brings another opportunity to learn and interact with each other,'' he said.  mark norris, editor in chief of the independent student newspaper, the daily campus, said: ''i think most students just assume it's coming here. from what i can tell most people seem pretty supportive.''  