white house retreats under pressure   the bush administration's abrupt abandonment on wednesday of its program to eavesdrop inside the united states without court approval is the latest in a series of concessions to congress, the courts and public opinion that have dismantled major elements of its strategy to counter the terrorist threat.  in the aftermath of the 2001 attacks, president bush asserted sweeping powers to conduct the hunt for operatives of al qaeda, the detention of suspects and their interrogation to uncover the next plot. but facing no new attack to justify emergency measures, as well as a series of losses in the courts and finally the democratic sweep of the november election, mr. bush has had to retreat across the board.  ''i think there's no question that both politically and legally, the president has been chastened,'' said douglas w. kmiec, professor of constitutional law at pepperdine university and generally a supporter of the administration's interpretation of executive power.  harold hongju koh, the dean of yale law school and a critic of the administration's legal theories, said the president's strategy might have provoked so strong a judicial and congressional rebuff that it would ultimately accomplish the opposite of his goal. ''i think historians will see it as an exorbitant and extreme theory of executive power that ended up weakening the presidency,'' mr. koh said.  that would be an extraordinary outcome, and one that is far from assured. in some areas, the administration has preserved its freedom to act, notably in persuading congress last fall to deny prisoners held in guantánamo bay, cuba, the right to challenge their detention in american courts. the full details of the new approach to the domestic eavesdropping program have not been publicly disclosed.  mr. bush's legal strategy has been directed not only by the practical need to prevent attacks but also by the belief, expressed most fervently by vice president dick cheney, that presidential powers, and the war-making power in particular, were excessively curbed in reaction to the vietnam war and the watergate scandal.  among the laws passed in the post-vietnam, post-watergate era was the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978, a hard-fought compromise between the security agencies and civil libertarians. the national security agency and the f.b.i. could keep eavesdropping on spy and terror suspects in the united states, but only by justifying their actions to a federal judge in secret hearings before the foreign intelligence surveillance court.  for more than two decades, that compromise served, and government eavesdropping on american soil took place only under court order. but after the sept. 11 attacks, the white house decided that the court approval process was too slow and cumbersome to match the terrorist threat and that the president had the power to bypass the fisa act and order surveillance on his own authority as commander in chief.  in december 2005, a few days after the program of eavesdropping without warrants was disclosed by the new york times, mr. cheney linked it explicitly to the broader question of executive power. ''it was true during the cold war, as well as i think what is true now, the president of the united states needs to have his constitutional powers unimpaired, if you will, in terms of the conduct of national security policy,'' mr. cheney told reporters. ''so when you're asking about my view of the presidency, yes, i believe in a strong, robust executive authority.''  the same philosophy guided administration actions in other areas. hundreds of men were labeled unlawful enemy combatants and imprisoned at guantánamo bay, a location chosen in the hope that it would be beyond the reach of american courts. dozens of terrorist suspects were seized by the central intelligence agency and held in secret overseas locations.  some of those c.i.a. prisoners were interrogated using techniques far harsher than anything approved in earlier wars, including waterboarding, a simulated drowning that many human rights advocates believe crossed the line into torture.  slowly but surely, each of those programs has been eroded. in some cases, the press has uncovered them, creating an outcry from civil libertarians and some democrats in congress and often revealing a rift inside the administration.  in others, the courts have weighed in, upholding some of the administration's moves but setting firm limits to others. in the hamdi case in 2004, justice sandra day o'connor wrote for the supreme court's majority, ''we have long since made clear that a state of war is not a blank check for the president when it comes to the rights of the nation's citizens.''  last year, in hamdan v. rumsfeld, the court rejected the rules for military commissions to try unlawful combatants. mr. bush subsequently ordered the c.i.a. to move its 14 so-called high-value qaeda suspects to guantánamo to await legal proceedings. though a new list of approved interrogation techniques has not been finalized, officials say it will not include waterboarding.  the n.s.a. program, too, has faced tough scrutiny.  a federal judge in detroit ruled the program unconstitutional, a finding now on appeal. under pressure from some republicans as well as democrats in congress, the administration first agreed to brief the full senate and house intelligence committees on the closely guarded program and then accepted the idea of legislation to bring the program under the law. the several proposals pending in congress to rein in the n.s.a.'s eavesdropping may now become moot.  but even if mr. bush has again backed away in the face of legal and political trouble, he has by no means given up on the national security agenda that he clearly sees as his legacy, for better or worse. despite strong opposition from congress and the public, he has decided to send more american troops into combat in iraq. mr. bush remains commander in chief, whose constitutional powers remain formidable.  democrats may have been empowered by the election and by the administration's recent setbacks, but while voicing loud protests over mr. bush's new plan for iraq, they are moving cautiously, with most willing at least for now to embrace only symbolic resistance.  news analysis  