felled trees in east hampton: a prank's toll, or a beaver's lunch?   steven niggle was duck hunting on scoy pond in the northwest woods here when he did a double take at a tree with a ring chewed out of its lower trunk. then he found several more gnawed-up trunks around the pond, some merely stumps with a pointy, chewed up tip, others with trees still partially attached, either fallen or leaning.  mr. niggle, 19, said he wondered why the pond's water level seemed about three feet higher than normal, overflowing its banks. turned out that a dam meticulously fashioned from twigs and saplings, some with gnawed-off ends, was blocking the mouth of ely brook, where the pond flows into another one nearby. a lodge made of sticks showed up later in a shallow section of the pond, which is in the grace estate town nature preserve.  ''i said, 'is that a beaver ring around that tree?' '' mr. niggle recalled of that day at the pond last month. ''because i've been upstate and seen logs wash down the river chewed up from beavers, but i've never heard of beavers around here.''  mr. niggle told his father, charles niggle, who also had not heard of beavers being in these parts, and who went to see for himself. word spread among the local hunters and outdoorsmen, none of whom knew of beavers having lived here.  according to local records and wildlife books, the beaver -- the official animal of new york state -- was once prevalent on long island, but disappeared by the early 1700s as a result of trapping, hunting and deforestation for farming.  local environmental experts say that more recently, beaver-chewed wood has washed up on east end shores after huge rainfalls, probably from connecticut. a dead beaver was found on shelter island last year, and there was evidence of a beaver on plum island a few years ago. in the late 1990s, a fatigued beaver was seen just off the long island sound beach in southold; it was rescued and died soon afterward.  but live beavers chewing trees and building dams in an east hampton nature preserve is something else.  ''it's a real mystery,'' said larry penny, 71, director of the town's department of natural resources. ''it's possible someone caught them up north and released them here.''  environmental officials say the beavers could have washed out from flooded connecticut rivers, gotten disoriented, and wound up swimming across long island sound. if any live in the fresh water pond on gardiners island -- the huge, private, unoccupied land between long island's forks -- they may have taken the shorter swim over from there. or somebody may have brought beavers to scoy pond.  then again, there are no reports of actual sightings of beavers, which tend to work at night and avoid people.  ''it's possible it could be a hoax,'' mr. penny said, ''but i really doubt someone would go through the trouble. it's just too difficult.''  at first, steven niggle saw only a few gnawed trees. by last week, more than a dozen stumps were visible, five inches to a foot in diameter, their nubs whittled sharp by a busy little chiseler who left mounds of fresh wood shavings on the forest floor. on some trees, only the bark was stripped away. on others, the trunks appeared beveled by beaver bites. still others were cut clear through and were left leaning against other tree branches.  mr. penny said adult beavers, which weigh about 20 pounds, can drag a large tree to a pond to help build or protect the lodge. he knelt at a stump one foot in diameter, from a white oak whose age he estimated at about 60 years. about 20 yards off a southeast edge of the pond, there was a dense wigwamlike structure of branches and switches rising three feet above the surface.  ''that's the lodge,'' mr. penny said, peering at it through a thicket of trees and overgrowth. ''they dam up the river to raise the water level and then build their lodge in shallows so that they must swim underwater to enter it.''  daniel rosenblatt, the long island regional wildlife manager for new york state's department of environmental conservation, said long island was not particularly abundant in wetlands or the hardwood trees that beavers prefer to soft wood, such as the pine trees that proliferate on long island.  ''we don't have any breeding beaver on long island, and we haven't seen evidence that they have been able to survive here,'' he said. ''periodically, we've had some wash up on the north shore, probably flushed out from connecticut rivers.  ''there are very few locations where they could take root on long island,'' mr. rosenblatt added. ''a lot of the estuaries here have salt tidal influence, and beavers need a fresh water system of lakes and rivers to become widespread.''  mr. penny joked that the town might install night video cameras connected to its web site to spot the industrious beaver -- or beavers.  ''the beaver is known for appearing out of nowhere, out of the dark, to a pond and building a dam,'' he said. ''they are seen in some indian lore as the reincarnated spirit of the departed.''  