defense portrays harrowing childhood as reason to spare killer of 2 detectives   ronell wilson had a miserable childhood. there were roaches everywhere. he took beatings, sucked his thumb long past infancy and failed his driver's license exam six times.  detective rodney j. andrews was a doting father. he told his boys to be leaders. he helped with their homework, taught them chess and took them to theme parks.  ''he was the best dad i could ask for,'' said detective andrews's elder son, christian, 16, testifying yesterday in federal district court in brooklyn, where a jury must decide whether mr. wilson should die by lethal injection for killing detective andrews and his partner, james v. nemorin.  the same jurors have already convicted mr. wilson, 24, of murder for shooting the detectives in the back of the head during an undercover assignment on staten island in march 2003.  with his head high, his back straight, his voice deepened by adolescence, christian went on, ''he always did stuff for me and justin.''  in this second phase of the trial, prosecutors seek to add mr. wilson's name to a roster of 46 federal death row inmates, by the count of the death penalty information center. just three have been executed since 1963, including timothy mcveigh in 2001.  mr. wilson's lawyers said they plan to offer his own sorry history to spare him that fate. the trial is expected to last about two weeks, with the mundane and intimate details of biography as evidence.  ''let us begin, ladies and gentlemen,'' a defense lawyer, mitchell dinnerstein, said in court yesterday, ''our sad work together.''  prosecutors began their case as some twisted childhood reunion. up to the witness stand came a police officer who had arrested mr. wilson for throwing a bottle at a police van at age 11, a young man mr. wilson had confronted in a street fight and another mr. wilson had bullied at age 13.  ''he took my book bag,'' said the bullying victim, jack marczewski, now a 23-year-old computer technician. ''he opened it up and started going through it.''  an assistant united states attorney, morris j. fodeman, said in his opening statement that the case for execution would depict patterns of violence and misanthropy escalating from such juvenile delinquency. the judge, nicholas g. garaufis, wore the dress robes he reserves for solemn occasions.  mr. wilson, who maintained a cast of stolid indifference through the first phase of his trial, now seemed a shrunken man, slumped and listless. a screen for the display of evidence photographs lay on the table before him, unwatched.  but his lawyers seemed newly invigorated. after the prosecutor concluded his quiet, studied opening argument, mr. dinnerstein made an impassioned plea for mercy.  ''it's about life and death; that's what we're going to be talking about,'' he said, his voice strained and breaking. ''whether that boy, that person, that man lives or dies.''  he recounted a timeline of lovelessness and neglect, a boy born earl ronell wilson at the start of the crack epidemic to an absent father and an addicted mother. he spoke of an infested apartment in coney island, interventions by child welfare workers, cramped quarters, meningitis, cruel nicknames and threats of suicide.  ''a suicidal 6-year-old,'' mr. dinnerstein said.  he asked for mercy, in the form of natural death in a maximum security prison.  ''more death,'' mr. dinnerstein said, ''gives honor only to revenge.''  then prosecutors began recounting the lives of the slain men, starting with detective andrews. after three and a half years of legal machinations, his relatives took the witness stand to describe his life, their loss.  ''who was rodney andrews to you?'' asked a prosecutor, colleen kavanagh.  after a long pause, the woman on the witness stand, maryann andrews, answered, ''rodney was my best friend, the love of my life, my first love, my husband, the father to my two boys.''  through testimony and family photographs, the jurors watched baby rodney asleep in a puffy chair beside a cousin, young rodney all duded up for mother's day in his outlandish sunday best, teenage rodney sweeping maryann into his arms for a smooch. they heard of his service in the navy, a fall overboard that broke his wrists, his struggle to recover and his rebirth as a police officer.  that cousin asleep in the puffy chair, derek williams, now 39 and a senior analyst for the metropolitan transportation authority, recounted bygone days acting out scenes from ''adam-12'' and other television police shows.  a sister-in-law, rosemary lubrano, spoke of the void left by detective andrews's death.  ''i believe in my heart,'' ms. lubrano said, ''that rodney is looking down from heaven, and he is watching over us, and he will protect us.''  when christian walked into the courtroom for his turn at the witness stand, he took a long look at his father's convicted killer, then turned to receive a prosecutor's questions. in response, he quantified episodes of homework assistance and other fatherly duties.  ''i miss him being there for me and my brother,'' christian said in a strong, confident voice. ''giving me a little advice, and joking around with me.''  as he walked from the courtroom, christian did not give a second look to mr. wilson, slumped there in his chair with an index finger to one temple and a thumb to the other, one fatherless young man hiding his eyes from the gaze of another.  