springfield, u.s.a., my second home   as an actor, i never set out to work in the same place for decades. i certainly never intended to log hours in a fictional hospital among chiseled doctors and sultry patients. but playing a trusty orderly on ''guiding light'' -- the longest-running soap opera in history -- has been a ritual spanning my entire adult life.  millions of people faithfully follow ''guiding light,'' a daily dose of romance and drama that began as a radio serial in 1937 and moved to television in 1952. like many devoted viewers, i have found my own life intertwined with the adventures in springfield, u.s.a., only my interaction has been somewhat more personal.  i arrived in manhattan in 1983, in the summer of my college sophomore year, with vague aspirations about acting. at a theater bookstore, now defunct, i copied down the addresses of casting directors from backstage, which i didn't buy because it cost $2 and i couldn't afford it. i mailed my head shot to all the soaps, and an assistant from ''guiding light'' called two days later. ''hi, honey,'' he said. this was the first time a man had ever called me honey. ''i need you to come play an orderly.''  back then, ''guiding light'' was taped in a chelsea studio, a dank building with stained brick walls and concrete stairwells that nonetheless seemed as magical to me as the actual locale of springfield, u.s.a. inside, i reported to locke, an avuncular stage manager with years of experience in live tv. ''i'm playing an orderly,'' i said, nervously. ''i'm an extra.''  ''we have no extras here,'' he said, not raising his eyes from a clipboard. my breath caught in my throat. ''we have leads, and we have supporting players. there are no extras at 'guiding light.' ''  locke showed me the police station set, the town square set and several sumptuous boudoirs before leading me to my assigned domain -- cedars hospital. it had a gleaming e.r., a circular nurses' station and a single private room. there was also a doorway, conspicuously marked storage closet, which i later learned was the site of many illicit assignations. ''your job,'' locke instructed, ''is to keep things busy.''  he wasn't kidding. after a whirlwind rehearsal, during taping he sent me upstage, downstage, offstage and through a pair of swinging doors, sometimes with a not-so-subtle shove on the shoulder. a few times, when things got particularly frenetic, locke himself donned a white lab coat and directed traffic while on camera.  there was, i found, an art to acting in the background. we supporting players were charged with making the hospital look like a hive of activity -- except for those moments when a lead character needed to switch paternity test results or unplug a rival's life support system. then the cedars' hallways were mysteriously deserted.  after i'd made several nonspeaking appearances, the senior casting director called. ''i have a part for you,'' she rasped into the phone. ''you need to come get your script.''  ''er, when is the audition?'' i said, gulping.  ''there is no audition. i'm giving you the job.''  ''but how do you know i can do it?'' i asked, stupidly.  ''darling, if i didn't think you could do it, i wouldn't be offering it to you.''  two weeks later, i told dr. bauer that he had a phone call -- and earned three times my usual salary.  i was hired at ''guiding light'' regularly that summer, until the fall when school started. i returned during the following summers and all through graduate school. and then i never left, coming back every week or so since then. i've always played the same orderly, with my own scrubs and my picture on an id tag that reads ''dr. please!''  in the mid-'90s the show relocated to a new studio, tucked away on three floors of an office building near grand central terminal. here, nurse lillian had a scandalous affair, dr. bauer lost innumerable patients and the beloved maureen died in a car crash. meanwhile i was under the tutelage of a new stage manager, the glamorous ann. under her watchful eye, i stayed busy pushing gurneys, administering cpr and shouting out ''stat!'' during crises, which tended to occur during sweeps weeks.  during this era, i had one of my favorite lines, spoken to a harried intern. ''but rick,'' i said, enunciating clearly. ''you mean you haven't told alan-michael that eleni is having frank's baby?'' in dress rehearsal, i stumbled over my words, and ann buttonholed me immediately. ''you must get this exactly right,'' she said gravely. ''you are summarizing six months' worth of story line!''  thanks to ''guiding light,'' i've never been a waiter, a caterer or a telemarketer, to name but a few of the usual actor's day jobs. i've been lucky enough to hold a survival job where my coworkers have included the semifamous (i once shared a dressing room with sean from ''survivor''), the soon-to-be famous (mira sorvino) and the already-famous-but-just-passing-through (joan collins).  i have never ceased to be amazed by the diversity of the show's viewers. a die-hard fan in a chanel suit once recognized and harangued me in a bookstore about a story line involving an angel. (she knew more about the plot than i did.) another time, i was having dinner with a close friend when he suddenly had a seizure. after i frantically revived him and called 911, several e.m.t.s arrived to take him to the hospital. a uniformed police officer stepped toward me with a serious expression.  ''may i speak with you privately?'' he asked. i nodded gravely as we moved a few feet away. i was astonished when the officer inquired, ''are you on 'guiding light'?'' and asked for one of the actresses' phone numbers. more pleasantly, some years ago i escaped jury duty after a lengthy discourse with an assistant district attorney about reva's returning from the dead.  away from the show, i've performed everywhere from the lower east side to lincoln center. i've had roles on ''law & order: criminal intent,'' ''saturday night live,'' other soaps and in commercials. yet ''guiding light'' has always been home base, my most consistent source of work. it has not been lost on me that i earn my health insurance playing a health care worker.  i work on a freelance basis, called in from week to week, so i consider myself extremely fortunate to have lasted so long on this program. i've seen colleagues, including casting directors, come and go. a gruff cameraman tugged at my arm one afternoon on the set.  ''kid,'' he said, ''i remember, you were already here on my first day. and i've been here forever! so whatever you're doin'  somebody likes it!''  in 2005, the show moved again, this time to the hulking cbs broadcast center on west 57th street. cedars hospital was scaled down and given a new, tropical look in shades of lime green. ''it looks like a hospital in miami,'' one director quipped, ''or maybe the inside of a papaya.'' these days, i earn $140 for a half-day's work, or $290 if i speak a few lines. things have been busy at cedars lately, in fact, with reva battling breast cancer and lizzie having jonathan's baby even though she's reconciled with coop. (don't ask).  recently i was chatting in the greenroom with a fresh-faced actor playing a high school student. ''dude,'' he said, ''like, how long have you been coming here?'' i pondered an oil painting of the show's symbol, a lighthouse, while i thought about my answer.  ''dude,'' i told him, ''i've been coming here, on and off, since before you were born.'' he was stupefied. for a second, so was i.  at the time, i felt sheepish, unsure if i should be embarrassed or proud of playing such a minor role for such an improbably long period. but i love my day job on daytime tv, and my small contribution to this fantasy world has enriched my real life immeasurably. at ''guiding light,'' i've learned that with masterly plotting, good stories can go on and on. and since neither i nor the show is finished just yet  tune in tomorrow.  rituals  