in defeat, rivers gives a glimpse of a winner   in the countdown to his first playoff game, philip rivers had heard tales of new england patriots linemen appearing in shadows and safeties lurking in blind spots, of wild schemes and whatever else bill belichick could cook up.  ''i'm going to expect everything you can put in a playbook,'' rivers, the san diego chargers' quarterback, said on the eve of sunday's american football conference playoff game against the new england patriots, recalling the mayhem that belichick had caused opposing quarterbacks in playoffs past. ''you study and be ready for what they've shown, then you don't get surprised by anything.''  in new england's 24-21 victory over the chargers at qualcomm stadium, the 24-year-old rivers proved a fast study and an able leader in directing san diego to within whiskers of the a.f.c. championship game.  rivers, who began his n.f.l. career as the quarterback the giants did not want, was 14 of 32 for 230 yards with an interception, and he led the chargers on a number of key drives that nearly sank new england's cagey defense.  after the patriots took a 24-21 lead with 1 minute 10 seconds left in the game, rivers had one last chance.  he passed to antonio gates for 14 yards and to eric parker for 21 to get the chargers to the patriots' 36, giving place-kicker nate kaeding a chance to tie the score with a 54-yard field goal. the kick sailed right and fell short, and the patriots escaped.  earlier in the fourth quarter, rivers appeared to have led the chargers on a game-winning drive.  with san diego protecting a 14-13 lead, rivers delivered a pair of pinpoint passes to gates for gains of 19 and 12 yards.  facing a second-and-9 from the new england 34, rivers connected with receiver vincent jackson to the patriots' 3, setting up ladainian tomlinson for a touchdown run to give san diego a 21-13 lead with 8:35 remaining.  rivers avoided the big mistake for most of the game, with the exception of a lob pass toward tomlinson on the final play of the third quarter. patriots linebacker rosevelt colvin tipped the ball to himself, coming down with the interception and stopping the san diego drive. the patriots, however, could not capitalize on the mistake and were forced to punt.  rivers appeared at ease from the moment he walked onto the field in a long-sleeved t-shirt and shorts two hours before kickoff. he dug his shoes into the grass, tossed short passes to his receivers and softly clapped his hands.  before assuming the role of chargers starting quarterback, rivers had been the quarterback the giants traded away, along with three draft picks, to san diego in exchange for eli manning during the 2004 draft.  while manning was looking to wiggle out of any situation that might land him with the chargers that year, rivers took home a boxful of chargers caps from the senior bowl and waited to find out where his n.f.l. career would begin.  hours before the draft, rivers awoke in raleigh, n.c., and washed his car while wearing a chargers t-shirt.  after backing up drew brees for two years, rivers earned the starting job when brees signed with the new orleans saints. rivers provided a steady hand alongside the dynamic tomlinson, completing 61.7 percent of his passes and throwing for 3,388 yards, 22 touchdowns and 9 interceptions.  against the patriots, rivers was often on target despite his final stat line. chargers receivers dropped at least six passes that might have prolonged drives or changed the game's outcome.  as his opposite number, tom brady, marched the patriots down the field for their winning drive, rivers could only watch from the sideline. he twisted his chargers cap to the side as new england got closer and finally charged ahead with a 31-yard field goal.  rivers had come close to matching brady, and to nearly solving belichick, but he and the chargers fell short.  pro football  