airbus predicts operating loss for 2006   airbus warned wednesday that major production delays on its twin-deck a380 jet would probably push it to an operating loss for 2006, despite a record number of deliveries.  the drain on its resources may prompt the european aeronautic defense and space company, the parent of airbus, to sell new shares to raise funds, the company said.  eads, which reports its earnings on march 9, said the losses -- from penalty payments for a380 delays, the write-down of airbus assets and a costly overhaul plan -- would roughly offset all gains made in the group's military and space businesses.  three months ago, eads said that a two-year delay in the superjumbo program would cut earnings by more than $6 billion over the next four years.  ''these are the first consequences of our 2006 turbulences,'' said louis gallois, the eads co-chief executive, who took the helm at airbus in october after two predecessors resigned in a span of a few months. ''we are clearing the ground to start again on a sound basis.''  it was a grim coda to a year which by several other measures was a success for airbus, based in toulouse, france. airbus said it delivered a record 434 aircraft in 2006, beating out its american rival boeing, which said it shipped 398 planes last year.  airbus said its 2006 deliveries represented $33.6 billion in revenue, short of boeing's estimated $40 billion in revenue based on aircraft list prices. airbus also reported total net orders of 790 planes last year, well below boeing's figure of 1,044, which put boeing ahead of airbus in new plane orders for the first time in six years.  at a briefing in paris, mr. gallois acknowledged that airbus had been hurt by its slowness to recognize the challenge posed by boeing's 787 dreamliner, a midsize long-range plane that boeing began developing in 2002 and plans to deliver in 2009. airbus's belated competitor to that craft, the a350, was announced only last spring, and had to be completely redesigned after airlines found it lacking in capacity and fuel-efficiency. eads approved the redesigned aircraft, the a350-xwb -- for extra wide body -- just last month. it is expected to enter service in 2013.  hans-peter ring, chief financial officer of both airbus and eads, said on wednesday that a ''significant'' portion of the approximately $13 billion in projected development costs for the a350-xwb would be incurred in the group's 2006 accounts, although he declined to give details.  mr. ring also warned that the costs of the a350 development and late charges for the a380 could be a drain on the group's approximately $7.5 billion in cash reserves, which might force eads to sell new shares to raise funds.  he said that such a request would have to be put before shareholders at the group's annual general meeting in may.  analysts said the prospect of a capital increase was worrying at a time when the structure of the group's core shareholder group was in flux. daimlerchrysler is currently in talks to sell a 7.5 percent stake in eads to a consortium of primarily german banks, a deal that would reduce daimler's holding in the company to 15 percent.  lagardère, a conglomerate based in paris, cut its 15 percent stake to 7.5 percent last year. the french state still holds a 15 percent stake, and sepi, a spanish government holding company, owns 5.5 percent. the remaining 49.5 percent of eads is freely traded on european stock markets.  ''this obviously raises major issues for the existing shareholders,'' said nick cunningham, an aerospace industry analyst at the panmure gordon brokerage firm in london. ''if eads only plans to go to its core shareholders for the cash, then there is the question of who would take up daimler's allocation.  ''if they decide to put more shares into the open market, then you would have to look at selling them at a big discount, and i'm not sure eads is willing to do that,'' he said.  