jury selection in libby trial moves slowly because of bias   the task of seating a jury for the perjury trial of i. lewis libby jr. did not get easier thursday when a majority of the candidates interviewed were disqualified, mainly because they expressed deep distrust of the bush administration and the iraq war.  mr. libby, also known as scooter, is facing five felony counts for his role in an investigation of who leaked to journalists the identity of a c.i.a. operative in july 2003 and why. the indictment charges him with lying to agents of the federal bureau of investigation and a grand jury about whether he spoke to journalists about valerie wilson, the central intelligence agency officer.  mr. libby is the former chief of staff to vice president dick cheney, who will be a featured witness for the defense. the attitudes of many potential jurors to mr. cheney and the iraq war have upset the judge's schedule for the trial, which envisioned opening arguments monday.  at the end of the day thursday, the judge, reggie m. walton, lamented the slow pace of getting enough potential jurors for a pool to be winnowed down to 12 jurors and four alternates. so far, only 30 people have qualified; the pool must have at least 36 people to account for the number that lawyers for both sides can exclude without giving a reason.  ''it took us all day to get six jurors qualified,'' judge walton said.  it was a day consumed with unexpectedly long bouts of questioning, largely from mr. libby's lawyers, who are trying to exclude anyone with a bias against the administration.  of the 10 jurors who were dismissed thursday, the views of some were quickly apparent; others came out only under detailed questioning.  in the morning, a woman who said she was an economist, told the court that she believed the war was ''a terrible mistake, a horrendous mistake and a betrayal'' of the country. she eventually acknowledged that such hard feelings could affect how she views testimony from mr. cheney and other officials.  