where snow is all that glitters, worry over growth's effect   chuck shirk is the kind of loyal skier arapahoe basin ski area is famous for. mr. shirk hates almost everything about modern ski resorts -- fancy stores, snooty restaurants, expensive real estate. a-basin, as arapahoe is called by just about everybody, is unencumbered by such trappings, he said.  ''you've got everything you need here -- you've got a bathroom and you've got lifts,'' mr. shirk, 53, said as he packed his car to drive back to his home near denver.  but now a-basin, about 70 miles west of denver, is moving toward the biggest expansion in its 60-year history, with a sixth chairlift, a new restaurant and a near doubling in acreage, all approved last month by the federal forest service. and the old raw-boned culture of the place that people like mr. shirk love has become part of the debate.  there is no question that skiing and snowboarding here are about as basic as it gets: a slippery mountain, a way to get to the top, and beer and chili at the bottom in a lodge that has barely changed since the mid-1960s, when the owners bought it cheap, as military surplus. the a-frame building, trucked in and reassembled piece by piece, was funky looking even then, having been used to test missile engines, and it has become an a-basin symbol in the decades since.  ''we're a ski area, not a resort,'' said rocky white, 53, an instructor who sat with friends in a lawn chair on the edge of the parking lot on a recent sunny afternoon. a barbecue had been set up, with steaks on the grill. dogs gnawed bones as skiers and snowboarders whooshed toward the nearby chairlift.  ''you find real people here,'' mr. white said, ''not people with their noses up in the clouds.''  some skiers and snowboarders say that the expansion will be the beginning of the end of the a-basin's ''pull up a chair and sit a spell'' feel, and that the place will eventually become a real resort. others say that change is inevitable, and that if it helps a place they love stay economically viable, then expansion it is. discussion groups on web sites like telemarktips.com, which is devoted to backcountry skiing, obsess over what the changes may bring.  environmental issues shape part of that debate; more traffic into the mountains means more trees cut down to make trails. but an equally important element is the borderland between the groomed-trail experience and the wilder backcountry terrain that exists beyond the ski area's boundaries.  the expansion will put a-basin skiers into an area called the montezuma bowl that is now used only by backcountry skiers who go there independently. taking montezuma into the mainstream -- taming it, some skiers say -- is exactly what many people fear for a-basin itself.  ''some places should be set aside as backcountry,'' said sena hitt-laustsen, a research assistant at the university of colorado who was sipping a beer with her boyfriend in the lodge. ''i'm opposed to the expansion.''  other people say it is about emotion and character.  ''we're all concerned about the place losing its feel,'' said eric mink, an environmental chemist and an a-basin regular who was shopping at an outdoor-equipment store in denver on a recent afternoon.  ''in the past, everything has been so chill up there, so stress-free,'' mr. mink, 28, said. ''but what if it turns into durango or vail? it's already too crowded to ski on the weekends.''  a-basin's general manager and chief operating officer, alan henceroth, who started his ski industry career as a ski bum and busboy 24 years ago at a resort down the road, said he agreed that expanding a-basin without destroying its distinctiveness was a fine line to walk.  but growth is also crucial to survival, mr. henceroth said. he said he hoped that the expansion, which will increase the amount of intermediate-level terrain, would attract more women, in particular, who in the past might have been turned off by a-basin's austere reputation. it has some of the highest ski slopes in north america, over 13,000 feet, and some of the steepest. about 60 percent of the visitors are men, mr. henceroth said.  ''whenever you have something that people like and you propose change, it's human nature to resist,'' he said. ''my biggest objective is to preserve what people feel about this place.''  one thing that set a-basin apart from other resorts when it was being developed was its land. places like aspen and vail in colorado, as well as jackson hole, wyo., and park city, utah, all had ample privately owned property at the bases of their ski lifts to allow for the construction of stores, condominium complexes, bars and restaurants. a-basin, tucked into a tight mountain valley on a two-lane road with forest service land reaching right up to the lodge, was hemmed in.  ''there was no developable land to speak of,'' said max dercum, who co-founded a-basin in 1946, when all that existed was a towrope powered by a ford v8 engine to pull skiers up the mountain.  but mr. dercum, 94, who skied into his 90s and was a racer on the senior circuit into his late 80s, said in a telephone interview that what did not happen here became important to the rest of the colorado ski industry, too.  in the early 1960s, he said, a group of investors came to a-basin and wanted to build a big hotel on private land high on the ski slope. but the plan fell through, mr. dercum said, partly because of the difficulty of the terrain and the altitude, and the group moved on -- to vail, which was just getting started. the swiss-style lodge they had envisioned for a-basin became one of vail's first buildings, and the group became vail pioneers.  now the imprint that vail helped create, many skiers say, is everywhere, and places like a-basin are fading fast.  mr. shirk, the a-basin devotee, said that some time back he drove his motorcycle to western colorado, to the resort town of telluride, looking for the ski-town simplicity he had heard was still alive. he turned around quickly and came right back.  ''it was glitz like aspen and everybody else,'' he said. ''i stopped at a place and said, 'where do you recommend for lunch?' and they said, 'well, do you want french? do you want sushi?' i was like, nah.''  