how to choose a fiscal watchdog   in the next few weeks, new york legislators will choose a replacement for alan hevesi, the state comptroller who was forced to resign after pleading guilty to a felony. the new comptroller will play an enormous but largely unseen role in safeguarding the state's finances for the next four years. there will be great pressure to make a political choice, but legislators should resist that instinct and vote for the most able and independent candidate.  we are not ready to endorse a candidate, but it is not too early to lay out the job qualifications, starting with fearless independence. the new comptroller will not only have to audit gov. eliot spitzer's administration, but may also look at any state spending -- including how the legislature doles out its pork and other political favors. for this reason, the five or so democratic assembly members who want the position bear the heaviest burden of showing their independence. sheldon silver, the assembly speaker, who controls the largest bloc in the legislature, will play the biggest role in choosing the next comptroller. it should not be someone who goes easy on mr. silver and his colleagues in return for getting the job.  financial expertise is also a must. the new comptroller will single-handedly be responsible for investing $146 billion in state pension money. the state needs someone with a sure hand to protect the state's retirees, and someone who knows how to use the power of that fund to promote good corporate governance and socially responsible investments.  the next comptroller should have a proven record as a reformer. he or she will have to reject pleas to waste scarce positions on the politically connected, and be willing to shake things up, from wasteful public authorities to mismanaged school districts. the person should promise to work for public campaign financing for the comptroller's job.  mr. spitzer and the leaders of the state senate and assembly have agreed on what sounds like a good process. there will be public hearings, and a group of former comptrollers will winnow the field down to five contenders. but in the end legislators will choose. their responsibility is to choose someone who will look out for the interests of all new yorkers, not simply those who did the choosing.  editorial  