he-men strut stuff to romance new york   ''i love new york,'' the vh1 reality show on which men with nicknames vie for the favor of a woman known as new york, only started last week. but oh, the downloadable moments -- they're already piling up.  first came a catcall that doubled as a case for intelligent design. it was delivered as the guys got their first glimpse of the curvy, golden new york, whose real name is tiffany pollard. ''she didn't come from no cro-magnon man,'' a competitor said. ''there was a divine wisdom that put that together.''  then came chance's blinding insight into mr. boston's bone structure, as the rivals readied for a fight. ''he looks like al gore's own nephew,'' chance said. and so he did.  and finally there was new york's praise for the hot jerk who insulted her mother. ''he is a thug,'' she drawled. ''and he is not a fake thug. he is dangerous. he wears baggy clothes. he has a great face. and he drinks a lot. i like that.''  what's engrossing about ''i love new york'' is exactly what was engrossing about ''flavor of love,'' the show's progenitor, which starred flavor flav, a reality show veteran and onetime rap hypeman. (on that show new york tried twice to win flav's heart; instead she got her own show.)  both shows feature the oh-no-she-didn't repertory company: those tireless shouters and boasters and brawlers who so saturate syndicated television with their theatrics that they deserve retainer fees, or at least a powerful union. this troupe is the making of ''the maury povich show,'' ''elimidate'' and the trash-video web site ebaumsworld.com.  and now they're the making of flav's show and ''i love new york.'' on these burlesque restagings of ''the bachelor,'' the cast is far from the jack do-rights or habib do-wrongs of standard-issue prime time. instead the population of the vh1 shows comes from -- or agrees to meet in -- a kind of sci-fi universe of superfriends a long way from the american middle class. absent from this fantasyland are standards about sexual display, lifetime marriage, work ethics, career goals and direct deposit.  people dress in red hats, chest-baring shirts and glittering synthetic blends. they're also both rich and poor at once, in the way of actresses, writers, strippers, porn stars, drug dealers, dancers, artists, masseurs, trainers, day laborers, filmmakers, escorts and freelancers of every stripe. they live alternately on debt and big payouts; and when they get their cash, they spend it on champagne, diamonds and stuff for their hair.  such is the conceit of the shows at least. and contestants who embrace this conceit earliest and ham it up proudest get eliminated last. on ''i love new york'' thugs in baggy clothes have better chances with girls than blond bankers in pinstripes, or kiss-ups who recite scripture. a buff, well-groomed showoff who flaunted his masculinity in a speedo -- and whom new york's mother concluded was gay -- eased through the first elimination, compared with the earnest georgetown graduate and the devastatingly handsome tennis pro with the cautious style. they were cut.  flamboyance rules with new york, and the truth is that men hardly register with her unless they talk crudely, laugh loudly, make bold gestures and get drunk. when the hypothetical gore nephew look-alike mr. boston awkwardly tried to cut in on her conversation with the tough-looking chance, mr. boston seemed to have blown it, especially as he spouted nervous nerdisms like ''you need ritalin'' in response to chance's practiced baiting. on the contrary.  new york confessed to the camera, reflecting on mr. boston's ''suburban'' aspect. ''for him to step to an urban brother,'' she said, ''i was so impressed.'' on last week's episode a man made game conversation about his difficulties at work, and new york just couldn't focus. she preferred the guys who discussed, say, how incredibly hot they were.  seen through her eyes the swaggerers are definitely more sexy and more fun. and seeing through new york's eyes is surprisingly easy. her way of talking, especially when she's not in the fullest feather of cuckoo narcissism, is so brazenly inflected and jammed with unexpected insights that it makes every woman who's ever appeared on ''the bachelor'' and ''the bachelorette'' look barely sentient.  though new york does rely on ''i'm feeling you'' and other clichés that borrow from mysticism and the new age, she obviously aims, as flav did on his show, for originality in her speech. she also admires it in others. in the first episode you saw why: her mother, sister patterson, is a skillful talker and diabolically good listener. new york has brought in her mother to evaluate the prospects, and ms. patterson does manage to pinpoint problems. ''that man has the behind of a woman,'' for example.  but her real gift is for revealing others. with a few nurturing-sounding questions, ms. patterson drew out people's pathologies and presumptions with the talent of a ''60 minutes'' correspondent. (mr. boston confided that his children with new york would be very ''light-skinned,'' like derek jeter; ms. patterson's version of a raised eyebrow was hilarious.)  on tonight's episode new york puzzles over the characters of the suitors who remain. ''i'm not going to have people around me that's lying to me,'' she maintains. are they there to be with her or to become hip-hop stars? does 12 pack have a girlfriend? is white boy o.k. with how much she eats?  new york's vanity would seem to take up all her time, but it doesn't. sure, she declines to swim, saying, ''this is good hair. this is human hair.'' but when she appears without makeup, she looks at once wise and vulnerable. according to press materials, she's only 24. flavor flav has broken her heart twice. she deserves some love.  boozily explaining her needs to the guys, she resorts briefly to ''i'm keeping it real.'' but quickly she drops the phony expression and corrects herself. ''i'm keeping it funky,'' she says, as tears run down her cheeks.  i love new york  vh1, tonight at 9, eastern and pacific times; 8, central time.  mark cronin, cris abrego and ben samek, executive producers for mindles entertainment and 51 pictures; for vh1: jeff olde, jill holmes, kristen kelly and michael hirschorn.  television review  