a ghastly toll: 34,000 iraqi dead   to the editor:  re ''iraqi death toll exceeded 34,000 in 2006, u.n. says'' (front page, jan. 17): the united nations report indicating that more than 34,000 iraqi civilians were killed in 2006 is shocking and should make all americans pause to think about the true human cost of this war.  when american politicians, democratic or republican, speak about the human cost of the iraq war, they normally mention only the 3,000 american military men and women who have honorably given their lives.  their service should certainly be recognized. but by not mentioning the broader tragedy of war and the thousands of innocent iraqis who have also lost their lives, americans send a message to the world that american lives are of greater value than iraqi or muslim lives.  we and our politicians must demonstrate that every life lost in this struggle should be mourned.  robert fenstermacher  white plains, jan. 17, 2007  to the editor:  president bush's invasion of iraq, begun with the support of congress and the american people, has resulted in the collapse of that country into sectarian hatred, torture, murder and chaos.  last year, according to the united nations, more than 34,000 iraqi civilians were killed; for those keeping count, this amounts to more than 10 times the number who died on sept. 11.  today, though most americans have turned against the war, the political debate remains mired. president bush, seeking to postpone an inevitable defeat, urges escalation, while many in congress argue for withdrawal.  entirely lost in this debate, however, is a far more painful and urgent question that should bedevil every american: what do we americans owe the iraqi people, and how can we begin to repair the catastrophe we have wreaked upon a people who never did us any harm?  françois furstenberg  montreal, jan. 17, 2007  to the editor:  re ''bush widens iraq criticism over handling of executions'' (news article, jan. 17):  how long will the united states continue pretending that iraq is a sovereign nation instead of an occupied country with a puppet government?  william cherry  portland, ore., jan. 17, 2007  to the editor:  re ''the missing partner in iraq'' (editorial, jan. 17):  prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki should have been the first among those who cheerfully welcomed president bush's decision to add 21,500 united states troops to quell the sectarian violence in iraq.  instead, as your editorial pointed out, ''mr. maliki has demonstrated how far his own goals diverge from america's best interests.''  the united states has wrongfully placed itself as a lone warrior in this already failed catastrophic war.  i wonder how long it is going to take president bush and his administration to realize that this sinful war is beyond redemption, now that even the iraqi government shows its indifference toward his latest offer.  vincent peters  new brighton, minn., jan. 17, 2007  to the editor:  you write (''the missing partner in iraq,'' editorial, jan. 17):  ''unless president bush insists that mr. maliki accept specific and enforceable policy benchmarks and timelines -- starting with the disarming of sectarian militias -- the united states will remain hostage to the iraqi prime minister and his radical shiite agenda.''  there is no reason for the united states to remain hostage in iraq or anywhere else, for that matter. we control our own destiny.  an ultimatum should be given to prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki to toe the line or suffer the consequences of an immediate american withdrawal.  paul schoenbaum  williamsburg, va.  jan. 17, 2007  