bertelsmann is days away from naming a new chief   hartmut ostrowski is the sober son of a north westphalian plumber whose favorite corporate dictums run the range from ''just do it!'' and ''keep it simple!'' to ''put your fish on the table.''  the fish saying refers to mr. ostrowski's penchant for displaying a wooden fish on a gleaming conference table as a signal to staff members at arvato, the printing company he runs, to speak candidly. but when it comes to his own future, mr. ostrowski is keeping the fish under wraps.  many insiders and outsiders alike agree that mr. ostrowski, 48, has emerged as the probable new chief executive of bertelsmann, the privately owned behemoth that counts arvato among a portfolio of media companies, including the publisher random house, the pan-european broadcaster rtl and a half-interest in sony bmg, the music label.  mr. ostrowski declined to discuss his prospects in advance of a management congress in germany at which the new chief executive is expected to be introduced.  the choice is expected to be made after a meeting this week of a four-member supervisory board personnel committee. as the only family member on that committee, liz mohn, 65, the wife of bertelsmann's 85-year-old patriarch, reinhard mohn, will play a decisive role in the handover of power.  it will be the second time that mrs. mohn will be pivotal in the selection of the company's new chief executive. her clash with the former chief, thomas middelhoff, over his ambitions to take the company public ultimately ended in his ouster in 2002.  bertelsmann would not comment about contenders for the top spot, but there has been plenty of public speculation in the german news media. another name often cited is ewald walgenbach, 47, the chief executive of bertelsmann's book club business, direct group.  mr. walgenbach, who took the helm of the struggling book club in 2002, was the subject of a series of positive news articles in germany after he invited a group of journalists to portugal in september to learn more about his company. in a well-timed leak last week, handelsblatt, the german newspaper, cited anonymous company sources as saying that mr. walgenbach's book club had reaped its first profit before taxes in eight years.  a direct group spokesman declined to comment on the report and said that mr. walgenbach was not available for interviews on the succession issue.  but the news provoked some smirks among insiders and former employees at bertelsmann, who said that mr. ostrowski's ascension appeared inevitable for a variety of reasons -- most notably for his discreet, unglamorous profile and his steady progress in building arvato into one of the most reliable earners in bertelsmann's portfolio.  the discreet charm of a new chief executive is an important characteristic in a company that has sought to distance itself from the hard-charging mr. middelhoff. bertelsmann paid $5.8 billion this year to avoid taking the company public by buying out the 25 percent stake owned through a holding company by albert frère, the belgian financier.  gerd schulte-hillen, the former chairman of bertelsmann's supervisory board, who resigned in a power struggle in 2003, said in an interview that mr. ostrowski's rise could be a positive step for the company because of his proven entrepreneurial abilities and cost-cutting style at arvato, where he has pushed the printing company into new areas like call-center services.  but the new chief executive will inherit some challenges. bertelsmann's debt swelled to more than $10 billion after it agreed last may to buy out mr. frère, leaving the company with little money to expand through acquisitions. and its top-earning company, rtl, with annual revenue of more than $7.5 billion, faces pressure as advertisers and viewers move funds and attention to the internet.  so far, mr. ostrowski has been careful to avoid the limelight, except for a notable profile and interview in march, when he revealed the existence of the fish as a corporate motivator. he also emphasized his corporate dedication by saying that he works 70-hour workweeks. the interview was granted to the neue westfälische, the newspaper in bertelsmann's home town, gütersloh, which happens to count mr. mohn among its readers.  although mr. mohn is not as active today in the family-owned company that he helped shape from 1971 to 1981 as chairman and chief executive, he remains an important figure.  historically, he played a vital role in the selection of chief executives, even using handwriting analysis to determine desirable personality traits -- a practice that endures today, according to former employees.  the new chief executive must also be a diplomat, respecting the informal power of mrs. mohn, who maintains an office at bertelsmann headquarters in gütersloh and the company's satellite administrative offices in berlin. her daughter, brigitte, is also an executive in the bertelsmann foundation and her son christoph was appointed to the company's supervisory board in november, leading to more speculation that the younger mohn might emerge someday as a candidate.  one of the rituals of the congress where the chief is introduced is that participants receive a memento. one year it was a crystal paperweight etched with the company's core values. in 2005, it was an electronic picture frame loaded with photographs of top executives, including mr. ostrowski, sportily dressed in a team arvato soccer uniform, and a smiling mr. walgenbach.  asked if this year bertelsmann would distribute souvenir wooden fish, a company spokesman issued a terse response: no.  media  