perjury trial is set to begin for former cheney adviser   i. lewis libby jr., the former chief of staff to vice president dick cheney, will go on trial on tuesday, nearly three years after a c.i.a. operative's name appeared in a newspaper column, setting off a major investigation of who leaked the name and why.  but neither mr. libby nor anyone else has been charged with disclosing the name, which might have violated a federal law protecting the identities of central intelligence agency officers. instead, he faces five felony counts that he lied to a grand jury and the f.b.i. agents investigating the leak.  the situation of mr. libby, who once worked at the highest reaches of government power in washington and now faces the possibility of a long jail sentence, is a vivid example of what has become a contemporary capital cliché: ''it's not the crime but the cover-up'' that often leads to legal problems for officials in high-profile investigations. the perjury and obstruction of justice charges against mr. libby stem not from the leak but from his behavior in the leak investigation.  the trial, expected to last at least a month, may serve as a stage for such intriguing issues as how the administration dealt with critics before going to war in iraq, the changed relationship between journalists and senior government officials, and the always vexing question about the wisdom of using an independent prosecutor to investigate crimes in an administration.  among the trial's highlights will be a likely appearance from mr. cheney, in what historians believe would be the first time a sitting vice president has testified in a criminal trial. mr. cheney would testify for the defense. he is expected to praise mr. libby as a public servant and attempt to clothe many of his actions in official vice presidential approval.  in an interview on ''fox news sunday,'' mr. cheney called mr. libby ''one of the finest individuals i've ever known.'' pressed about his former aide's honesty, mr. cheney replied, ''i believe he's one of the more honest men i know.''  whatever the nature of mr. cheney's remarks, if he testifies, the very fact of his appearance would underscore how the trial has created a deeply uncomfortable moment for the white house. it is a problem not only because a former official faces serious charges, but also because the subject is connected closely with how the administration may have used flawed intelligence about iraq to justify going to war.  mr. libby is charged with lying to a grand jury and the f.b.i. agents investigating the leak of the name of the c.i.a. officer, valerie wilson, who was known by her maiden name, valerie plame. her name first appeared in a july 14, 2003, column by robert d. novak, saying that she worked at the c.i.a. and was married to joseph c. wilson iv, a former ambassador. only days earlier, mr. wilson had written an article that was published on the op-ed page of the new york times, charging that the administration twisted intelligence to build a case to invade iraq.  patrick j. fitzgerald, the top federal prosecutor in chicago, was assigned to investigate whether anyone violated a federal law that prohibits the disclosure of the names of c.i.a. officers, and whether ms. wilson's name was leaked in an effort to discredit mr. wilson.  mr. libby told the grand jury and the federal bureau of investigation that he had not disclosed information about ms. wilson to any journalists. but judith miller, then a reporter for the new york times, and matthew cooper of time magazine told the grand jury that mr. libby had indeed spoken to them about ms. wilson.  mr. libby also testified that he learned of ms. wilson's identity from a third journalist, tim russert of nbc news, but mr. russert is expected to testify that that is false. prosecutors have said that mr. libby learned of ms. wilson's identity from administration officials including mr. cheney.  looming over the proceedings is speculation that mr. libby would be a plausible if not likely recipient of a presidential pardon if convicted.  away from the wide-angle political drama, the trial will have its own legal script. court filings and hearings leading to trial have built two views of the case.  the prosecution view goes something like this:  the only issue that should matter to the jury is whether mr. libby lied as charged. to avoid the possibility that he could be charged with violating the law that prohibits disclosing c.i.a. officers' names, he decided to lie about his conversations with reporters about ms. plame.  mr. libby ''had strong reason to believe'' that the reporters would successfully resist testifying and that the leak investigation would end inconclusively, as so many others had. he concocted the idea that he had learned of ms. wilson's identity from mr. russert because he thought mr. russert would not testify and contradict him.  the defense case goes like this:  mr. libby may never even have mentioned ms. wilson's name to mr. cooper and ms. miller, whose testimony to the contrary may be the result of their remembering their conversations incorrectly. but even if he did talk about her and later deny it, it was an innocent case of remembering inaccurately what was a trivial matter compared with his agenda in the summer of 2003.  in addition to his chief of staff duties, mr. libby dealt with issues of vast importance as mr. cheney's national security adviser. to demonstrate that, defense lawyers are hoping to present the jury with a picture of mr. libby's workaday world, a complicated, fast-moving place in which an issue like naming ms. wilson was relatively insignificant.  the judge in the case, reggie m. walton of federal district court in washington, has so far weighed in on the side of the government in narrowing the issues to whether mr. libby's statements to investigators and the grand jury violated the law.  the trial is also notable for its roster of celebrity witnesses. in addition to mr. cheney and mr. russert, host of ''meet the press,'' bob woodward of the washington post may testify.  mr. woodward has acknowledged that although he did not write about it, he learned the identity of ms. wilson in 2003 from the man who turned out to be the source for mr. novak.  that source was richard l. armitage, a former deputy secretary of state, who acknowledged publicly last august that he had told mr. fitzgerald he was the original source.  that disclosure raised questions among mr. libby's defenders and others about why mr. fitzgerald chose to prolong the investigation when he knew as early as october 2003 that mr. armitage was the leaker, and that he had not violated any laws because of the circumstances in which he disclosed ms. wilson's name.  to those critics, mr. fitzgerald's investigation demonstrated the same problems as those conducted by independent counsels in previous cases who, unchecked by normal constraints, often proceeded until they could charge someone with a ''process'' crime like perjury.  