nbc's 'today' is expected to add a fourth hour   meredith vieira won't appear on it at all, and matt lauer will make only an occasional cameo, if that, but nbc is expected to announce formally today that it will expand ''today,'' its morning-program empire and the most profitable program on television, to a fourth hour, beginning at 10 a.m. on weekdays next fall.  the network, which supersized the program from two to three hours in 2000, knows that it risks diluting the ''today'' brand through yet another expansion. but it is banking, instead, on the ''today'' name serving as a lure to women, in particular, who watch television midmorning, said an nbc universal television executive who was briefed directly on the ''today'' plan but who would only discuss it anonymously before today's announcement.  the ratings on the third hour of ''today'' have fallen during each of the last three years, with the 3.8 million viewers it has drawn each morning, on average, so far this television season representing a drop of 6 percent from the same point in the 2005-6 season and 9 percent since 2004-5, according to nielsen media research. similarly, ratings for the first two hours of ''today'' were down this fall, when compared with the program's performance a year earlier -- including that among women -- though its chief competitor, ''good morning america'' on abc, has also lost ground.  though ''today,'' which begins at 7 a.m., would become the first television program in recent memory -- if ever -- to command four hours each weekday on a major broadcast network, the move is not necessarily revolutionary: the fourth hour of ''today'' is expected to look much as the third does now, in terms of its focus (home, cooking, health and fashion) and its talent lineup.  its primary hosts will be ann curry, the news reader on the first two hours of ''today,'' and al roker, the program's weatherman, as well as natalie morales, who typically joins them in leading the third hour. (while nbc's weighing of a fourth hour of ''today'' has been widely reported in recent months, variety reported online on sunday that the announcement was expected today, at a gathering of television critics in pasadena, calif.)  for now, at least, nbc is not expected to hire any new hosts for the program, though it does anticipate giving at least occasional airtime in the fourth hour to up-and-coming stars like david gregory (who covers the white house for nbc news); lester holt and campbell brown (co-hosts of ''weekend today''); hoda kotb (a correspondent for nbc's ''dateline''); and maría celeste arrarás (an anchor on telemundo, the spanish-language television channel, which nbc owns).  when mr. lauer typically appears on the third hour of ''today,'' it is usually to welcome the audience to the program, before he slips off. it has not been decided whether he would play a similar role, at times, in the fourth hour, the nbc universal executive said.  ms. vieira is a different story: because she also appears as the host of the syndicated game show ''who wants to be a millionaire,'' she is prohibited, contractually, from appearing regularly in the third and fourth hours of ''today''; that poses a conflict because ''today'' is already directly opposite ''millionaire'' in some markets. (both hosts, though, often remain in the ''today'' studios in manhattan to appear live for the program's first half-hour in west coast markets, beginning at 10 a.m. eastern time.)  it remains to be seen how many nbc affiliates -- beyond the 10 owned by the network -- would broadcast a fourth hour of ''today.'' but the decision by nbc to add the hour would seem to have its most immediate effect on ''martha,'' martha stewart's daytime talk show, which is now at 10 a.m. on nbc-owned stations in new york and los angeles. (those stations have renewed the show for next season.)  executives in nbc's domestic television unit, which syndicates ''martha,'' and mark burnett, who produces it, did not immediately respond to telephone and e-mail messages yesterday seeking to ask where it might be moved on the schedule next season. for years ''today'' has been widely described as the most profitable program on television, with profits last year estimated at about $250 million.  correction:  january 24, 2007, wednesday  an article in the arts last wednesday about nbc's plans to extend the ''today'' program to a fourth hour attributed an erroneous distinction to the show. ''nightwatch'' on cbs, which had its premiere in 1982, ran for four hours on weekdays. ''today'' will not be the first such weekday program of that length on major broadcast networks.  