a house built around a tower of books   first came the books. then came the architecture.  seven years ago, when nader tehrani and monica ponce de leon, partners at office da, an architecture firm in boston, were asked to renovate a five-story town house in the back bay neighborhood, they faced a singular design challenge. the house belonged to elmar seibel, now 54, a dealer in rare books on art and architecture, and his wife, azita bina-seibel, 46, a chef and restaurateur.  mr. seibel's personal collection includes at least 40,000 books on persian and iranian culture. he keeps many in a warehouse, but perhaps 14,000 or 15,000 are at home.  there is a 1491 copy of a medical book written by avicenna, the 11th-century philosopher and physician also known as ibn sina. a 17th-century eyewitness account of the coronation of a shah, written by jean chardin, a french jeweler, is inscribed to jean-baptiste colbert, then the finance minister of france. a 19th-century cookbook has 4,000 handwritten recipes of dishes made for the shah's court.  the collection began with the birth of the couple's son, kian, now 13. mr. seibel, a west german native, and ms. bina, born in iran, wanted to give him something from his mother's family's cultural heritage. ''the original idea was to create something for him -- but it takes on a life of its own,'' mr. seibel said. (kian, who is fluent in farsi, has not yet read any of the books in the collection. but he says he will, soon.)  where, then, were the 14,000 books to go?  ''what holds the house together is a vertical staircase that wraps itself around a tower of books that goes up three floors,'' mr. tehrani said. (the family lives on the top three floors, while ms. bina's mother, aghdas zoka-bina, and a tenant occupy apartments on the first and ground-floor levels.) the stairway ends just below a skylight. ''the tower of books appears to pierce the skylight, though it doesn't in reality,'' mr. tehrani said.  ''the staircase is the 'it' factor,'' he added. the books are easily accessible from the staircase, just four inches away. some shelves are designed to hold books upright, while others are wide and shallow, so that manuscripts or magazines can be left there, in an offhand way -- and they are. many of the shelves are backed in translucent glass to let natural light shine through, and recessed lighting in the ceiling makes it possible to grab a book, settle onto any step and read in perfect light. squinting is not required.  ms. bina-seibel and the architects collaborated closely on the design. the executive chef and co-owner of lala rokh, a 12-year-old persian restaurant, and bin 26 enoteca, a italian restaurant opened this fall, she had learned something about construction from her father, a developer of real estate and roads. ''i can read plans,'' she said. ''i used to go with him in the morning to sites'' in tehran, where her family lived until the 1970s.  in boston, ms. bina-seibel knew mr. tehrani, an iranian, both through his reputation as an architect and also socially. an architecture buff, she plunged into the design of the house, spending many hours a week at office da. ''i'd show up in the morning, and leave at 7 at night,'' ms. bina-seibel said. ''they teased me. 'should we just give you the key to open up the office?' '' together, she and the architects custom-mixed paints, talked about materials and ate.  mr. tehrani said, ''we'd have breakfast and lunch.''  ms. bina-seibel added, laughing, ''sometimes dinner.''  mr. seibel said: ''i got away with doing nothing. i had four meetings.''  the couple wanted a modern home that was not a museum. it is not. when ms. bina-seibel meets a visitor, she slides in stocking feet, one foot in front of the other, down the hallway, where the floor is a smooth, gleaming rosewood.  the architects consider themselves modernists, and what separates modern design from traditional, mr. tehrani said, is ''the thinness of modern construction -- traditional construction is massive.'' they also stripped away extraneous hardware, like doorknobs, from many surfaces, but the final design is not cold. instead, the house is warm, sensuous, pale.  to climb the central stairway is to feel bathed in the soft glow of gleaming, golden-hued wood. the wainscoting on the staircase walls is five-eighths-inch-thick sheets of maple veneer over plywood; the treads are solid maple. in places the wainscoting curves out to support the handrail, a smooth, slender maple rod that ends in a point at the top and the bottom of each flight of stairs, ''like a snake that goes up the staircase,'' mr. tehrani said.  for the house's painted walls, the architects transformed the colors of persian art into pastels, mixing about 2 percent red, blue or green into each can of benjamin moore white paint. on the fourth floor, the guest bedrooms are painted a barely discernible pale green. kian's third-floor bedroom is the palest blue, and the master bedroom has just a hint of pink: the 2 percent red. the deep colors of the art and rugs stand out against the subtle palette on the walls.  a floor-to-ceiling slatted divider separates the staircase from the family room. through the slats is a view of the kitchen at the rear of the house.  in addition to working as executive chef at her two restaurants, ms. bina-seibel said, she cooks for her family three nights a week. ''i like everything open, and i couldn't bear having a wall there,'' she said. the divider, she said, is not only a structural necessity, but also a modernist take on a persian iron grille.  the kitchen and adjoining family room are furnished with a mix of antiques and italian modern furniture. the dining table is 18th-century english, and the modern, deeply cushioned sofa, which faces the television, is one of many italian pieces ms. bina-seibel ordered from a boston shop for the family room, bedrooms and one of her favorite rooms, the music room. that small space holds 2,000 vinyl records (mostly classical), a sound system and two facing leather and wood chairs. it is her preferred spot for important conversations. ''this is where we talk about our son,'' she said.  although the family moved into the house when construction finished in march 2003, the italian furniture wasn't ordered until after they had moved in and wasn't finished for a couple of years. (all in all, she said, the renovation cost about $3 million.)  as the family waited for the new furniture, ms. bina-seibel's mother kept urging her daughter to let her make silk curtains for the windows in the bedrooms and family room.  ''she is of the old school, who was taught how to sew and how to cook,'' ms. bina-seibel said of her mother. ''she made the sewing pattern for my sister's wedding dress, and she sewed the pearls on the dress.'' but ms. bina-seibel kept putting off her mother. ''how can i do the curtains until i know the furniture?'' she would say.  last summer, ms. zoka-bina's curtains -- shimmering swaths of silk lined in silk pongee -- were finally installed. the house is finished.  