uneasy at first, mets embrace their new orleans connection   a woman wearing a pink cowboy hat covered in rhinestones walked down bourbon street on wednesday night and spotted a character with equally outrageous headgear.  ''hey there,'' the woman shouted. ''who are you?''  mr. met froze on a balcony above the street. usually, he does not leave new york and therefore does not require an introduction. but in new orleans, a city known for its costume parties, he just looked like some guy who decided to dress up as a baseball.  eager to make the woman's acquaintance, mr. met tossed her a string of beads from the balcony, keeping with local tradition. so began the improbable relationship between new orleans and the mets.  one year ago, professional sports franchises in this city were threatening to move out in the aftermath of hurricane katrina. this season, the mets are moving in. for at least the next two years, their class aaa affiliate will be the new orleans zephyrs.  the mets did not initially want to be here. for 38 years, their class aaa affiliate was in norfolk, va. they helped norfolk build a stadium. they cultivated norfolk as a fan base. their star third baseman, david wright, grew up going to games in norfolk.  but after last season, norfolk dumped the mets for the baltimore orioles. with 10 major-league teams switching class aaa affiliates, the mets at least hoped to remain in the international league. they looked at columbus, ohio, and scranton, pa, but those vacancies were filled. new orleans plays in the pacific coast league, famous for its far-flung cities and brutal road trips. many big-league teams considering new orleans for minor-league operations were concerned about the travel, the temptations on bourbon street and the post-katrina logistics.  ''i'm not going to tell you it was our first choice,'' said jeff wilpon, the mets' senior executive vice president. ''but in the end, i think we'll look back and see that it was the best choice.''  the zephyrs have been in the new orleans area for 14 years, playing their home games in the suburb of metairie. zephyr field needed a $2 million renovation after the hurricane, but the team still managed to play a full schedule last season.  ''it's not that much different here than anywhere else,'' said mike schline, the club's general manager.  zephyr field sits across the street from the headquarters of the new orleans saints, where running back reggie bush hones his spin moves. the proximity of the zephyrs and the saints is somewhat significant, considering that the mets are handling their entry into new orleans the same way bush did.  it is hard to remember now, with the saints playing in the national football conference championship game sunday, but bush wanted no part of new orleans at this time last year. he hoped to be drafted first over all, by the houston texans. bush was disappointed when the saints selected him, but he did not mope. he realized that he had to embrace his role for a greater good.  bush immediately started donating money. he scheduled community events. he saved a school. before the season began, he was nicknamed saint reginald.  ''it's been so special,'' bush said wednesday. ''i really couldn't ask for a better situation than the one i got in new orleans.''  the mets seem to be copying bush's playbook. they have donated $650,000 to causes in new orleans since the hurricane. they wrote a check last week for $20,000 to the greater new orleans sports foundation for little league fields. they are planning for zephyrs players to work regularly with habitat for humanity.  this is not altogether unique. the mets donate to every community where they have an affiliate and they strongly encourage players to get involved with charities. but in new orleans, the expectations for philanthropy are much higher.  ''they are doing everything right so far,'' said tony ruda, 57, a mets fan from new orleans. ''giving all that money before you step on the field goes a long way here.''  ruda and his son vincent were among a crowd of 200 at a ''meet the mets'' cocktail party wednesday night in the courtyard of pat o'brien's bar. the master of ceremonies of the event was ron swoboda -- known in new york for his diving, game-saving catch with the mets in the 1969 world series, and known in new orleans as a zephyrs broadcaster.  swoboda, who has lived here for the past 25 years, may be the only recognizable link between the mets and new orleans. when the mets signed a two-year player-development agreement with the zephyrs in september, swoboda was flown to new york as an ambassador. ''can you spell window dressing,'' swoboda said.  ken oberkfell, the zephyrs' manager, goes back even further in new orleans than swoboda. he was a member of the 1977 new orleans pelicans, a minor-league team that played its home games in the superdome, filling about 5 percent of the stadium.  louisiana is a football state, but it knows a little hardball. louisiana state, tulane, the university of new orleans and the university of louisiana-lafayette have all taken turns as college baseball powers.  although the mets stock many of their top prospects at class aa binghamton, outfielder lastings milledge could start this season in new orleans, and they could send the injured pitcher pedro martínez here for a rehabilitation start as he prepares to return to the majors.  putting martínez on bourbon street is a recipe for excitement. for other prospects, it will be an interesting proving ground. ''if a young player can't handle new orleans, maybe he's not ready to handle new york,'' said adam wogan, director of minor league operations.  mr. met needed only one night of minor-league seasoning. the zephyrs have their own mascot, a semiaquatic rodent with orange teeth named boudreaux. this breed of rodent, a nutria, is rarely found in the united states outside louisiana.  ''they're actually edible,'' swoboda said. ''people down here like to chop them up and put them in their gumbo.  ''welcome to new orleans.''  baseball  