today in business   an expensive blunder -- a top interior department official was told nearly three years ago about a legal blunder that allowed drilling companies to avoid billions of dollars in payments for oil and gas pumped from publicly owned waters, a report by the department's chief independent investigator has found. [page c1.]  cablevision turns down offer -- the board of cablevision systems corporation rejected an $8.9 billion offer to sell the company to the dolans, its founding family. [c1.]  more troubles for intel -- intel reported that fourth-quarter profit fell 39 percent as the company continued to fight for market share and to absorb the high cost of its corporate overhaul. a particular disappointment was the critical measurement of gross profit margin, indicating that the price war with its smaller rival advanced micro devices was continuing to take a toll. [c2.]  supreme court shuns i.b.m. case -- the supreme court's decision not to hear arguments that i.b.m. illegally discriminated on the basis of age when it changed its traditional pension plan in the 1990s saves i.b.m. a significant amount of money, but it resolves almost nothing for the many other companies that made similar changes to their own plans. [c1.]  expanded role for cable boxes -- makers of cable set-top boxes exhibited devices at the consumer electronics show last week with a host of new features: more hard-disk space for storing digitally recorded tv shows, easier-to-navigate program guides, connections to web sites, dvd burners and video games. [c1.]  yum brands vs. peta -- yum brands, the fast-food conglomerate, got an unpleasant surprise recently when it made a $1 million offer for property in norfolk, va., that turned out to be owned by an affiliate of the people for the ethical treatment of animals, known as peta, which has been engaged in a campaign against kentucky fried chicken, which is owned by yum brands. [c4.]  copy protection is broken -- a loose-knit coalition of hackers around the world defeated the antipiracy software protecting several high-resolution movies in the hd dvd format, a feat that could send the technology companies behind the new wave of advanced dvds scrambling back to the drawing board to improve their copy protection. [c4.]  verizon to sell assets -- verizon communications is selling its residential telephone business in three new england states for $2.72 billion, shedding more of what the company sees as noncore assets as it invests billions to upgrade its wired and wireless networks for next-generation services. [c4.]  new push for toothpaste -- in a bid to regain the sales lead in the toothpaste aisle from its rival colgate-palmolive, the procter & gamble company has introduced crest pro-health, which claims to deliver in one tube everything a consumer could possibly want in a toothpaste. advertising. [c6.]  two charged in online gambling -- two founders of neteller, a company that processes internet gambling transactions, were arrested and charged with laundering billions of dollars in gambling proceeds, federal prosecutors announced. [c6.]  commerce bancorp in inquiry -- commerce bancorp, which calls itself ''america's most convenient bank,'' rattled investors with the disclosure that federal regulators were investigating the bank's real estate deals with executives. critics have long complained about the commerce bancorp's business ties with firms that are either owned or controlled by commerce's chairman and president, vernon w. hill ii, above, and his wife, shirley hill. [c3.]  dow struggles to a high -- wall street ended mixed after an erratic session, with the dow jones industrials reaching a third consecutive record close despite concerns about corporate profits and falling oil prices. [c13.]  online  business briefing  articles on these developments are at nytimes.com/business.  symantec warned of disappointing third-quarter results and cut its full-year outlook, sending its shares down 12 percent as it blamed weak business software sales and higher-than-expected costs. analysts said the shortfalls raised doubts about symantec's july 2005 acquisition of veritas software. (reuters)  the home builder centex corporation said it expected to post a loss in the quarter that ended dec. 31 because of softness in the housing market. the company said it expected to lose $2 a share for the quarter, including $150 million of option deposit and walkaway costs, $300 million to write down land values and $60 million in additional taxes. (ap)  the goodyear tire and rubber company has agreed to pay $925,000 to hundreds of women who were denied tire-building jobs at its virginia plant, the labor department announced. (ap)  freeport-mcmoran copper and gold, which mines precious metals, reported that its fourth-quarter profit fell despite strong metal prices, as sales dropped at its indonesian mine. (ap)  forest laboratories reported that its quarterly profit rose 28 percent, topping wall street expectations, with results led by sales of its lexapro antidepressant and namenda alzheimer's disease treatment. (reuters)  the td ameritrade holding corporation, the online brokerage firm, reported that its first-quarter earnings surged 69 percent, aided by rising money market account fees and interest revenue since its latest major acquisition. (ap)  