diet supplements and safety: some disquieting data   in october 1993, during a senate hearing on a bill to regulate herbs, vitamins and other dietary supplements on the presumption that they were safe, senator orrin g. hatch, republican of utah, spoke up in their defense. herbal remedies ''have been on the market for centuries,'' he said, adding: ''in fact, most of these have been on the market for 4,000 years, and the real issue is risk. and there is not much risk in any of these products.''  that benign view was written into the bill when it was passed by both houses the following year. while the law, the dietary supplement health and education act of 1994, forbade manufacturers to claim that their products ''treat, cure or prevent'' any disease, it allowed them to make vaguer claims based on a standard that did not require them to do any testing. and it stated that ''dietary supplements are safe within a broad range of intake, and safety problems with the supplements are relatively rare.''  but hiding in plain sight, then as now, a national database was steadily accumulating strong evidence that some supplements carry risks of injury and death, and that children may be particularly vulnerable.  since 1983, the american association of poison control centers has kept statistics on reports of poisonings for every type of substance, including dietary supplements. that first year, there were 14,006 reports related to the use of vitamins, minerals, essential oils -- which are not classified as a dietary supplement but are widely sold in supplement stores for a variety of uses -- and homeopathic remedies. herbs were not categorized that year, because they were rarely used then.  by 2005, the number had grown ninefold: 125,595 incidents were reported related to vitamins, minerals, essential oils, herbs and other supplements. in all, over the 23-year span, the association -- a national organization of state and local poison centers -- has received more than 1.6 million reports of adverse reactions to such products, including 251,799 that were serious enough to require hospitalization. from 1983 to 2004 there were 230 reported deaths from supplements, with the yearly numbers rising from 4 in 1994, the year the supplement bill passed, to a record 27 in 2005.  the number of deaths may be far higher. in april 2004, the food and drug administration said it had received 260 reports of deaths associated with herbs and other nonvitamin, nonmineral supplements since 1989. but an unpublished study prepared in 2000 for the agency by dr. alexander m. walker, then the chairman of epidemiology at the harvard school of public health, concluded: ''a best estimate is that less than 1 percent of serious adverse events caused by dietary supplements is reported to the f.d.a. the true proportion may well be smaller by an order of magnitude or more.''  the supplements linked to the most reactions in 2005, according to the poison control centers, were ordinary vitamins, accounting for nearly half of all the reports received that year, 62,446, including 1 death. minerals were linked to about half as many total reports, 32,098, but that number included 13 deaths. herbs and other specialty products accounted for still fewer total reports, 23,769, but 13 deaths. essential oils were linked to 7,282 reports and no deaths.  among herbs and other specialty products, melatonin and homeopathic products -- prepared from minuscule amounts of substances as diverse as salt and snake venom -- had the most reports of reactions in 2005. the poison centers received 2,001 reports of reactions to melatonin, marketed as a sleep aid, including 535 hospitalizations and 4 deaths. homeopathic products, often marketed as being safe because the doses are very low, were linked to 7,049 reactions, including 564 hospitalizations and 2 deaths.  but most other types of herbs and specialty supplements also appear in the annual report. in 2005, the poison centers received 203 reports of adverse reactions to st. john's wort, including 79 hospitalizations and 1 death. glucosamine, with or without chondroitin, was linked to 813 adverse reactions, including 108 hospitalizations and 1 death. echinacea was linked to 483 adverse reactions, including 55 hospitalizations, 1 of them considered life-threatening. saw palmetto was not listed on the report.  injuries to children under 6 account for nearly three-quarters of all the reports of adverse reactions to dietary supplements, according to the poison centers. in 2005, the most recent year for which figures are available, 48,604 children suffered reactions to vitamins alone, the ninth-largest category of substances associated with reactions in that age group.  major medical groups and government agencies do not generally recommend vitamin or mineral supplements for children who are otherwise healthy. but an analysis of the national maternal and infant health survey, published in the journal pediatrics in 1997, found that 54 percent of parents of preschool children gave them a vitamin or mineral supplement at least three days a week.  advocates of the products correctly point out that the poison centers' figures do not prove a causal link between a product and a reaction and that, in any case, far more people are injured and killed by drugs. painkillers alone were associated with 283,253 adverse reactions in 2005, according to the poison centers, more than twice as many as with supplements. but only 3.5 percent of those reactions occurred when people took the prescribed amount of painkiller; most were from overdoses, either accidental or intentional. the same was true of asthma drugs (3.6 percent of reactions were associated with the prescribed dose) and cough and cold drugs (3.1 percent).  while reactions to vitamins, minerals and essential oils occurred at similarly low levels when people took the recommended amounts, adverse reactions linked to the recommended levels of herbs, homeopathic products and other dietary supplements accounted for 10.3 percent of all reactions to those products reported to the poison centers -- about three times the level seen for most drugs.  drugs marketed in the united states go through a rigorous f.d.a. approval process to prove that they are effective for a particular indication, with the potential risks balanced against the benefits. while the approval process has come under attack in recent years as unduly favorable to drug companies, it remains among the toughest in the world.  there is no comparable requirement for supplements. even so, hundreds of millions of tax dollars have been spent since the early 1990s on hundreds of studies to test the possible benefits of supplements. the national center for complementary and alternative medicine, established by congress in 1991 to ''investigate and validate unconventional medical practices,'' has a 2007 budget of more than $120 million.  since april 2002, five large randomized trials financed by the center have found no significant benefit for st. john's wort against major depression, echinacea against the common cold, saw palmetto for enlarged prostate, the combination of glucosamine and chondroitin for arthritis, or black cohosh and other herbs for the hot flashes associated with menopause.  a new source of data on adverse reactions to dietary supplements will soon become available: in december, congress passed a measure requiring the manufacturers of dietary supplements and over-the-counter drugs to inform the f.d.a. whenever consumers call them with reports of serious adverse events. the bill was signed by president bush the day after christmas. it is a welcome acknowledgment that ''natural'' does not always mean ''safe.''  essay dan hurley is the author of the new book ''natural causes: death, lies and politics in america's vitamin and herbal supplement industry'' (broadway books), from which this essay is adapted.  correction:  february 6, 2007, tuesday  a national poison control database suggests that some diet supplements may pose risks to consumers, raising questions about a 1994 federal law stating that ''safety problems with the supplements are relatively rare.'' but an essay in science times on jan. 16 about those risks overstated the number of adverse reactions to supplements reported in the database.  the essay said the database, issued by the american association of poison control centers, reported 125,595 incidents of poisonings in 2005 related to vitamins, minerals, essential oils, herbs and other supplements, and a total of 1.6 million such incidents from 1983 to 2005. in fact, the figures refer to reports of exposures to those substances.  the poison control association defines ''exposures'' as calls to poison centers from the public or health professionals reporting ''actual or potential exposure to a substance (e.g., an ingestion, inhalation or topical exposure).'' in an e-mail message, dr. susan smolinske, a spokeswoman for the association, said that ''some exposures to diet supplements result in unknown or benign outcomes, rather than adverse outcomes.'' she cited an august 2005 report in the journal clinical toxicology suggesting that about 10 percent of exposures result in ''moderate to major'' medical outcomes.  the database has no category for poisoning incidents, so that number is not known. while it does have a column headed ''adverse reactions,'' that category refers only to reports of reactions ''occurring with normal, prescribed, labeled or recommended use of the product,'' leaving out overdoses and cases where the dose was unknown.  the number given for ''adverse reactions'' is lower than the number of people treated in health care facilities after exposure to a substance. it is also generally lower than the number of medical outcomes ranging from minor to fatal that were associated with the substance.  the 2005 figures in the essay should have been reported as follows:  st. john's wort: 203 exposures, 25 adverse reactions, 79 visits to health care facilities, 36 medical outcomes ranging from minor to fatal.  homeopathic products: 7,049 exposures, 178 adverse reactions, 564 health care visits, 267 medical outcomes.  glucosamine: 813 exposures, 65 adverse reactions, 108 health care visits, 62 medical outcomes.  echinacea: 483 exposures, 33 adverse reactions, 55 health care visits, 32 medical outcomes.  melatonin: 2,001 exposures, 53 adverse reactions, 535 health care visits, 320 medical outcomes.  vitamins: 62,446 exposures (including 48,604 in children under 6), 1,938 adverse reactions (these are not broken down by age), 6,322 health care visits, 3,800 medical outcomes.  all diet supplements: 125,595 exposures, 5,334 adverse reactions, 17,843 health care visits, 12,314 medical outcomes.  correction:  february 6, 2007, tuesday  an essay in science times on jan. 16 about risks associated with diet supplements referred incorrectly to statistics taken from annual reports by the american association of poison control centers. the statistics were for exposures to various substances, not adverse reactions to those substances. a corrective article appears today on page f6.  