house backs a cut in interest on college loans   house democrats on wednesday pushed through legislation cutting the interest rate on federally subsidized loans to college students, drawing on large bipartisan support despite opposition by the white house.  the bill's easy passage -- by 356 to 71, with 124 republicans joining democrats to support it -- underscored the broad appeal of college affordability as an issue. and it was another step in the democrats' drive to pass key bills in their early days in control of the house.  representative george miller, democrat of california and chairman of the house education and labor committee, who sponsored the bill, said it illustrated his party's commitment to strengthening the middle class. ''with this vote, the house took the first step towards guaranteeing that every student who is qualified to go to college will be able to afford to go,'' he said.  representative roscoe g. bartlett, republican of maryland, said he could not fathom why his party's leaders opposed the bill.  ''i just think that we need more of our kids going to school,'' mr. bartlett said, after casting his vote. ''this is one of the better places to invest money, and as long as we're taking people's money, we should put it back where it's needed.''  the measure, which will halve the interest rate over the next five years, is estimated to cost $6 billion, which would be financed by increasing fees that lenders pay to the government and by reducing the 30 or so largest lenders' government-guaranteed profits on student loans.  in a statement opposing the bill issued on wednesday morning, well before the vote, the white house said the measure did nothing to improve access to college, because it only helped ease the burden of repayment for graduates. instead, the white house called for increased grant aid to lower-income students.  the white house statement also said access to higher education should be improved by containing costs. the responsibility for helping families, the statement said, ''must be shared with colleges, which also have a central role in making higher education affordable.''  the white house did not threaten a veto, but the size of wednesday's majority indicated that democrats would have the strength to override one.  the afternoon's debate gave little hint of the broad bipartisan support the measure would garner. republicans derided the bill as a gimmick -- ''bait and switch,'' in the words of representative tom price of georgia, who said it would take full effect only five years from now, and then for only six months, barring further congressional action.  but ultimately the issue's appeal for many republicans was too strong. representative michael n. castle, republican of delaware, voted for the bill, describing it as ''a step towards assisting college students pay for the soaring costs of higher education.'' mr. castle added, however, that the bill ''barely skims the surface of the true problem of how we can help increase access and affordability for all students.''  the bill comes as tuition increases at public and private institutions routinely outpace inflation, putting college out of reach for many students, and increasing the debt they carry upon graduation. the average student graduates college carrying more than $18,000 in debt.  ''no one wants to be on the receiving end of a campaign ad attacking an incumbent for siding with bank lenders over middle-class voters,'' said sarah binder, a senior fellow at the brookings institution.  according to the u.s. public interest research group, the bill would save the average student who starts college next year about $2,300 in interest payments over the life of a 15-year loan.  representative tom latham, republican of iowa, also voted for the interest cuts. ''the savings students will receive is commendable,'' he said, ''and deserves our support.''  a similar bill in the senate, sponsored by edward m. kennedy, democrat of massachusetts and chairman of the education committee, would also reduce the interest rates on student loans, along with making a raft of other changes. his bill would also increase the maximum pell grant to $5,100.  representative howard p. mckeon of california, the education committee's ranking republican, contended that the house measure would only make repayment terms easier for graduates, whose expected lifetime earnings top $1 million.  the bill cuts the interest rate on subsidized stafford loans to 3.4 percent from the current rate of 6.8 percent in stages over five years, beginning with loans taken after july 1. to make the bill affordable, the full benefit of the loan's promise of 3.4 percent interest rates applies only to loans made after july 1, 2012, and expires by the end of that year. the subsidized stafford loans are also open to middle income families.  the student loan industry lobbied against the bill, but appeared resigned to its passage in the house. the consumer bankers association said some lawmakers saw the student lending program as ''a bottomless pit of budget savings that can be drawn on repeatedly to fund changes to student aid programs.''  the 110th congress  