a ban tells of wealth and its discontents   guangzhou, the chaotic export capital in southern china, appeared to hit a major chinese milestone this month, becoming the country's first city to reach a per capita income of $10,000 -- more than five times the nationwide figure and a rough threshold for becoming a ''developed'' country.  but in a measure of just how problematic prosperity can be here, the city will institute a ban on motorcycles and motorized bicycles on monday, hoping to quell a crime wave that has been building to more than 100,000 offenses a year.  the vehicles, the primary mode of transport for migrant workers clawing their way up guangzhou's economic ladder, are also favored by criminals who have terrorized the city in recent years, including a shocking case in late 2005, when a woman had her hand cut off by a thief on a motorcycle. news accounts concluded that motorcycle thieves were divided into gangs, including one called the hand choppers.  ''crime will be a long-term problem in guangzhou,'' said peng peng, director of research management for the guangzhou academy of social sciences. ''as long as there is a vast gap between the rich and poor in the city, guangzhou will suffer from crime.''  the communist party is forever trying to focus the expectations of the chinese people on a better, if distant, future where everyone is more affluent and where china is a true modern nation. yet cities like guangzhou and nearby shenzhen, which have already begun to taste real prosperity, are learning how new wealth can bring new problems and not always solve the old ones. as incomes have steadily risen in guangzhou, so have crime, traffic and inequality.  inequality here is unquestionably stark between the 7.5 million registered residents and the estimated 3.7 million migrants. this week, guangzhou had to lower its per capita income figure to $7,800; the $10,000 level had been calculated without including migrants, whose wages are notoriously low.  but public sympathy has limits, particularly since studies show that migrants are responsible for much of the city's street crime. most major chinese cities feel very safe by american standards. still, in guangzhou, thefts, purse snatching, robberies and muggings have become common. one 2006 poll found that only 20 percent of residents felt safe. hawkers at one pedestrian overpass in tianhe district were selling switchblades and collapsible metal rods as self-defense weapons.  last march, zhang guifang, a high-ranking communist party official in the city, signaled a tougher stance when he encouraged police officers to open fire on crime suspects when necessary. the police subsequently shot five mugging suspects, and crime seemed to slow down.  recently, there has been talk, including by a high-ranking official in guangzhou's communist party, of capping the number of migrants allowed into the city as a means of curbing social problems. as yet, the city has not instituted any restrictions, but the motorcycle ban has already forced thousands of motorcycle taxi riders to leave. others have turned over their motorcycles and motorized bicycles to government impound lots in exchange for modest cash payments.  ''it might be because guangzhou is richer now,'' said lin mu, 50, a motorcycle taxi driver, offering an explanation for the ban and then laughing at his own words. ''there are no more poor people, so there is no room for motorcycles! everyone has millions and millions!''  another migrant, who gave only his last name, gong, idled his motorcycle with other riders along a major thoroughfare in the city's tianhe district. ''a lot of people have left,'' said mr. gong, 40, his eyes darting in search of customers as well as police officers. ''we're just biding our time until the final deadline on the 15th.''  mr. gong said he migrated to guangzhou five years ago from hunan province, bringing his wife and child. he had earned about $250 a month on his motorcycle -- a healthy wage for a migrant -- but now he said he was not certain what he would do.  ''oh, here they come, here they come!'' he said, suddenly racing off as two police officers approached on a motorbike. ''sorry, i've got to go.''  along beijing road, one of guangzhou's most fashionable shopping boulevards, random interviews found that nearly everyone had been robbed or knew someone who had been. maggie qu, 20, who recently graduated from a local technical college, said a thief stole her wallet and cellphone out of her purse two months ago. her friend, chen jianguo, 21, expressed sympathy for migrants -- ''they are chinese, after all'' -- but he blamed them for the crime problem. ''they do bring crime,'' mr. chen said. ''unemployed people and uneducated people have to make a living, so they may resort to crime.''  he added: ''there are too many of them coming, and there are not enough job opportunities.''  ms. qu blamed migrants for ''polluting the environment.''  ''they are spitting everywhere and littering,'' she said.  of course, migrants are also responsible for performing the hard labor that generates much of the city's economic output -- just like elsewhere in china. ye cunhuan migrated to guangzhou from hubei province in 2003 and opened four stores that sell motorized bicycles. these bikes, equipped with small motors, are popular for deliveries and also for people who cannot afford a motorcycle. now, ms. ye has had to close two stores and is facing ruin.  ''this has been fatal to my business,'' she said.  she has responded by filing a lawsuit that claims the ban violates a national law that establishes the legality of motorcycles and motorized bicycles. the case was heard last monday, and she expects a verdict by march. ms. ye scoffed at the idea that criminals used motorized bicycles, given their low rate of speed, and characterized the ban as an act of discrimination against migrants and others with less money.  ''they don't want to see any of the poor or any ugliness on the streets,'' ms. ye said. ''they want guangzhou to be a city that attracts wealth and beauty and is full of luxury cars.''  guangzhou journal  correction:  january 19, 2007, friday  an article on monday about the crime and discontent that has accompanied prosperity for some in the chinese city of guangzhou referred incorrectly to the city's economic development. it has reached $7,800 per capita gross domestic product -- not per capita income.  