a chance to save their skin   baby boomers are so last century.  at least, that is how a lot of the skin care companies see it. there may be tens of millions of boomers out there craving to renew their skin's youthful glow. but their children collectively represent an even bigger market for skin care regimens, and they will be spending on skin care for many decades to come.  clinique is repositioning its three-step cleanser squarely at college students. avon is pushing mark., a line of items aimed at 17- to 24-year-olds. lancôme is selling juicy tubes, lip glosses aimed at teenagers, and in britain, a new company called young and pure is marketing face and hair products to girls as young as 10.  ''the cosmetics people are realizing that young people have plenty of money that they are perfectly willing to spend on lip glosses and creams,'' said allan g. mottus, a consultant to the beauty industry and publisher of the informationist, a trade publication. ''now they are trying to figure out better ways to reach them.''  not everyone is hopping on board, of course. novartis, which acquired keri lotion from bristol-myers squibb in 2005, centered a new advertising campaign in the fall on the theme of ''timeless beauty,'' and has a package redesign in the works for this year. but research shows that keri lotion has always had the strongest appeal among consumers who are 35 and older and that is the age group that novartis will continue to focus on.  few if any companies are abandoning the older crowd -- anti-aging creams are big sellers. but increasingly, cosmetics companies are running parallel campaigns aimed at younger customers.  ''our core customer is still 38 to 50, but we no longer think of the under-38s as fringe customers,'' said elizabeth park, executive vice president of global marketing for elizabeth arden u.s. similarly, avon sees mark. as an add-on, not a replacement. ''our interest in boomers hasn't diminished, but we do realize that this younger generation is concerned about skin care at a much earlier age,'' said claudia poccia, president for u.s. beauty for the mark. line.  but the just-postpimple crowd is pretty elusive. young women are far less likely to shop in department stores than their mothers were. and department store cosmetics counters, with their consultants always ready to suggest products, have long been the retail location of choice for introducing all but the cheapest products.  so the companies are looking for new ways to bring those younger consumers in.  the three-step cleansing program -- exfoliate, tone, moisturize -- has been clinique's cornerstone product for almost 40 years. that regimen can combat aging, but it can also combat oily skin.  in 2006, clinique, which had been devoting about 90 percent of its advertising budget to magazines and newspapers rarely read by those in their teens and 20s, began to advertise on mtv and other television shows aimed at a younger audience. it took its message to web sites like facebook. and it began demonstrating the three-step product on college campuses.  sales of the three-step product jumped almost 10 percent in 2006, ''and i really believe it is business from new young users, not just incremental sales from our longtime customers,'' said lynne greene, president of clinique. this year, less than 50 percent of the budget will go to print.  arden has changed its ways, too. it is advertising its new intervene pause & effect moisturizer in instyle, allure and other magazines that reach the young. and it has also introduced a new three-in-one cleanser, for which it has mounted an e-mail and web campaign aimed at women in their mid-20s ''who are really just getting interested in skin care,'' ms. park said. it has priced the product at $20 for five ounces -- low for a department store brand, but more affordable for someone in an entry-level job.  the companies have been fine-tuning the products and packaging as well. arden's new cleanser is free of fragrance because research showed that young women do not like scented skin products.  avon, meanwhile, has introduced the hook up connector, a product that lets customers snap together a mascara, lipstick or other cosmetic (like lego blocks, in terms of the mechanics). later this year it plans to introduce a small multiproduct compact that women can load up with different products every day if they wish.  ''this generation personalizes its cellphone rings and computer screens, so it makes sense to let it customize its cosmetics,'' ms. poccia said. ''the freedom to mix and match is just more important to young women than it was to their mothers.''  but it is in the marketing, not the actual products, that the industry's new fascination with youth comes through. none of the companies are following the old ''hope in a jar'' model -- buy this cream and soon look like the beauty queen hired as its spokeswoman. instead, they are using their web sites and marketing materials to try to explain how the products work and why they are useful.  ''this younger generation knows that a lot of the ingredients in the $50 jar are also in the $3 jar, but they also know that some products really can be differentiated on the basis of science,'' ms. park of arden said.  in fact, they also know that sometimes, common household items work just as well as fancy creams to solve skin problems. they were, after all, brought up by mothers who probably knew the trick of using cucumber slices to reduce puffiness around the eyes.  avon, for one, is harnessing that knowledge. included in the tips that visitors to meetmark.com will find: a dab of toothpaste can dry up an unsightly pimple.  ''this generation is so educated that we do not try the hard sell, but rather try to be influencers,'' ms. poccia said. ''we give the facts, the statistics, the test results, and let a young woman make choices on her own terms.''  advertising  