taking on a big u.s. partner, a first family of canadian media courts trouble   leonard j. asper is part of the best-known family in the canadian media and one of its most aggressive. but have the aspers picked one fight too many?  mr. asper, chief executive of canwest global communications, a leading broadcaster and newspaper publisher, has just concluded a 2.3 billion canadian dollar deal ($1.97 billion) for alliance atlantis communications, best known in the united states as the creator of ''csi: crime scene investigation'' and in canada for its lucrative specialty cable channels.  but canwest is still struggling with the debt it took on when it bought the largest canadian newspaper chain from a company then controlled by conrad m. black.  like many buyers these days, mr. asper used private equity capital. but by relying on money from goldman sachs, the prominent american-based investment bank, for the bulk of the deal announced on wednesday, mr. asper is directly challenging canadian laws banning the foreign control of broadcasters.  ''there's concern that goldman might be trying to rent our passport for this purchase,'' mr. asper said during an interview on friday. ''it's just the opposite. we're renting their equity.''  canada's foreign ownership rules are complex. the key for canwest will be to demonstrate that goldman sachs will not have any effective control over major decisions related to the 13 alliance atlantis channels.  that may be tough. while no one disputes that global will operate the channels, it will provide only about 132 million canadian dollars of the 2.3 billion canadian dollar purchase and will receive 17 percent of the equity.  mr. asper maintains that the deal is straightforward. ''this is really a three-stage purchase in installments,'' he said, concluding in a plan by canwest to buy out the goldman sachs interest down the road.  but others say the deal will not pass muster with regulators.  ''there's something between a possibility and an absolute probability that the deal won't fly,'' said ian morrison, spokesman for the friends of canadian broadcasting, which lobbies for canadian programming. ''all this deal may do is establish a market price for alliance atlantis.''  the aspers have had their run-ins with regulators over the years, but have mainly benefited from the limitations that the government in ottawa puts on foreign ownership.  when canwest's global television, like any private broadcaster, buys the rights to an american show, global's signal dislodges the host american network's feed when that program goes on the air.  ''the easiest and simplest way to make money in canadian broadcasting is by airing american programming,'' said marc raboy, a professor of communications and media at mcgill university in montreal. ''it's a no-brainer: american content is cheaper than producing canadian content.''  in 1974, mr. asper's father, israel h. asper (known to everyone as izzy) was the leader of the liberal party of manitoba and an owner of an independent television station in winnipeg, when he joined a group to rescue global, then an audaciously named, but financially challenged station, in toronto.  when joined with a string of independent stations that canwest owned, global evolved into a network. it also came under fire frequently for producing as little canadian programming as rules permitted.  ''they have a very slender record in that area,'' mr. morrison said. the elder mr. asper died in 2003, three years after buying the newspaper chain from mr. black (a purchase that is at the center of mr. black's planned trial in chicago).  since then, global has also gone from canada's most profitable private broadcaster to one that trails the rival ctvglobemedia. in 2001, canwest's broadcast outlets had operating profit margins of 33 percent; last year, that had dropped to 5 percent.  the company's media assets, though concentrated in canada, include properties in australia, new zealand, britain and ireland. another problem for global has been a gradual shift by viewers in canada, as is the case in the united states, away from traditional networks and toward specialty cable channels, where the company is weak.  indeed, mr. asper blames regulators for much his weakness in the cable tv business. alliance atlantis, primarily a film producer at the time, was given channels and global was shut out in an attempt to diversify ownership in the broadcasting industry. he acknowledged that global's methods did not help.  ''it's also true that we were a victim of our business planning,'' he said, ''because in a couple of cases, we did not put the same canadian content commitment in our license applications as others.''  mr. asper will be back before the same regulator later this year looking for approval on last week's deal.  another issue will be the deal's complexity. among other things, the ultimate size of canwest's equity holding will become clear only in 2011, when the channels acquired merge into global.  ''the deal is quite convoluted, and details remain surprisingly sparse,'' robert bek, a media analyst with cibc world markets, wrote in an investors' note last week.  professor raboy also anticipates that canwest will have a difficult time persuading the regulator that goldman sachs will not have a large influence, particularly given canwest's heavy debt.  ''it will be asking if, in financial terms, canwest is strong enough to sustain a deal like this,'' he said.  