rice, meeting abbas, promises u.s. push on mideast peace   secretary of state condoleezza rice, pledging deeper engagement in middle east peace efforts, met on sunday with mahmoud abbas, the palestinian authority president. he rejected suggestions by some israeli officials for establishing a temporary palestinian state within provisional borders but pledged that any american money to bolster his security forces would not be abused.  ''i have heard loud and clear the call for deeper american engagement in these processes,'' ms. rice said after two and a half hours of talks with mr. abbas.  ''the united states is absolutely committed to helping to find a solution where israelis and palestinians can live in security, in which they can live in peace and in which they can live in democracy,'' she said, adding, ''you will have my commitment to do precisely that.''  ms. rice's visit to the palestinian government headquarters was clearly an effort to bolster mr. abbas in his struggle to regain the political advantage over the militant group hamas, which won control of the parliament in elections a year ago. but none of the parties here predicted a speedy breakthrough.  the israeli officials she is meeting during two days of shuttling between israeli and palestinian officials are also showing weakness in the polls. ms. rice's effort to accelerate progress on the road map -- a step-by-step process for resolving the israeli-palestinian dispute -- is overshadowed in the minds of many here by new bush administration initiatives toward iraq and iran.  although no formal proposal has been presented, some israeli officials have floated the idea that peace efforts can be accelerated by establishing a provisional palestinian state within temporary borders to be subsequently finalized.  but mr. abbas said the idea would never work, fearing that the palestinians might be locked into those temporary borders. ''we have also noted to minister rice our decision to end any temporary or transitional solutions, including a state with temporary borders, because we do not believe it to be a realistic choice that can be built upon,'' mr. abbas said during a joint news conference with ms. rice.  mr. abbas issued assurances that there would be careful spending and accounting of american money should congress approve a state department proposal for $86 million in ''nonlethal assistance'' to enhance the palestinian security forces directly under his political wing -- as opposed to those loyal to hamas. ''be confident that we will not misuse any aid that we receive from any party,'' he said, noting that vehicles and communications equipment, as well as weapons, had been destroyed in clashes with the israelis.  the rice-abbas meeting was held in the palestinian government compound in ramallah, just across a lot from where construction is under way on a mausoleum for yasir arafat, the previous palestinian leader.  last month, israel's prime minister, ehud olmert, met with mr. abbas and offered a number of concessions aimed at strengthening him. ms. rice had described the meeting as a reason for optimism.  while mr. abbas said sunday that it was ''a good meeting,'' he also said, delicately, that ''we are waiting for the application of our agreements.''  but a spokesman for mr. abbas, mohamed edwan, gave a far more pessimistic review on sunday. he said that several agreements emerging from the session, including a review of checkpoints and establishing a process for releasing prisoners, had languished, and he complained that a meeting that produced promises with no subsequent progress could only weaken mr. abbas. it ''hurts him rather than benefits him,'' mr. edwan said.  ahmed yousef, an adviser to the palestinian prime minister, ismail haniya, of hamas, said of ms. rice, ''she said that she is here to listen, but the situation needs movement, not listening.'' referring to previous pledges by israel, he said, ''what about israel's release of the money, the easing of movement, the removal of checkpoints,'' and added, ''even on these issues, she hasn't come with anything new.''  he was referring to a promise by israel to release $100 million, which is a portion of the tax revenue that israel collects on behalf of the palestinians, but has been withholding since hamas came to power early last year. israel has withheld more than $500 million during this period.  in jerusalem, where israeli ministers gathered for the weekly cabinet session, several expressed growing frustration at the continued palestinian rocket fire coming out of the gaza strip.  ''it is clear that sooner or later we will have to respond,'' said avigdor lieberman, the minister of strategic affairs and an advocate of tough measures against the palestinians.  late sunday night, israeli troops shot two palestinians, detonating the explosives they were carrying as they approached the gaza strip's border fence with israel, the israeli military said. both palestinians were killed, the military added.  