apple earnings rose 78% last quarter   apple inc., sweeping past even optimistic analyst expectations, delivered $1 billion in profit for its first quarter, based largely on the christmas performance of its ipod music player business.  setting both revenue and profit records, the company shipped more than 21 million ipod players, more than double the number that it shipped in the same quarter last year. profit rose 78 percent, from $565 million in the comparable quarter last year, and revenue rose to $7.12 billion, a 24 percent increase from the $5.75 billion the company reported a year earlier.  ''it sure feels good,'' said steven p. jobs, the co-founder and chief executive of apple, during a telephone interview after the company's briefing for analysts. ''it's an amazing milestone. we've been betting on innovation for a long time, and it's working well for us.''  the company's stock reached a record on tuesday, at $97.60, but the stock closed at $94.95 wednesday and slipped even more, to $94.17, in after-hours trading. analysts said the decline came in response to apple's conservative guidance for the next quarter, which has traditionally been a difficult one for the company.  the company expects revenue to fall to between $4.8 billion and $4.9 billion and earnings to fall to between 54 cents a share and 56 cents a share next quarter, according to peter oppenheimer, the chief financial officer.  the strength of the company's quarter was underscored by apple's far outstripping wall street's expectations. the consensus expectation of analysts surveyed by thomson financial was for earnings of 78 cents a share; apple reported earnings of $1.14 a share.  while its mainstay macintosh computer line did reasonably well, growing 28 percent from a year ago, the company's business focus has clearly shifted toward mobility. the company's desktop computer business grew only 5 percent from a year ago, but its portable business was up 79 percent, largely on the success of its macbook line of notebook computers.  moreover, the changing face of apple's business could be clearly seen in the company's introduction of the iphone cellular phone, which will begin shipping in june. the phone blends the company's ipod music player with some of the data features of its macintosh computers.  according to market share numbers released on wednesday by gartner, an industry research firm, apple had 5.1 percent of the united states personal computer market during the last quarter. that is an increase of 30.6 percent over the share in the same quarter a year ago. dell is the dominant personal computer maker, with a market share of 34 percent for the latest quarter, but gartner said dell had lost more than 17 percentage points of market share in the last year.  the story of apple's quarter could be seen in the weeks leading up to christmas, when the company virtually transformed its fashionable retail stores into warehouses for eager consumers. in its downtown san francisco store, for example, two aisles were set aside for customers to line up, walk past large stacks of products and check out quickly.  ''we created an express lane,'' mr. jobs said. ''we had a lot of people wanting to buy products and we didn't want to disappoint them.''  despite the stock decline on wednesday night, financial analysts said they believed the company was in an unusually strong position, with both its macintosh and its ipod businesses doing well and two new businesses, the iphone and apple tv, on the horizon.  ''the fundamentals are extremely strong,'' said shannon cross, a financial analyst at soleil-cross research. ''the one question was on the mac side. it was a little lighter than people had expected.''  several analysts have said they expect the new market segments to increase what has been described as the halo effect -- the benefits that apple's macintosh computer sales receive from consumers who have purchased ipods.  apple may also benefit in the coming months as consumers begin to consider replacing their computers after microsoft introduces its vista operating system. many industry analysts say they believe that the delay in getting that system to market significantly hurt the sales of windows-compatible pcs in the last quarter.  on wednesday, microsoft introduced new price plans for pc users who wish to upgrade their existing systems. the company said that high-end versions of vista will ship with new pcs even though consumers will have access initially only to the more basic functions. they will then be able to unlock additional features by purchasing upgrades.  mr. jobs noted that apple's operating system, macintosh os x, comes in only one version, and that sophisticated features like its filevault, which protects data privacy, are standard. microsoft users will have to buy the most expensive version of vista, vista ultimate, for as much as $199 above basic vista, to obtain bitlocker, a similar feature of that operating system.  a significant key to the company's strong sales of digital music players was the introduction of its postage-stamp-size shuffle, which began shipping at the end of october, about the same time as microsoft's zune music player, which met with lackluster reviews and meager shipments.  ''apple's ipod sales were outrageous,'' said charles r. wolf, a financial analyst at needham & company, who owns apple stock. ''i have a feeling the shuffle played a big role.''  apple said it had generated $1.75 billion in cash during the quarter, leaving it with a cash balance of $11.9 billion.  analysts did not focus on the company's stock options backdating difficulties. only one question addressed stock options, and the company responded that it was cooperating with government investigators.  in a filing with the securities and exchange commission last month, the company said it was cooperating fully with federal officials looking into irregularities the company reported last year, in which documents related to an options award given to mr. jobs in 2001 were altered.  despite wall street speculation about mr. jobs's importance to the company, he said he did not believe he was an irreplaceable asset at the firm that he helped found.  ''i believe i'm an irreplaceable asset with my family,'' he said, ''but apple is an amazing company that would go on without any individual, including myself.''  