balanchine and stravinsky, reunited   stravinsky was arguably the most important composer for dance in the 20th century, beginning with a 1910 commission from serge diaghilev to score michel fokine's ''firebird.'' although stravinsky wrote only four scores for ballets by george balanchine, the two artists had a long and mutually fruitful working relationship.  the new york city ballet paid tribute to that relationship on tuesday night at the new york state theater with ''stravinsky and balanchine: an eternal partnership,'' the first of 10 themed programs of familiar repertory that the company will present in an effort to provide context for the ballets audiences will see this season. (will the programs also be more marketable? the tribute's slightly odd title does conjure up an image of the eminently practical stravinsky and balanchine, who died in 1971 and 1983 respectively, looking down -- or up -- to count the houses.)  the selection of ballets suggests the range of responses stravinsky's music drew from balanchine, from the cool, bare-bones complexity of their 1957 ''agon,'' set to an original score, to the jazzy playfulness and powerful surge of balanchine's 1972 ''symphony in three movements.''  balanchine's elegiac moments are seldom among his best. take ''duo concertant,'' a fussy, artificial-looking quartet in which two dancers (yvonne borree and nikolaj hübbe) relate unconvincingly to an onstage pianist (cameron grant) and violinist (arturo delmoni).  much more believable is the unstressed relationship of dancers to instruments in balanchine's 1963 ''movements for piano and orchestra,'' now paired in performance with his 1960 ''monumentum pro gesualdo.'' together they suggest the connections and the distinctions between the more classical and more modern looks of balanchine's ballets, with ''monumentum'' delicately pouring out patterns in space for sweetly chaste-looking dancers and ''movements'' seeming to turn classical traditions on their head, with music to match.  ''agon'' occupies a central position in balanchine's oeuvre, a ground-shifting masterpiece in which he and stravinsky drew from mid-17th-century court dances to create what balanchine called a ''quintessential contemporary ballet'' that represented a total collaboration with the composer. harshly astringent at times, sportily athletic at others, the tightly knit ''agon'' includes one of the most eerily intense and sensuous of pas de deux, danced on tuesday by wendy whelan and albert evans.  not so famous but nearly as arresting is the pas de deux (exquisitely danced by miranda weese and jared angle) at the heart of ''symphony in three movements,'' a ballet that, like ''agon'' in a very different way, celebrates the affection balanchine and stravinsky felt for america and things american, like jazz dance and music. it is a ballet that pushes excitingly from one climax to another. in the pas de deux balanchine uses innovative movement -- jagged limbs and lifts of a hunched-over ballerina who looks as if she is seated -- to evoke the intimate love symbolized by the traditional pas de deux.  in the end perhaps ''eternal partnership'' suggests most how willing the two, though so meticulous about their crafts, were to be led into each other's beckoning realms.  the new york city ballet performs through feb. 25 at the new york state theater, lincoln center; (212) 870-5570 or nycballet.com.  dance review  