after the months of marketing comes the day of reckoning   for 2006 the big day was thursday, when the firm released its annual retail report of hardware sales and the top 10 selling console games of the year. (the data released on thursday do not include pc games.) the list includes a mixture of sequels and newcomers; some well regarded games didn't make it at all.  say hello to the new boss, same as the old boss -- last week, before the sales report came out, i was talking to an industry executive about the ubiquity of online pc games in south korea. he brought up just who really rules the video-game roost in the united states: a television football analyst who young players may not even realize was once a coach, john madden.  ''well, yes, online gaming has become a part of the culture in korea,'' he said, ''just like an entire generation of young men in america have grown up on madden football and madden has become a dominant part of pop culture for a big swath of the population here.''  the numbers for 2006 back up that assessment. for the second year in a row, a version of madden nfl football from electronic arts topped the charts, with 2.8 million games sold for sony's playstation 2. perhaps even more telling, the top version of madden has placed no lower than third every year since 2001. every summer, it seems, there are articles about potential ''madden fatigue'' setting in among the game's rabid player base. and every year, it seems, the franchise seems to maintain its momentum, just as the national football league always seems to stand astride televised sports like a colossus.  in the same vein, sony deserves credit for the continued strength and popularity of the now-venerable ps2, priced at only $129. sony has taken a lot of heat for the lackluster inauguration of its playstation 3, but the ps2 was actually the top-selling home game console in the holiday season, and half of the top 10 games of 2006 were for the older system. like madden itself, the ps2 has practically become a fixture in the homes and consciousness of americans under age 35.  sometimes you can take it with you -- in looking at last year's breakout hits, the first game that comes to mind is gears of war, the intense, sumptuous third-person shooter for the xbox 360 that lived up to all the considerable hype that microsoft had generated to promote it; it came in at no. 3 for the year.  but perhaps the more interesting and far-reaching newcomers to the top 10 list were two games for nintendo's portable ds unit. (the ds stands for the unit's dual screens.) while much attention has focused, deservedly, on the innovations in nintendo's new wii home console, the ds has not so quietly taken over the buzz in the handheld game market, putting a beating on sony's more powerful but less fun playstation portable -- much as the wii is besting sony's more powerful but less fun playstation 3.  with 1.6 million units sold, the ds was the top-selling game machine in the country overall in december, beating out even the playstation 2. the psp, meanwhile, sold fewer than 1 million units last month, according to npd.  and though a new ds mario brothers game ranking at no. 2 was not a surprise, perhaps even more impressive was the no. 7 showing of the ds game brain age, which in some ways is hardly a game at all. instead, brain age is a collection of mental exercises, like math problems, meant to encourage and develop continued cerebral activity in seniors. while sony and microsoft continue to cater mostly to the hard-core young male gamer, nintendo has staked its future on bringing a much broader demographic into the game world. it seems to be working.  is there anybody out there? -- of course, top 10 lists are telling not just for what is on them, but also for what's missing. and in 2006 there were two games in particular from famous developers that scored well with critics, but failed to crack the top sales echelon.  for the second year in a row, rockstar games tried mightily to prove that it deserved to be known not just as the company that makes grand theft auto. and for the second year in a row, it failed.  in 2005 rockstar's game the warriors seemed well made and creative, but it just didn't move in stores. . last year rockstar's bully seemed well made, creative and whimsical as well (you have to like a video game set at a dysfunctional boarding school), but it didn't fly off the shelves. and so, for all of the company's attempts to diversify, this year the spotlight will once again be on g.t.a.; grand theft auto iv is expected later this year and will almost surely be a monster hit.  the other slightly disappointing sales result came from the elder scrolls iv: oblivion, the sprawling single-player role-playing game from bethesda softworks. those results, however, are a bit easier to explain. first of all, many people who like that sort of game prefer to play them on pcs rather than on consoles, and pc figures were missing from the npd data.  second, the tide in role-playing games has clearly shifted to massively multiplayer online games like world of warcraft. sotto voce, some game executives have accused world of warcraft of sucking everyone else's air out of the genre. if anyone would know, perhaps it is the single-player loyalists at bethesda. and with the first retail expansion pack for w.o.w. scheduled to hit stores tomorrow, a lot of the rest of the industry had better start reaching for oxygen masks.  video games  