king day in atlanta, 'the one without mrs. king'   politicians, religious leaders and relatives of the rev. dr. martin luther king jr. gathered monday in the chapel that was his spiritual home to celebrate his birthday, but for the first time, they did so without the presence of his widow, coretta scott king, who died last year at 78.  dr. king's older sister, christine king farris, conducted the service in the place of her sister-in-law and thanked all for being present ''on this special occasion, the one without mrs. king.''  tributes to her were nearly as plentiful as those to dr. king; and choral music, a special love for mrs. king, who was a trained singer, played a large role in this year's service.  ''the 39th annual commemorative service is the first time we have gathered on my uncle's birthday without the presence of our rock, our spiritual guide, our dear founder, coretta scott king,'' said isaac newton farris jr., a nephew of dr. king.  many of the thousands who lined the streets around ebenezer baptist church to watch a parade and peace march that followed the service said they were inspired to attend this year's celebration as much because of mrs. king's legacy as her husband's.  ''i wanted to find out if it had the same spirit as it had in years past,'' said geneva vanderhorst, 52, of marietta, ga. ''and it does. this whole city has picked up her mantle.''  hundreds of visitors squeezed into the wood pews in the church on auburn avenue, where dr. king, his father and grandfather preached, with hundreds more listening from a newer sanctuary built across the street. thousands also watched the proceedings on a live, locally televised broadcast.  against the backdrop of an escalating war in iraq and increasing economic disparity in the united states, many who spoke during the ceremony used dr. king's pulpit to call for a return to the principles of social justice and nonviolence that defined the civil rights leader's life.  ''millions can't find jobs, have no health insurance and struggle to make ends meet, working minimum-wage jobs,'' said mayor shirley franklin of atlanta. ''what's going on?'' she asked, invoking the title of the marvin gaye song.  the rev. t. dewitt smith, president of the progressive national baptist convention, said, ''when we fight a war for oil and not for democracy, we are in trouble,'' adding, ''there is no excuse for war.''  outside the church, robert snead, 6, stood on auburn avenue with his brother, tyriq, 2, and waved a white and blue sign with a dove that read ''troops come home.''  the boys' mother, felecia snead, of atlanta, said she brought them to the king day celebration this year because her brother, an officer in the navy, was about to be sent to iraq for a second tour of duty.  ''i wanted them to know about nonviolence,'' mrs. snead said. ''i wanted them to know there's an alternative.''  