letter tells of difficulties in prosecuting detainee abuse   a justice department team responsible for reviewing accusations of abuse of detainees by civilian government employees in iraq and afghanistan has encountered ''delays'' and ''unique difficulties,'' the department said in a letter on tuesday.  the letter, to senator patrick j. leahy, democrat of vermont, said prosecutors found that some accusations were not credible. some victims could not be identified, it said, and a few had been released from custody and could not be found.  in one case, two lawyers were prepared to travel to an unidentified middle eastern country to interview people who say they had been abused, but canceled the trip because the country's officials refused to allow the prosecutors to meet with them.  ''as with an american suspected of a crime, those americans who are the subject of the referrals are innocent until proven guilty,'' the letter said. ''when career prosecutors conclude that we cannot prove allegations of a crime beyond a reasonable doubt, the department -- consistent with its longstanding practices and policies -- will not prosecute.''  the justice department provided the report in response to questions posed by senator richard j. durbin, democrat of illinois, who in a letter on dec. 18 asked government lawyers for a progress report. democrats have expressed skepticism about the department's inability to bring cases to trial.  the letter described the reasons no charges would be brought in most of the cases, saying, ''all were declined for insufficient evidence to warrant criminal prosecution for one or more of the following reasons: insufficient evidence of criminal conduct; insufficient evidence of the subject's involvement; insufficient evidence of criminal intent; low probability of conviction.''  a government lawyer who worked on some of the cases said tuesday that the problems made prosecutions unlikely in nearly all of the 21 abuse accusations the team reviewed.  but the official, who did not want to speak on the record about pending investigations, said prosecutors had tried hard to assemble cases.  ''we took these allegations very seriously,'' the official said. ''we tried hard to get the complete story, to get these cases to prosecution. a lot of effort has gone into this.''  of 10 accusations referred to the justice department by the inspector general of the central intelligence agency, one remains under investigation, the official said. the unclassified version of the letter, which is heavily edited to remove classified information, provides no details.  some human rights lawyers said the open case could be that of an iraqi man who died during an interrogation at abu ghraib prison in november 2004 after he was turned over to the c.i.a. by the military. of 10 accusations referred by military authorities against civilian contractors, one was dropped, the official said. nine remain open, but the officials said it was uncertain if any action would be taken because the offenses could be misdemeanors.  one additional case, stemming from an f.b.i. accusation of abuse at the detention center in guantánamo bay, cuba, also remains open. the official said there had been no referrals from any agency to the justice department after january 2006.  