keeping tabs on our kids' weight   to the editor:  re ''as obesity fight hits cafeteria, many fear a note from school'' (front page, jan. 8):  the simple fact is that most parents of overweight children do not want to be told that their child is overweight.  while it is assumed that this important information is explained to parents by their pediatrician, this rarely takes place. thus, some schools have assumed the responsibility to report it to parents.  but most states, school districts and schools themselves avoid the issue for fear of insulting the family and lowering the child's self-esteem. sadly, by choosing to do nothing, they appear to be hoping that the status quo will be more effective than a health report.  nonsense. what must be done for the future health of our children and nation is for states and schools to monitor and track body mass index percentiles and allow schools to report either aggregate or individual results to parents, even if it means telling them to consult a physician, as is done for vision and hearing exams.  to offer nothing more than criticisms and excuses is like fiddling while rome burns.  daniel j. hoffman  new brunswick, n.j., jan. 8, 2007  the writer is an assistant professor in the department of nutritional sciences at rutgers.  to the editor:  while dr. david ludwig, director of a weight program at children's hospital boston, is correct in saying that the body mass index can be an effective, low-cost screening tool for childhood obesity, the north penn junior-senior high school program violates a tenet of well-designed screening: appropriate programs to treat such cases should be in place before screenings are performed.  if a school district does not have the resources to provide healthy food or useful physical education, it might be wiser to forgo b.m.i. screening until it does. surely no one thinks that removing powdered sugar from the funnel cakes served at breakfast is a weight-loss strategy!  identifying students who need lifestyle changes without providing an environment conducive to making them won't solve the problem.  and the girl who didn't want to eat after receiving a letter saying she was in the 80th percentile for b.m.i. could be a textbook example of why it is a bad idea to send home those results without ensuring that parents and children understand the numbers.  i commend north penn for getting involved in health promotion, but please, make sure the basics are in place, or those efforts will end up being wasted.  julie e. dunn  watertown, mass., jan. 8, 2007  the writer is a chronic-disease epidemiologist.  to the editor:  dr. david ludwig was on target when he said that identifying overweight students through body mass index screening doesn't mean much without addressing nutrition and ''limited if any opportunities for phys ed in school.''  my eighth-grade son has 90 minutes of gym a week at his bronx middle school -- if the class isn't pre-empted by an assembly or standardized test, as it was last week.  it's hard to blame the school administrators because they have limited time to fulfill the mandated academic requirements.  years ago, i hated phys ed class in junior high. but as a physically active adult, i know better. if we are truly concerned about the health of our nation's children, physical education must again become a priority.  linda bloom  bronx, jan. 8, 2007  to the editor:  something largely overlooked in physical-education programs is an emphasis on group activities like soccer.  as children become adults, these types of sports become harder to do because of conflicting schedules. a physical-education program focusing on lifelong activities like walking and yoga would better serve our youth.  joe lawrence  waltham, mass., jan. 8, 2007  to the editor:  in 1972, when i was 8 years old, my school sent a note to my mother saying that i was considered overweight.  my mother immediately put me on a strict diet and watched every morsel i put in my mouth. she told me not to tell my classmates i was on a diet lest they tease me, putting the icing on the cake of shame.  i went from having barely any consciousness of what i was eating to being restricted, shamed and obsessed with trying to get more food than i was allowed.  i lost weight but am now an obese adult with major food issues. we cannot solve this societal problem in the bodies of individual children; their innocent minds simply can't process it.  shame on school districts that mail these reports while serving fries in the cafeteria.  maryann gorman  narberth, pa., jan. 8, 2007  to the editor:  a significant contribution to solving childhood obesity and a partial replacement for lack of physical education in some schools could be made by cutting buses for students who live less than a mile from school.  a fast walk is as good as any soccer game! and crossing guards cost less than buses.  margaret h. rand  east patchogue, n.y.  jan. 8, 2007  