aol agrees to buy online ad broker for $900 million   aol said monday that it had agreed to buy tradedoubler, a swedish company that matches internet advertisers with online media owners and e-commerce sites, as aol tries to grab a bigger share of the booming global market in internet advertising.  the deal, at 6.3 billion swedish kronor, or $900 million, would be aol's first major acquisition since randy falco was named chief executive in november, after the company's shift to a free, advertiser-supported portal from a subscriber-based service.  ''if you want to get a good hold on the european internet advertising market, tradedoubler is the best bet,'' said mats bergstroem of nordea securities in stockholm.  internet advertising is growing more than 25 percent a year, according to media buying agencies.  aol, which is owned by time warner, already owns advertising.com, an agency based in america that buys online media owners' advertising space and selects ads to fill it.  tradedoubler's main business model is slightly different. it works on behalf of online marketers, gathering ads and offering them to internet media owners and other web sites, which can choose which ones to run. an electronics retailer, for instance, could select advertising from a computer maker, and the companies would share revenue from any online transaction that resulted from clicks on the ads.  tradedoubler operates in 18 european countries but its reach outside europe is limited. aol hopes to bolster its internet advertising presence in europe after it sold its broadband operations in britain, france and germany.  those agreements came after aol dropped subscriber fees in the united states and moved to a business model based on advertising.  ''there's a good fit when it comes to geography -- that's obvious,'' the chief executive of tradedoubler, martin henricson, said. ''but there is also a good fit in terms of products and services.''  but analysts said the price aol and tradedoubler agreed on -- 215 kronor a share -- might not be enough to satisfy shareholders. aol said it had the support of investors holding 20 percent of tradedoubler's shares. it said the offer represented a 20 percent premium to the average share price for tradedoubler over the last 90 days.  ''not only does our offer provide an attractive premium valuation, but it also will enable tradedoubler to play a key role in our strategic focus on growing our online advertising business in europe,'' said jeffrey l. bewkes, president and chief operating officer of time warner.  but a swedish pension fund called alecta, which has a 10 percent stake in tradedoubler, said it would vote against the agreement.  ''our view is that the bid of 215 kronor per share doesn't reflect the value and the growth we see in the future,'' the head of equities at alecta, peter van berlekom, said.  mr. bergstroem, the nordea analyst, said he thought aol would prevail eventually but probably at a price of more than 230 kronor a share. tradedoubler stock was already trading at near that price monday, closing at 227 kronor, up 29 kronor. mr. bergstroem said internet advertising specialists like adlink internet media, which is based in germany, or valueclick, which is based in los angeles, might be interested in bidding.  the scale of deal-making in online advertising has been growing as the business races ahead. last month, the publicis groupe agreed to buy digitas, a specialist in internet marketing, for $1.3 billion.  online ad techniques that can demonstrate measurable results, including google ads linked to keyword searches and tradedoubler ads linked to sales leads, are in particular demand.  ''what it all boils down to is that an advertiser wants performance,'' mr. bergstroem said.  