a report brings back memories of living in the dark   just days before dan glasser's future in-laws flew in from san diego last summer, he and his fiancée made the rounds of butcher and seafood shops in their queens neighborhood, gathering fresh fish, shrimp and prime cuts of steak.  they were looking forward to a week of delicious meals and good times with her parents. what they experienced instead were hunger pangs and nine grueling days of what they called ''luxurious camping'' in their darkened apartment in sunnyside.  hours before the parents arrived, a widespread blackout plunged several neighborhoods in northwest queens into darkness. perishables spoiled. manhole covers exploded. fistfights broke out over bags of ice.  and neighbors and business owners in affected neighborhoods like astoria, woodside and sunnyside took to the steamy streets, wondering what had gone wrong.  according to a 185-page report issued by state regulators on wednesday, the fault for making the lives of 174,000 new yorkers miserable last july lay entirely with consolidated edison.  the report, in pointed language, blamed con ed for shortcomings like failing to maintain and oversee its electrical network and to provide basic and accurate information to customers who lost power.  many residents and business owners who already had a dim view of the giant utility expressed a mixture of vindication and annoyance yesterday after learning that their opinions had been validated by official findings.  ''at the time we had no idea what happened,'' said mr. glasser, 29, who recently opened a vintage collectibles shop in sunnyside with his fiancée. ''my first reaction is that they should have their stuff together,'' he said. ''it baffles me that this company could let something like this happen.''  the shrimp and meat he had bought with his fiancée, tara andrus, spoiled during the blackout. the couple and her parents, bill and rene andrus, cooled off by taking to the streets. they sipped wine by candlelight and made the best of it.  ''they were troopers,'' mr. glasser said.  yesterday, while snowflakes fell and the temperature hovered around the freezing mark, the topic of conversation among residents was less the day's chilly weather and more the sweltering series of july days when they were forced to soldier through the blackout.  ''i was very disturbed by the initial reports from con ed saying 8,000 people were affected,'' said renee clark, 32, who lives in astoria and works in greenwich, conn. ''from the very start it was obvious to us that it was a gross underestimation.''  ms. clark, standing near the intersection of steinway street and astoria boulevard yesterday, said the utility had done little to communicate with residents or to provide a reliable timetable for repairs.  ''we didn't know what they were up to,'' she said, as several silver con ed trucks rolled past on steinway street. she watched each one of them drive off and said she was already dreading this summer.  while several residents said they were pleased by the conclusions in the report, which was issued by the public service commission, they said nothing could make up for the physical and financial suffering they endured.  at the sunny side super deli at 50-12 39th avenue in woodside, the owner, iwsook kwon, 50, lamented the $5,000 worth of food and business she said she lost. the ice cream was completely melted by day 2. the deli meat was ruined by day 3. her patience ran out by day 4, and days 5 and 6 were a blur, she said.  ''some people had it worse,'' mrs. kwon said, snapping off a lottery card from a roll for a customer.  fortunately, mrs. kwon said, there was a single outlet in the basement of the store that didn't lose power. during the day she stretched an extension cord to the first-floor deli to run a fan. at night she dragged it upstairs to cool her family's sleeping quarters in their apartment above the store.  ''five of us. one little fan,'' she said.  mrs. kwon said she feared another blackout this summer, saying that if it happens again, she will have no solace. ''nowhere for us to go,'' she said. ''people still need the little stuff. the dry stuff. newspaper. coffee.''  at the gian piero bakery, on 30th avenue near 45th street in astoria, the owner, michael dellapolla, 40, detailed the damage from last summer.  ''i was out for 10 days,'' he said. ''i lost about $25,000 worth of product. i had to rent a generator. that cost $9,000.''  mr. dellapolla said that he was happy with the report's findings, but added that he wished the issues had received attention sooner.  ''after it happened they were really working,'' he said, referring to con ed. ''but this neighborhood has had problems for many years. before last summer we never saw them. no people spoke to us. they forgot about us.''  for mr. glasser, whose future in-laws flew back home the day the blackout ended, the experience made for a great kink in the otherwise drab days of summer.  ''for me it was kind of, i wouldn't say fun,'' he said, ''but it made life interesting for a week.''  