news summary   international a3-7  barriers to new iraq plan built by iraqis themselves  just after president bush unveiled his new war plan for iraq, the heart of the effort -- a major push to secure the capital with thousands of additional american troops -- faces some of its fiercest resistance from the very people it depends on for success: iraqi government officials.  a1  as part of its latest plan to stabilize iraq, the united states intends to more than double the number of regional reconstruction teams and to add nearly 400 more specialists for existing and new teams. a7  defense secretary robert m. gates, left, met with prime minister tony blair in london on the first stop of a weeklong trip to europe and the middle east aimed at winning support for the white house plan for stabilizing iraq.  a5  nominee for french president  france's interior minister, nicolas sarkozy, captured the governing party's nomination for president, pledging to enforce laws restore morality to public life and make the french work longer and harder. a3  peace meeting in pakistan  secretary of state condoleezza rice, pledging deeper engagement in middle east peace efforts, met in pakistan with mahmoud abbas, the palestinian authority president. a5  national a8-12  cheney defends efforts to obtain records  vice president dick cheney defended efforts by the pentagon and the central intelligence agency to obtain financial records of americans suspected of terrorism or espionage, calling the practice a ''perfectly legitimate activity'' used partly to protect troops stationed on military bases in the united states.  a10  more ads in more places  consumers' viewing and reading habits are so scattershot these days that many marketers say the best way to reach them is to try to catch their eye at every turn. but some people have had enough, and are pushing back against the ubiquity of advertisements.  a1  mississippi factory to close  after hurricane katrina tore through long beach, miss., the oreck corporation reopened the storm-damaged plant where it assembles its vacuum cleaners. but now, oreck is moving its manufacturing to tennessee.  a1  planning for future air traffic  by 2025, government experts say, america's skies will swarm with three times as many aircraft. to keep passengers moving safely, the federal aviation administration will need to replace a half-century of outmoded technology with a new air traffic control system.  a9  alzheimer's gene detected  a variant gene involved in alzheimer's disease has been detected through study of dominican families living in manhattan, scientists are reporting. the researchers found that in four of the populations they studied, people with alzheimer's had distinguishing genetic markers.  a8  libby set to stand trial  i. lewis libby jr., the former chief of staff to vice president dick cheney, goes on trial soon, nearly three years after a c.i.a. operative's name appeared in a newspaper.  a11  new york b1-7  spitzer to nominate black judge to court  gov. eliot spitzer announced that he would nominate theodore t. jones jr., a judge who is african american, to a seat on the court of appeals. last summer mr. spitzer's predecessor, george e. pataki, declined to renominate judge george bundy smith, left the court of appeals without a black jurist for the first time since 1985. b1  rabbi embattled over views  when rabbi yisroel dovid weiss returned from a conference in tehran aimed at debating the holocaust, he was met with anger and scorn. though he does not deny the holocaust, he agrees with the iranian president that it has been exploited to justify the existence of israel.  b1  newark deals scrutinized  federal agents investigating the financial dealings of sharpe james, the former mayor of newark, are reviewing land transactions in which several of his top advisers may have benefited from the sale of city property at prices far below market rates. b1  neediest cases  b7  arts e1-12  romantic age gap in films  older people and the younger objects of their desires are appearing on screen in almost every combination. but sometimes there is a gap between what filmmakers intend and the way audiences respond. e1  obituaries a13  alice coltrane  the widow of the jazz saxophonist john coltrane and the pianist in his later bands, who extended her musical searches into a vocation as a spiritual leader, she was 69. a13  business day c1-8  citigroup may shorten name  citigroup, the banking giant, may shorten its name to citi and get rid of the familiar red umbrella logo it inherited from travelers group.  c1  business digest c2  editorial a14-15  editorials: busywork for nuclear scientists; politicizing prosecutors; the light-touch tax audit; ethics fencing in the senate.  columns: bob herbert and paul krugman.  bridge e11  crossword e11  metro diary b2  tv listings e12  weather b8  correction:  january 17, 2007, wednesday  a headline and an entry in the news summary on monday about middle east peace efforts by secretary of state condoleezza rice misstated the location where she held talks with mahmoud abbas, president of the palestinian authority. it was in the west bank city of ramallah, not in pakistan.  