i.b.m. sales beat forecasts on software and services   i.b.m. reported quarterly profits and revenue yesterday that slightly surpassed wall street estimates, lifted by strong software sales and a solid performance from its big services unit.  the company's quarterly performance is an encouraging sign that i.b.m.'s strategy of betting that software can help fuel its services business is gaining ground.  in the past, analysts say, the company has tended to attain its profit targets through cost-cutting or a cyclical surge in its mainframe sales, while the underlying health of its services remained uncertain. services account for nearly half of the company's revenue.  but the services business grew more than 6 percent, to $12.8 billion, and new services contracts signed during the quarter, an indicator of future revenue, rose 50 percent from a year ago, to $17.8 billion. software sales rose 14 percent, to $5.6 billion.  ''this was a better, more balanced quarter than i.b.m. has delivered in a long time,'' said laura conigliaro, an analyst at goldman sachs & company.  still, investors gave i.b.m. no credit for its quarterly results. in after-hours trading, i.b.m. shares fell more than 5 percent, down $5.60 a share, to $93.85. the company's shares closed the regular trading session at $99.45, off 57 cents,  analysts attributed the fall in late trading mainly to the expectation by some investors that i.b.m. would considerably exceed the wall street consensus estimates, and to profit-taking by traders who have watched technology shares climb considerably in recent weeks.  ''unless there was a strong upside surprise, they were selling,'' noted a. m. sacconaghi, an analyst at sanford c. bernstein & company. ''look what happened to apple,'' whose shares fell despite reporting a record quarter on wednesday.  i.b.m. reported quarterly net income of $3.54 billion, or $2.31 a share. that was 11 percent higher than the year-ago quarter, when the company earned $3.19 billion, or $1.99 a share. but excluding discontinued operations and tax gains, i.b.m.'s performance was not enough ahead of the wall street consensus estimate of $2.19 a share to prevent the after-hours sell-off, mr. sacconaghi said.  analysts said they also found the company's guidance for 2007 somewhat confusing. in a conference call with analysts, mark loughridge, i.b.m.'s chief financial officer, said that the wall street consensus projections for 2007 were reasonable, without being specific. the consensus estimate for the full year of 2007 is $6.60 a share, according to figures compiled by thomson financial.  but mr. loughridge also said he expected that i.b.m. would attain its long-term model of lifting earnings per share by 10 to 12 percent a year in 2007. a 10 percent gain over the 2006 performance suggests profits of $6.67 a share for 2007, ms. conigliaro noted.  revenue in the quarter rose 7 percent, to $26.3 billion, but rose only 4 percent excluding the currency gains from a weaker dollar.  the software business was a particular bright spot for i.b.m., especially in newer technologies deemed strategically important to the company. for example, its websphere products, which use web standards and tools to build corporate software applications, increased sales by 22 percent.  revenue from the hardware business edged up a modest 3 percent, to $7.1 billion, and would not have grown at all without currency gains. sales of mainframes rose 5 percent, and revenue from industry-standard server computers, using personal computer technology, increased 7 percent. but minicomputer sales fell 10 percent.  i.b.m. is a huge company, with yearly revenue of more than $90 billion and many different businesses. over all, mr. loughridge called the fourth quarter a ''strong finish'' to a good year, and most analysts agreed. ''it was a very solid quarter -- not a blowout, but very solid,'' said mr. sacconaghi of bernstein.  