serious german violinist gets a rock star ovation   there were several hallmarks to the concert on sunday afternoon by the met orchestra. this was the orchestra's 50th program at carnegie hall since james levine and his players emerged from the pit at the metropolitan opera to present a full-fledged symphonic concert in the hall in 1991. the program offered mr. levine's restrained take on brahms's third symphony, and a major premiere by the formidable modernist composer charles wuorinen.  but the concert is likely to be remembered most for the exhilarating performance of beethoven's violin concerto, with christian tetzlaff as soloist. this serious-minded 40-year-old german musician seemed somewhat dazed by the rock star ovation that erupted after his stunning performance.  mr. tetzlaff's bookish appearance is a little deceptive. to be sure, he is a keenly intelligent musician who gained early attention for probing performances of works like the schoenberg, berg, stravinsky and ligeti concertos. but he is also a brilliant and powerfully intuitive player. i have seldom heard the rustic character of beethoven's rondo finale conveyed with such earthy vigor. it was charming to see this trim, boyish violinist almost dancing as he played, his feet planted on the floor, but his foam rubber knees swaying continually.  mr. tetzlaff's penchant for rhythmic freedom and rubato is not a trait you associate with mr. levine's music-making, but the conductor clearly admires this violinist. mr. tetzlaff made his debut with mr. levine and the met orchestra in 2004 in the berg concerto, and they performed the beethoven and schoenberg concertos together during mr. levine's tenure as conductor of the munich philharmonic.  the beethoven concerto, especially in the first movement, has a spacious quality. the music evolves in large, structural blocks, and the violin part is filled with what seem to be transitional passages of scales and ascending patterns of broken thirds. mr. tetzlaff brought improvisatory freedom to these curious passages yet made every restless run come across as part of an integral conception.  and though kept on alert, mr. levine seemed energized by mr. tetzlaff's work. in the larghetto slow movement mr. tetzlaff played the wistful melodic phrases with arching lyricism and radiantly penetrating pianissimos, while in the orchestra mr. levine achieved an uncanny balance between timelessness and subdued intensity. though beethoven wrote no cadenzas for this work, he did compose some when he made an unconventional arrangement of the piece as a piano concerto. in another fresh stroke, mr. tetzlaff played his adaptations of beethoven's piano cadenzas, which proved more unpredictable than the cadenzas by fritz kreisler used by a majority of violinists.  the impact of this original performance was probably enhanced by hearing it right after the premiere of mr. wuorinen's ''theologoumenon,'' composed for mr. levine's 60th birthday in 2003 on a commission from ronald a. wilford, mr. levine's longtime manager and the chairman of columbia artists management. the title is a term meaning a private, nondogmatic theological opinion. during the piece's most extreme moments, when the orchestra built to some anxious, gratingly dissonant, wailing outburst, many in the audience might have been puzzled by the composer's comment in the program notes that, over all, he considers this fitful piece to be contemplative.  but in a way, mr. wuorinen's observation fits the music. in the last decade or so, this once unabashedly complex serialist, now 68, seems to have allowed a lyrical generosity into his works. this 20-minute piece comes across as a series of quizzical, sustained passages: over some foundation, like repeated bass notes, pitches pile up to form a tremulous chord, and quietly restless musical events break out: fluttering woodwind motifs, fidgety percussion riffs.  then the collective sounds fade, and the process begins again. the music could be described as depicting the mind state sought during meditation, when you strive for contemplativeness and let intrusive thoughts just register and then float right by.  in brahms's third symphony, mr. levine strove, it seemed, for an organic reading that allowed inner voices and layered complexities to come through, details often lost in sweepingly romantic interpretations. for some the performance might have been restrained to the point of ponderousness. i found it fascinating. besides, in the beethoven concerto mr. levine certainly proved that, with the right partner, he can be as impetuous as anyone.  music review  