regulators say con ed failures led to blackout   in a devastating condemnation of consolidated edison, state regulators have concluded that a failure to adequately maintain, operate and oversee its electrical network was ''the overriding cause'' of the nine-day blackout that paralyzed western queens last july.  the regulators estimated that 174,000 people lost power in the blackout -- 70,000 more than was previously known. for the first three days of the blackout, con edison had insisted that no more than 8,000 people were affected.  in a 185-page draft report posted on its web site last night, the staff of the new york state public service commission concluded that the company had ''failed to fulfill its responsibilities'' under state law and recommended a formal proceeding that could result in large financial penalties against con edison.  the withering assessment and the prospect of hefty fines are all but certain to renew calls for the ouster of con edison's chairman and chief executive, kevin m. burke, who was widely blamed for failing to discern the magnitude of the blackout, which lasted from july 17 to 25, until three days after it started.  in its relentlessly critical language, the report sharply contradicts con edison's own 600-page report, released oct. 12, which attributed the blackout to a series of events beyond its control, notably an underground fire, malfunctions in an electric breaker and a sudden surge of current.  the state report concludes instead that the primary cause of the blackout was ''the company's failure to address a multitude of pre-existing problems and issues associated with the operations, maintenance and oversight of the long island city network,'' which supplies power to about 460,000 people in western queens.  the report suggests that the blackout lasted as long as it did because of con edison's ''failure to shut the network down in light of glaring evidence that the secondary system was experiencing severe damage'' in the early part of the blackout.  on the night of july 18, the second day of the event, top con edison managers contemplated shutting down the entire network, which would have caused an even wider blackout but would have caused less damage and been easier and faster to recover from.  mr. burke and other executives have since defended their decision not to shut down the network -- a decision that the new report suggests was a grave mistake.  even as con edison's rank-and-file workers ''worked hard to contain the crisis,'' according to the report, ''the company's senior management failed or refused to comprehend the magnitude of the damage to its secondary system and the subsequent impact on customers.''  in a statement last night, a con edison spokesman, michael s. clendenin, said a controlled shutdown would have ''affected the lives of more than one million people, with no guarantee that power would have been restored any sooner.'' he added, ''we believed then, and still believe, that that would have been a worse situation.''  mr. clendenin said the utility was reviewing the report and ''will implement any actions necessary to reduce the likelihood of similar occurrences in the future.''  an analysis by the new york times last summer, based on con edison documents, found that the long island city network had the most feeder-cable failures in 2004 and 2005 of any of the 57 networks. the analysis also found that several failures involved components that were 30 to 60 years old.  con edison said in response that the network was fine and among the top one-fourth of all underground networks in performance.  the new report rejected that argument. it stated that many of the network's components ''were not in conformance with the company's operating specifications.''  it added that con edison failed to understand the effects of load growth and transformer additions on the network. ''the size and complexity of the network,'' it said, ''outpaced the sophistication of the company's primary planning and contingency analysis tools.''  the report also found that that the utility's performance was ''particularly unacceptable'' when it came to communicating with the public.  con edison never gave a precise estimate of the number of people affected in the blackout. its final rough guess was 25,000 customers -- a term that includes residential buildings and businesses and was said to translate to roughly 100,000 people. the new report found that the blackout affected 65,000 customers, or about 174,000 people.  the lack of a reliable estimate delayed con edison's response to the blackout and the arrival of emergency resources, according to the report, which called the absence of a system to properly assess damages and outages ''a major failing.''  assemblyman michael n. gianaris, a queens democrat whose district included much of the area affected by the blackout, said the new report vindicated the utility's critics. ''clearly, the fiction that con edison's decisions were correct has been exposed,'' he said.  assemblyman richard l. brodsky, a westchester democrat and the chairman of a committee that oversees the public service commission, said the draft report should be accompanied by financial penalties. ''there's a lot of criticism, but no action,'' he said. ''that's not good enough.''  the commission's chairman at the time of the blackout, william m. flynn, ordered the investigation on july 26, a day after the blackout ended. the commission held five days of hearings from august to november.  the staff originally intended to issue the draft report by dec. 31. con edison and others may comment by jan. 31. then the commission will approve a final version.  in a related action, the commission yesterday approved the hiring of a consultant, vantage consulting of cudjoe key, fla., to conduct an independent audit of con edison's electric emergency response program. con edison is to cover the cost of the work, which is not to exceed $800,800.  the commission ordered the audit in september and received seven proposals from consultants in november, before selecting vantage.  