tar heels rally to top huskies and extend win streak to 20   ivory latta shook her fists and shuddered as the roar from the near-sellout crowd drowned out the players on the floor of carmichael auditorium on monday night. latta, a compact jitterbug and the leader of north carolina's women's basketball team, had just swished a tie-breaking 3-pointer from the top of the key with 1 minute 1 second remaining against connecticut in a battle of two of the best teams in the country.  on this night, no. 2-ranked north carolina was just a little bit better.  the tar heels squandered a 15-point lead in the second half, but came back for an 82-76 victory to extend their season-opening winning streak to 20 games and remain one of two undefeated teams in the country. rival duke (19-0) is the other.  north carolina forward erlana larkins finished with 15 points and 16 rebounds; latoya pringle contributed 18 points; and latta added 14 but had 8 turnovers.  kalana greene led connecticut (14-2) with 23 points.  north carolina has now beaten connecticut three years in a row, including a 77-54 victory in hartford last season that was the worst defeat in coach geno auriemma's 21 years at uconn.  the tar heels have defeated two of the most storied programs in the country this season, including an earlier victory against tennessee.  ''both connecticut and tennessee to me, those teams are measuring sticks,'' north carolina coach sylvia hatchell said. ''they have for years been at the top of women's basketball. for us to have had wins this year against those two, that means a lot to me because i think those two programs have set the bar for a long time.''  uconn lost to no. 4 tennessee by 70-64 on jan. 6; the lady vols squandered an 18-point lead before rallying to hand the no. 6 huskies their first defeat of the season.  ''if i was a smarter guy, if i was a more realistic guy, i would have said, 'well, you know, those are the growing pains that young teams go through,' '' auriemma said. ''but this is connecticut basketball and you don't play at connecticut and go through growing pains. you come to connecticut grown up. we can talk all we want about the effort and the courage it took to come back. the bottom line is, at connecticut the only time you're happy is when you win.''  the huskies nearly pulled it off. the tar heels led through most of the game and pulled ahead by 60-45 with 13:15 remaining in the second half. but foul trouble proved costly for north carolina.  larkins had picked up her fourth foul moments earlier and was sent to the bench. without her presence under the basket on both ends, connecticut was able to chip away at the lead. larkins stayed on the bench as the huskies used an 11-0 run to close to 64-62 with 7:00 to go. larkins returned after that, setting up a furious finish.  connecticut finally took its first lead when guard renee montgomery scored with 4:51 remaining to put the huskies ahead, 70-68. the teams went back and forth after that for nearly four minutes with neither able to pull away. but latta's 3-point shot broke a 76-76 tie and connecticut could not answer. latta added two free throws to seal the victory.  perhaps this triumph will nudge north carolina to no. 1 next week. the tar heels were no. 2 last week when the top team, maryland, lost to no. 3 duke on saturday. instead of moving up, north carolina stayed at no. 2 while duke leapfrogged to the top spot.  hatchell made sure to mention it to the team at halftime as a motivator.  larkins said, ''it in a sense doesn't really matter what other people think of us as long as we know that in our heart we have a chance to be the no. 1 team and we are the no. 1 team.''  college basketball  