today in business   an abbreviated citigroup -- as part of a rebranding intended to shift the company's focus from deal making to internal and international growth, citigroup is tentatively planning to shorten its name to citi and replace its red umbrella logo with a stylized arc above the name. [page c1.]  trying to harness youtube -- youtube, a newly powerful force in the media world, distributes unauthorized movie clips. but it can also help studios build tremendous buzz, and that is driving hollywood to try to work with it instead of against it. [c1.]  cutbacks at time -- time inc., the publishing division of time warner, is planning to cut more than 150 people, about half of them in editorial jobs across the company's best known magazines, like people, sports illustrated, time and fortune. [c1.]  a town's newspaper feud -- since a full-blown war erupted last july between wendy mccaw and the staff of her newspaper, the santa barbara news-press, over protests that she was meddling in newsroom decisions, the hostilities have only spread in this upscale and usually peaceable seaside town. [c1.]  canadian law challenged -- leonard j. asper, left, the chief executive of canwest global, a leading canadian broadcaster, just made a major deal for alliance atlantis, creator of ''csi: crime scene investigation'' and owner of lucrative specialty cable channels in canada. but by relying on money from goldman sachs of new york for the bulk of the deal, mr. asper is directly challenging canadian laws banning foreign control of broadcasters. [c6.]  first amendment and eli lilly -- a showdown is scheduled for a federal courtroom in brooklyn between eli lilly, the pharmaceutical giant, and lawyers representing individuals, organizations and web sites who argue that their online speech has been gagged. [c3.]  bargains for big spenders -- looking for a bargain weekend flight from new york to florida? onesky.com may have just the ticket, assuming you have $9,500 to spend, and you can find a return flight. e-commerce report. [c4.]  heir apparent at bertelsmann -- liz mohn, below, the wife of the patriarch of bertelsmann, the privately owned media conglomerate, will play a leading role in selecting its new chief executive, and hartmut ostrowski, the head of its printing subsidiary arvato, is said to have the edge. [c5.]  station responds to a blog -- a radio station in san francisco pre-empted three hours of programming to play clips from its talk shows in response to a blogger's campaign against what he called insensitive and intolerant comments. [c3.]  another move to private equity -- john browne, bp chief executive, will move to the private equity firm apax partners in july. [c3.]  asian trade pact -- china signed a trade-in-services agreement with the association of southeast asian nations, a step toward establishing a comprehensive free trade pact. [c2.]  snowless in new england -- new england's fickle weather has been the subject of many jokes, and it seemed to be playing one last week on yankee magazine. [c5.]  diversity a victim of layoffs -- staff cuts at the philadelphia inquirer have taken a heavy toll among black journalists, who tend to have less seniority. [c5.]  