iraqi refugees find sanctuary in sweden   former residents of baghdad living in this calm swedish town know why they left. ''iraq is finished,'' said taghreed ewas, 34, a chemical engineer who fled last year after she received several death threats and narrowly escaped a kidnapping.  as they flee the mayhem of their homeland, iraqis have swarmed into neighboring countries in the middle east by the hundreds of thousands. but they are also increasingly coming to europe, especially sweden, one indication of how the war in iraq is now beginning to have serious consequences for countries far beyond its borders.  last year, 8,951 iraqis applied for asylum in sweden, up from 2,330 in 2005. of those, almost 3,000 arrived in november and december. those choosing this relatively small country of nine million people represent nearly half of the iraqi refugees arriving in europe and surpass by far the number admitted to the united states each year.  ''we don't use words like flood, but it's clear that it's a very large increase,'' said krister isaksson, a forecast analyst at the swedish migration board. ''we see no reasons why it would slow down. instead we believe it might continue to increase.''  ms. ewas, who fled with the help of smugglers through northern iraq and turkey, leaving much of her family behind, has little hope of returning to iraq. ''every day there is worse than the day before,'' she said at an immigrant reception center here.  the mass exodus of iraqis spawned by the deteriorating security situation at home is having the most extreme effect on iraq's neighbors. the united nations refugee agency estimates that 500,000 to 1 million displaced iraqis are in syria; up to 700,000 in jordan; 20,000 to 80,000 in egypt; and up to 40,000 in lebanon.  but the agency has begun warning that the crisis is spreading beyond the middle east. in late december, it issued an advisory to governments recommending that asylum seekers from southern and central iraq ''be favorably considered as refugees under the 1951 refugee convention.''  ''people have been optimistic, hoping that the situation would get better,'' said paal aarsaether, the agency's spokesman for the nordic countries. ''but now the international community has realized that this has to be dealt with.''  sweden's relatively liberal asylum laws and immigration regulations have made it by far the most attractive destination in europe for iraqi refugees, ms. isaksson said. of the 16,261 iraqis who applied for asylum in western europe from january to november last year, about 45 percent came to sweden. in november, when 1,413 arrived here, only 13 applied in france, 65 in denmark and 230 in germany.  ''we give iraqis residence permits to an extent that isn't done in the rest of europe,'' ms. isaksson said. unlike countries that require language knowledge or economic guarantees, she said, citing denmark and the netherlands, ''we don't put many demands on immigrants.''  another factor is that more than 80,000 iraqis already live in sweden, forming the country's second largest immigrant group, after finns. many refugees come because they have relatives here.  sodertalje, a scenic industrial town about 20 miles southwest of stockholm, is home not just to the truckmaker scania, which has its main factory here, but also to a thriving and growing population of iraqis, most of them christians. ms. ewas chose sodertalje because her brother lives here.  the rapid increase in iraqi immigrants is having an impact on the communities where they settle. at sodertalje's immigrant reception center, a converted factory building where refugees and other immigrants come to register with the local authorities, the situation borders on chaotic, said catharina helling, the center's director.  ''we are feeling the strain,'' ms. helling said, noting that the center's staff has increased to 25 from 8 a year ago. she said that the municipality is having problems recruiting swedish-language teachers. in december, 131 new immigrants registered at the center, all of them iraqis.  ''this doesn't happen without pain,'' ms. helling said.  those who arrive also increasingly bring memories of truly harrowing experiences from the chaos in iraq. the center has hired two staff members to give the refugees counseling, but ms. helling admits that this is not enough given the help and understanding many iraqi refugees need.  one woman who stopped in at the center this week was nooralhuda, 63, who arrived in sodertalje in late 2005. she declined to give her last name because, she said, she is still ''living in fear.'' she left baghdad after her daughter and three young granddaughters were kidnapped. a few days after their disappearance she was attacked in her home, but survived, and her neighbors persuaded her to flee. she now lives with her son and his family here in sodertalje.  nooralhuda said she had not given up hope that her daughter and granddaughters might turn up alive. she often calls her neighbors to ask if they have heard something, she said.  ''for iraq, there is no hope,'' she said. ''for me, my wish is that i get word that my daughter and granddaughters are alive, and that i can help them to come here, to sweden.''  the reach of war  