more room to pirouette at lincoln center studios   to the untrained eye, they may just be dance studios -- albeit spanking new ones -- with the requisite barres, mirrors and sprung floors. but to those who have followed lincoln center's ambitious, sometimes torturous, redevelopment project over the last eight years, they are a milestone: the first piece to be completed.  the four studios, unveiled yesterday, are part of the school of american ballet's new lincoln kirstein studio wing, named for the school's founder. the ballet school is both a constituent of lincoln center and the official academy of the new york city ballet.  the studios were designed by elizabeth diller of diller scofidio + renfro, the leading architecture firm in the makeover of the lincoln center campus, which also includes upgrades of alice tully hall, the film society, the juilliard school and the plaza.  reynold levy, the president of lincoln center, said the opening of the dance studios underscored that the redevelopment project is ''real,'' as did the dismantling of the milstein bridge across 65th street last summer and what ms. diller refers to as the ''architectural striptease occurring at juilliard.''  ''what we're seeing is the realization of a set of dreams,'' mr. levy said.  but for peter martins, the ballet school's artistic director and faculty chairman, it is the space that counts.  the wing, in the samuel b. and david rose building on west 65th street, created four studios out of two existing ones through an unusual floating and stacking design, increasing the total number of studios to seven from five.  ''i asked liz if there was a way to take wonderful studios like this and horizontally cut them in half and double the studio space,'' mr. martins said.  ''after three minutes in there, liz said it's possible to make a 'floating studio.' ''  in each studio, ms. diller essentially suspended a smaller studio inside a larger one. each smaller studio is supported by three beams tied into the building's structure.  simply dividing the existing studios in half vertically would have left the bottom one claustrophobic and devoid of natural light, she said.  instead, ms. diller and her team rerouted duct work in the old ceiling to gain eight feet in height.  the room had to accommodate ''a leap with outstretched hands,'' ms. diller said, or, as mr. martins observed, the end of balanchine's 'serenade,' which involves ''dancing on shoulders.''  ms. diller said her collaboration with ballet executives was an easy one.  ''we kind of do the same thing,'' she said. ''we're interested in bodies and space, and we're interested in overcoming the laws of gravity.''  though the concept of nesting a smaller studio in a larger one was simple, the execution was challenging, involving complicated issues like structural support, mechanical functions and acoustics. ''they went with us, and they took a leap of faith,'' she said of the ballet executives. ''and it took a lot of faith.''  while the studios are discrete spaces, they share existing windows and a lounge in the middle of the vertical space.  the walls between the studios and the connecting lounge are made of liquid crystal glass and embedded with electrical current so that they can change from transparent to opaque with the flick of a switch. this allows teachers ''to be able to control whether kids are cognizant of parents,'' ms. diller said.  (in addition to yielding more space for classes and rehearsals, mr. martins said, the expansion will allow the ballet school's children's division to lower the minimum age to 6 from 8, starting in september.)  in something of an unusual gesture, lincoln kirstein's name is emblazoned in muscular backward letters on the wall, so that it reads correctly in the mirror opposite.  ''the notion of seeing it in the mirror, the spirit of lincoln kirstein is here,'' ms. diller said. given the scope of lincoln center's overall project, the ballet project was small-bore. it cost a relatively modest $7.2 million -- financed by a bond -- and took only three months. the students used the baryshnikov arts center on west 37th street as temporary space.  but ms. diller said the studios were of a piece with lincoln center's larger campaign to become more accessible, permeable and welcoming.  ''whatever we touch here ultimately is about connection and social aspects like teaching and learning,'' she said. ''some of that is associated with light and air and the appreciation of space.''  