jet assistant won't seek dolphins' vacancy   brian schottenheimer, who just completed his first season as the jets' offensive coordinator, removed his name from consideration for the miami dolphins' coaching job yesterday.  schottenheimer, 33, met for a preliminary interview with the dolphins' owner, wayne huizenga, in the new york area last week. he was one of three candidates invited back for a second interview. the former falcons coach jim mora and georgia tech coach chan gailey were the others.  in a statement announcing his decision, schottenheimer, who was the quarterbacks coach for the san diego chargers before moving to new york, said, ''i am committed to the new york jets.''  schottenheimer's liberal use of shifts, motions and formations gave the jets' offense a kaleidoscope of looks that made defending it a challenge. in a statement, coach eric mangini acknowledged schottenheimer's contribution to the success of the jets, who were defeated in the first round of the playoffs by the new england patriots after finishing the regular season 10-6.  ''brian's creative approach on offense was an integral part of our progress in the 2006 season,'' mangini said in a statement, ''and i'm pleased he will remain with the jets to build on that progress.''  declaring for draft -- ted ginn jr., ohio state's game-breaking receiver and return man, and adrian peterson, oklahoma's fleet running back, will pass up their senior seasons to enter the n.f.l. draft. yesterday was the deadline for underclassmen to declare their intentions.  a week after his team lost to florida, 41-14, in the bowl championship series title game, ohio state tailback antonio pittman also said he was leaving early for the n.f.l.  colt brennan, the record-breaking hawaii quarterback, declared himself eligible for the draft, too, but left himself the option of returning to the warriors. louisville quarterback brian brohm, however, said he was staying in college.  ginn and pittman will join ohio state receiver anthony gonzalez, who announced last week that he would give up his final season of eligibility to turn pro.  peterson will also pass up his senior year. he missed seven games last season because of a broken collarbone, and still ran for 1,012 yards and 12 touchdowns.  brennan set the n.c.a.a. record with 58 touchdown passes last season in leading hawaii to an 11-3 record. (ap)  steelers narrow search to three -- the assistant head coach russ grimm has emerged as the front-runner for the steelers' coaching job, a search that was narrowed to three finalists yesterday after the offensive coordinator ken whisenhunt left for arizona.  the steelers identified grimm, a pittsburgh assistant for six years, and the defensive coordinators mike tomlin of the vikings and ron rivera of the bears as the finalists to replace bill cowher. (ap)  coordinators on the move -- the ravens promoted rick neuheisel to offensive coordinator, although coach brian billick said he would continue to call the plays next season.  the panthers fired dan henning, their offensive coordinator.  the packers promoted joe philbin, the team's offensive line coach, to replace jeff jagodzinski as the team's offensive coordinator. jagodzinski was hired as head coach at boston college last month. (ap)  around the league -- robbie tobeck, the seahawks' former pro bowl center, retired yesterday.  seahawks quarterback matt hasselbeck said that he played the final eight games of seattle's season with broken fingers on his nonpassing hand. (ap)  n.f.l. roundup  