in the patriots' school of etiquette, class is finally dismissed   for the past five years, the new england patriots have been the n.f.l.'s best team and its moral authority.  they are the rare group that won three super bowls and still complained regularly about a lack of respect. they admonished opposing players who talked about them in public, even when those players were insignificant and their comments were innocuous.  the patriots rarely revealed much of themselves. they avoided most locker-room showdowns and high-profile legal problems. they did not deliver many sound bites or perform many touchdown dances. they were usually a quiet and mannered champion.  apparently, they finally became tired of taking the high road. after new england beat san diego, 24-21, in a second-round playoff game sunday, the patriots stormed to the middle of the field at qualcomm stadium, celebrating in a way that did not seem to fit them.  they trampled the chargers' logo at the 50-yard line. they pointed at the chargers' sideline. they mimicked the sack dance made famous by chargers linebacker shawne merriman. they seemed to forget all their own rules of gridiron etiquette.  when they realized what they had done -- becoming everything they had preached against -- several new england players rushed over to san diego running back ladainian tomlinson. the patriots reached out to tomlinson and tried to make peace.  it was too late. tomlinson swiped their hands away and angrily turned toward the locker room, shouting: ''you're better than that! you're better than that!''  with that, the patriots' pristine image was slightly tarnished. they are no longer the goodie-goodies of the n.f.l. they suddenly look a lot like everyone else.  some will say that tomlinson had a case of sour grapes, but he was voted the league's most valuable player this season, has won numerous sportsmanship awards, and is widely respected by his peers. in his six-year career, he had never really spoken out about any subject.  ''i was very upset,'' tomlinson said. ''they showed no class at all, absolutely no class, and maybe it comes from their head coach.''  perhaps tomlinson watched too many games between the patriots and the jets this season. after one meeting, new england coach bill belichick refused to acknowledge jets coach eric mangini. after another meeting, in a first-round playoff game, belichick shoved a cameraman out of the way to get to mangini.  belichick has never been known for an endearing personality. he is famous mainly for devising defenses that unsettle star players. having failed to contain tomlinson on sunday, belichick will now return to a more familiar target for the american football conference championship game -- indianapolis quarterback peyton manning.  indianapolis lost to new england in the playoffs in the 2003 and 2004 seasons, but the dynamic has shifted somewhat. back then, the patriots were playing at home, they were the sentimental choice, and they had adam vinatieri kicking field goals for them.  now, the colts are at home, vinatieri is on their side, and they seem to be winning the sympathy vote. despite manning's regular-season brilliance, he has never been to the super bowl, and the patriots are the team most often in his way.  ''we always enjoy playing indianapolis,'' patriots quarterback tom brady said. ''i love watching peyton.''  manning and brady are widely considered the best quarterbacks in the n.f.l., for much different reasons. manning puts up the biggest numbers, while brady provides the biggest victories. manning's playoff failures and brady's playoff triumphs have already become legend.  both quarterbacks won short-handed this season. manning lost his top tailback, edgerrin james, to free agency. brady lost his two top receivers, david givens and deion branch, to free agency and a trade. for months, new england and indianapolis looked tired. baltimore and san diego were the cream of the conference.  but the patriots and the colts endured again, on the strength of their experience and guile. no team is better at manufacturing motivation late in a season than the patriots, who seize on any kind of slight, real or imagined.  last week, the patriots complained that san diego coach marty schottenheimer did not respect them, just as they complained two years ago that philadelphia receiver freddie mitchell did not respect them and indianapolis place-kicker mike vanderjagt did not respect them.  in the past, the patriots responded simply with victories. on sunday, they responded with a victory and an in-your-face celebration. around the n.f.l., such displays are common. in new england, they were always seen as uncouth.  the patriots offended the chargers in the same way that the patriots are so often offended. these two teams and their delicate sensibilities will meet next season in new england, but first the patriots will head to indianapolis for the a.f.c. championship game.  they are looking for their fourth super bowl in six years, and finally, a bit of respect.  pro football  