polishing the silver as a family of cannibals licks its chops   lillian hellman was an only child, and while she found little to envy in that fact, it is hard to imagine what contentment she would have mined from the alternative. family life is a stifling affair in hellman's work, the relationships among siblings founded on a will to emotional cannibalism. they replace love with possession, and from the fruits of ownership no happiness is ever squeezed.  this idea supplies the profound heart of ''toys in the attic,'' hellman's last play and the subject of austin pendleton's excellent revival, a production of the pearl theater company, which opened on sunday night. written in 1960, 21 years after ''the little foxes'' explored the destructive enmity of the hubbard siblings, hellman's final theatrical effort offers an even more dismal evocation of the 20th-century family.  the berniers of new orleans don't even have the hubbards' greed or dynastic inclinations to drive them. they are, in a representative sense, the hubbards some generations later, a post-depression family, its corrupted ambitions behind it, whose members are left only with the miseries of their own perverse insularity.  the story itself revolves around a parentless trinity: carrie and anna bernier, two never-married sisters on the cusp of middle age who both intensely cultivate and despise their brother, julian's, dependence on them. after an absence of some time, julian returns home from chicago with a large sum of mysteriously procured money; he also has a wife, lily, for whom the sisters cannot hide their contempt. (lily, like birdie hubbard, is another hellman woman whose relative guilelessness signifies neurosis. battiness is apparently the best friend of innocence.)  it falls to anna to embody the play's fatalism -- the notion that the bernier sisters will never get anywhere in the world beyond the perimeter of their front porch -- and robin leslie brown seems almost eerily too well cast in the role. she doesn't express resignation so much as inhabit it, the look coming as easily to her as the smile on the face of a child with a new tricycle.  mr. pendleton, who has also directed a production of ''the little foxes'' on broadway, understands the essential lugubriousness of the play but is astute enough not to give over to it fully. unlike some of hellman's other work, ''toys in the attic'' is not a play that would benefit from a light touch, and mr. pendleton doesn't provide one. but he finds in it the easily obscured seed of redemption and applies a nourishing hose.  lily's mother, albertine prine, is the play's only true pillar of psychological fortitude, and joanne camp plays her with an air of supreme confidence as a woman who has come by her sanity through bucking the codes of traditional southern womanhood. her romantic companion is her african-american chauffeur, and she can fully accept the mistakes she has made rearing her daughter.  mr. pendleton situates many of albertine's scenes on the berniers' porch, which consumes the right side of the stage (the rest of it is taken up with the family's tattered living room); we are figuratively outside, as if to suggest that the only hope for a vaguely fulfilling life is to conduct it outside the confining parameters of traditional domesticity.  ''toys in the attic'' is a play that has no patience for nostalgia and nothing but judgments for the obsessive attachments of family. it yearns, remarkably, for room and reason.  ''toys in the attic'' continues through feb. 18 at the pearl theater, 80 st. marks place, east village; (212) 598-9802 or pearltheatre.org.  theater review  