breaking ground   the setai, new york  what -- metropolitan residential building.  where -- lower manhattan.  amenities -- a rooftop lounge area and a full-service spa, among others.  prices -- residences range from $650,000 to $6.75 million.  status -- expected to open this summer.  developers -- zamir equities and the setai group.  contact -- (212) 968-8880 or www.setainy.com.  details -- on broad street in the financial district of lower manhattan, this project, which is headed in part by the owners of the well-known setai hotel and residential development in the south beach area of miami beach, will create 167 condominiums in a 30-story former office building. the residences will range from pied-à-terre-size, 475-square-foot studios to 3,424-square-foot, three-bedroom apartments. according to jonathan breene, a founder of the setai group, many buyers are expected to use their units as second or vacation homes, as is the case with the group's south beach residences. the units are available furnished for an extra charge. the top five floors and some units on lower floors will have glass walls. a private club in the building, open to few nonresidents, will include the spa, a restaurant with a large wine selection, a fitness center with private trainers, a whirlpool, a library, a lounge and a screening room; wine storage will be offered to residents. a second, smaller fitness center, also with trainers, will be available only to residents. the roof will have a glass-enclosed area with a fireplace as well as an outdoor whirlpool and cabanas. room service, maid service and butlers will be available; charges will apply for these and for the spa services.  trump ocean resort baja, mexico  what -- oceanfront resort and residential development.  where -- on the northern end of the baja peninsula about half an hour south of san diego.  amenities -- beach access, swimming pools and restaurants, among others.  prices -- residences range from around $250,000 to about $3 million.  status -- construction is planned to begin around the end of this month. the first residences are scheduled to be completed in late 2008, and the overall project should be finished in three to four years.  developers -- the trump organization and irongate development.  contact -- (866) 858-8736 or www.trump-baja.com.  details -- this 17-acre project on the pacific coast of the baja peninsula just outside the center of tijuana is planned to include 526 studio to three-bedroom condominiums in three towers. size will range from 532 square feet to more than 2,200 square feet. the units will be sold in whole ownership, and a voluntary revenue-sharing rental program will operate as a hotel. the project will sit on cliffs, with paths leading down to a half-mile beach. there will be four swimming pools, one specifically for children and one with an infinity edge. one of the several restaurants will offer fine dining. a spa, a fitness center and tennis courts are also planned, and walking paths will run through a garden area that will accommodate special events.  nick kaye  breaking ground is a weekly look at projects, planned or under construction, that include weekend or vacation homes.  breaking ground  