transactions   major league baseball  american league  cleveland indians--agreed to terms with of jason michaels on a two-year contract and rhp matt miller on a one-year contract. sent rhp brian sikorski outright to buffalo of the il.  kansas city royals--named jerry nyman pitching coach and kyle turner trainer for idaho of the pioneer league.  oakland athletics--agreed to terms with lhp joe kennedy on a one-year contract.  texas rangers--agreed to terms with rhp joaquin benoit on a one-year contract. released 2b joey hooft, lhp pat ford, of joe napoli and c alberto martinez.  toronto blue jays--agreed to terms with 1b lyle overbay on a four-year contract.  national league  cincinnati reds--agreed to terms with c david ross on a two-year contract and rhp paul wilson on a minor league contract.  colorado rockies--agreed to terms with inf-of john mabry on a minor league contract.  florida marlins--agreed to terms with lhp dontrelle willis on a one-year contract.  houston astros--agreed to terms with inf mike lamb on a one-year contract.  los angeles dodgers--agreed to terms with lhp mark hendrickson on a one-year contract.  san diego padres--agreed to terms with c josh bard on a one-year contract.  n.b.a.  chicago bulls--suspended g chris duhon one game for a violation of team policy.  seattle supersonics--signed f andre brown to a second 10-day contract.  n.f.l.  carolina panthers--fired dan henning, offensive coordinator.  green bay packers--named joe philbin offensive coordinator, winston moss assistant head coach/defense, james campen offensive line coach, and jerry fontenot assistant offensive line coach.  giants--named jerry reese general manager.  seattle seahawks--announced the retirement of c robbie tobeck.  n.h.l.  atlanta thrashers--assigned d mark popovic to chicago of the ahl.  calgary flames--assigned lw eric godard to omaha of the ahl.  columbus blue jackets--assigned f geoff platt to syracuse of the ahl.  phoenix coyotes--assigned d matt jones to san antonio of the ahl.  