right to a lawyer applies to everyone   to the editor:  re ''official attacks top law firms over detainees'' (front page, jan. 13):  charles d. stimson, the deputy assistant secretary of defense for detainee affairs, who said that he was dismayed that lawyers at many of the nation's top firms were representing prisoners at guantánamo bay and that the firms' corporate clients should consider ending their business ties, may understand the constitutional concept of free speech. but he certainly does not understand the nature of our judicial system.  that includes the concept that one is presumed innocent until proved guilty; that people charged with crimes have the right to legal counsel; that legal counsel should present the very best defense possible; and that these constitutional concepts and rights protect all of us from the arbitrariness of government.  what is the purpose of bringing democracy to iraq if we destroy it at home? what are our soldiers fighting for if not to protect our society and the ''rule of law''?  lawrence h. pelofsky  cooperstown, mo., jan. 13, 2007  the writer is a lawyer.  to the editor:  my partners and i at jenner & block are proud of the pro bono work our lawyers do, including our representation of prisoners held at guantánamo bay.  i've defended men and women accused of murder, rape, child molestation, organized criminal activity, people called before a subcommittee of the house un-american activities committee, judges and lawyers charged with various deviations from the path of righteousness, and many others who, as one of my clients used to say, are not candidates for immediate canonization.  this is the first time in more than 50 years of practicing that anyone has suggested that there is something untoward about my representing people accused of these offenses, even those who are guilty.  thomas p. sullivan  chicago, jan. 13, 2007  to the editor:  i almost died fighting for our freedoms at the battle of leyte gulf in world war ii. one of those freedoms was and still is the right to counsel.  the president claims that he is fighting for freedom and democracy in iraq. but with deputy assistant defense secretary charles d. stimson's new mccarthy-like tactics against law firms, on top of reading private mail, tapping phones and imprisoning individuals indefinitely, i see those freedoms rapidly slipping away here at home.  just as corporate chief executives who backdate stock options are entitled to legal representation, so, too, are those imprisoned at guantánamo, many of whom have yet to be charged with a crime.  at 91, i can fight for democracy only with this letter. i challenge the law firms to continue the fight for our democracy here at home and urge all lawyers to join them.  solomon kornblau  delray beach, fla., jan. 13, 2007  the writer is a retired government lawyer.  