arts, briefly   'stomp the yard' dances into the money  in its debut, the stepping movie ''stomp the yard'' (sony), with columbus short, above, as its dancing hero, pulled in $22 million over the weekend to end the three-week american box-office domination of ''night at the museum'' (fox), according to estimates compiled by the box-office tracking company screenline. ''night at the museum,'' the ben stiller comedy, had a $17.1 million weekend, which raised its cumulative total to $185.7 million, but dropped it to second place in its fourth week in release, followed by the up-from-poverty saga ''the pursuit of happyness'' (sony), with $9.1 million and a total of $136.4 million in five weeks. the musical ''dreamgirls'' (paramount), taking $8.1 million, finished fourth. fifth place went to another paramount film, ''freedom writers,'' starring hilary swank as an inspirational high school teacher, which attracted $7.1 million. other new releases lagged badly, with ''alpha dog,'' ''primeval'' and ''arthur et les minimoys'' placing seventh, eighth and ninth, and none earning a third of what ''stomp the yard'' drew.  hollywood pursues poisoned agent's story  two major hollywood studios are racing to bring to the screen the story of the former k.g.b. agent alexander litvinenko, who died of radiation poisoning in london in november, variety.com has reported. columbia pictures and the director michael mann are competing against warner brothers and johnny depp, left, to make the thriller. variety reported that, based on a book proposal and sample chapter, columbia paid $500,000 against a total of $1.5 million on friday for the screen rights to ''death of a dissident,'' a book written by mr. litvinenko's friend alex goldfarb, and the agent's widow, marina, to be published in may by free press, a simon & schuster imprint. warner brothers and mr. depp, above, were among the bidders for the book. although they lost out, they already had an option on ''sasha's story: the life and death of a russian spy,'' a book being written by alan cowell, the acting bureau chief in london for the new york times.  leonardo quest to resume  the search for a lost leonardo da vinci fresco, regarded by his contemporaries as his masterpiece, is to resume, the associated press reported. the italian culture minister, francesco rutelli, and officials in florence announced last week that they had approved renewed exploration in the palazzo vecchio, where some researchers believe a cavity in a wall may have preserved the masterwork, leonardo's unfinished mural of the ''battle of anghiari,'' for more than four centuries (above, a self-portrait by the artist). ''we took this decision to verify conclusively if the cavity exists and if there are traces of the fresco,'' mr. rutelli said. the fresco was thought to have been destroyed in the mid-16th-century when the artist giorgio vasari renovated the hall of the 500 in the palazzo, the seat of power for florentine rulers. vasari is known to have salvaged other art by leaving it behind walls when he made renovations. the art researcher maurizio seracini, who touched off the quest some 30 years ago, will be part of the exploration team. once a date is set, he said, investigators will need at least 18 months to arrive at a definitive answer. ''we are not talking about a search like any other,'' mr. seracini said. ''we are searching for leonardo's greatest masterpiece, considered as such by his contemporaries.''  footnotes  the metropolitan museum of art will be open today. for three years, the museum, normally closed on mondays, has been opening for ''met holiday mondays,'' including martin luther king jr. day today. the museum also will be open on feb. 19 (presidents' day).  the soprano renée fleming, right, has withdrawn from the toscanini gala tomorrow night at avery fisher hall because of illness, the new york philharmonic has announced. she will be replaced by the bass rené pape, singing arias by verdi in the joint concert by the philharmonic and symphonica toscanini of italy, conducted by lorin maazel and commemorating the 50th anniversary of the death of arturo toscanini. citing illness, the tenor ramón vargas has withdrawn from the opera orchestra of new york's presentation of rossini's ''otello'' on wednesday in carnegie hall. he will be replaced by bruce ford. a three-piece british rock band has made history by landing in the top 40 of the official u.k. charts, becoming the first band unsigned by any recording label to achieve that feat. the band, koopa, from essex, hit the chart at no. 31 with the debut of its download-only single ''blag, steal & borrow.'' at the start of the year, chart rules were changed to allow digital single sales to count toward a chart position, even in the absence of a cd version.  