record year followed by record deal   the sale of the 41-story skyscraper at 666 fifth avenue for $1.8 billion -- a record price for an office building in manhattan -- closed last week, and the deal is symbolic of the red-hot demand from big investors for commercial properties.  in 2006, office buildings purchased by investors in new york city reached nearly $30 billion, double the amount that investors paid just two years earlier. class a offices, with the most modern and high-tech space, accounted for 37 percent of the dollar amount of the sales in 2006.  these figures -- compiled by cushman & wakefield, which tracks sales of $10 million or more -- do not include 666 fifth avenue, which is between 52nd and 53rd streets. that purchase by kushner properties from tishman speyer will be counted in 2007.  ''i've never seen a market like this in 25 years,'' said peter hauspurg, co-founder and chairman of eastern consolidated, a real estate investment firm based in new york. ''and it started right back up on jan. 2. you would think people would relax for a week, but it's been one frenzy after another.''  eastern consolidated -- a moderately sized company compared with large firms like cushman and cb richard ellis -- had its own record-breaking year in 2006, brokering $2 billion in sales. ''something could come around to derail the momentum,'' mr. hauspurg added. ''but nobody sees anything on the horizon.''  nearly $20 billion worth of sales are already under contract to close in the first quarter of 2007, indicating that this year will be a record breaker as well.  investors presumably would not be willing to pay astronomical prices unless they expected the buildings to generate reliable income, and it is a fact that rents have soared in recent months.  these rent spikes, particularly in the class a market, are a result of a robust corporate economy and a paucity of new office space in manhattan, according to brokers and real estate analysts. in the 1960s, '70s and '80s, 55 million to 65 million square feet of office space was added to the new york market during each decade. but in the 1990s, the pace slowed to only 10 million additional square feet, and in the first decade of the 21st century, about 20 million square feet are projected to be added.  this relatively slow growth in the supply of new buildings and the increasing globalization of real estate -- including an influx of foreign capital as well as more european and asian companies seeking space -- have increased the value of office buildings in new york, creating a strong investor sales market. again, 666 fifth avenue, whose ground floor retail tenants include brooks brothers, is instructive; it sold in 2000 for $518 million, so its value has more than tripled in six years.  ''the vast majority of properties we see are leased below market rate today,'' meaning that as leases expire, tenants will face higher rents, said jon caplan, executive director of cushman & wakefield's new york capital markets team.  ''in new york, we had more than a 20 percent increase in rent between 2005 and 2006,'' mr. caplan said. ''if a lease was signed only a year ago, it's already below market. if it was signed three years ago, chances are it's significantly below. so we will continue to see a shortage of office space with spiking rental rates, and that is going to drive investor sales.''  the seemingly endless rise in rent is causing concern among real estate brokers who represent tenants. ''in previous cycles, a more steady, inflation-resistant market was the norm,'' said david j. goldstein, executive vice president of studley. ''now people want to see extraordinary returns, so they're willing to take risks and play chicken with potential tenants.''  for tenants who cannot pay the highest rents, there may be few options other than to look outside of manhattan, or even new york entirely, mr. goldstein said, as buildings trade for upward of $1,000 a square foot; that price for a commercial building was rarely recorded before last year.  ''we are currently tracking, over the past 60 days, seven major office properties that have closed or will close at $1,000 a square foot or more,'' said robert m. white, president of real capital analytics, an independent research firm based in new york. ''and these are big buildings, not boutique spaces with small floor plates.''  one such building under contract is 2 herald square, a 12-story property that is in a premier retail corridor. it is being purchased by sitt asset management for $500 million, or $1,400 a square foot. five times square, a 40-story building constructed in 2002, sold in november for $1.3 billion, or $1,125 a square foot.  ''if you look at the absolute numbers, it raises your eyebrows,'' mr. white continued. ''but because of land prices and construction costs, they're not too far out of line.''  mr. white's research shows that prime new york office space sells for roughly three times the national average, but when measured in terms of short-term yield for investors, there is not much difference between new york and other major american cities. the higher prices paid for buildings in new york are balanced by the proportionately higher rents that owners can charge.  but compared with a handful of global financial centers overseas, office space is actually relatively affordable in new york. according to colliers international, a global affiliation of independently owned commercial real estate firms, space in london and hong kong goes for more than double the price of space in new york. in addition, colliers said that in terms of yield to investors, new york's commercial market ranks eighth among global cities.  but these rankings may be changing. ''there has been a fundamental repricing of real estate in new york,'' said william s. macklowe, president of macklowe properties, a real estate investment trust that owns the general motors building. ''the underlying real estate economy justifies that upward pricing pressure.''  square feet  