pilot in crash of small plane had decades of experience   andrew coppolo loved flying so much that he volunteered to fly cancer patients from around the northeast to faraway chemotherapy sessions.  through the group angel flight northeast, he took people to hospitals and clinics, donating his time and the cost of the fuel, said victoria coppolo, 27, his eldest daughter.  but on monday night, as he was returning home from a business trip to north carolina in dense fog, his small plane crashed in a neighborhood here, killing him and narrowly missing a house, the police said.  and to add to the tragedy of the coppolo family, one of the emergency workers who responded to the scene was the pilot's son, scott.  mr. coppolo, 55, a father of three who lived in atlantic highlands, had more than 30 years of flying experience, his family and the police said. he flew helicopters in the new jersey national guard for 20 years and was licensed to teach flying, ms. coppolo said on tuesday.  ''flying was his passion,'' ms. coppolo said, a passion he shared with her and her siblings, scott, 25, and margaret, 19. ''all of us had been flying with him since we were infants,'' she said.  scott coppolo, who is an works at st. joseph regional medical center in paterson, n.j., was called to the crash scene and was shocked when he learned the pilot who was killed was his father, he said tuesday night. he learned of the connection when he recognized the number on the plane's tail as his father's and then saw his father's cellphone in the wreckage, he said.  just after 7:30 p.m. on monday, mr. coppolo, flying a single-engine beechcraft a36, received clearance to begin a landing approach at essex county airport in fairfield, about four miles from the crash site, said brian rayner, an air traffic safety investigator for the national transportation safety board.  the cause of the crash will not be determined for several months, said mr. rayner, who was at the crash scene on tuesday. he said the plane showed no signs of mechanical malfunction. asked if the fog had played a role, mr. rayner said the weather conditions should not have mattered because mr. coppolo had been flying under a flight plan that required him to use instruments to navigate.  mr. coppolo, a mechanical engineer who owned an engineering business in orange, was a meticulously careful pilot, ms. coppolo said. ''he never would have taken any chances,'' she said.  mr. coppolo owned the beechcraft with several partners, ms. coppolo said. he kept the plane at essex county airport.  as night fell on tuesday, federal investigators worked to load crash debris onto trucks to take to a delaware warehouse for further examination. the burned and twisted right wing and tail of the plane still sat upside down tuesday afternoon at the foot of the driveway of a two-story home at 115 nellis drive.  sonja abbassi, 20, who lives there with her family, was at dinner in paramus with her mother, amal, and sister, lubna, at the time of the crash. her father was out of the country. she said the plane knocked out a small tree and the mailbox.  