ravaged by fires, australian state warns of hot weather's danger   australia's second-most-populous state, victoria, is in the grip of one of the worst bush fire seasons in recorded history, and the state's government has issued warnings that with more hot weather on the way the situation is likely to get worse before it gets better.  ''this is the worst bush fire conditions we have ever had in victoria's history because it is going to go on, and it is going to get worse,'' the state's premier, steve bracks, said wednesday, after cutting short his holiday to take control of the crisis.  almost 2.5 million acres of forest and farmland in the southeastern state have already been burned, and 200,000 people were without power on tuesday after lines were bought down by the fires. power was restored to most of them on wednesday afternoon.  mr. bracks warned that despite the 104-degree heat, people should continue to conserve electricity.  ''we are bracing ourselves for some very, very tough conditions,'' he said.  there have been no confirmed fatalities from the most recent fires, but eight houses have been destroyed.  seventy-five people died in victoria and south australia during the 1983 ash wednesday blazes.  mr. bracks said the current conditions were ''the worst we have faced, but it's the best prepared we have been.''  despite the efforts of about 3,000 firefighters, some using helicopters to water bomb the advancing lines of flames, the fires were spreading north on wednesday, crossing the state border into new south wales.  tourists and residents were being evacuated wednesday from areas of the snowy mountains, including the resort town of thredbo.  fire crews were using bulldozers to cut containment lines through the scrub and forest in an attempt to stop the advance of the fires, while aircraft were flying over the national park close to thredbo to check for hikers and campers who might not have heard of the evacuation warning. fire crews have been arriving from as far away as canada, and a team from the united states was on its way.  firefighters are particularly concerned about the fire that caused the power failure, which is centered on tatong in eastern victoria. ''we are steering and managing the fire; we can't put it out,'' said pauline clancy, speaking for the emergency coordination center at victoria's department of sustainability and environment.  some of the fires have been burning for more than a month, fueled by high temperatures following some of the driest conditions on record. australia is in the grip of a drought that has desiccated huge areas of farmland and forest across the nation, creating perfect conditions for the major bush fires.  most of the fires are a result of lightning strikes on the dry scrub, but officials say that some may have been started by arsonists, including one that has combined with others to create the single largest fire, which covers almost two-thirds of the burned area and has been burning since dec. 1. that fire already has a front almost 930 miles long.  critics say that the government has done too little to clear low scrub, which provides much of the fuel for the fires. normally, the authorities set controlled fires in the winter so there is less fuel during the summer. the state government said that for large areas of victoria, the winter was too dry to risk controlled burns.  fire crews say that even at night, when conditions usually ease, fires are racing from tree canopy to tree canopy, creating a situation that is almost impossible to control.  