new york's lawmakers hope for more federal help with democrats in power   with congress in the hands of their fellow democrats, lawmakers and other officials from the new york metropolitan region are seeking to rewrite many of the aid formulas to funnel tens of billions of additional dollars to the region in the coming years.  in the house, for example, many members of the party's sizable liberal wing, including members from new york, are eager to restore many of the cuts that republicans imposed on programs dear to them, including federal money for hospitals, mass transportation projects and homeland security initiatives for densely populated urban areas.  but getting that list accomplished is far from a sure thing. democrats themselves are divided along regional and ideological lines that are already posing hurdles for the city and state legislative agendas, according to lawmakers' aides from the region.  the goals of the city and state may run into resistance from the demands of more moderate and conservative democrats, including newly elected members who have pledged to end years of deficit spending under republican rule.  some democrats from the new york region said that their efforts to get more federal aid could be hampered by the decision of house leaders, chiefly nancy pelosi, the new speaker, to embrace ''pay as you go'' budget rules. those rules would prohibit the house from increasing the deficit by passing any new tax cuts or entitlement spending programs unless they were offset with spending cuts or tax increases.  ''there is an enormous amount of pent-up demand among members,'' said representative anthony d. weiner, referring to the competing needs of his democratic colleagues. ''part of nancy pelosi's job is managing that demand and running a tight ship. and that's going to require her to say 'no' to a lot of people.''  ''early signs'' indicated that mrs. pelosi was likely to side with many moderate and conservative democrats, particularly recently elected lawmakers who will be among the most vulnerable incumbents running in the 2008 election cycle because they will be just completing their first term. ''nancy pelosi is focused like a laser beam on the needs of these new members,'' he said.  the democratic takeover of congress comes as new york officials project multibillion-dollar deficits for the state in future years.  in a recent interview, new york's newly elected governor, eliot spitzer, said the budget he would present to the state legislature this month would not be predicated on any new infusion of federal aid.  but he said he would be looking to members of the state's congressional delegation -- particularly those in leadership roles in the new democratic majority -- to help make long-term changes to federal policy to help the state in areas like education, health care and transportation.  as far as new york lawmakers and other officials are concerned, one major issue that congress must grapple with is limiting the number of new york residents who have to pay the ''alternative minimum tax.''  while the tax has taken increasingly larger shares of income from people in high-tax states like new york, abolishing it or even limiting it has been difficult because it brings in billions of dollars in revenues for the federal government.  as head of the house ways and means committee, the tax-writing panel, representative charles b. rangel of harlem has placed cutting the alternative minimum tax at the top of his agenda. but mindful of the uphill battle he faces, he has been quietly meeting with members of the tax committee before releasing a proposal, according to aides.  in addition, new york lawmakers in both parties are planning to renew their campaign to secure new york city a larger share of the federal funds designated for antiterrorism programs around the nation.  this comes after a difficult year for the city in washington. the city's share of such money was slashed to $124 million in 2006 from $207 million in 2005, or roughly 40 percent.  new york lawmakers and their allies from other big cities want specific language in legislation that would limit the cities eligible for such aid to those like new york that can demonstrate genuine vulnerability to terrorist threats.  another top priority for new york lawmakers is making changes, if only modest ones, to the formula the federal government uses to reimburse the state for its expenditures under medicaid, the health insurance program for the poor.  the current cost of medicaid in new york is more than $40 billion a year, with the federal government picking up about 50 percent of the tab. new york's reimbursement rate is among the lowest in the nation; the federal government covers about 76 percent of mississippi's medicaid costs, for example.  very few medicaid experts in new york's congressional delegation expect that the federal government will increase the state's reimbursement rate in any significant way, given the regional battles that will almost certainly erupt over any changes to the federal formula. but the goal of the delegation and other new york officials is to secure more medicaid dollars by making modest adjustments to, say, eligibility standards and other requirements of the variety of existing programs run under medicaid.  the delegation is also girding for a fight over possible medicaid cuts to new york hospitals that would be achieved through a little-noticed regulation that the bush administration proposed just last week, according to congressional sources. in the case of new york city's health and hospitals corporation, for example, the cuts could total as much as $700 million a year, according to new york congressional aides monitoring the issue.  democrats from the new york region face another hurdle in realizing their goals. earlier this month, president bush said that he would propose a plan to balance the federal budget by 2012, though he did not say whether his plan was predicated on deep new spending cuts in domestic programs or forecasts of continued rapid growth in tax revenues.  