let's play two   there were two home teams in the st. benedict's preparatory school gymnasium thursday night. one was wearing its white home jerseys, trimmed in maroon and gray, and playing the kima school from washington. the other st. benedict's team was wearing street clothes and cheering from the stands.  the st. benedict's team in the stands is 4-2 this season, and 6 of its 10 players may join division i programs next season.  the team on the floor was even better. after easily beating the kima school, 74-46, it is 16-0.  with a student body of just under 600, st. benedict's, an all-boys parochial school, has something that is rare -- if not unprecedented -- among secondary schools: two varsity basketball teams that are among the nation's elite.  st. benedict's has long had a prep basketball team, partly composed of postgraduates and fifth-year seniors, which is not eligible for nationally sanctioned tournaments and most national rankings. this season, the school added a traditional high school team -- the 11 players in jerseys thursday night, who are enrolled in grades 9-12.  although it is not common, other high schools have two varsity teams. what makes the st. benedict's two-team system different is the school's decision to spread the wealth between the two teams, rather than making the prep team the showcase squad with all the best talent.  ''we're trying to run a great prep-school program that competes nationally against the better prep schools, and in the same breath, have the national high school program, with two totally separate rosters, one gym, one school, and one coaching staff,'' said dan hurley, the 34-year-old coach of the high school team.  oak hill academy in mouth of wilson, va., the most successful prep basketball program in the country for at least the past decade, also fields two varsity teams. but oak hill places its best players on its ''gold'' team, which travels to play games throughout the country, while the ''red'' team plays locally, coach steve smith said.  hurley's father, bob, is the longtime coach at st. anthony in jersey city, and his brother bobby was a star guard at duke. now dan hurley, who played at seton hall, oversees both st. benedict's teams; he appointed his longtime assistant coach, dennis dubois, 45, as the coach of the prep team.  the two teams provide quite a talent pool for college programs. ''even in the preseason, the gym is full of recruiters,'' said jabari edwards, a 6-foot-9 center on the prep team.  the high school team is ranked second in the country by usa today and has won by an average of nearly 26 points. the team is led by corey stokes, a 6-5 senior who is headed to villanova, and samardo samuels, a 6-9 power forward considered one of the top juniors in the country.  the prep team features edwards, who has committed to george washington; rashad bishop, who has committed to cincinnati; and ryan bacon, who has committed to delaware. another starter, chris smith, and the sixth man john holland are being recruited by less prominent division i programs, dubois said.  hurley said he first thought about splitting the program last season. edwards, who would be a standout on almost any other high school team, was stuck on the bench. his playing time was limited because he was behind samuels and lance thomas, who now plays at duke. ''jabari was too good of a player not to be playing,'' hurley said.  hurley approached the school's headmaster, the rev. edwin d. leahy, and the athletic director, michael dipiano, to propose forming two teams. last may, the administration gave its approval, hurley said.  st. benedict's benefits from players transferring to the school. of the 21 players on the two varsity teams, 10 transferred from other schools; 4 players on the prep team transferred in this season, hurley said.  because of the high number of transfer players, members of the freshman and junior-varsity teams have little chance of ascending to the varsity. hurley said he hoped that maybe two of the current junior varsity players would rise to the varsity team.  many players transfer to st. benedict's because it offers a basketball experience that is more like a college program than a high school. the school has seven coaches for 21 players; most division i teams have four coaches for 15 players.  ''the commitment that we make to the kids here is an 11 1/2-month-a-year training program,'' hurley said.  the goal, he said, was to prepare players ''for what their next coach and university are going to expect from them.''  oak hill's smith said that the st. benedict's players, like his own, ''have to travel and keep their grades up. that's the same things that happen when they get to college.  ''i have had more than one division i coach tell me our kids are like college sophomores when they get them,'' he said.  the system is certainly a departure from the traditional high school basketball model, in which players compete locally and division i is a pipe dream.  john ziemba, the coach at fort lee high in new jersey, said the contrast was stark. ''our school has been very successful in basketball,'' ziemba said. ''about four or five years ago, we played a summer-league game against st. benedict's, and they beat us by something like 60, and it could have been 100 -- it's apples and oranges.  ''we're a high school basketball team trying to win a league championship, and they're an elite school that prepares their kids to go play college at the division i level, basketball-wise and academically. it's a tremendous place for what it is, but to compare it to a public school, there's no comparison.''  hurley's coaching style is such that he can be sarcastic and sincere in the same sentence, leading his players in a prayer one minute and cursing at them the next. he does not use a whistle at practice, relying only on his ability to bellow over the squeaking sneakers and thumping ball, a commanding presence he may have inherited from his father, who has won 24 state titles at st. anthony.  having two teams has created some challenges. st. benedict's had trouble finding opponents for its prep team, which will play only 17 games this season -- and that is only if it reaches the state prep finals. the high school team will play at least 30 games.  despite the prep team playing a short schedule, hurley has his hands full with two schedules, 21 players and six assistant coaches. ''if it means enough to you, it's tough living through one season, and now i am living through two,'' he said.  college basketball  