nbc president says ratings are gaining momentum   even in the face of what he acknowledged will likely be another tsunami of ratings from fox's ''american idol,'' which again set a viewership record on tuesday night, kevin reilly, the president of nbc entertainment, said here on wednesday that his network had established significant momentum this season and had regained its status as the network of what he called ''quality programs.''  mr. reilly pointed to a number of successes for nbc, including growth in shows like ''the office,'' the comedy that has turned into a hit for nbc after being on the ratings critical list. ''if you stick with quality, it pays off,'' mr. reilly asserted.  it may be paying off for mr. reilly personally. after weathering rumors that his job was threatened, mr. reilly has seen his position solidified by the addition of this season's biggest new hit, ''heroes,'' as well as several other series that he said have ''picked up buzz,'' if not yet ratings.  in that category he mentioned the comedy ''30 rock'' and the drama ''friday night lights.'' he called those shows ''too good to not leave them on.'' mr. reilly all but committed to bringing ''30 rock'' back next season, saying, ''i'd be surprised if that went until may'' before the network announced it would renew the comedy.  alluding obliquely to his own situation, he said, ''there has been a lot of conjecture and instability,'' but now, he said, confidence has returned to the network's program department. ''shockingly, weirdly, it's become fun again,'' he said.  nbc managed to finish the first half of the television season tied in some areas with cbs and abc for ratings leadership. but national football league games on sunday nights are gone from nbc, and ''idol'' is back, so those standings will not last much longer.  still, mr. reilly said, ''we're one show away from really moving the momentum in the other direction.''  the next batch of potential shows from nbc will include far more closed-ended dramas, he said, with fewer serialized shows, many of which failed this season. he also said nbc's comedies ''will continue to be bold.''  one bold move that nbc may be the first to try is moving a show from the internet to broadcast-network television. nbc ordered scripts based on a pilot called ''nobody's watching,'' which gained wide exposure after playing on youtube. mr. reilly said the show might have a chance to leap from the web to the network next season.  one web-based experiment that the network is sure to try, perhaps as soon as this spring, is putting a batch of the network's pilots online: even as they are being screened by nbc executives. ''let that audience weigh in,'' mr. reilly said. among other subjects mr. reilly discussed was a new plan for the comedy ''scrubs,'' which had been thought to be in its last season. it has scored impressively for nbc on thursday nights, and now the network is seriously considering bringing it back again next season, mr. reilly said.  one deepening area of concern for nbc is its daytime lineup of soaps. one series, ''passions,'' has already been canceled, and mr. reilly pointedly declined to commit to nbc's most venerable soap, ''days of our lives,'' beyond its current contract, which runs out in 2009. the soap opera genre has become ''very, very tough for us financially,'' mr. reilly said.  surprisingly, he said, one of nbc's pillars of profitability, late night, is also under some ''economic pinch,'' even though the network continues to dominate there with jay leno and conan o'brien. he reconfirmed nbc's plan to replace mr. leno on ''the tonight show'' with mr. o'brien in 2009, even though he acknowledged that mr. leno could decide to create a show on another network.  ''jay's been a company guy and a team player for a long time,'' mr. reilly said, adding, ''i hope we can figure out the right arrangement'' to keep him at nbc.  the network has an offer on the table for mr. leno with ideas for shows in both prime time and late night, mr. reilly said. but he conceded that the decision about where mr. leno will wind up after he leaves ''tonight'' will ''go right to the end'' of his current deal.  