today in business   buyout battle for reit -- a group of investors offered $38 billion for equity office properties, the nation's largest office landlord, topping a $36 billion deal that equity office had reached with the blackstone group, and setting off the biggest buyout battle since the landmark fight for rjr nabisco nearly two decades ago. [page c1.]  offer for tribune co. -- as the deadline for bids for the tribune company came and went, the team of eli broad and ronald w. burkle made an audacious offer to give the company an infusion of cash and become the largest shareholder with a 31 percent stake. [c1.]  web ads and dancing cowboys -- even as online advertisements are becoming less obtrusive, lowermybills.com is a stubborn holdout, with its ubiquitous web banners featuring two-stepping cowboys, frisky rooftop dancers and weird tattoos. some say the undulating characters in the ads are highly distracting and have so little to do with low-interest loans that they border on the surreal. advertising. [c1.]  more variety in foreign cars -- foreign automakers are introducing new models at the high and low ends of their respective brands that may cause some unintended double-takes among consumers. [c1.]  apple posts big profit -- apple inc., brushing by even optimistic analyst expectations, delivered $1 billion in profit in the quarter, based largely on the christmas performance of its ipod. [c10.]  push for emissions controls -- congressional democrats are increasingly determined to wrest control of the global-warming debate from the white house and impose the kind of mandatory controls on carbon-dioxide emissions that most smokestack industries have long opposed. [a24.]  regan imprint to shut down -- harpercollins announced that it planned to close reganbooks, the imprint created by judith regan, left, the editor who was fired last month after public outcry over a book and television deal with o. j. simpson. the imprint will close march 1. [c5.]  cash shortage for disaster fund -- the federal government's biggest program to help people rebuild after natural disasters is on the verge of running out of money because of budgeting problems at the agency that runs it, the small business administration. [a1.]  signs of economic resilience -- a tight labor market is pushing up many workers' wages, consumers are spending more at shopping malls and the skid in the housing market is easing in some areas of the country, according to the latest regional survey of economic conditions by the federal reserve. [c4.]  deal for outlet malls -- the mills corporation, the owner of suburban outlet malls, said that it had agreed to be acquired for $1.4 billion by brookfield asset management. brookfield, a public company that owns high-quality office buildings like the world financial center in lower manhattan, will pay $21 a share for mills, an 18 percent premium. [c18.]  digital music up sharply -- sales of digitally distributed music rose about 80 percent in 2006 but failed to make up for falling sales of compact discs, a trade group said. [c5.]  signal on satellite merger -- the chairman of the federal communications commission, kevin martin, said that sirius satellite radio and xm satellite radio holdings would not win approval of a merger under current regulatory rules. [c5.]  retailer in data breach -- the tjx companies, the retailer that operates the t. j. maxx and marshalls discount clothing chains, has joined the ignominious list of companies that have had sensitive customer financial data pilfered. [c11.]  democrats to act on royalties -- house democrats, brushing aside objections from the bush administration, said that they had ample votes to pass a bill that would eliminate $14 billion in subsidies and tax breaks for oil companies and channel the money to renewable energy projects. [c12.]  airbus forecasts loss -- airbus warned that major production delays on its twin-deck a380 jet would probably push it to an operating loss for 2006, despite a record number of deliveries. [c17.]  airlines post mixed results -- the amr corporation earned a surprise fourth-quarter profit and southwest airlines said that net income fell, demonstrating how fuel-pricing decisions dictate carriers' finances even when planes are full. [c17.]  g.e. said to be near deal -- general electric is near a deal to buy abbott laboratories' medical diagnostics unit for more than $5 billion, according to people involved in the negotiations. [c18.]  shares dip on rate concerns -- wall street finished lower after the federal reserve reported slow but steady regional economic growth, deflating hopes for an interest rate cut. [c21.]  online  business briefing  articles on these developments are at nytimes.com/business.  the lennar corporation, one of the nation's biggest homebuilders, reported a fourth-quarter loss, in contrast to a large profit a year ago, but the company's stock rose as it discussed 2007 earnings goals that, if reached, would surpass analysts' expectations. (ap)  mellon financial, the investment manager that is being acquired by bank of new york, said that fourth-quarter earnings rose 14 percent on an increase in fees for overseeing hedge funds and mutual funds. (bloomberg news)  