not a front-runner, but moving ahead in polls   the transformation, on vivid display in a studio inside abc news's washington bureau on sunday morning, was arresting. there was representative john p. murtha, a pennsylvania democrat whose criticisms of the bush administration's policies in iraq had long ago earned him a reputation as little more than a gadfly, now being interviewed about his threats to withhold money for additional troops in his new capacity as chairman of the subcommittee on defense appropriations.  his interviewer, too, has experienced the broadcast equivalent of electoral gains in recent months. he was george stephanopoulos, the host of ''this week.'' during the most recent ratings sweeps period, in november -- something like the new hampshire primaries for advertisers, networks and local stations -- mr. stephanopoulos surged past cbs's ''face the nation'' and its host, bob schieffer, to finish in second place among the network public affairs shows. it was the first time mr. stephanopoulos, 45, had moved out of third place since he took over ''this week'' in sept. 2002, a notable milestone, even if ''meet the press'' on nbc continued its commanding hold on first place.  meanwhile, mr. stephanopoulos, who also carries the title of chief washington correspondent for abc, has been receiving increasing airtime weeknights on ''world news'' since charles gibson became its full-time anchor last spring, a period in which mr. schieffer's visibility has receded as he has yielded his slot as anchor of the ''cbs evening news'' to katie couric.  mr. stephanopoulos said his sweeps showing had been ''more than a little sweet'' when considering that abc had offered his job on ''this week'' in 2005 to ted koppel, in an ultimately failed effort to keep mr. koppel at the network after nudging him off his longtime perch at ''nightline.''  an intense, at times humorless, man who, out of camera range, still sometimes wraps his ankles around the legs of his chair and pulls his knees in close during an interview, mr. stephanopoulos says he hopes the audience has detected that he feels more at ease than when he began his transition from political adviser to broadcaster in 1997.  ''i think i was generally too tightly wound, a little too determined to show i had done my homework and knew what i was talking about, as opposed to finding the best way to ask a question and get the most information,'' he said in an interview after sunday's show.  one example of how self-deprecating he has become was evident in his recounting of a ''walk and talk'' on camera with president bush last year in rural north carolina. after a few minutes, mr. bush observed, with some glee, ''man, you're sweating.''  indeed, mr. stephanopoulos had begun perspiring so profusely that he was forced to retreat inside a giant refrigerator at a cafeteria near where the conversation was taking place, before continuing. afterward, he said, mr. bush had paid him what he considered a high compliment: ''good talk. i appreciate you didn't make it about you.''  that presidential pat on the back aside, it is probably no accident that mr. stephanopoulos's higher profile has come in the midst of the democratic takeover of the house and the senate. many of the names of the leaders of the new congress have come right out of the rolodex he maintained as senior adviser to the president during the first term of the clinton administration, and before that as an aide to the democratic representatives richard gephardt of missouri and edward f. feighan of ohio.  one of them is representative rahm emanuel, an illinois democrat who is credited as one of the engineers of the democratic victory in november but who, as another policy adviser to mr. clinton, had an office that was, at times, inches from mr. stephanopoulos's.  ''in a period where people turn to fox because there is a simpatico mind-set, and cnn, too, it wouldn't surprise me that at a time when there has been a change of fortune for democrats in congress, george's viewership is up,'' mr. emanuel said in a telephone interview.  which is not to say that mr. emanuel, mr. murtha or their colleagues can count on any special treatment from mr. stephanopoulos. though it has been more than a decade since his boyish mien -- framed by the same thick jet-black hair he has now -- served as the public face of bill clinton himself early in his administration, mr. stephanopoulos says he continues to bend over backward to ensure that he is regarded as nonpartisan. outside the ''this week'' studio on sunday, stephen hadley, mr. bush's national security adviser, said he regarded mr. stephanopoulos not as the democratic operative he long was but as more of a kindred spirit with similar work experience, if not political leanings, who had always provided him a fair hearing.  ''he has some background in how the white house works,'' mr. hadley said, after taping an interview with mr. stephanopoulos en route to a live conversation with tim russert on ''meet the press.'' ''so he knows the environment from which we come.''  on that same broadcast mr. stephanopoulos was arguably as tough, if not tougher, on mr. murtha, his second guest, as he was on mr. hadley, his first. after pushing mr. hadley, without success, to acknowledge whether the administration felt it had the authority to invade iran, mr. stephanopoulos succeeded in getting mr. murtha to concede that any effort by the democrats to withhold money for sending new american troops to iraq would probably come well after many of those troops were already on their way.  in framing a follow-up question, mr. stephanopoulos seemed almost to lecture mr. murtha -- whom he has known for more than two decades -- saying, ''as you know, congressman, even a lot of democrats believe that it's both morally wrong and maybe even politically suicidal to tamper with the war funding in any way, to send any kind of signal that you're not going to get the troops on the ground what they need to fight this war.''  still, as the 2008 presidential election continues to take shape, the most important democrat to mr. stephanopoulos may ultimately be hillary rodham clinton, the wife of his former boss, whose relationship with him is most certainly complicated, though difficult to divine from the outside. by the accounts of some clinton insiders, their rapport suffered, at least initially, after the publication in 1999 of mr. stephanopoulos's tell-all memoir of his white house years, in which he periodically depicted mr. and mrs. clinton in an unflattering light.  what is known is that mrs. clinton, who was interviewed on both ''today'' on nbc and ''good morning america'' on abc on wednesday, has not appeared on mr. stephanopoulos's show since august 2004 (nor on mr. russert's or mr. schieffer's since shortly thereafter).  to get that 2004 interview, mr. stephanopolous acknowledged, he had to do a fair amount of groveling before mrs. clinton's aides, variously telling them, ''don't forget me'' and ''don't leave me out.''  asked about the state of his relationship with mrs. clinton, mr. stephanopolous said he often saw her socially, and that when he did, ''she laughs, she makes jokes.'' a spokesman for mrs. clinton, philippe reines, said in an e-mail message yesterday, ''hrc and george see each other a fair amount in the capitol, including right before she called for rumsfeld's ouster'' -- earlier last year -- ''when they had a good long chat.''  mr. stephanopoulos's relationship with mr. clinton would appear to be slightly better than that; the former president asked him to read an advance copy of his own memoir, in 2004, mr. stephanopoulos said, and has been interviewed by mr. stephanopoulos several times on ''this week.'' mr. clinton has also had mr. stephanopoulos moderate panels for his annual gathering in new york, known as the clinton global initiative.  the only rough spot, mr. stephanopoulos said, came last fall, when mr. clinton begged off an interview with him because his network, abc, was broadcasting a made-for-television movie critical of the clinton administration's actions just preceding the sept. 11 terrorist attacks. ''this is not about you,'' mr. stephanopoulos was told by aides to the former president, an account they confirm.  for all the progress mr. stephanopoulos has made in recent months and years, his task still remains formidable. since early december, his broadcast -- which this season has drawn an average viewership of 2.6 million -- once again fell behind that of ''face the nation'' (2.8 million) and ''meet the press'' (4 million), according to nielsen media research.  but even if a democrat should retake the white house next year, mr. stephanopoulos said no one should expect him to reclaim his desk in the west wing.  ''i'm retired,'' he said. ''i've chosen a different path now.''  