grand jury looking at katrina insurer   a grand jury in mississippi began hearing testimony yesterday on possible criminal charges against state farm for its handling of claims after hurricane katrina, people close to the proceedings said.  the start of the grand jury proceedings in the marble circuit courthouse in pascagoula, on the gulf coast, raised new questions about efforts to settle hundreds of lawsuits filed after the storm in 2005.  early last week, state farm and other participants in the settlement talks said they were close to an agreement that could put hundreds of millions of dollars into the hands of policyholders along the coast who have been waiting for insurance money to begin rebuilding.  several participants in the talks said state farm wanted to reach agreement before a grand jury began hearing evidence on whether it ordered adjusters and independent engineers to file paperwork that would lead to underpayments to homeowners. as part of the agreement, state farm was insisting that jim hood, the attorney general of mississippi, drop a criminal investigation into the company's handling of claims and call off the grand jury, which would decide whether there was probable cause to return an indictment.  but the talks were jolted last thursday by decisions by a federal judge and jury in gulfport that awarded a couple in biloxi $2.7 million, mostly in punitive damages, in a separate lawsuit against state farm.  lawyers opposing state farm said they feared that the insurer, the biggest in mississippi and the nation, would break off the talks.  the next day, however, state farm was back at the table with trial lawyers and mississippi officials.  the negotiations gathered speed throughout the long holiday weekend, and some participants thought an agreement might be announced as early as tuesday.  but, according to several participants, mr. hood refused to sign off on the deal. that enabled the grand jury to be seated in pascagoula. it also meant that another of state farm's conditions was not met: a requirement that mr. hood also drop a civil lawsuit against it and other insurers.  when the grand jury began hearing testimony yesterday, participants in the talks said, state farm lawyers seemed on the verge of ending the negotiations.  but in a brief interview late yesterday, phil supple, a spokesman for state farm, said that the insurer continued ''talking with all parties'' and remained optimistic a settlement could be reached.  as for the grand jury proceedings, mr. supple said state farm ''is cooperating fully with the attorney general's grand jury investigation.'' he would not confirm reports that one witness had been terry blalock, state farm's senior claims executive in mississippi.  in late summer, two independent adjusters provided evidence to mississippi officials that they said supported claims of impropriety against state farm. the two adjusters contended that state farm destroyed large numbers of documents related to their payments for hurricane katrina damage. state farm has insisted that it did nothing wrong.  an aide to mr. hood said late wednesday that he was in a meeting and could not speak with a reporter.  lawyers and others who have been following the settlement talks and the claims disputes with insurers along the mississippi coast, where tens of thousands of homes were damaged or destroyed by high wind and surging floodwaters, said several witnesses went before the grand jury yesterday.  