g.e. may buy abbott's diagnostic unit   general electric is near a deal to buy abbott laboratories' medical diagnostics unit for as much as $5 billion, according to people involved in the negotiations.  acquiring the abbott business, which makes and sells glucose monitoring systems, blood test kits and other chemically based diagnostic tools, would enable g.e.'s health care unit to expand its growing stable of diagnostic products and services.  the g.e. unit, ge healthcare, has annual revenue of about $16 billion and has long been a leader in expensive diagnostic machines like cat scanners and mri equipment. the abbott product line would help g.e. add nursing homes and other nonhospital medical settings to its base, analysts said.  they predicted that g.e. would quickly wring efficiencies from the abbott diagnostics unit. ge healthcare's margins generally top 16 percent, they said, while abbott diagnostics' margins are about 7 percent.  the diagnostics business, while profitable for abbott laboratories, is far smaller than the company's drug business, which had profits of $3.1 billion on sales of $9.84 billion in the first nine months of 2006. abbott diagnostics, by contrast, had profits of only $306 million during that period, on sales of $2.98 billion.  in november, abbott laboratories expanded its drug business by agreeing to buy kos pharmaceuticals for $3.7 billion.  abbott is also betting on growth in its cardiovascular stent business. early last year the company paid $4.1 billion to acquire guidant's stent and other vascular business as part of the deal that enabled boston scientific to acquire guidant.  abbott is now hoping to win federal approval to enter the lucrative market of selling drug-coated stents -- tiny metal devices that are designed to prop open coronary arteries after blockages have been cleared.  abbott's diagnostics business, though, has been under something of a cloud since the company agreed in 1999 to pay $100 million to settle accusations that it had failed to meet federal quality standards in producing its test kits.  ''they lost a lot of ground to competitors,'' said one analyst, who said that he could not be identified until the deal was formally announced. ''shedding it to streamline management makes some sense,'' the analyst said. ''it's a natural progression of their morphing away from the hospital supply business.''  he noted that abbott in 2004 had sold off its hospital products business into an entity called hospira.  for g.e.'s part, the acquisition continues an acquisition strategy that has included buying amersham, a british diagnostic pharmaceuticals and biosciences company, for more than $9 billion in 2004.  but some analysts wondered whether g.e. was overpaying.  ''g.e. is getting a reputation as a place that will pay top dollar for a fixer-upper,'' said another analyst, who declined to be identified because he had not yet written to his clients about the deal.  the deal would comes just after g.e. announced on monday that it was buying smiths aerospace for $4.8 billion. that announcement came less than a week after word emerged that g.e. had put its lackluster plastics business on the auction block, in the hope of getting $8 billion to $10 billion for it.  