bloomberg seeks further changes for city schools   mayor michael r. bloomberg laid out ambitious new plans yesterday to overhaul the school system by giving principals more power and autonomy, requiring teachers to undergo rigorous review in order to gain tenure and revising the school financing system that has allowed more-experienced teachers to cluster in affluent areas.  the plan, which would also increase the role of private groups, represents the most sweeping changes to the system since the mayor reorganized it after gaining control of the schools in 2002. although the mayor has chosen to spend some of the city's current surplus on tax cuts, he said he could invest more in schools with money promised by gov. eliot spitzer to equalize state education aid across new york.  the administration can undertake most of the education measures unilaterally, without city council or union acquiescence.  mr. bloomberg presented the plans with great fanfare in his annual state of the city speech, which he gave this year at the new york city college of technology, in brooklyn.  in the midst of his second and final term, mr. bloomberg also offered a raft of new proposals, including curtailing labor costs by forcing the city's unions to negotiate pension benefits as part of the collective bargaining process.  responding to an increase in complaints against the police, and as the outcry over the fatal police shooting of sean bell has continued, mr. bloomberg said he would provide more money for the civilian complaint review board, which investigates reports of police abuses. and he called for reforming the ''pay-to-play'' culture of government by banning political contributions from people who do business with the city.  but in a speech packed with new antipoverty, criminal justice and tax-cutting measures, including reducing property taxes and eliminating the sales tax on clothing, the mayor's focus on education was the most far-reaching and politically contentious element. this time, he seems intent on carrying out structural changes that his aides said would address inequities that they maintain are at the heart of troubled schools, particularly the imbalance in the quality of teaching and administration between schools in rich and poor neighborhoods. [news analysis, page b1.]  ''during our first term, we brought stability, accountability and standards to a school system where they were sorely lacking,'' mr. bloomberg said. ''with this strong foundation now laid, we can take the next steps forward, creating great schools where all students can succeed.''  randi weingarten, the president of the united federation of teachers, raised concerns about the mayor's tenure proposal, calling it ''a vital protection for teachers to be able to do their job.'' she also said the mayor should focus more on reducing class size and giving teachers more latitude on instruction.  the proposals would overhaul the present system of near-automatic tenure for teachers after three years; requiring them to be more rigorously evaluated and actually recommended for tenure by principals.  at the same time, the administration is moving to extend the ''empowerment school'' concept across the system, eliminating the 10 regional offices and making principals far more responsible for hiring, teacher training, curriculum and budgets.  in keeping with the focus on accountability, mr. bloomberg said, principals will also be evaluated more thoroughly, with public letter-graded reports based largely on their students' annual standardized test scores.  finally, mr. bloomberg's plan includes changing the way money is distributed to schools, to ensure that funds are based on the number of students and their particular needs, to close gaps in per-student spending in different schools that can run as high as $2,000 per child, he said. under current procedures, each school is given enough money to cover the salaries of all its teachers . if a school has many long-time teachers, who earn more, its per-pupil spending is greater.  in doing so, bloomberg administration officials said, the intent was to make the system fairer and to help improve schools that often lack resources and to allow administrators to use those resources as they see fit. the shift is partly designed to help schools that serve large numbers of poor students to attract more experienced and highly paid teachers who often gravitate to affluent areas.  as if to pre-empt concerns in neighborhoods like the upper west side and park slope, where some schools have high payrolls, mr. bloomberg said that the administration would take the new approach ''flexibly, and phase it in over time to make sure that important programs we have now and services for our kids that we have are not jeopardized.''  city officials said they would pump $150 million more annually into the schools, and expect to have more funds available from money that mr. spitzer has pledged to the system and through the savings from eliminating regional offices.  in another proposal, which is all but guaranteed to meet stiff opposition from municipal employees' unions, mr. bloomberg said that he would move to set pension benefits during regular contract negotiations. rising pension costs present one of the most dire long-term threats to the city's fiscal health, experts say, and the city's unions negotiate these benefits separately from their wage talks, and often do end runs around the city by convincing state lawmakers to sweeten worker pensions.  ''it's time for albany to stop playing santa claus with the city's money,'' mr. bloomberg said.  mr. bloomberg's address featured an unusual level of razzle-dazzle, with a rousing marching band from brooklyn and invited guests who had recently engaged in acts of bravery. they included ranger, a police department german shepherd who limped onstage to great applause, his leg in a cast because a tendon was gashed on broken glass as he helped search for a suspect.  mr. bloomberg said he planned to increase funds for the civilian complaint review board as part of an effort to make sure that the police treat ''every new yorker equally and with dignity and that all complaints are taken seriously,'' a statement that seemed to acknowledge wide outrage at the shooting of mr. bell, who died in a hail of 50 police bullets nearly eight weeks ago.  city officials plan to increase the board's budget, which has hovered around $10 million in recent years, by about $1.5 million, which would allow it to hire 25 new staff members. the number of misconduct complaints against new york city police officers is on the rise, due in part to the city's 311 telephone system, which was put in place in 2003.  as part of his war on illegal handguns, mr. bloomberg said that he would seek a new state law to try any juvenile, regardless of age, accused of a violent felony committed with a gun as an adult. at the same time, he said, he would spend $9 million on a program aimed at reducing the number of juveniles sent away for their crimes.  in addition, mr. bloomberg said that the city would create a new academy to train administration for children's services managers and seek legislation to allow the agency to perform criminal background checks on adults suspected of child abuse.  the mayor's plans also included a program to help the poor by assuring that families eligible for the earned income tax credit -- worth about $1,000 on average -- actually receive the money.  the department of finance is preparing amended tax forms for the roughly 120,000 households in the city eligible in 2003 and 2004 who never claimed the credit. this week, mr. bloomberg said, the department will begin sending those amended returns out for the affected taxpayers to sign and submit.  the mayor's address  