inquiry into newark's ex-mayor turns to sales of city land   federal agents investigating the financial dealings of former mayor sharpe james of newark are reviewing land transactions in which a few of his top advisers and political allies may have benefited from the sale of city property at prices far below market rates, according to court documents and lawyers involved in the case.  in recent weeks, investigators have served subpoenas on city hall requesting thousands of pages of personnel records and other documents regarding officials who supervised municipal land deals during the final years of the james administration. some of the officials may have profited from the deals.  among the transactions being examined are the sale last may of 12 vacant city lots at the below-market price of $4 per square foot to manuel rosa, a real estate developer who has been a longtime supporter of mr. james and employs one of his sons.  investigators are also reviewing a series of transactions involving karen hilliard-johnson, a director in the city's department of economic and housing development. property records show that in 2000, ms. hilliard-johnson bought a home for $200,000 -- when similar homes were selling for well over $300,000 -- from a developer who later purchased dozens of low-cost city lots from the department where she worked.  and an article published yesterday in the star-ledger of newark reported that investigators were examining the sale of nine city-owned parcels to tamika riley, a public relations consultant who occasionally traveled with mr. james. she bought the properties for $46,000 and later resold them for $700,000.  mr. james has been the subject of an inquiry since last summer, when the united states attorney's office began investigating whether tens of thousands of dollars in travel expenses he charged to two city credit cards during his final months in office were for legitimate city business.  mr. james, who is still a state senator and the director of the urban issues institute at essex county college, did not return calls requesting comment, but his lawyer said in an interview last week that both the credit card bills and the land sales were appropriate because they contributed to mr. james's efforts to spur redevelopment.  ''anything that was done was done to benefit the city,'' said the lawyer, raymond m. brown.  subpoenas for the personnel records of ms. hilliard-johnson and other city development employees have been served on city hall. lawyers involved in the case, who spoke on condition of anonymity because the matter was going before a grand jury, said the city had turned over records of property transactions involving ms. hilliard-johnson, ms. riley, mr. rosa and others.  michael drewniak, a spokesman for the united states attorney, christopher j. christie, declined to discuss the investigation, some aspects of which have been reported in the star-ledger.  mayor cory a. booker, who succeeded mr. james in july, also declined to comment, according to his director of communications, desiree peterkin bell.  during last year's mayoral campaign, mr. booker made a major issue out of the cut-rate sale of city land, often at $4 per square foot at a time when private appraisers said it was worth more than $25. mr. booker blasted the james administration for permitting the sales, calling them an improper giveaway of city resources to people with political connections. his lawyers also went to court and won an injunction blocking dozens of sales.  one of the deals that was halted involved three parcels that ms. riley planned to buy, according to lawyers familiar with the case.  between 2001 and 2005, ms. riley's company, tri, bought an assortment of city properties, some for less than $2 a square foot, according to city land records. the most recent sales, in 2005, involved two city properties that ms. riley bought for $12,000 and resold within a year for a total of $250,000.  neither ms. riley nor her lawyer, francis cutruzzula, could be reached yesterday for comment.  the transaction involving ms. hilliard-johnson relates to her $200,000 purchase of a four-bedroom home in newark in 2002. the home was built and sold by a developer on land it bought from the city in 2001 for $1 per square foot, at a time when ms. hilliard-johnson worked in the development department. in subsequent years, the company received a variety of project approvals and low-cost land deals from the city.  contacted last week at her office in city hall, ms. hilliard-johnson said she had done nothing improper. she referred questions to her lawyer, randy davenport, who did not return repeated calls seeking comment.  mr. rosa's company, lilac development, has been a major financial supporter of mr. james. the judge who issued the injunction blocking some of the james administration's land sales noted that mr. rosa and his employees had given $15,000 in contributions to mr. james early last year, when the company was trying to buy more than an acre of city land at a discount price. on may 24, mr. rosa bought just under an acre of city property for $4 a square foot, according to land records.  mr. rosa did not return repeated calls to his office last week requesting comment.  