3 lands of orient compete with french holiday favors   for centuries the people of this charming mountain village believed that only blessings came from the east.  after all, was it not on the feast of the three kings, those mysterious magi from the orient, that the french began the tradition of the galette, a flat, round pastry with a favor hidden in its dough -- a practice that these days continues through the end of january.  whoever got the slice with the favor in it became king, or queen, for the day, complete with a paper crown, and the favor was said to bring an abundance of good fortune.  the favor is still called a fava bean, or fève, for beans were what french bakers originally buried in the cakes. but more recently the favor in the finest galettes has been made of fine china, delicately decorated with flowers, texts or other themes to delight the recipient.  in recent decades clamecy, population 5,000, became synonymous with these fine porcelain favors, thanks to a little porcelain works that is perhaps their premier manufacturer.  but as the practice has become even more popular and sales of the pastries are growing, misfortune is coming from the east. recognizing a niche market, manufacturers in thailand, vietnam and even china have begun flooding the french market with favors. some are made of plastic, but many are of fine china. some have traditional designs, while others represent cartoon figures.  while the faïencerie de colas porcelain works here is still doing reasonably well -- last year it produced 500,000 favors in a total market of roughly 60 million -- the owners worry about the future. ''we cannot produce for french mass marketers,'' said jean-françois colas, 60, who has run the business since 1972. ''we cannot comply with what they need. we don't have the flexibility.''  the company was established in 1918. mr. colas's father joined it in 1925 as a designer, and in 1938 he took it over. the younger mr. colas's son, alexandre, 32, is taking over. but favors were not always on the list of the company's products, which consisted of traditional vases, lamps, candle holders, platters and other china. making favors came about almost by chance.  ''every year, among our employees, we shared a galette, a big galette, from a local baker,'' mr. colas said. ''but in the 1970s plastic favors began showing up, and we thought we can do something ourselves. so we got the idea for a collection.''  by now the company, with its 10 employees, has 43 collections of thumbnail-size favors: tiny wristwatches (without the bands), porcelain pralines, patriotic favors in the shape of the map of france, tiny dishes commemorating almost any event. the company adds three to five collections every year.  the favors have become a passion for some in france. people save them, there is a fair each year for collectors, catalogs are published and the finest bakers in paris and elsewhere order up special editions to put in their finest galettes.  alexandre colas led a visitor through a sagging collection of 18th- and 19th-century buildings, with narrow stairs and stone floors, that house the porcelain works in a section of clamecy along the yonne river that people call bethléem, since it is believed that a local ruler offered refuge to bishops from bethlehem during the crusades.  today traditional porcelain products make up about half of the company's production, the tiny favors the rest, though 25 years ago the favors accounted for only 20 percent. alexandre colas sees the day coming when the favors will dominate.  but the company is losing ground, he said. every year the family sends its salesmen to bakers across france. ''for every 20 bakers, only one says yes,'' said alexandre colas, who gave up a career as a naval engineer six years ago to join the family company. ''even though our favors are not much more expensive than others, they usually say we're too expensive.''  the colas favors can cost anywhere from 30 cents to $1.30, though the price can rise steeply, depending on how elaborate the pieces are. ''the difficulty is to position yourself as a favor manufacturer in a globalizing world,'' he said.  at the bake shop he has operated for nine years in the medieval heart of clamecy, christian meignen discussed his galette business. mr. meignen, a picture-book baker, with full rosy cheeks and thinning hair dusted with flour, said he sold 310 on jan. 6 -- three kings day -- and 350 the day after. all told, he expects to sell about 1,400 by the end of january.  what explains the mushrooming popularity of the galette? ''it's not so much the family, but friends and business associates who are enjoying galette,'' he said, noting that the local water company had ordered 120 of the pastries for its employees.  an apprentice, gregory lopez, 22, deftly rolled out the dough for galettes, some with almond paste or apple, others plain, then placed a porcelain favor near the border of each. ''you have to put it at the edge,'' mr. lopez said. ''if you put it in the middle the knife would hit it immediately when you cut it.''  have any of mr. meignen's customers ever swallowed a favor or broken a tooth? ''no,'' he said decisively. ''you know there's a favor in a galette, so you're looking for it when you bite in.''  still, alexandre colas recalled that he once met a baker from syracuse, n.y., at a trade show in paris, who at first showed interest in buying porcelain favors for his baked goods but later backed off. ''he said there were too many legal issues,'' he said.  back at the colas's workshop, anne-marie biauzon, who has been with the company about 18 months, sat hunched over tiny crowns, a popular design, that she decorated with gilt edging. work has already begun on next year's favors.  on jan. 6, she said, she and her family enjoyed a galette, and one of her two daughters found the favor. but was she sure it was from the colas collection?  ''yes,'' she replied, ''i baked the galette myself.''  clamecy journal  