economy seems to be holding its own, but inflation risk persists   the economy seems to be shaking off a slowdown brought on by the precipitous drop in housing, the latest economic data suggested yesterday.  more new home construction was started in december than in november, the census bureau reported, and the consumer price index, the nation's best-known inflation gauge, rose at its fastest pace in eight months -- on the surface, at least, an indication of robust demand. fine print in the reports, however, signaled that the five-year-old recovery is far from being on solid ground.  ''the economy is performing significantly better than many economists had expected as recently as a month ago,'' said lynn reaser, chief economist for the investment strategies group at bank of america. ''but the housing downturn and cutbacks in auto production are still likely to hamper growth.''  the housing starts came in at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 1.6 million units, up 4.5 percent from the november rate. the number of building permits issued last month also rose, suggesting that prices may have fallen enough to draw people back into the market.  nevertheless, the increase in construction starts was entirely in apartment buildings. builders started fewer single-family homes in december than in november. and compared with a year ago, permits and construction for any type of housing were down about 25 percent.  ''very simply, the benchmark single-family sector is very weak,'' joel naroff, president of naroff economic advisors, wrote to his clients.  the inflation numbers were also ambiguous. the 0.5 percent increase in december came after no increase in november, and sharp drops in september and october.  not since the 0.6 percent rise in april, has the consumer price index jumped so sharply in one month -- suggesting to bernard baumohl, managing director of the economic outlook group, that inflation is far from subdued, as the federal reserve would like.  ''all this talk about the fed lowering rates is looking increasingly unlikely,'' mr. baumohl said, ''and the possibility is growing that the fed will have to raise rates in the second half of this year.'' like many economists, mr. baumohl focuses mainly on the so-called core inflation rate, which measures price changes other than those for food and energy.  the core rate rose 0.2 percent in december, matching the increase in four of the last six months. it appears to be leveling off, he said, at an annual rate of 2.6 percent, which was the year-over-year increase reported yesterday by the bureau of labor statistics.  if so, that would be well above the 1 to 2 percent annual rate that ben s. bernanke, the fed's chairman, describes as acceptable.  patrick jackman, an economist at the bureau, argued that home rents are playing a big role in the core rate's steady increase to 2.6 percent last year from 2.2 percent in 2004 and 2005. the bureau measures housing costs not by the purchase price of a house, but by rents and by what it describes as the rental equivalent of owning a home.  indeed, more people are seeking to rent homes, driving up rental prices. compounding the impact on inflation, no other item counts as heavily as rents in the bureau's monthly calculation of changes in the consumer price index.  most of the 0.2 percent increase in the core inflation rate last month came from rising rents, the bureau reported. meanwhile, the cost of many other major items -- recreation, for example, education and health care -- rose only mildly or not at all. car prices fell.  the two exceptions were apparel and tobacco prices, the former going up because of an anomaly in the seasonal adjustment formula the bureau uses for the christmas season, and the latter because wholesalers raised prices last month.  ''if i were on the fed, i would say there is really no inflationary pressure in the broad economy,'' mr. jackman said.  the 0.5 percent increase in the overall inflation rate last month came mainly from a spike in fuel costs. after falling from august until early november, fuel prices rose until late december -- and then started to fall again.  absent the spike in gas prices, the overall price index would have risen by about 1.25 percent last month. oil prices in 2006 rose much more slowly than in 2005. as a result, the rise of 2.5 percent in the overall price index last year was well below the 3.4 percent increase in 2005.  ''inflation does seem to be subsiding,'' ms. reaser said, ''and i think that will continue partly because the fed's earlier rate increases are still putting a lid on economic growth.''  