a powerful storm ices six states and kills dozens of people   an icy storm has caused the deaths of at least 41 people in six states since friday, including seven mexicans in a van in oklahoma apparently traveling in search of jobs.  the storm, which has downed countless limbs and power lines and knocked out electricity to hundreds of thousands of people, has now expanded its reach from texas to the northeast.  the single biggest loss of life took place early sunday morning in elk city, okla., when, the police said, a van carrying 12 people on icy roads crossed into oncoming traffic and collided with a tractor trailer. immigration officials and local authorities were sorting through the pieces monday to learn more about the victims.  ''with there being so many in the minivan, they had to be migrant workers,'' said lt. rick weedon of the oklahoma state police. ''what else would they be doing than going somewhere to work? the majority were headed to north carolina, and some to detroit.''  lt. pete norwood, public information officer for the oklahoma state highway patrol, said the driver of the truck would be cited for driving too fast for conditions.  the victims were ages 16 to 56, the authorities said.  ''there were people laying all over the highway,'' said john thompson, a paramedic with the elk city fire department who helped transport the injured to great plains regional medical center in elk city. ''i don't think anybody could have been wearing seat belts.''  lieutenant weedon said one of the men injured in the van was in the custody of immigration and naturalization service officers, who picked him up monday at a hotel in sayre, okla., not far from the stretch of interstate 40 where the accident occurred. two of the other occupants remained hospitalized.  lieutenant weedon said state officials were trying to reach mexican officials in dallas to discuss the case.  in all, at least 15 people were killed on oklahoma roads during a three-day ice storm that moved east early monday. about 120,000 customers were without power in oklahoma, and an additional 300,000 in missouri, where hundreds of thousands of people lost power in december in a major snowstorm.  the army corps of engineers dispatched soldiers to deliver 100 emergency generators to the mcalester area of oklahoma, the associated press reported, and 50 generators were being sent by the federal emergency management agency.  gov. brad henry of oklahoma declared most of the state a disaster area and asked president bush to declare the state a federal disaster emergency because of property damage caused by falling limbs.  with a wave of arctic air trailing the storm and expected to push temperatures into the single digits in some areas, oklahoma officials were strongly discouraging travel, the a.p. said. officials said the frigid weather would refreeze slush and water on roads.  residents in oklahoma and missouri were still having to cut paths through many streets made impassible by tree limbs.  road conditions in missouri were less severe than in oklahoma, because the temperature stayed just above freezing in the central and eastern parts of the state. among the weather-related deaths reported in missouri was that of a bonne terre man who died when floodwaters swept his car off a bridge and into a swelling creek.  dozens of warming shelters were set for people ill-equipped to deal with the cold because of loss of power or poorly insulated homes. in parts of missouri, the national guard went door to door, checking on residents and helping clear roads.  waves of freezing rain, sleet and snow since friday have been blamed for 17 deaths in oklahoma, 8 in missouri, 8 in iowa, 4 in new york, 3 in texas and one in maine.  in western and upstate new york on monday, more than 110,000 customers lost power and highways were closed, the a.p. reported. as much as half an inch of ice coated trees, power lines and roads. three people were killed when a car slid into a dump truck in sennett, outside syracuse.  about 95,000 customers of national grid were without power as of monday afternoon. more than 17,000 rochester gas and electric customers were without power in the morning, though most had their power restored by evening.  more snow and ice were being forecast for much of western new york.  the storm interfered with observances planned for martin luther king's birthday across the country, the a.p. reported.  in texas, officials canceled gov. rick perry's inauguration parade, planned for tuesday, after forecasters predicted more ice. more than 160 flights were canceled at dallas-fort worth international airport, and the university of texas was closed.  