candidates for state comptroller line up   the strange race to become the next comptroller of new york state began in earnest on friday as at least 18 candidates took the first step toward being considered by submitting their résumés to the state legislature.  the aspirants include six democratic state lawmakers, eight current and former government officials and four businessmen. prominent newcomers who expressed interest in the job included martha e. stark, the new york city finance commissioner; james l. larocca, who served in the cuomo and carey cabinets; and alphonse fletcher jr., a money manager and philanthropist.  the entire legislature will select the new state comptroller, but the real power to make the choice rests with the assembly democrats, its largest voting bloc. many politicians here said they believed that the state lawmakers on the list have the inside track for the job.  the popularly elected comptroller, alan g. hevesi, won with a comfortable majority in november, only to resign his four-year term in december after pleading guilty to a felony for using a state worker as a driver and aide for his wife.  it is unclear if there are more than 18 candidates because the assembly democrats, who had pledged to conduct an open and public selection process, declined to say who had applied for the job by the time the deadline of friday at noon had passed. they said that they would not release a list of candidates until monday, when the candidates must submit financial disclosure forms. the republican-led senate provided its list of candidates, which officials said they thought was complete but could not say for sure.  aides to the new governor, eliot spitzer, made it clear this month that they would prefer an independent candidate with fiscal experience from outside government. but after the spitzer administration had trouble encouraging candidates to apply, the governor said that he would be open to a candidate from the assembly.  governor spitzer negotiated a selection process with the assembly speaker, sheldon silver, and the senate majority leader, joseph l. bruno, that calls for the candidates to be interviewed by the legislature's joint fiscal committees, and then screened by a panel of three former new york state and new york city comptrollers. the panel will then whittle down the list to no more than five candidates, and the members of the legislature will pick one from that pool.  several democrats and republicans who saw the preliminary list of people interested in the job said that the qualifications of the candidates from outside the legislature appeared to be so strong that it was unlikely that more than two, or maybe three, lawmakers would make the final list of five candidates -- which would shift the political calculus, depending on who makes the final cut.  the decision will probably rest with mr. silver, who has influence over the 108 assembly democrats, or a majority of the legislature, which currently has 211 members. he is expected to take the governor's views into consideration, and a number of other groups will most likely weigh in, from caucuses within the assembly to party leaders outside the assembly.  five assemblymen are seeking the post -- richard l. brodsky of westchester, thomas p. dinapoli of nassau county, alexander b. grannis of manhattan, joseph d. morelle of the rochester area, and felix ortiz of brooklyn -- along with one state senator, martin connor of manhattan and brooklyn.  mr. dinapoli is well liked by many colleagues, and could emerge as a consensus candidate, but is generally better known for his environmental work here than for his work on fiscal issues. mr. brodsky has been lining up votes and stressing the investigations he conducted into state authorities, but some of his colleagues view him as acerbic. mr. ortiz has the support of hispanic groups.  the comptroller oversees the state's $145.7 billion pension fund, audits state agencies and local governments, and monitors state and local budgets.  perhaps because of calls that the state's top fiscal office should not be given to a political appointee, several of the assemblymen vying for the post are taking steps to play down their political ties: mr. morelle quit his job as the chairman of the monroe county democratic party, and mr. dinapoli stepped down from his position on the democratic assembly campaign committee.  but more outsiders are seeking the job than lawmakers. they include william j. mulrow, an investment banker who ran for comptroller in 2002 and who is close to mr. spitzer. but his bid could face difficulty because he is a member of one of the groups bidding for the state's valuable horseracing franchise.  and several state and local finance officials have expressed interest as well, including howard s. weitzman, the nassau county comptroller; andrew a. sanfilippo, the buffalo comptroller; david hancox, the director of state audits at the state comptroller's office; philip latessa, the syracuse auditor; andrew s. eristoff, who was the tax and finance commissioner in the pataki administration, and robert s. hoffman, a former auditor in the state tax department.  so many people applied that the public hearing that is scheduled for tuesday, where candidates will be invited to make 15-minute statements and take questions, may take more than one day. it could be crowded: since the hearing will be held by the assembly ways and means committee and the senate finance committee, more than 60 lawmakers could conceivably be sitting on the daïs and asking questions.  candidates for comptroller who serve on those committees will not be allowed to question the other candidates, assembly officials said.  