senators denounce bush policy limiting refuge for iraqis   senate lawmakers sharply criticized the bush administration on tuesday for failing to provide refuge in the united states for the most vulnerable of the iraqis fleeing the violence at home.  the united nations estimates that two million iraqis have fled the country and that 1.7 million are currently displaced within the country. of those, roughly 500,000 have been displaced since february, with roughly 40,000 to 50,000 more fleeing their homes each month. among them are iraqis who have been threatened or attacked for working with american troops and companies.  in testimony before the senate judiciary committee, ellen sauerbrey, an assistant secretary of state, acknowledged that only 466 iraqis had been admitted as refugees since the american invasion of iraq in 2003. she said that expanding the resettlement of vulnerable iraqis in the united states was ''a top priority.''  ms. sauerbrey said the state department was considering several options, including offering the iraqis refugee or other special status, and expediting the processing of iraqi religious minorities and of refugees who have worked for the american government.  the bipartisan panel of senators called for prompt action, warning that the united states was abandoning many iraqis who had helped the united states -- as translators, guides and contractors -- at great personal risk.  two iraqis who were recently granted political asylum in the united states testified at the hearing about being threatened and beaten before they escaped their country.  several senators and some outside witnesses also called on the united states to increase its assistance for iraqi refugees and to support an international conference to address the crisis. the conference, which would be held by the united nations, would most likely include syria and iran, which have received hundreds of thousands of iraqi refugees but are also viewed by the bush administration as sponsors of the insurgency in iraq.  ''we have a special obligation to keep faith with the iraqis who have bravely worked for us and have often paid a terrible price for it by providing them with safe refuge in the u.s.,'' said senator edward m. kennedy, the massachusetts democrat who leads the judiciary committee's immigration subcommittee.  senator arlen specter, republican of pennsylvania, asked ms. sauerbrey why the bush administration was not doing more. ''that's a very small percentage of those who are in need,'' senator specter said of the number of iraqis resettled in the united states.  he raised particular concerns about the status of 20,000 available refugee slots for the current fiscal year, which have yet to be allocated to any refugee group. ''why not use them now when there is such a crushing need?'' mr. specter asked.  ms. sauerbrey said it was still uncertain whether financing would be provided for those slots. she also said a rigorous and often time-consuming process of security screening to distinguish bona fide refugees from terrorists had slowed the resettlement of iraqis and discouraged the united nations from screening applicants and referring them to american officials.  from feb. 1, 2003, through sept. 30, 2006, the united nations screened 3,964 iraqi refugees for resettlement to various nations, with australia accepting the largest number. of that group, only 483 were referred to the united states because of long processing times for resettlement. the united states admitted 202 iraqi refugees last year, officials said.  ms. sauerbrey said iraqis would fill most of the 20,000 refugee slots, if the financing for those slots becomes available. ''we are working very diligently,'' said ms. sauerbrey, who oversees the state department's bureau of population, refugees and migration. ''this issue is the very top priority in my bureau.''  pressure on the bush administration has been mounting in recent weeks, with advocacy groups and some former government officials calling for the united states to accept a larger share of the refugee burden. most iraqi refugees have fled to neighboring countries like syria and jordan. but those countries are staggering under the load.  within the bush administration, there was, until quite recently, considerable hope that improving security in iraq would lead many of the displaced to return home. in the bush administration's proposed report on refugee admissions, which was submitted to congress last fall, officials said they hoped that ''significant numbers of iraqi refugees will ultimately be able to return to iraq.''  that view has changed, officials say.  ''at present more iraqis are fleeing their homes to other areas of iraq and to neighboring countries than are returning,'' ms. sauerbrey said.  the struggle for iraq  