serbia vote could lead to coalition of democrats   two leading democratic parties emerged monday as the groups most likely to form a government in serbia, despite a first-place showing for a nationalist party in the parliamentary elections on sunday.  but the prospect of slow negotiations to secure a coalition complicates international efforts to find a solution for the disputed province of kosovo, which are approaching a turning point.  the nationalist radical party took 82 seats in the 250-member parliament, initial results indicate. a strong performance by the democratic party, led by president boris tadic, held back the radicals.  the democratic party won 65 seats, according to initial results from the state election committee. other parties, led by the serbian democratic party -- a different group from the democratic party -- took 47 seats. that positions the two democratic groups to lead a slightly broader coalition.  it will not be easy, however, because the two main democratic parties have longstanding rivalries, and the prime minister, vojislav kostunica, seems unwilling to negotiate his job away, though his serbian democrats came in third.  western governments are hoping for the installation of a strong negotiating partner in belgrade as the united nations prepares to make its proposals for the future of kosovo, the serbian province that has been under united nations control since 1999.  western diplomats in the region say that a democratic party-led coalition would be most able to track down serbia's remaining war crimes suspects, notably the wartime bosnian serb army commander, ratko mladic.  in brussels on monday, the european union pledged to keep its door open to serbia despite the strong showing by the nationalists. speaking after a meeting of foreign ministers, olli rehn, the european union's enlargement commissioner, commended the country for conducting a democratic vote.  president tadic urged monday that a new administration be rapidly formed, saying he would award the position of prime minister ''to the one who has a best chance to gain a majority in the new parliament.''  mr. kostunica, the prime minister, who has led a minority government for three years, said he was ''open for talks with other parties.'' but he implied that mr. tadic's party would have to compromise.  the former finnish president who is the united nations envoy to the kosovo negotiations, martti ahtisaari, has held back from announcing his proposals for kosovo's future until the elections were over, in order not to influence them.  a spokesman for mr. ahtisaari's office said a version of the document would be presented to diplomats on friday.  mr. ahtisaari's plan is expected to enable kosovo to seek international recognition, and to transfer supervision of the province from a united nations mission to a small body led by the european union.  a 78-day bombing campaign led by nato forced the serb-dominated security forces to cede control of kosovo in 1999, after the forces were accused of committing atrocities against the ethnic albanians who predominate in kosovo. in the election on sunday, serbs in kosovo voted, but most albanians did not.  diplomats familiar with the negotiating process say mr. ahtisaari's document, which is ultimately subject to security council approval, is unlikely to mention independence explicitly. instead, recognition of kosovo would be left to individual countries.  but russia has said it will oppose any resolution that does not have serbia's support.  in serbia, a leading contender for the job of prime minister, bozidar djelic of the democratic party, suggested that mr. ahtisaari should not act until the serbs form a government, because earlier action on the delicate issue of kosovo could strengthen the nationalists' position. under serbian law, the parties have until the end of april to agree on a coalition, or face the possibility of new elections.  a european affairs analyst suggested that some european union nations might be reluctant to back a settlement that leads to an independent kosovo. spain, slovakia, romania, greece and cypress have voiced their concerns about such an outcome.  ''it could provide more opportunity for disunity to emerge,'' said the analyst, judy batt, a senior researcher at the european union institute for security studies in paris, who was in belgrade to monitor the elections.  conversely, she said, ''the longer belgrade takes forming a government, the less sympathy they will have among member states.''  