the home that you can't call your own   when most people consider the pain of moving, they think of the actual move: cardboard mountains, insubordinate packing tape, back strain and bewildered children.  but for many, the stress is nothing compared with the torture of living inside the place they are selling. tethered indefinitely, they must endure invasion (and banishment) at an hour's notice, countless rejections by strangers, scrutiny of voyeuristic neighbors and, more frequently these days, the erosion of their own expectations.  battle fatigue can set in quickly under the strain of keeping one's home in the meticulous condition of a marine barracks.  ''it's kind of easy to do in the beginning,'' said lauren cangiano, a senior vice president of halstead property. ''but a couple of weeks go by, and it's rough. it's a burden knowing they have to keep things in order for an indefinite amount of time. you can't live normally because you don't want to disrupt anything -- you have to live more lightly.''  one seller, melissa alcruz, compared her three-month ordeal with a search for a mate. ''you have to make the apartment look good, but you can't look too fussy or high maintenance -- your house can't look like a museum,'' said ms. alcruz, 37.  after three months, she and her husband recently sold their one-bedroom apartment at 40th street and second avenue. elaine clayman, a senior vice president of brown harris stevens, was their broker.  ''you also don't want to give away too much information,'' ms. alcruz said, ''so we took away photos, personal items, religious stuff -- the same way when you're dating you don't give out too much information right away.''  homebound by a difficult pregnancy, ms. alcruz nevertheless compulsively cleaned her floors and windows each day while enduring more than a dozen showings and two open houses per week and swallowing backhanded compliments like, ''wow, they did a really great job for a so-so apartment.''  the place finally sold in october. ''i had at least five people come back four times and not make an offer,'' ms. alcruz said. ''you get excited, and then you feel crushed.''  elevated hopes jolted by reversals frequently bedevil sellers, especially lately, brokers said.  ''there's so much hype, and expectations build up, and you're getting the place ready with the flowers and pictures,'' said susan kelty law, an associate broker at houlihan lawrence real estate in the tony suburb of bronxville, n.y. ''if nothing happens, a seller can get depressed.''  a few months ago, a client ''had a great splashy open house for brokers, followed by a public open house on the weekend,'' ms. law said. ''then no offers. she said, 'i feel like i had a big dinner party and nobody had a good time.' ''  for many sellers, the first cut -- before the apartment is even listed -- is the deepest.  ''the decluttering process was almost like moving in itself,'' said stephen r. jones, 35, who was referring to the excruciating rite of pruning his apartment into a topiary version of its former self.  ''we had a one-bedroom apartment, and a 2-year-old, and all his toys everywhere and our stuff and a nanny working there as well,'' he said. but their agent, kim mogul wright of prudential douglas elliman, not unreasonably insisted that much of it had to go, especially because an apartment of that size would probably attract buyers without children.  ''our storage room was almost like a jigsaw puzzle, it was so tightly packed and arranged,'' mr. jones said. ''it wasn't just knickknacks -- it was pieces of furniture.''  roger hanna and zhanna gurvich, another pair of sellers sharing a one-bedroom with a toddler, created a computer spreadsheet to track the 1,500 items stowed in 75 boxes spread among 3 storage units.  mr. hanna, 40, and ms. gurvich, 38, both set designers, also invested about $10,000 and several months of sweat equity fixing up their apartment at 110th street and central park west. after two months on the market and one price cut, they sold it in december with the help of their agent, jody sperling of the fox residential group.  ''it's kind of sad,'' mr. hanna said last month as he prepared to pack up his streamlined domicile. ''suddenly, there's enough room in the apartment because all of our stuff isn't here.''  he and his wife are planning to pocket their profit and rent their next home.  other sellers described feeling disenfranchised, like squatters in someone else's house. ''to me, that was the hardest thing,'' said beth levine ain, a 31-year-old children's book author who works from home. ''it started to feel less and less like our apartment.''  (brokers contend that this sort of mass-market appeal is exactly the point. ''we always say your house should show like a pottery barn catalog,'' ms. law said.)  when it comes to controlling clutter, initially and before each showing, parents of young children engage in an ongoing skirmish against action figures, legos and exersaucers. it can involve a grueling daily slapstick routine of hiding and retrieving toys, highchairs and strollers.  ''we literally took luggage carts of toys down into the lobby of the building every sunday for open houses -- toys, ottoman, laundry baskets, everything we could possibly move out of the apartment -- and we would bring it back up'' from a storage closet in the lobby on sunday night, said ms. ain, who has a 21-month-old daughter and lived through four months on the market.  ''during the weekday showings, i would scramble to get the big toys and stroller out,'' she said. ''it became very harried. i happened to have a toddler who was not a great sleeper, and i was very emotional and overwrought.''  the junior-four condo that she and her husband, jonathan, owned on the upper west side was finally sold for around $760,000 early last year by ms. wright of prudential douglas elliman.  sellers report strategies worthy of a clandestine f.b.i. operation. mr. hanna described his family's preshowing routine: ''first, there are the messes we made, and then the mess that our son makes. and then one of us will get him out of here so we can vacuum and wipe down everything. then there's always the idiot check where you walk around and see if you folded the towels and if there's toilet paper, and you want to stash anything somebody might just pick up, like prescription drugs or jewelry or car keys.''  where to stash the kids themselves during showings is a conundrum that relies heavily on improvisation.  parents of young children said they sought refuge at starbucks, building playrooms, friends' apartments and even the lobby, where some spied on buyers to analyze their body language. (note to parents: if a nanny will shoulder most of the burden, make sure to allot extra money for activities and strained nerves.) others just hit the streets with babies and dogs in tow.  sometimes, brokers and clients work together in advance to draw up a regular schedule -- accounting for preschool, nap times and the like--during which the apartment can be shown.  mindy diane feldman, a vice president of halstead property, noted that family-size apartments were most likely to have their first showings on weekdays, while smaller apartments generate more traffic on weekends and in the evening.  ''if you live in a building that does not permit open houses,'' ms. feldman said, ''putting your apartment on the market will be more disruptive to your daily life.'' instead of a single showing that draws many potential buyers all at the same time, the sellers will have to endure lots of individual showings. and ms. feldman said that a ban on open houses may lengthen the time it takes to sell.  sometimes, ms. law of houlihan lawrence said, sellers and brokers have to bite the bullet and go through with a showing even though it's inconvenient. ''you just can't help the fact that it's happening at a terrible time and the seller must stay in the house,'' she said. ''when inventory is increasing, it's important that the showing go forward, even where there's a child napping or it's not the ideal time.''  most brokers said they try to warn clients as far ahead as possible. ''it's not uncommon for people to want to know 24 hours in advance so that when they leave the house in the morning, they know what they're leaving,'' said ruth indyk lubick, a vice president of prudential douglas elliman.  not surprisingly, sellers reported that last-minute showings were the most irritating. they felt more tolerant of repeat visitors but fumed at window shoppers and their brokers. ''i would get very angry when realtors would show it just to show and not because they had motivated buyers,'' ms. ain said.  the longer an apartment lags, drawing lowball offers or none at all, the more demoralized and resentful sellers become, driving some to carelessness.  tamara reingold solomon, 28, and her husband, richard, 30, tried to sell their one-bedroom triplex at fifth avenue and 35th street for seven and a half months. they dropped their price twice and switched brokers. ray schmitz of coldwell banker hunt kennedy sold it in december.  but being on display for so long ''was a pretty bad feeling,'' ms. solomon said, and the couple's housekeeping efforts diminished as their first broker's exclusive wore on. ''it stems from showing after showing and then just nothing,'' ms. solomon said. ''we almost felt like it was a museum.''  or a still life. kelly and mark connors, parents of four boys ages 6 through 12, listed their three-bedroom colonial in westchester last spring, and it languished in a spongy market for three months before their broker, anne kelty of houlihan lawrence in bronxville, sold it.  ms. connors recalled the time she lay down for a nap and woke up to find a broker and a buyer in her bedroom. ''it gets to where you have no private time,'' she said. ''you're in a store window on display.''  the not-very-subtle interest of neighbors can contribute to the sensation of being carefully watched. ''our entire building came to our first and second open house because they want to see what their apartments are worth,'' said simone wiener, 36. the two-bedroom, two-bathroom apartment she and her husband, craig, 33, own on the upper east side is listed by ms. cangiano of halstead at $995,000.  ms. wiener says she understands the neighbors' curiosity. ''i've been there,'' she said. ''i've had friends who sold in the building, and i've gone to the open houses.''  more galling, some sellers said, are neighbors who had inferior apartments that sold for more money and within a far shorter time frame. mr. hanna, for example, whose apartment was originally listed at $495,000, said that a year before, a neighbor had sold a similarly sized apartment with fewer updates for the same amount and in just one week. mr. hanna's apartment sold after two months and a price cut to $479,000.  relations can grow strained when compounded by the stress of looking for a new home. several couples said they finally came up with a de facto division of labor, with one spouse focused on the sale and the other on the purchase.  still, the degree of agony may depend in part on a seller's psychological makeup. ms. cangiano of halstead recently sold an apartment for clients who ''knew they couldn't handle the stress, so they put their apartment on at a better price.''  at the other extreme, she said, are the risk takers. ''they can dish it out and take it,'' she said.  sellers seeking a merciful end to their suffering can get it by dropping their price, brokers said. or they can call up their broker and yell.  sandy mattingly, an associate broker at coldwell banker hunt kennedy, encourages his clients to dump their angst on him.  ''part of the agent's role is to be a blotter for that so they can get it out of their system and go back to running on a smooth level,'' mr. mattingly said.  