paid notice: deaths   sederbaum, arthur d. krass   sederbaum--arthur d. krass, snow & schmutter, p.c. mourns the loss of our dear friend and colleague, art sederbaum. our deepest sympathies to jayne and the sederbaum family.  $(6$)sederbaum--arthur. with affection and profound sadness, we mourn the loss of our partner, arthur sederbaum, one of the leaders of our personal planning practice and a pillar of the new york trusts and estates bar for decades. art was nationally renowned for his expertise and his ability to communicate complicated ideas in easily understandable language in writings and lectures delivered at educational organizations and cultural institutions throughout the country. he was also highly respected for his selfless contributions to professional and philanthropic organizations. a graduate of columbia university and columbia law school, with an l.l.m. from new york university, art had a true passion for the law he practiced. his engaging personality and down to earth intellect were the gifts he shared with his colleagues. his gregarious personality, combined with boundless energy, wit and humor, made him a sought after caring friend and mentor, as he helped so many reach their fullest potential. we were lucky to have art with us, and he will be sorely missed. we honor his memory by remembering him as a shining example of a true professional blessed with the wisdom of humanity. we extend our most heartfelt sympathy to his wife jayne and the sederbaum family. the partners of patterson belknap webb &tyler llp  $(6$)sederbaum--arthur d. the rockefeller university deeply mourns the loss of arthur sederbaum, beloved husband of our esteemed trust and estate committee member jayne kurzman. art was a longtime friend of rockefeller and he will be greatly missed. on behalf of our colleagues, we extend heartfelt condolences to jayne, her family, and the entire sederbaum family. paul nurse, president frederick a. terry, jr., chairman, committee on trust and estate gift plans russell l. carson, chairman david rockefeller, honorary chairman the rockefeller university  