barbaro loses to rivals at the eclipse awards   barbaro might have been the story of 2006 in thoroughbred racing, but he was neither the horse of the year nor the 3-year-old champion. with his career cut short because of the fractured hind leg he sustained during the preakness stakes, voters for the eclipse awards decided he did not accomplish enough on the racetrack to merit any championship honors.  the winners of the awards, which honor the year's top performers in the industry, were announced last night in beverly hills, calif.  in the voting for the 3-year-old male championship, barbaro, the kentucky derby winner, came in a distant second to bernardini, the winner of the preakness, the jim dandy, the travers and the jockey club gold cup.  of the 271 votes cast -- by members of the national turf writers association, employees of the daily racing form and representatives of the national thoroughbred racing association and equibase -- 210 went to bernardini. barbaro received only 56 votes.  barbaro did not fare any better in the voting for horse of the year, although he received more votes in that category than bernardini. the winner was invasor, who won all four of his north american starts in 2006, including the breeders' cup classic (he defeated bernardini). invasor received 228 votes, to 21 for barbaro and 16 for bernardini.  the barbaro team was not shut out, however. his jockey and his owners were named eclipse winners.  barbaro's regular rider, edgar prado, won an eclipse award as the nation's outstanding jockey.  barbaro's owners, roy and gretchen jackson, shared an award with darley stable as the nation's top owners.  it was previously announced that the jacksons and the george d. widener hospital for large animals in kennett square, pa., where barbaro has been treated since breaking down in the preakness on may 20, would receive a special eclipse award for their contributions to the sport.  there were no unanimous winners, but a handful of horses came close to sweeping the voting in their divisions. the breeders' cup juvenile filly winner, dreaming of anna, received 265 of the 270 votes in the 2-year-old filly division, and invasor defeated lava man by a 262-8 margin in voting for the nation's outstanding older male.  with 213 votes, fleet indian was an easy winner in the older filly and mare category, becoming only the third new york-bred horse to win an eclipse award.  the closest race was in the male turf division. the breeders' cup mile winner, miesque's approval, was the top vote-getter with 74, 5 more than the tin man. english channel was third, with 63 votes.  despite missing the final six days of the year after his suspension for a medication violation, todd pletcher won his third consecutive eclipse award as the nation's outstanding trainer.  pletcher set records in 2006 for the most single-season earnings by a stable, the most stakes victories and the most graded stakes victories.  the other winners were street sense, 2-year-old male; wait a while, 3-year-old filly; thor's echo, sprinter; ouija board, female turf; mcdynamo, steeplechase; adena springs, breeder; and julien leparoux, apprentice jockey.  street sense's team will try to help him become the first breeders' cup juvenile champion to win the kentucky derby, and the first 2-year-old champion to win the derby since spectacular bid in 1980.  horse racing  