spitzer picks pennsylvanian to spur upstate economy   gov. eliot spitzer poached one of pennsylvania's top economic development officials on monday to give him a similar job in new york as part of mr. spitzer's effort to rebuild western new york's stagnant economy.  the official, daniel gundersen, 46, was named the upstate co-chairman of the empire state development corporation, a $160,000-a-year post. he has been executive deputy secretary of pennsylvania's department of community and economic development since 2003 -- essentially serving as the department secretary's top deputy. he has also worked in economic development for maryland and for philadelphia.  mr. spitzer has said repeatedly that revitalizing the faltering upstate economy will be a major priority of his administration, and to that end he has split the top management of the empire state development corporation, creating co-chairmen for upstate and downstate. mr. gundersen will run an office based in buffalo while patrick j. foye, the acting downstate chairman, will also have authority over the albany region and the hudson valley.  mr. spitzer also continued his practice of appointing former colleagues at the attorney general's office to prominent roles. he named ken schoetz, who has been an assistant attorney general in charge of the buffalo regional office, to be the chief operating officer of the development corporation upstate. mr. schoetz, whose job will pay $150,000, has also been one of the state's representatives on the peace bridge authority.  ''dan gundersen brings tremendous economic development experience to new york state,'' the governor said in a statement. ''paired with ken schoetz, we have the right team in place to bring much needed energy and focus to upstate economic development through the newly created upstate e.s.d.c. headquarters.''  reviving the battered economy of the buffalo region, which has suffered from a loss of automotive and other manufacturing jobs, will be no small feat.  in an interview, mr. gundersen said that, among other things, he wanted to identify companies that were growing in the region and make it a priority to keep them in the state.  ''there are fast-growing companies in every region of every state,'' he said. ''if you don't focus on the important issues to them, they're the most likely to relocate to regions that can sustain their growth.''  the management of the development corporation was often criticized under former gov. george e. pataki, who appointed as chairman his fund-raiser and close ally, charles a. gargano, and then used the agency's borrowing authority to finance billions of dollars for special projects at the governor's discretion or the discretion of the republican-led senate.  