heroic teachers, on screen and off   to the editor:  re ''classroom distinctions,'' by tom moore (op-ed, jan. 19):  as someone who leads writing classes in inner-city schools, i share many of mr. moore's beliefs about the portrayal of students and teachers in hollywood's ''teacher films'' and the devaluation of teachers in our public schools.  it is unfortunate that so many of these movies focus on inner-city classrooms and students of color, since there are some fine classrooms in disadvantaged neighborhoods and many chaotic schools in affluent suburbs.  unlike mr. moore, i would argue that ''freedom writers'' is a break-out film, by placing the stories of the students front and center, and demonstrating realistically that disadvantaged kids need more time, attention and creative lesson-planning than our static public schools allow.  while erin gruwell, the subject of the film, may have taught for only five years, as mr. moore points out, she went on to edit and publish a well-received anthology of student writing, and established the freedom writers foundation to disseminate some of the nontraditional teaching methods that helped her students graduate from high school.  in her portrayal of ms. gruwell, hillary swank shows that there are some teachers on the front lines -- including mr. moore -- who still give students all they've got.  neil ross  minnetonka, minn., jan. 19, 2007  to the editor:  as a high school teacher working in a school system increasingly challenged by the complex needs of the ''post-desegregation urban poor'' and the post-rational demands of the no child left behind act, i applaud the authenticity of tom moore's observations (and hbo's ''the wire,'' a show i had to abandon after weeping uncontrollably at its honest portrayal of explosive classroom violence).  in reality, teaching is a grueling and at times depressing profession. making heroes of people like erin gruwell, who visit the classroom for a few years and flee, psyches intact, only further burdens career teachers who struggle to live balanced lives in the face of relentlessly escalating student needs.  natalie sekicky  cleveland heights, ohio  jan. 19, 2007  to the editor:  in 1965, as a recent harvard graduate with a master's degree in early childhood education from bank street college, i became a teacher at p.s. 92 in harlem, with one class of 32 bright and restless second graders who carried the weight of the world on their shoulders. i was one of those idealistic teachers mr. moore describes, ready to give my all.  my all was not enough. the conditions of poverty in the neighborhood and too many children locked in a classroom all day with one inexperienced teacher caused me to leave within 18 months. i went to teach at the east harlem block schools, a community school with smaller classes, teacher assistants from the neighborhood, a learn-by-doing philosophy and a supportive principal.  that worked, and i stayed on that track for the next 40 years, and now work on creating small schools for high school dropouts.  mr. moore is right: solo heroes cannot do the job. caring school communities with respect for student opinion, enough skilled and caring adults to commit to every young person's success, and a positive school culture can do the job.  dorothy stoneman  president, youthbuild usa  somerville, mass., jan. 19, 2007  to the editor:  i don't quite agree with tom moore when he writes that ''the most dangerous message'' films like ''freedom writers'' promote is that ''what schools really need are heroes.'' schools do need heroes, just not the heroes of film.  school ''heroes'' are hard-working, reliable, smart and decent people who do not bail out of their classrooms after a few years of dramatically successful teaching. school heroes are teachers who stabilize classrooms and communities by instructing one generation of students and then sticking around to teach the next generation. sadly, however, these are rarely the heroes of most movies or most newspaper articles.  judith e. stein  chicago, jan. 19, 2007  