against manning, patriots put the pressure on their pass rush   harassing peyton manning with a consistent pass rush is a top priority for the new england patriots.  the patriots sacked manning three times during their regular-season game nov. 5, but the colts still won, 27-20, as manning threw for 326 yards and 2 touchdowns. looking at game film in preparation for sunday's american football conference championship game against indianapolis only reinforced what the patriots already knew: the more time they give manning to throw, the harder it will be to contain him.  ''we looked at that game, and you look back and think, 'well, i didn't rush that bad personally and neither did anybody else,' '' patriots linebacker mike vrabel said earlier this week.  ''then you say, 'well, his numbers were still pretty good.' you've just got to do more. you've got to get there quicker, whether you're rushing or whether you're covering. this is a game where you're just going to have to do more and you're just going to have to play better.''  on several plays in november's game, manning made throws from outside the pocket, running away from pressure to buy more time. manning is not known for his scrambling ability, so the patriots say they want to be more disciplined when they rush to prevent manning from getting away.  ''you always think of peyton manning as a pocket passer, which he is, but he does have the ability to get outside the pocket and can make plays on the run,'' new england defensive end richard seymour said. ''his ability to ad-lib and their receivers just staying alive is something that we have to be aware of.''  all the patriots who had been ailing with the flu practiced friday: wide receiver troy brown, linebacker tedy bruschi, offensive tackle ryan o'callaghan and defensive tackle mike wright.  safety rodney harrison, who missed the patriots' first two playoff games with a knee injury, also practiced, but his status for the game remained uncertain.  panthers hire lewis -- carolina hired tim lewis, the giants' former defensive coordinator, as its new secondary coach. lewis, who was fired by the giants last week, replaced rod perry, who was fired monday. the giants' defense struggled this season, allowing an average of 342 yards a game.  ''our staff is familiar with him, and we think he will make a strong contribution to our defense,'' panthers coach john fox said. (ap)  now that's a super refund -- before the season, the owners of cowboy maloney's electric city chain in mississippi offered anyone who bought a high-end flat-screen television their money back if the saints won the super bowl.  con maloney, who owns the chain of 12 electronics and appliance stores with his brothers, eddie and johnny, acknowledged that the three of them never dreamed they would have to make good on their offer. now, the maloney brothers are preparing to possibly have to pay back about $1 million to more than 800 customers. (ap)  n.f.l. roundup  