in role reversal, new england fades with game on the line   the locker room was quiet, players spoke in hushed tones, and the new england patriots felt as empty as many of their past victims.  this was an unfamiliar finish for the patriots, losing an 18-point second-quarter lead and the american football conference championship game. sunday's 38-34 victory by the indianapolis colts will be remembered as a classic playoff game, but for the patriots, the second half was a nightmare.  they were shredded by peyton manning and the indianapolis offense. they dropped passes. they committed key penalties. and in the end, quarterback tom brady ran out of magic and time.  having won three super bowls in the past five seasons, the patriots saw the opportunity to win another snatched away. there will be plenty of time for self-analysis. but immediately afterward, the prevailing feeling among the patriots was disappointment.  ''it'll take a good while to swallow this one,'' said linebacker tedy bruschi, a member of the patriots' three super bowl winners. ''i put so much into this season. i'm really emotional right now. this game was momentum swings on top of momentum swings. and theirs was the one that finished it.''  the colts dissected new england's proud defense in the second half, scoring on five of seven second-half possessions, not counting the knee that manning took to end the game. the patriots could not stop the colts when it counted most. they were protecting a 34-31 lead with 2 minutes 17 seconds to play, when indianapolis regained possession on its 20.  from that point, manning engineered a drive that will take its place in n.f.l. lore, moving the colts 80 yards in seven plays for the winning touchdown, a 3-yard run by joseph addai.  uncharacteristically, the patriots surrendered yardage in chunks during that decisive drive. manning completed a 32-yard pass to bryan fletcher and another for 14 yards to reggie wayne.  on that play, patriots defensive end tully banta-cain was penalized for roughing the passer, moving the ball from new england's 23-yard line to the 11 with 1:53 left.  without that penalty, perhaps the colts would have settled for a tying field goal that would probably have forced overtime. instead, the colts called addai's number on three consecutive running plays, the final one resulting in a touchdown.  that left the patriots trailing by 4 points with 54 seconds and two timeouts remaining. when they took over at their 21.  even for brady, this was a nearly impossible situation. four plays later, he tried to force a pass to ben watson that was intercepted by marlin jackson with 16 seconds to play. indianapolis could celebrate. the patriots could reflect.  ''we just let too many opportunities slip away,'' said brady, who completed 21 of 34 passes, for 232 yards and a touchdown. ''the last pass, you're just trying to force it, make a play. in hindsight, you probably should throw it away. but time was an issue.  ''it's frustrating for all of us when it ends like this, because the expectations are high. we just have to come back next year and try to do it better.''  the patriots appeared to have the colts on the run in the second quarter, after new england defensive back asante samuel cut in front of a pass intended for marvin harrison and returned the ball 39 yards for a touchdown. the extra point gave the patriots a 21-3 lead, and they stopped indianapolis on its next drive.  but after reaching the colts' 27, the patriots committed back-to-back penalties and eventually punted.  that gave the colts a chance to regroup, and they managed a 12-play drive for a field goal that pulled them to 21-6 at halftime.  in the second half, the colts' offensive machine clicked, and the patriots at times looked tired and a step slow.  ''they're a high-powered offense,'' patriots linebacker mike vrabel said. ''we knew the game wasn't over.''  asked if he was disappointed that the patriots could not generate more of a pass rush against manning, defensive end ty warren said: ''you not only have to get to him, you have to get to him quick. they run timing patterns. if you don't get there, the ball is gone.''  the patriots had a chance to run out the clock, getting the ball with 3:32 left and leading by 34-31. but they were stopped after three plays, giving manning the opportunity to orchestrate his final drive.  so instead of going to another super bowl, brady will be watching it. or will he?  ''knowing me, probably not,'' brady said. ''probably not.''  pro football  