indecent exposure   on a sleeting december day in 1972, in merced, calif., a 7-year-old boy named steven stayner got into a battered white buick with a man named ken parnell, who said he was a preacher and who offered to give him a ride home from school. instead, mr. parnell drove over the bradley overpass out of merced to an unheated cabin off highway 140. mr. parnell put the boy to bed and, the next night, took him to yosemite and molested him.  mr. parnell kept steven in his room at the lodge where he worked for the next week, and then he brought the boy a puppy. he told steven that his parents no longer wanted him. ''i've adopted you,'' he said. ''your name is now dennis, and i'm dad.''  steven named the puppy queenie. he did not try to run away, not that night or the next week or the next year or the six after that. they moved from yosemite to santa rosa to the hills of mendocino county, and ken parnell fed him and clothed him and sent him to school. to any strangers glancing at the two -- any strangers who didn't know that mr. parnell was repeatedly raping the boy -- they appeared as just another drifting father and son scraping by on the fringes.  in 1980, with steven galloping into puberty, ken parnell kidnapped another boy, this one only 5. steven by then understood that children shouldn't be raped -- so he fled into the darkness with the smaller boy to the police station in ukiah, calif.  and then he became famous. even in 1980, when there were only three networks and the news was slotted in before the prime-time sitcoms, steven was a sensation. he missed school to appear on the morning shows, and all the adults in merced welcomed him back as a hero for escaping a pedophile and rescuing another victim, too.  and yet the question lingered: why would a boy stay with a rapist for more than seven years? there is no answer, and a thousand answers. maybe he was scared when he was seven. maybe he believed his parents didn't want him. maybe he developed a form of stockholm syndrome. or maybe he was just a kid and he couldn't explain it in a way that any grown-up watching television would understand.  i learned about steven's story when i met his older brother, cary, a few years ago. cary grew up to become -- and this is quite possibly only a grotesque coincidence -- a serial killer who murdered four women in yosemite. he didn't know why steven stayed. when i tracked down ken parnell in his dirty apartment in berkeley, calif. in 1999, he didn't know, either. but i doubt he thought very deeply about it: mostly, after five years in prison, he seemed disappointed that steven hadn't come to visit him. ''his parents wouldn't let him,'' he told me, and he sounded genuinely wounded. (he's back in prison now, sentenced to 25 years to life in 2004 for trying to arrange a young boy's abduction.)  all of which would be a sad and detestable bit of history, except that it is happening again. more than 25 years later, another adolescent boy, this time from a small town in missouri, has come home from captivity. that boy was allegedly kidnapped more than four years ago, when he was 11, by a pizzeria manager named michael devlin, and he was rescued on jan. 12 -- several days after mr. devlin supposedly snatched another, younger boy. and now those two boys are famous, their names and faces inked into newspapers and broadcast across what is now a universe of 24-hour cable networks.  their return is rightly celebrated. but in that celebration, one of the few sacrosanct rules of modern journalism -- the self-imposed prohibition against naming people who may be victims of sexual assault -- has been abandoned in favor of a fetishistic drama. to date, mr. devlin has not been charged with sex crimes, but any journalist who professes to believe there is not a sexual element in a 41-year-old man kidnapping pubescent boys is disingenuous or incompetent.  the legal distinction is obviously significant, but the journalistic one is merely parsing. had either boy been molested by an uncle, had either been brutalized in an alley, had either claimed, even falsely, to have been gang-raped at an elite university, he would remain anonymous. we would not know his name, and we would not recognize his face.  there is a reason for that rule. yes, it is occasionally debated, the argument usually being that cloaking rape victims in anonymity implies that they should be ashamed for having been victimized. that is a fine academic discussion. but in the real world, few rape victims would want their faces broadcast, their suffering shoveled onto the talk shows and into the tabloids. and no child, no matter how brave, deserves it.  because still the questions linger. bill o'reilly, for instance, on fox news asked the most obvious one about the older boy in missouri: ''why didn't he escape when he could have?'' later in that broadcast, he offered an answer: ''the situation here for this kid looks to me to be a lot more fun that what he had under his old parents.'' and still later: ''there was an element here that this kid liked about his circumstances.''  he said that, to millions of viewers, about a 15-year-old boy who is famous simply because he'd been kidnapped and held captive for four years.  people whispered the same things about steven stayner. according to his brother and others, he came back to merced a deeply wounded boy, wild and angry and scarred. yet he received no therapy -- his parents believed that was for weak people -- and was granted no time to rebuild his life quietly and privately. sure, the networks and the grown-ups all called him a hero, but the teenagers in the town where he had to live taunted him, questioning his sexuality.  his fame brought him small riches -- $30,000 for a television movie, $15,000 for rescuing the other boy -- but he blew much of the money on drugs and cars. he ended up delivering pizzas to make a living, and on a rainy night in 1989, a few months after ''i know my first name is steven'' was broadcast, he got on his motorcycle without a helmet or a license and drove into the side of a car that pulled in front of him. he was 24 when he died, married with two kids, and still famous because he'd been kidnapped and raped as a boy.  and now two new boys are famous because terrible things were likely done to them. they led the news shows, made the cover of people, and, on thursday, the older one and his family sat down with oprah winfrey. she asked his parents if they thought he'd been molested. she asked the boy, off-camera, why he hadn't tried to escape. it was all very tasteful, as these things go, but also dreadfully and permanently public. and that's the last thing either boy needs.  op-ed contributor sean flynn is a correspondent for gq magazine.  