state panel to scrutinize 17 hopefuls for comptroller   if only flavor flav had thrown his oversize clock into the ring, it might have made a good reality television show.  imagine it: seventeen people vying to become new york state's top fiscal officer are coming here on tuesday to perform before a team of withering judges -- a joint session of the state assembly's ways and means committee and the state senate's finance committee.  then, at least a dozen contestants will be voted off the island by a panel of former city and state comptrollers. the names of up to five finalists will be forwarded to the entire legislature, which will then pick one lucky winner -- the next state comptroller.  the winner will get a term of nearly four years as the sole trustee of the state's $145.7 billion pension fund and the power to monitor budgets, audit state and local agencies and approve or block state contracts, among other things.  all right, so the major networks have not picked it up. not even c-span. but viewers who have digital cable should be able to catch the action. the state legislature will broadcast the proceedings as lawmakers begin choosing a successor to the state's popularly elected comptroller.  as viewers of last year's drama will recall, the elected state comptroller, alan g. hevesi, resigned his entire four-year term after pleading guilty in december to a felony for using a state worker as a driver and personal aide for his wife.  seventeen candidates are now officially running for the post: five democratic assemblymen, who are widely seen as having the inside track because assembly democrats control a majority of the legislature's votes; a democratic state senator; several businessmen; and a number of current and former state and local government officials.  over the weekend, carol bellamy, the former executive director of unicef and the first woman elected president of the new york city council, expressed interest in the post but then withdrew from consideration.  one official, martha e. stark, new york city's finance commissioner, got a vote of confidence -- but not an endorsement -- from her current boss, mayor michael r. bloomberg. he called her ''a very competent person who would do a great job'' and spoke of the need for a selection based on merit instead of politics.  many candidates began making the rounds here on monday. one of them, howard s. weitzman, the nassau county comptroller, said he viewed the field as being divided between state lawmakers and all the other candidates.  another, james l. larocca, a veteran of the cuomo and carey administrations who ran for governor in 1998, said that outside candidates could still have a strong shot if the legislature became fragmented.  some, like andrew s. eristoff, who was commissioner of tax and finance in the pataki administration, began issuing policy proposals.  in remarks prepared for tuesday, mr. eristoff said that the state constitution should be amended so that the comptroller is no longer the sole trustee of the pension system -- a system he called ''nothing short of ludicrous.''  