a sleepy city on the steppe fears hordes of high rollers   the town's chief administrator sat next to an office window overlooking rows of dilapidated four-story, soviet-era apartment buildings in this grim industrial town. as he looked down at the rooftops, he considered the potential impact of dozens -- perhaps even hundreds -- of casinos and thousands of gaming arcades setting up shop in this region.  ''i haven't been to las vegas, so i can't compare,'' said the administrator, kuagdel turuadeleav. ''but there are casinos in almaty and in astana, and they look fine. there will be some conspicuous changes, but i don't see any problems coming.''  local officials say that if all goes according to plan, kapchagai will soon be transformed into a ''las vegas on the steppe,'' as boosters here are calling it. under a new law promulgated by kazakhstan's president, nursultan a. nazarbayev, to take effect in april, gambling will be restricted to two provincial cities -- kapchagai, not far from almaty, the country's largest city, and shchuchinsk, north of astana, the capital.  rich in oil, kazakhstan, like russia and some other former soviet republics, has experienced a gambling boom. the country has 132 casinos and more than 2,000 smaller gambling parlors, slot halls and bookmakers, according to mr. nazarbayev's office.  the designation of two densely configured casino centers has excited investors. gambling industry officials say two chinese companies plan to build an enormous casino complex in kapchagai.  casino managers say they cannot possibly relocate their casinos by april, and they recently gathered in front of government offices to protest the april deadline.  but the high visibility of kazakhstan's many casinos -- typically decorated like pinball machines, with blinking neon lights, even when situated in quiet residential neighborhoods -- has produced a backlash in this country of only 17 million people. mr. nazarbayev has said that creating two dedicated gambling centers will help isolate the social cost of gambling from the general population, and also create tourism destinations for foreign gamblers, especially the chinese. kapchagai is about 400 miles from the border with china.  but many of the 51,000 residents of kapchagai do not share their local government officials' enthusiasm for mr. nazarbayev's plan.  ''people are afraid of chaos,'' said sasha imguleako, 19, a worker at one of the low-stakes gambling arcades already in business in kapchagai. ''criminals will come, and we are all afraid of trouble.''  a fear of increasing crime is not the only source of concern. people wonder whether a gambling culture will corrupt young people, destroying the city's traditional work ethic.  ''we worry about it, but worry is all we can do,'' said svetlana bakiev, who owns a small grocery near the center of town and is the mother of two daughters, ages 14 and 18. ''we have no place else to go.''  for many in kapchagai, the far-reaching impact of many thousands of gamblers streaming into the city is simply hard to fathom. ''we will need street lights working past midnight,'' said ms. bakiev's husband, max bakiev. ''right now, they stop working at 12 a.m. this is something that will need to change.''  some of the buzz in kapchagai's smattering of restaurants and storefronts focuses on the price of real estate -- apartments costing $2,000 just a few years ago now fetch as much as $10,000, with most of the increase coming in a recent, speculative frenzy over the coming gambling industry.  but one of the chief selling points of a major gambling center on the central asian steppe is also among the chief sources of anxiety among residents: chinese gamblers. the chinese appetite for gambling may stoke investment fervor from macau to malaysia, but for many kazakhs the idea of encouraging hundreds of thousands of chinese visitors to cross the border 400 miles to the east raises the specter of an invasion.  ''this town will be a lot like hong kong,'' said sayassat yusenbaev, 28, a businessman having dinner at a kapchagai restaurant with friends from his office.  not so, said another man at the table, sayassat dyussembayev. ''people in general are feeling negative about the chinese, but they don't need to worry: the chinese will come in large groups and stick together in one casino, like a herd,'' he said.  people in kapchagai say they share the widely held belief in kazakhstan that the chinese are seeking to economically colonize their sparsely populated neighbor. ''they already have taken over the markets around the border,'' said mr. bakiev, the grocer. ''they can buy everything here.''  mr. turuadeleav, kapchagai's chief administrator, acknowledges that many residents are concerned. ''we don't know what's going to happen and nobody else does either,'' he said. ''but we can expect new hotels, restaurants. that means new jobs for people who want them.''  indeed, the economic implication of a las vegas on the steppe wins near universal plaudits.  ''we're not necessarily pro-casino, but we're for anything that makes this town bigger,'' said mr. dyussembayev, the kapchagai businessman.  kapchagai journal  