family of five found slain in burned home upstate   a family of five -- two adults and three children -- was found slain in its house in a working-class section of dutchess county early friday after firefighters responded to a blaze that gutted the home, the authorities said.  it was unclear friday night how the family had been killed, or where the bodies were found in the house. a fishkill police official at the scene said there had been reports of gunfire before the fire broke out, but he would not elaborate. ''it's definitely being investigated as a homicide,'' said the official, who would not give his name.  maj. william carey of the state police told the associated press that the fire was set ''to cover the killing'' of the family. ''we're just starting the investigation at this point,'' major carey said.  other officials said the youngest child had been bludgeoned and the middle child stabbed.  the state police identified the victims friday night as manuel morey, 33, known as tony; his wife, tina, 30; and their three sons: manuel, 13, also known as tony; ryan, 6; and adam, 10.  the quiet town of fishkill, about 60 miles north of new york city, was flooded with reporters, photographers and television news trucks. police officials said homicides were rare in the community. ''this has got to be the biggest thing that's happened in all my years here,'' said a police sergeant, thomas g. hurley.  neighbors said the moreys moved into a rented rundown cape-style home on route 82, a busy two-lane highway, a year ago. most neighbors said they knew the family members mostly for their raucous summer barbecues and their fondness for riding noisy all-terrain vehicles late at night. the house has a dirt yard, and a woodsy plot in back abuts a 20-foot-wide stream.  police officers at the scene said the bodies were taken to the dutchess county medical examiner's office for autopsies.  the fire, which was reported around 3:15 a.m., gutted the house and collapsed part of the roof. it required at least six fire departments to extinguish, and investigators were sifting through evidence late into the night.  police officials said they were investigating, in connection with the house fire, a car fire that occurred simultaneously half a mile east on route 82. they would not specify the connection.  neighbors described the morey sons as rough-and-tumble kids who liked to help their father fix their all-terrain vehicles, and played in the woods in the back of the house. manuel was in the seventh grade at van wyck junior high school in wappingers falls, where he played on the football team. the other sons attended elementary school.  neighbors said the elder manuel and tina morey grew up in the area. one neighbor, cheryl bianchini, said mr. morey irritated the neighbors by riding his a.t.v. ''up and down the block at all hours of the night.''  ''it was really loud and annoying, and the police were called on him a few times, but he kept doing it,'' she said.  a police sergeant said he could not verify that claim on friday.  ''the family had problems, troubles,'' said ms. bianchini, whose daughter alyssa attended brinckerhoff elementary school with adam.  the owner of the house, tom skaarva, 43, who lives a few houses down, said mr. morey worked installing fences for a local company and began renting the house last february. ms. morey always brought over the rent money, $1,350 in cash, on time each month, but he said they had not paid the rent since nov. 1, so he had begun eviction proceedings.  ''the wife appeared in court, but tony never showed,'' mr. skaarva said. ''we had not seen him around for a while. i don't know if he moved out or what.''  mr. skaarva said he rented to mr. morey without checking his background and soon came to regret it.  ''he tore up that lawn with his a.t.v.,'' mr. skaarva said. in the summer, he installed a wooden stockade fence and began having raucous barbecues every weekend, he said.  he said mr. morey always wore a white t-shirt and leather jacket and jeans. ''he'd never look you in the eye,'' he said. ''he would just keep staring at the ground and pacing.''  