8 thai army officers among 15 people held in new year's eve bombings that killed 3   authorities in thailand detained 15 people, including some military officers, in connection with a string of bombings that killed three people and disrupted celebrations on new year's eve, the police said saturday.  police sources said nearly 100 police officers and soldiers had searched 18 locations in and around the capital and detained eight military officers and seven civilians.  ''i was informed by police that they have detained some suspects and it is very regrettable that some of the officers are involved,'' prime minister surayud chulanont told reporters in bangkok. ''it is the power of police to investigate and file charges if they have evidence.''  the arrests were made under martial law imposed after a coup four months ago that ousted prime minister thaksin shinawatra.  the police said no charges had been filed, and it remained unclear who was behind the bombings, which the government has said were done by supporters of mr. thaksin.  in separate televised comments on saturday, mr. surayud said mr. thaksin, who was outside the country at the time of the coup and is now in japan, could return to thailand if he promised not to engage in politics.  ''mr. thaksin should express clearly that he will stop all movements and express that his family wants to live in peace,'' mr. surayud said. ''then, we can talk and make arrangements.''  the interim government, appointed by the military junta, has remained worried about a backlash from mr. thaksin's backers and has resisted the possibility of his return.  on jan. 10 the government told television executives not to carry statements by mr. thaksin.  on saturday the local cable provider, ubc, deleted from its broadcast a cnn interview done this week in singapore.  in the interview, mr. thaksin denied involvement in the bomb blasts, saying: ''i do everything for the good of the country and the people. i don't do something that's stupid.''  he said that he did not want to return to thailand if his presence would cause division or unrest and that he had no plans to become involved in politics.  ''if i have to go to testify, i go,'' he said, referring to potential corruption cases against him. ''but now the reason i'm not going back yet because i want unity in the country. i want the administration to do the reconciliation.  ''i want everyone to unite, to move the country forward together,'' he said.  the ruling generals remain nervous, however.  last week the coup leader, gen. sonthi boonyaratglin, told fellow members of the junta not to talk on mobile telephones because they might be tapped.  ''our army has a problem now,'' he said. ''when we make a call, the line goes to singapore. when we talk secrets, they go straight to singapore.''  early last year the family of mr. thaksin, a telecommunications tycoon, sold control of his company, shin corporation, to temasek, the investment arm of the singapore government.  the tax-free, $1.9 billion sale contributed to the building opposition against mr. thaksin that culminated in the coup.  it also raised tensions between the governments that broke into the open last week when mr. thaksin visited singapore and met with a government official.  worried about mr. thaksin's possible return and about potential threats or violence by his supporters, the ruling generals now seem increasingly to be on the defensive.  ''what general sonthi said was they should be careful of confidential information they talk about on mobile phones,'' said a spokesman for the junta, sunsern kaewkumnerd. ''they should switch to talk on fixed-line phones or in person.''  tanyapas chuaycho, a company spokeswoman, denied that there had been any wiretapping.  ''we are a business, we are not a spy,'' she told the bloomberg news agency. ''we can't do it, and the question is why would we?''  in recent months, mr. thaksin has been traveling through asia, from hong kong to bali to china to singapore to japan, meeting with supporters and keeping his name in the newspapers at home.  he is represented in washington by barbour griffith & rogers, a prominent lobbying firm, and he has hired the public relations firm edelman of new york to help arrange meetings with the news media.  in a telephone interview from hong kong, alan vandermolen, vice president for asia and the pacific at edelman, said, ''we're working with him in his capacity as a private citizen and supporting some media outreach to support his efforts to return to thailand.''  