staten island asks for whom the bridge tolls   of all the staten islanders who pass under the powder blue arches of the verrazano-narrows bridge, few know it better than john guzzo. mr. guzzo, who lives in rosebank, just north of the bridge's tolls, drives a dump truck all over the region, paying a truck rate of $38 each time he re-enters his borough, which he often does five times a day.  ''i've been here since we used to pay 50 cents for the bridge,'' mr. guzzo said recently, talking on a cellphone while hauling a load in commack, n.y.  talk of change is now in the air -- except that the topic is not the size of the toll but the way it is paid. currently, cars pay $9 to cross the bridge from bay ridge, brooklyn, into staten island, and nothing to leave. the idea is to charge drivers $4.50 in each direction. the aim is to deter new jersey-bound drivers from skirting tolls entirely by crossing the verrazano into brooklyn free of charge, and then driving into manhattan and entering new jersey via the holland tunnel, which is also toll-less in that direction.  the two-way toll is on the table again: the staten island advance reported this month that representative jerrold nadler, a democrat whose district comprises parts of manhattan and brooklyn, planned to reintroduce a bill in congress to establish it. mr. nadler unsuccessfully proposed such legislation in congress in 1999, 2001 and 2003, and in a recent interview he said he would like to start new talks with local officials about the idea.  reaction on staten island to the two-way option, which was official policy until traffic concerns led to its elimination in 1986, has not been kind. according to mr. guzzo, who is also vice president of the rosebank homeowners and tenants association, people in the area don't want tollbooths both ways because they are certain that traffic would back up onto the service roads near their homes.  several staten island officials, including borough president james molinaro, also expressed opposition.  ''congressman, changing the toll on the verrazano will not alleviate this historic problem,'' mr. molinaro wrote to mr. nadler on jan. 9. ''however, it has the potential to certainly create more gridlock for staten islanders.''  but mr. nadler said that drivers who skirt the toll save $75 million to $90 million a year, and securing that money would finance much-needed local transit projects.  ''i'd like to talk to chuck about this,'' mr. nadler said, referring to senator charles schumer. ''i'd like to know what he thinks people would be interested in, with capital improvements or transit improvements for staten island.''  in addition, he said, e-zpass technology could minimize the traffic effects of a two-way toll. ''with modern e-zpass,'' he said, ''you can go through at 50 miles per hour without slowing down.''  jeff vandam  neighborhood report: verrazano-narrows bridge  