hammers and nails and 9 to 5   this is the view when one steps off the elevator on the 12th floor of part of the international toy center, the famed office complex in the flatiron district: exposed concrete floors; huge, empty, gutted spaces with wires dangling from the ceiling; and a hole in one wall hastily covered over with a plastic sheet.  yet just down the hall, resembling a sort of high-rise oasis amid this construction, is the carpeted and cubicled office of adventure publishing, where the employees are busy putting out a trade magazine that covers the toy industry.  adventure is one of three tenants left in the building at 1107 broadway, where for decades, scores of toy companies leased showrooms. a developer, the chetrit group, bought the building and its counterpart, at 200 fifth avenue, in 2005 and is turning them into condominiums.  the developer offered buyouts to tenants, but a few who have long-term leases have stayed and are facing off in court with the landlord. they are adventure on the 11th floor, wisconsin toy on 13 and all in the cards, a greeting card company, on 14. otherwise, the building is vacant.  whatever the strength of the two sides' court cases, the scene is striking for new york. often, a few apartment dwellers may remain in buildings undergoing conversion, but seldom is it businesses who are the leftover tenants.  last spring, as the toy center conversion proceeded, the building's housekeeping staff was trimmed. then men wielding sledgehammers began punching holes in the walls and ripping apart offices. business calls were conducted amid loud drilling. dust coated the halls.  now, when temperatures dip, employees of adventure put space heaters in their cubicles. during the day, they sometimes hear the low, rumbling, mysterious sounds of heavy demolition.  david levine, a representative of the chetrit group, said the company was careful to respect the tenants' needs. ''we comply with the leases,'' he said. ''the contractors we hired were fully aware of the situation. we'd much rather prefer to have the building empty, but we've dealt with it.''  touring the toy center is an odd, ghostly experience. it is a place where the elevator opens on the 10th floor to a sign that reads, ''danger: hole.'' a place where you wander floor after abandoned floor and then, suddenly, at the end of a crumbling hallway, come upon a bright, cheery showroom, where wisconsin toy displays its sopranos puzzles, leap frog bingo, mighty wheels trucks and mini-footballs.  in an office decorated with pictures of his teenage son sits bob kirn, wisconsin toy's new york chief. ''when we had to vacate for two days while they ran air sample tests, it was difficult,'' mr. kirn said, with middle-manager fortitude, one morning last week. ''but it's like a lot of things -- you get used to it.''  steven kurutz  neighborhood report: flatiron district  