anatomy of an insult: abc is stung by an actor's anti-gay slurs   executives at abc and its parent, disney, are mulling the future of the actor isaiah washington, a star of the hit series ''grey's anatomy,'' after mr. washington last week publicly used an anti-gay slur for the second time in roughly three months, a disney executive said friday.  the situation has potentially great implications for abc, which is reaping millions of dollars in advertising revenues from a show that, in its third season, is among the highest rated on television.  the executive, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because company officials were instructed not to go beyond a prepared statement, said that mr. washington's behavior could be considered grounds for dismissal under disney's corporate antidiscrimination policy.  abc and touchstone, disney's television studio, called mr. washington's behavior ''unacceptable'' in a statement issued on thursday, three days after mr. washington's most recent remark, which occurred in the backstage press room at the golden globes ceremony last week.  mr. washington later apologized for the remark and said that he was seeking help for ''issues i obviously need to examine within my own soul.'' but the damage might be done for mr. washington, 43, who portrays dr. preston burke on ''grey's anatomy,'' which this season has attracted an audience of more than 18 million viewers each week, according to nielsen media research. on thursday, the first broadcast since the show won for best dramatic television series at the golden globes, the audience numbered nearly 22 million, according to abc.  mr. washington first got into trouble for using the same slur during an off-camera dispute on the set of the show in october. the remark was aimed at t. r. knight, who portrays dr. george o'malley on the series and who had not previously talked publicly about his sexuality. it followed a brief fight between mr. washington and a third actor on the show, patrick dempsey. after that incident became public, mr. washington apologized, and mr. knight publicly acknowledged that he was gay. the october fight has continued to be the subject of gossip around the show, and after the golden globe victory for ''grey's anatomy,'' the show's actors and creator gathered backstage to answer reporters' questions. one asked about the fight and the remark.  mr. washington moved to the microphone and denied that he ever used the slur to describe mr. knight, at the same time repeating the word. fellow cast members who were with mr. washington appeared shaken, quickly going from jubilant to solemn. after the awards show another ''grey's'' actor, katherine heigl, publicly repudiated mr. washington's remarks.  mr. knight appeared on ''the ellen degeneres show'' on wednesday and disputed mr. washington's denial of using the slur in october.  as discussion of the incidents grew, mr. washington remained silent until after abc issued a statement chastising him.  ''we have a longstanding policy to create and maintain respectful workplaces for all our employees,'' the abc statement said. ''we dealt with the original situation in october, and thought the issue resolved. therefore, we are greatly dismayed that mr. washington chose to use such inappropriate language at the golden globes, language that he himself deemed 'unfortunate' in his previous public apology. we take this situation very seriously. his actions are unacceptable and are being addressed.''  an abc spokeswoman declined to comment on how the issue was addressed in october and what steps were being considered now.  after abc issued its statement, mr. washington again apologized, after first firing his publicist. he expressed his regret to mr. knight, colleagues, fans ''and especially the lesbian and gay community for using a word that is unacceptable in any context or circumstance.''  the statement appeared to acknowledge that mr. washington had used the slur before, despite his most recent denial. ''by repeating the word monday night, i marred what should have been a perfect night for everyone who works on 'grey's anatomy,' '' the statement said. ''i can neither defend nor explain my behavior. i can also no longer deny to myself that there are issues i obviously need to examine within my own soul, and i've asked for help.  ''i know the power of words, especially those that demean,'' the statement continued. ''i realize that by using one filled with disrespect i have hurt more than t. r. and my colleagues. with one word, i've hurt everyone who has struggled for the respect so many of us take for granted. i welcome the chance to meet with leaders of the gay and lesbian community to apologize in person and to talk about what i can do to heal the wounds i've opened.''  mr. washington added: ''t. r.'s courage throughout this entire episode speaks to his tremendous character. i hold his talent, and t. r. as a person, in high esteem. i know a mere apology will not end this, and i intend to let my future actions prove my sincerity.''  neil g. giuliano, the president of the gay and lesbian alliance against defamation, told cnn on friday that he expected to travel to los angeles this week to meet with abc executives and mr. washington.  kelly mullens, mr. washington's new publicist, declined to comment on mr. washington's plans for a meeting or his expected future with the show.  ''grey's anatomy'' ranks fifth overall among prime-time shows. it ranks second overall among viewers ages 18 to 49, the demographic group for which networks charge the highest advertising premium.  