key republican senator offers bipartisan call to reject bush plan for more troops in iraq   senator john w. warner of virginia, one of congress's leading authorities on the military, presented a bipartisan proposal on monday that soundly rejected president bush's plan to send more american troops to baghdad and urged the administration to find a new course in iraq.  ''mr. president,'' mr. warner declared, ''go back and look at all the options.''  on the eve of the state of the union address, the proposal by mr. warner and two fellow republican senators, susan collins of maine and norm coleman of minnesota, along with ben nelson, democrat of nebraska, was offered as an alternative to an iraq resolution backed by democratic leaders and is to be debated this week by the foreign relations committee.  while details of the competing iraq plans varied, one point could not be mistaken: a growing number of senators in both parties find the president's strategy flawed. while some republicans still vow to back the white house, the tough language from mr. warner, a former chairman of the armed services committee and a onetime navy secretary, dealt a blow to administration officials trying to salvage the iraq plan.  ''the american g.i. was not trained, not sent over there -- certainly not by resolution of this institution -- to be placed in the middle of a fight between the sunni and the shia and the wanton and just incomprehensible killing that's going on at this time,'' mr. warner said. ''we don't lessen importance of that mission, but it should be performed by the iraqi forces and not the coalition forces.''  the new resolution reflected mr. warner's typical style -- in their public comments, he and his allies took a diplomatic tone and sought to play down friction with the administration. yet the language of the proposal itself was clear in declaring opposition to the troop buildup and urging the iraqi leaders to seek a political solution to the sectarian violence.  ''we've had four other surges since we first went into iraq,'' ms. collins said. ''none of them produced a long-lasting change in the situation on the ground. so i am very skeptical that this surge would produce the desired outcome.''  the new warner proposal and the resolution introduced last week by senators joseph r. biden jr. of delaware, and carl levin of michigan, both democrats, and chuck hagel, republican of nebraska, are similar in many respects. both are nonbinding but declare that united states involvement in iraq cannot be sustained without strong public support and that the main military mission in iraq should be ensuring the nation's territorial integrity.  ''there is no misunderstanding, if anyone votes for this, you disagree with the president here,'' mr. hagel said, adding that he and other supporters of his resolution were open to negotiations.  but mr. warner's proposal says the senate ''disagrees with the 'plan' to augment our forces,'' while the other resolution states that it is ''not in the national interest of the united states to deepen its military involvement in iraq, particularly by escalating the united states military force presence.''  mr. warner engineered a similar resolution demanding a change in iraq policy in 2005. building on a democratic bill, mr. warner, then chairman of the armed services committee, maneuvered a resolution through congress that called for iraqis to take the lead in securing their country and required reports to congress on progress there.  that proposal also required 2006 to be a year of transition to full sovereignty in iraq, and mr. warner's new plan cites that requirement as part of the basis for resisting the troop buildup.  as early as next week, the full senate could open the most extensive iraq debate to be conducted in more than four years. the proposal unveiled monday, sponsors said, was fashioned to be more palatable to moderate democrats and republicans because it seeks to employ recommendations from the iraq study group and offers guidelines to establish a military strategy.  ''it's important to send a strong message to the white house,'' mr. nelson said. ''and it's a stronger message when it has significant bipartisan support.''  as mr. warner and his coalition acted, house republicans advanced their own plan on monday, hoping to find some middle ground between unqualified support for mr. bush's plan and mounting resistance among the rank and file, who are moving away from the administration.  under a plan announced monday by representative john a. boehner of ohio, the minority leader, and other senior republicans, mr. bush would be required to provide monthly reports on progress in meeting goals in iraq beginning this month.  among the new ''benchmarks'' proposed by republicans would be the level of cooperation by the iraqi government in military efforts as well as iraqi troop deployments and spending on military equipment. republicans said they have also asked the house speaker, nancy pelosi, to establish a bipartisan committee to monitor mr. bush's new strategy.  ''the new majority has two choices,'' mr. boehner said. ''they can either try to stop the president's new strategy and block funding for our troops, or they can join us in aggressively holding the bush administration and the iraqi government accountable for achieving success.''  that comment hit a nerve with democrats, who said republicans failed consistently in their duty to scrutinize the administration's conduct of the war when they held majorities in the house and senate.  ''where were the republicans the last four years?'' said brendan daly, a spokesman for ms. pelosi.  senator edward m. kennedy, the massachusetts democrat who has proposed a resolution to block spending for any increase in troops, said the terminology in a final resolution may be less important than gaining republican support for it.  ''if you look at what has happened to this debate in the last 10 days here in the united states, where not only from the democrats but from the republicans, this has been a major escalation of expression of opposition, reservation, exasperation, frustration, by members of the president's own party,'' he said. ''it's going to be reflected in the votes here.''  the struggle for iraq  