fifth avenue mirage   at 141 fifth avenue, a gleaming copper dome seems to rise above the turn-of-the-last-century facade, rich in beaux-arts detail, as homey curtains hang in the windows.  but it is all an urban mirage. the real 141 fifth avenue, at the corner of east 21st street, is hidden behind a wall of scaffolding, and the image is a full-size print of what the restored building will look like, laced to the scaffolding that surrounds it. the building is still deep in the midst of a cleaning and restoration.  itamar cohen, the creative director of 7th art, a marketing agency specializing in real estate development, said he created the print to celebrate the restoration of a beautiful building, and perhaps create a model for developers citywide who are facing a crackdown by the department of buildings over advertising at construction sites.  since the crackdown, he said, scaffolding across the city has been shrouded only in plain black mesh, like so many widows in mourning. ''we didn't want to have that ugly black mesh here,'' he said.  the print, adapted from a rendering by the project architect, cetra/ruddy, is 103 feet high and 66 feet wide, and then topped by more scaffolding and another print 46 feet high to cover the huge cupola on top. because the fabric was thicker than the black mesh, the scaffolding had to be strengthened at an extra cost to the developer.  scaffolds on historic buildings in paris, rome, florence and other cities have been wrapped in similar prints for some time, both to celebrate historic preservation and give the public a reassuring glimpse of a familiar landmark while it is undergoing restoration.  in new york, the scaffold images can be used as a subtle form of marketing to buyers or as neighborhood public relations, depending on the circumstances, or perhaps depending on the eye of the beholder. chris schlank, a partner in the firm developing the project, savanna partners, refused even to discuss his plans for the space, because a proposal to allow parts of the building to be converted into condominiums is now pending before the city's planning commission.  ''we are not selling any condos; this is an office building,'' he said. ''the mesh is to show the neighbors what we are doing to the facade of the building.''  but shaun osher, a founder of core group marketing, who was brought in to market any condos that might be built there, confirmed published accounts that the landmarked building was bought for about $60 million by the sl green realty corporation and savanna partners. sl green would eventually own the lower two stores, while savanna partners would build about 40 luxury condos throughout the rest of the building, including the dome, and a discreet rooftop penthouse, mr. osher said.  he would not discuss pricing, but said that prices in the area ranged from $1,200 to $2,000 a square foot, or up to $3 million for a 1,500-square-foot apartment.  big deal  