'my' yard? ha! the turkeys run the place now   it was dawn the first time i shuffled into the kitchen and saw the bald, blue-faced turkey peering in at me, just six inches outside the window. we both shrieked. he is a huge tom, standing a yard high with his head erect. though his face conjures that cinematic bogeyman freddy krueger, he is magnificently, iridescently plumed and powered by a pair of drumsticks with the size and acceleration of ferrari pistons. i call him blue boy, and i try to stay out of his way.  since that day, i have come to know b.b. as one of the feistier patriarchs of the flock now in permanent residence on our rocky hill in the woods. his harem of hens, with their tiny heads and long legs, have a certain olive oyl charm. what began about six years ago with the odd gobbler browsing in the yard here and there has multiplied into a burgeoning population that numbers in the scores. wild turkeys, all but extinct for nearly a century, were reintroduced to connecticut about 35 years ago, according to paul rego, a wildlife biologist with the state department of environmental protection, who told me their resurgence has been ''an incredible success story.''  no kidding. one extraordinary afternoon, watching a speed-dating scrum coalesce in our front yard, i counted 43 yawping, scratching, nerved-up suitors and hens. at least five were toms with tails fanned in full thanksgiving calendar display, strutting like k-fed on a club prowl.  as an enthusiastic, if very amateur, birder, i was tickled. i found that they are creatures of strong habit, following a steadfast daily path: up the hill from our neighbor's property, an hour's dalliance in our field and vegetable garden, then off into the south woods. but soon, the gardener in me was less enchanted. the modest divots of grub-hunting skunks are nothing compared with the havoc wreaked by foraging turkey feet. meleagris gallopavo strides the earth on sharp, spurred garden rakes -- lethal to emergent seedlings as the big, heavy birds boogaloo through baby clover, kale and snow peas.  to minimize damage, we engage in strategic shooing. our son charges like lebron on a fast break when the birds foul his hoops court. ''turkeys in the asparagus bed!'' i bellow at the snoring beagle, and she is off like a shot, exploding out the kitchen door into the boiling epicenter of beating wings, gobbles and squawks. it is a grand and antic sight. the turkeys are in no mortal peril; in seven years, our hound has caught -- she was quick to regret -- one living thing: a very angry bee. but her howl can shiver the fedex man's timbers.  it was livable, even fun, until all this plump, juicy nature brought uninvited guests: coyotes. the first time we heard the pack at about 4 a.m., just yards from the garage, all four of us turned up in the hallway, hearts pounding. the din assailed us almost nightly and made us stupid with fatigue. the turkeys, who at night roost high in the trees like dark boulders, slept safely.  the coyotes resorted to hunting by day. the big alpha male and his marauders were most active in early morning, when the children walked down through the still-dark woods to the school bus. all that howling made the poor kids flinch at a chipmunk's sneeze, and i took to driving them down. the vet warned vigilance with the beagle. the pack was getting bolder, taking down fawns, killing a shih tzu, even attacking a 75-pound labrador.  i called the town's animal control officer, who agreed that the situation was getting acute and proposed a solution: he would haul a road-killed deer into our woods as bait and take the big male out himself. my husband and i considered: rotting flesh? a shotgun? nah. we installed a motion detector light and take turns escorting the dog. mercifully, the siege abated somewhat as the pack moved north, though we still hear the ravening hunters in the distance. there are more turkeys than ever. and if you can't beat them, well  .  sometimes, when the words will not come, i flick on the screen saver and head outside for some turkey therapy in the calming winter woods. i have become a stalker of some skill. i wait until i hear the steady, unmistakable rustle in the woods: turkey tramp. theirs is a stately procession, churning up eddies of oak leaves, pecking idly at fungus-ruffled stumps and red-berried bittersweet vines.  i fall in behind and contemplate the grand folly of sexed species: b.b. and his male posse puff and preen as a half dozen hard-working hens run off a feral cat. three toms engage in a hilarious pose-a-thon high on a ridge. when they spot me, they cock their ugly heads, then dismiss me as inconsequential and carry on.  i have walked these hills a bit longer than this new generation of gobblers, but i must concede that the turkeys, adaptable and unruffled, are the superior suburbanites. plying their unmarked route, they are as constant and punctual as commuters heading for the 7:27 -- yet free as the wind.  e-mail: conn@nytimes.com  