wake up and smell the 'odorous air contaminant'   four years ago or so, about two weeks after hy chabbott's trouble with city government started, he was in line at the bank when another customer said he smelled coffee. ''that's me,'' said mr. chabbott, who spends most of his days in the roasting plant of the 167-year-old gillies coffee company, of which he is an owner.  had he heard, the man wondered, about the coffee business that had been fined $400 by a city inspector who called the smell of roasted beans a form of air pollution? ''i said, 'that's me too,' and they all started to laugh,'' mr. chabbott recalled last week on the floor of his plant on 19th street in sunset park, brooklyn. less of a laughing matter, mr. chabbott and his partner, don schoenholt, said last week, was the four years and hefty legal fees they spent contesting the fine, only to give up the fight this month after another judge denied their appeal.  notwithstanding all the scented candles and coffee air fresheners, and leaving aside whatever pollution may be present in the neighborhood from the gowanus canal, the elevated brooklyn-queens expressway or the city's nearby asphalt plant, the law, as interpreted by the city's department of environmental protection, still stands: the smell of roasted coffee beans is ''an odorous air contaminant.''  ''i couldn't believe that somebody wasn't going to look at this and say, 'this is silly. stop,' '' said mr. schoenholt, whose surrender was first reported in the brooklyn paper, a local weekly.  the rules, said ian michaels, a spokesman for the department of environmental protection, are clear. ''the law does not distinguish between what some people find pleasant and some people might find unpleasant,'' he said. ''regardless of what the smell is, the law says you have a right not to live with other people's smells.''  the department issues its fines by sending inspectors out in response to complaints, mr. michaels said, even if, as mr. schoenholt said was the case with the gillies plant, only one person has complained. ''if you were that one person who was getting the odor in your apartment, you would be pretty upset if the city didn't respond,'' mr. michaels said.  with residential development taking over the city's formerly industrial areas, mr. schoenholt said, the future of small businesses like his is uncertain.  on wednesday, one of the business's 23 employees cut open a burlap sack and emptied raw beans into a grate in the floor, and they were sucked into a machine and past a furnace, and swirled around until they poured out, dark brown, into a bin at the other end. they gave off a fragrance that some people would even consider pleasant.  legal or not, mr. schoenholt said with a shrug, it could not be any other way. ''i can't stop coffee from smelling like coffee,'' he said.  jake mooney  neighborhood report: sunset park  