race to fill senate seat has parties at full throttle   it is a campaign for a single state senate seat in the long island suburbs, a district that ranges from the grand estates of old westbury to working-class elmont -- and that has always sent republicans to albany.  but the feb. 6 special election for the vacant seat has turned into a proxy fight that is the first test of gov. eliot spitzer's political mettle, a clash that has pitted the state's most powerful unions and politicians against each other in what could become one of the costliest state legislative races in new york history.  at stake over the longer term is control of the new york state senate, with republicans hoping to retain the seat as a check on the ambitions of governor spitzer and the democratic tide he represents. after a détente with top republicans after his inauguration, the new governor now finds himself battling the republican senate majority leader, joseph l. bruno, who even warned the governor to back off from involvement in the campaign here.  but mr. spitzer ignored that warning, seizing on an opportunity to nudge the democrats one seat closer to senate control. taking time out from assembling his administration, he came to long island to campaign for the democratic candidate, craig m. johnson, and even filmed a commercial for him, breaking the nonaggression tradition between governors and legislative majorities of the opposing party. the republican candidate is maureen o'connell.  despite the abbreviated campaign, total spending is predicted to reach $3 million or more, with hundreds of campaign workers already knocking on doors and candidates flooding the airwaves with ads in the expensive new york city market.  ''it's like the battle of the titans,'' said arthur j. kremer, a former democratic assemblyman. besides the spitzer-bruno power struggle and the maneuvering for senate control, the race is also an early test for the republican party's new state chairman, joseph n. mondello, on his home turf. he was chosen by mr. bruno and also serves as county chairman here in nassau.  republican dominance of the senate peaked with 38 seats in recent years but dwindled to 34 in last fall's election. the democrats have 28 seats. if they win this seat, they need to capture only two more in the 2008 election to tie the republicans. then lt. gov. david a. paterson would cast the deciding vote.  governor spitzer created the vacancy by reaching across party lines to appoint senator michael a. l. balboni as chief of homeland security. some republicans suspected mr. spitzer of purposely putting the senate seat into play, but he has denied an ulterior motive.  the campaign is off to a quick start. ''we had 500 people going door to door last weekend, and we hope to have 700 this weekend,'' mr. mondello said. democrats say they have an equally ambitious field operation. their county chairman, jay s. jacobs, said that with an expected 10 to 15 percent voter turnout, ''the ground game is the decider.''  both camps are filling the airwaves with television and radio commercials, mailing literature, erecting signs, making telephone calls, setting up web sites and visiting train stations, shopping centers and community events.  ''you're running for the train -- i'm running for the state senate,'' mr. johnson, the democratic candidate, called out to a dashing dan on a frigid thursday morning at the long island rail road station in westbury. later mr. johnson walked around the corner to pitch to diners at the post avenue cafe. across the street was nassau republican headquarters, pictured in some textbooks as a symbol of the party's strongest organization in the nation.  at lunchtime his opponent, ms. o'connell, worked the crowd in the cavernous mineola community center here, filled with golden age club members. ''you've just got to get out there and vote,'' she pleaded. a man with two canes and a world war ii veteran's cap said, ''god bless you.''  neither side takes the race for granted. ''what you've got are two eminently qualified candidates, both bright, articulate vote-getters with a proven track record,'' said desmond ryan, a republican lobbyist.  local politicians relish the statewide attention. ''this district is the political epicenter for the whole state'' for the duration of the campaign, said william t. biamonte, the democratic elections commissioner in nassau.  the seventh senate district is roughly nassau's northwest quadrant, encompassing all of north hempstead and extending to elmont, franklin square and part of hicksville. though republicans have always held the seat -- mr. balboni won by 15 percentage points last fall -- the demographics have changed. democrats have an edge with 74,864 registered voters to 70,057 for the republicans. lately the district has tilted democratic in many contests.  ms. o'connell, 56, began as a nurse and designed home care for cancer patients. she became a lawyer, served as deputy mayor of east williston and was elected to the assembly in 1998, succeeding mr. balboni. in 2005 she won the county clerk's race. she has the conservative and independence designations and is endorsed by 1199 united healthcare workers east, the heath care workers union, and several government unions.  her union support, particularly by local 1199, one of the state's most politically potent unions, suggests how the fight may also test mr. spitzer's efforts to rein in state spending, particularly on health care.  the democrat, mr. johnson, 35, is a lawyer who was elected to the nassau county legislature in 2000, filling the vacancy created by the death of his mother, barbara. he serves as the finance committee chairman. he is also the candidate of the working families party and has been endorsed by the communications, food workers and painters unions.  nassau democrats were fractured last year when county executive thomas r. suozzi challenged mr. spitzer for the nomination for governor. mr. johnson backed mr. spitzer early on and repeatedly needled mr. suozzi. despite all that, the democrats seem united now, with mr. suozzi singing mr. johnson's praises.  ms. o'connell called property taxes ''the no. 1, no. 2 and no. 3 issue.'' mr. johnson also cited taxes, as well as the environment, health care and mr. spitzer's call for reform. his campaign hopes the governor's november coattails still have pull.  ''the rationale is very simple,'' said mr. biamonte, the democratic elections commissioner. ''this district voted over two-to-one for eliot spitzer. why would they send maureen o'connell to work against him?''  ms. o'connell flips that argument, saying the public does not need ''another yes man.'' mr. mondello accused mr. spitzer of overreaching to extend democratic control to all branches of state government. ''we've got a candidate who can set them back on their heels,'' he said.  but democrats say that ms. o'connell is camouflaging her true colors, omitting republican identification from most campaign commercials and literature. to that, she said: ''everybody in the community knows what i am.''  