bursting out of its 130-seat seams   it was about a decade ago that steve cutaia began to feel the heat.  ''it's like when you're in a room and somebody gradually turns up the thermostat,'' said mr. cutaia, the good-natured president of outpost in the burbs, the concert-sponsoring civic group based here. ''it creeps up on you. but after a while you become aware of it.''  mr. cutaia was referring to his budding awareness that the organization he co-founded was earning a reputation well beyond new jersey as a haven for intimate, affordable concerts by up-and-coming contemporary folk acts. but he might just as well have been talking about the steady growth that has fueled its first-ever expansion.  a longtime fixture at the first congregational church, where artists like lucy kaplansky and richard shindell performed in a 130-seat pew-lined nook, the 20-year-old outpost moved its concerts this month to two new locations. the 250-seat unitarian church, a quarter-mile away from first congregational, will house most shows. for bigger draws like judy collins, on the calendar for april, the 1,500-seat auditorium at montclair high school will be the outpost's new outpost.  on a recent friday night, as the outpost played host to the kennedys, a tight-harmonizing massachusetts duo, at the unitarian church, its new-venue opening-night jitters showed.  ''tonight we had to hoist the outpost banner on the back of somebody's car, because we didn't think about that in advance,'' mr. cutaia said between pre-concert dashes from the unitarian church to the outpost's offices, which will remain at first congregational.  while ticket-holding guests filed into the belly of the cavernous, dome-ceilinged church, he and several volunteers also twittered over the church's yet-to-be-tested sound system. they need not have worried.  ''it sounds like the inside of an acoustic guitar in here,'' maura kennedy said after a sound check with her husband, pete. later, a capacity crowd would confirm that observation with ample applause throughout a warm, glitch-free performance.  if adapting to a new space was a relatively smooth experience for the outpost, the decision-making process leading up to it was not.  ''sometimes people are on the same page, but their visions don't quite mesh,'' mr. cutaia said gingerly by way of explaining the decision by the outpost's 10-member volunteer board to expand from first congregational, which can accommodate 700 in its largest room. (most concerts were held in the 130-seat space.) when it was considering new venues, the group spoke with the south orange performing arts center, mr. cutaia said, but ultimately decided to remain in montclair.  ''montclair really wants us to stay here,'' he said. ''we want to stay, too. our mission has always been to be a vehicle to build this community.''  by almost anybody's account, it has. bold-name performers -- like roger mcguinn -- have attracted ticket buyers from as far as los angeles and london. bold-name music lovers have dotted audiences, too: elvis costello once bought a ticket to see dan bern. and favorite artists have returned repeatedly despite the tight quarters.  ''they cultivate a kind of atmosphere that transcends a performance space -- they show their community really cares about artists. that makes artists want to be there,'' said ms. kaplansky, who has been playing outpost shows for eight years and will make her debut at the unitarian church next month. ''it's a really special place.''  on the night of the kennedys' performance, the crowd was typical of most outpost shows: coffeehouse-casual, subdued.  as they settled in, regulars like gordon nash of queens were ready to show their support, down to the last detail. ''i love it,'' he said of the new space. ''it looks beautiful. and the unitarians designed their seats to be more comfortable.  ''those pews at first congregational -- they were hard as a rock.''  the next outpost in the burbs concert will be a performance by lucy kaplansky on feb. 2 at the unitarian church of montclair, 67 church street; tickets are $25. information: www.outpostintheburbs.org or (973) 744-6560.  