old girls on campus, majoring in improv   sometimes -- usually when they're about to do a scene involving new cast members -- carrie aizley and christen sussin, the stars of ''campus ladies,'' their largely improvised and often outlandish comedy series now in its second season on the oxygen cable channel, feel the need to issue a small disclaimer.  ''we'll just say, 'look everybody, we're speaking from character, and some hideous things may come out of our mouths,' '' said ms. sussin. playing an exuberantly oblivious, 40-something divorcée trying to fit in as a college freshman, she has a tendency to blurt out comments that are jaw-droppingly wrong, like the time she was trying to make small talk at a rush party for an african-american sorority and offered up: ''how 'bout that harriet tubman, huh? choo choo!''  ''so,'' ms. sussin will say to the uninitiated actors and extras, ''deal with that as you normally would. please feel free to react.''  and they do. blessedly devoid of laugh tracks, punch lines or phony double takes, ''campus ladies'' has considerable charm, much of it coming from the believable, often subtle reactions to the frequent faux pas made by joan beaman (ms. aizley) and barri martin (ms. sussin): pursed lips, raised eyebrows, occasional horrified gasps, even the universally recognizable ''ewwwww.''  there's a lot of body-part humor in ''campus ladies,'' scenes in bathroom stalls, jokes involving flatulence, underwear and sex: material that wouldn't be out of place on hbo or in a will ferrell movie, but which can seem jarring on a basic-cable network aimed primarily at women. viewers tuning in to find ''ellen'' reruns or ''oprah after the show'' might instead encounter something closer to ''lucy and ethel gone wild.''  which is exactly what ms. aizley and ms. sussin had in mind when they concocted the show two years ago, based on characters they created as part of the groundlings improvisational troupe in west hollywood, where they've been best friends and writing partners for 10 years.  ''i think the biggest thing is that we understood each other's sensibility,'' said ms. aizley, 41, who studied theater at boston university and met ms. sussin, 37, a massachusetts native who attended the university of southern california, in one of the groundlings improvisational classes. ''i had a more subtle, sardonic sense of humor but also, how would you describe it?''  ''inappropriate,'' ms. sussin suggested. ''and sort of out of your mind. i find you ridiculous and inappropriate in the very best way. carrie would write these out-of-control crazy sketches but perform them in a very subtle way -- dryly but with just enough goof.''  ms. aizley responded: ''and christen, as an improviser and a writer, was a smart, simple kind of funny, which i was drawn to. she had this one character, a little girl named honey thayer, that i could watch forever, just so funny and unaware of herself.''  describing a character that sounds very much like a younger version of barri martin, ms. sussin said: '' ''honey was kind of an overweight inappropriate little girl who had no self-consciousness and didn't care. she just ate cake and tried to avoid gym class and told the gym teacher that if you do too many sports, your lady parts would dry up and you could die. horrible things like that.''  interviewed in the backstage lounge at the groundlings theater, ms. aizley and ms. sussin, much like their ''campus ladies'' alter egos, are a conversational tag team, bouncing off each other so naturally that there is barely a moment's silence between them. ms. aizley is married to kevin neustadt and has two sons, ages 3 and 5. ms. sussin and her husband, david, have a daughter, who is 1 1/2. still, the two women are together constantly, even when they're not writing or performing. it shows.  ''i'm not great with conflict,'' ms. sussin said. ''i put my foot in my mouth more than anyone you've ever met.''  ms. aizley said, ''she doesn't, really.''  ''i do.''  ''no, you don't. she thinks she does more than she does.''  in business meetings as well as in interviews, ms. sussin is likely to do more of the talking, but only because ms. aizley articulates many of her ideas in private.  ''i can be the voice box, but i feel like we're holding hands in some weird way,'' ms. sussin said.  the ''campus ladies'' characters grew out of a sketch about two older women (''older than they are in the show,'' ms. aizley said. ''in their mid-60s.'') who want to talk dirty to their husbands but have no idea how to do it. so they call a sex hot line and ask a series of naïve and increasingly inappropriate questions.  ''they were trying to be sexy but just couldn't pull it off,'' ms. aizley said. ''and we ended up just really loving these ladies.''  when their manager, paul young, pushed the duo to come up with an idea for an improv-based series, they decided to reinvent the characters as two women in their 40s -- one widowed, one newly divorced -- who decide to enroll in college, live in a dorm and experience all the things they'd missed out on by marrying young.  ''college seemed like the perfect place for them to be fish out of water,'' ms. aizley said, ''to watch them in a place where they didn't belong.''  several networks passed on ''campus ladies'' before cheryl hines, mr. young's wife and a fellow groundlings alumna, heard that oxygen was in the market for comedies that would appeal to women. because of her success on hbo's ''curb your enthusiasm,'' a show that also works without scripted dialogue, ms. hines was able to convince oxygen to take a chance, even though there were no traditional scripts, just highly detailed premises outlined by ms. sussin and ms. aizley, scene-by-scene outlines that would be improvised as the cameras rolled.  ''my hat's off to oxygen,'' said ms. hines, who is the show's executive producer and has been instrumental in attracting directors like david steinberg and a roster of unlikely guest stars including janeane garofalo, sean hayes, penny marshall, beverly d'angelo, jason alexander and her ''curb'' castmate jeff garlin. ''they have really trusted us as to what's funny. there have been times when i thought, 'this will never see the light of day,' but oxygen has been great about letting us pretty much do what we want.''  when asked if the show's bawdy material and loose rhythms ever made the network nervous, debby beece, oxygen's president for programming and marketing, said: ''we are a niche within a niche in terms of networks aimed primarily at women. our audience tends to be open-minded and progressive and looking for edgier kinds of shows. and besides, most women would love to have a do-over. so a lot of them can relate to this. more than you know.''  in the course of the first two seasons (new episodes will appear through the first week of february), joan and barri have managed to discover, among other things, that they are not lesbians, that posing for dormitory webcams are not a good idea, that they're uncomfortable in communal bathrooms and that they really don't look good in thongs. they tried three-way sex with a frightened freshman (the result of a truth-or-dare game gone horribly wrong), tried to join that black sorority and, for a class assignment, pretended to be disabled for a week. there have been jokes about mammograms, unwanted facial hair and nighttime bladder leakage. not your usual comedy premises.  ''audiences aren't used to seeing women run around in their underwear for a laugh, especially women who are not 21 and don't have hollywood-model bodies,'' ms. aizley said.  ms. sussin continued: ''and sometimes if you try to do it, they're like, 'no, we don't want to see that.' it's o.k. if it's will ferrell.''  ''or jack black,'' ms. aizley chimed in.  ''with a flabby bum,'' her partner added. ''but if it's a woman's flabby bum, it's like: 'that's not pretty. that's not all right.' but somehow we managed to get past that, and now it seems o.k.''  ms. aizley said, ''and it brings us so much joy, to just be who we want to be and not feel like we have to look a certain way or be a certain weight or have our skin be perfect.''  ''yeah,'' ms. sussin said. ''it's nice to get over yourself.''  television  