the guilt-free corporation   ''the notion that the corporation should apply its assets for social purposes rather than for the profit of its owners -- the shareholders -- is an irresponsible use of assets,'' argues the venture capitalist betsy s. atkins.  writing in boardroom briefing, ms. atkins, the head of baja ventures, says companies certainly have an obligation to be responsible, which she defines as complying with all laws and regulations, creating quality products that are marketed in an ethical manner and presenting transparent financial information to shareholders.  but that is it.  shareholders, she argues, can, if they want, spend their own money to promote causes they believe in, but that should be an individual's choice.  ''i do not believe that the investing public considers their for-profit public corporate investments to be part of their social charitable causes,'' she writes. ''the concept of corporate social responsibility is one that deserves to be challenged and examined carefully.''  small gifts -- what is most intriguing about good magazine's reporting on who 10 of the nation's largest foundations decided to finance in 2005 is not which recipients received the most money. for example, you won't be surprised to learn that the robert wood johnson foundation made its largest gift, $14 million, to the national center for tobacco-free kids.  what is fascinating is who received the smallest gifts from each of the foundations. for example, the robert wood johnson foundation, which distributed a total of $360 million, gave $8,000 to vote and vaccinate.  then there was the william and flora hewlett foundation, with gave a total of $268 million, according to the magazine, including $4.7 million to the international planned parenthood foundation and $2,500 -- its smallest gift -- to a children's theater.  the lilly endowment distributed $429 million, including $53 million to the indiana university foundation and $5,000 to the white lick heritage community foundation in indiana.  as for the w. k. kellogg foundation, which distributed $244 million, it gave $6.8 million to the great lakes center for youth development, and made a $3,000 gift to the national organization of black county officials.  free the corporation -- john hasnas, a georgetown professor, has a modest proposal: he wants to make it easier for corporations to defend themselves.  writing in worth, mr. hasnas notes that under federal law a company is ''criminally liable for the actions employees take within the scope of their employment.''  ''it makes no difference whether the employees are acting in contravention of corporate policy, whether they have been specifically instructed not to act as they did, or whether the corporation did everything humanly possible to prevent the criminal activity.''  corporations cannot be jailed, of course, only fined. but invariably the fines are not paid by the people who committed the crime, but rather by the shareholders, through the diminution of corporation earnings.  ''so imposing criminal punishment on a corporation, rather than on the employees who committed the offense is punishing the innocent,'' he writes.  his solution is that for a corporation to be found guilty, it must be proved that the company encouraged, or at least failed to discourage, employees' criminal behavior. that way, ''ethical corporations would have a defense when charged with a crime.''  final take -- we are heading for a market correction, if money's (tongue firmly in cheek) logic can be believed.  as george mannes notes, in april 1987, filming of the movie ''wall street'' started and the crash of 1987 occurred just months later. in the spring of 2000, production of two television shows -- ''the street'' and ''bull'' -- began and that summer the standard & poor's 500 began a two-year slide. and in 2005, two shows about flipping houses were shown, and the real estate market promptly tanked.  why worry now? hbo recently announced a new series about a hedge fund trader and his pals. ''when hollywood turns its cameras on a financial trend, it's historically a prequel for a market collapse.''  paul b. brown  what's offline  