after finding trouble, hoping to find brees   on sunday at soldier field, the chicago bears are counting on a defensive tackle who weighs 300 pounds and goes by the name tank to storm the new orleans saints' backfield and seize the moment.  tank johnson's matchup against saints quarterback drew brees will be a prominent story line in the n.f.c. championship game, the bears' first super bowl berth since the 1985 season riding partly on johnson's shoulders.  yet those shoulders are burdened by serious off-field issues that have tarnished the team's public image and tested the patience of fans and the bears family, who have dealt with him the way one might a recalcitrant child.  johnson, 25, is facing a year in jail after an incident dec. 14 in which a swat team raided his home in gurnee, ill., a chicago suburb, and found four handguns and two assault rifles, some loaded and in plain view, along with three caged pit bulls and two ounces of marijuana.  at home at the time were johnson's 25-year-old girlfriend, lari; their daughters, ages 3 and 20 months; and his childhood friend willie posey, whom johnson employed as a bodyguard. johnson, who was on probation after pleading guilty to a gun possession charge in 2005, was 12 miles away, at the bears' practice facility in lake forest, preparing for a game against the tampa bay buccaneers. he turned himself in to the gurnee police hours after the raid.  johnson was charged with six misdemeanor counts of unlawful possession of a firearm, a violation of his probation. four counts added later were related to about 500 rounds of ammunition found in the house.  the next day, bears general manager jerry angelo pointedly lectured johnson, benched him for the buccaneers game and told him basically to start acting like a responsible adult. hours later, johnson showed up at a chicago nightclub with posey.  posey, 26, was shot to death at the club early the next morning. cook county authorities charged michael selvie, 34, with first-degree murder in that shooting. although johnson was not involved, angelo said then that he was livid that he had gone there after being warned about his behavior. angelo said he considered releasing johnson.  instead, after conferring with others in the bears' organization, angelo suspended johnson for the next game, at detroit on dec. 24. he insisted that the decision was made to try to save johnson and not to salvage the super bowl aspirations of the bears, who compiled the best regular-season record in the national football conference.  angelo declined to be interviewed for this article. he said at the time that keeping johnson had nothing to do with the fact that the bears' best interior lineman, tommie harris, had been lost for the season with an injury.  ''it was never brought up that we need this guy on the field to help us win,'' angelo said.  coach lovie smith has said little about johnson. in an interview with usa today in december, smith said: ''a lot of times the public would like for you to, boom, get rid of him as soon as you hear something. we're going to dig a little deeper. we say that we're a family. well, you don't get rid of a family member when they make a mistake.''  johnson apologized to his teammates privately after the latest arrest. he also issued a public apology.  he has been placed under home confinement, and can leave only for practices and games.  johnson pleaded not guilty this month to charges of possessing unregistered weapons and ammunition in lake county, where he lives, and will have a pretrial hearing next month. his next court date is tuesday in cook county, related to the probation violation.  under the terms of his confinement, johnson cannot drive. most days he receives a ride from teammates. sometimes he uses a car service. dennis kiaupa, a cabdriver for a company based in gurnee, has had johnson as a passenger.  ''i've had other football players as clients,'' he said, ''and tank's one of the best in terms of politeness.''  if the bears defeat the saints, johnson has been cleared to participate in the super bowl by a lake county judge, but he will also need permission from cook county.  ''he's going to be under the microscope, and he's got to try to lead as error-free a life as he can,'' bears defensive end adewale ogunleye said.  upon closer inspection, there is a softer side to johnson. two framed photographs of his daughters adorn a shelf of his locker, next to a bottle of baby oil. in front of his locker wednesday was a box of orange roses from a friend in detroit, katarina brown. she said in a telephone interview that johnson had talked to her high school students by speakerphone and encouraged them to study hard and stay out of trouble.  johnson, whose face is framed by dreadlocks, cannot escape his own legal issues. he can talk about football being his refuge, as he did when reporters surrounded his locker this week, but his real life always intrudes.  asked about his off-field troubles, johnson drew a long breath, then said, ''as a man, you put it on your shoulders and you handle it and you deal with it like a man.''  ''being a man,'' he added, ''is much more than this game of football or off the field. it's everything. it's being a good father and a good player and a good provider.''  the police raid of johnson's two-story brick home was prompted by complaints from neighbors about animal neglect, guns being fired in the backyard and marijuana use. gurnee's police chief, robert jones, told reporters at the time that there were loaded weapons in the house and that some of them were accessible to johnson's daughters.  ''so i think you could draw a conclusion that, yes, they were probably in danger,'' he said.  when asked what he would say to people who came to the same conclusion, johnson's eyes narrowed but his voice remained neutral. ''i don't say anything,'' he said. ''if you have any other questions, i'm really here to more or less talk about football.''  in his neighborhood, where people run old glory up the flagpoles in their unfenced front yards, he seems to have had the same polarizing effect as in the rest of the metro area. people are either convinced he has gotten off easy because he is a professional football player or believe he has been singled out because he is a professional football player.  no such divide exists in the bears' locker room.  ''everybody wants him here from top to bottom,'' ogunleye said, ''and we're excited that he's still with us.''  how deep is their trust? long snapper patrick mannelly, who has a 1-year-old daughter, was asked how he would feel about leaving her at johnson's house for a play date.  ''knowing tank as i do in the locker room,'' he said, ''i wouldn't have a problem with it.''  pro football  correction:  january 23, 2007, tuesday  a sports article on sunday about off-the-field issues involving tank johnson of the chicago bears referred imprecisely to weapons charges to which he has pleaded not guilty. johnson faces misdemeanor charges in illinois because the authorities say that when they found weapons and ammunition in his home during a recent raid, he did not have the required state gun-owner identification card; johnson has not been charged with possessing unregistered weapons and ammunition.  