a turbulent life is described by the family of a killer   robert earl barnes was holding a 40-ounce bottle of colt 45 when the big marble ashtray came crashing down, according to one witness. mr. barnes's wife, cheryl wilson, was at the other end of the ashtray. the children watched the shards disperse across his skull. depetra was 10, ronell 1, and the youngest about a month old. mr. barnes lifted a finger to his hairline.  ''i remember him saying, 'cheryl, if i'm bleeding, i'm going to kill you,' '' the witness, depetra wilson, testified yesterday in federal district court in brooklyn.  he was bleeding. they ran. mr. barnes kicked depetra down the stairs. cheryl wilson talked a bus driver into free passage through coney island. when they reached another apartment building, a friend refused to open his door. cheryl wilson left her children in the lobby, by a fountain.  ''i went around the corner to a club because that was the only place i knew somebody,'' cheryl wilson told the court.  she stayed for an hour, drinking, she said. when she returned, the children were gone, but only to the home of an aunt.  in seeking to spare ronell wilson the death penalty, defense lawyers have offered jurors a panorama of the wilson family method of rearing children. his lawyers have said they will depict mr. wilson as brain damaged from a childhood illness.  in testimony during the sentencing phase of the trial, witnesses contradicted one another in places. cheryl wilson, for example, remembered trying to push her husband out a window, not breaking an ashtray over his head in that particular fight.  none of the witnesses could agree on the age of the grandmother, now deceased. estimates differed by a decade or more.  but the relatives of ronell wilson who testified yesterday remembered a family life of heavy drinking, drug abuse, ridicule and fistfights. they all maintained it was that childhood atmosphere that led mr. wilson to execute two undercover police detectives during a robbery on staten island in 2003.  last month, mr. wilson, 24, was found guilty of the killings. and, if jurors sentence him to death, he will be the first new york defendant in more than 50 years to receive the federal death penalty.  the jury has already heard emotional testimony from the wives of the slain detectives, james v. nemorin and rodney j. andrews. prosecutors have rested their case arguing for execution, portraying mr. wilson as an unrepentant street gang member capable of ordering violence from prison.  the jurors displayed little evidence of sympathy as the wilson family members recounted the defendant's upbringing. some jurors crossed their arms. one closed her eyes for a while.  but that did little to diminish the combined credibility of the testimony. if anything, the witnesses' disorientation seemed to corroborate accounts of a troubled family.  the apartment mr. barnes and cheryl wilson shared in coney island was in an abandoned building, with no stove or refrigerator, several witnesses testified. the children slept on a shared mattress. the adults fought.  in the early 1980s, cheryl wilson and two of her sisters moved their children to their mother's apartment in the stapleton houses on staten island.  ''people used to tease us about 13 people living in an apartment,'' depetra wilson said. ''they'd yell, 'thirteen.' ''  nobody worked, depetra wilson testified. the three sisters sniffed cocaine. later they started smoking it, she said. they financed drug purchases with shoplifting, prostitution, public assistance checks and food stamps intended to buy milk for the children.  at 2, ronell ran a fever of 104 degrees. he had bacterial meningitis, an infection of the spinal cord fluid that can lead to retardation, the testimony went on.  in 1988, child welfare workers removed the children from their mother. ronell, then 6, was placed with his paternal grandmother. that year and again five years later, he was hospitalized for psychiatric evaluation. his mother was displeased. she criticized the grandmother.  ''you're not supposed to let your child get tooken somewhere without your knowledge,'' cheryl wilson said. she protested his treatment. ''i told her i didn't feel he needed it; don't be giving my son no medicine,'' she said.  at the hospital, ronell received few visitors. back home, he sucked his thumb until he was 15. he was photographed doing it when he was about 12. his older brother, depetra said, ''used to call him spesh, like special ed.''  cheryl wilson regained custody of ronell in 1997, but she sent him to live with her own mother, whose age she estimated was 78 by that point. ronell was in and out of juvenile detention.  upon release in 1999, he declined offers to join the family in pennsylvania, where his sister had become a teacher. instead, he returned to the stapleton houses, where he had friends.  ''he believed that they was his family,'' cheryl wilson said, ''being that i was never in his life.''  as each woman finished testifying, a defense lawyer asked how she would be affected by the execution of ronell wilson. an aunt, constance wilson, asked for leniency.  ''everybody makes mistakes,'' she said. the defense lawyer, kelley j. sharkey, reminded her that her nephew's mistake had been the murder of two police detectives.  to the same question, depetra wilson said her siblings knew that ''all i asked of them was please let me leave this world first.''  she ran from the courtroom, sobbing and clutching her stomach.  when it was her turn at the question, cheryl wilson said: ''it'd hurt. it'd hurt. it would really kill me.''  her voice did not break. she watched the jurors as she left. she did not look at her son.  at the end of the day, mr. barnes approached the witness stand for his turn. he almost walked into a table. the lawyer waved her hand for his attention. after drug and alcohol treatment, mr. barnes said, he now follows a regimen of powerful tranquilizers. then, he was asked about mr. wilson.  ''he's my son,'' mr. barnes said. he tried to name his son's birthday, but he was off by 23 months. he said he had never visited the hospital. he said he does not visit the federal detention center in brooklyn either.  the lawyer asked whether mr. wilson calls on the telephone, and his father said, ''yeah. we talk.''  