figuring out the p.e. ratio of steve jobs   apple's share price leaped to a record after the company unveiled its latest device to be hailed as the coolest thing ever, but investors are factoring more into their decision than a best guess on the number of iphones apple will sell.  buyers of apple shares are also betting on how many units apple will sell of the next cool thing and the next one after that. ultimately they are putting a price on the brilliance and creativity of apple's designers and engineers and especially on its founder and chief executive, steven p. jobs.  something so intangible can be tough to estimate, but when analysts and portfolio managers make the attempt, they make the stock appear cheap. they caution, however, that without those unique features that make apple apple -- mainly, mr. jobs -- the stock would be worth much less.  what apple does best is to see which gadgets in the marketplace work and which do not, then make new ones that are simple to operate and fill needs for consumers. apple may not plant its flag in new territory, but it will make money off the tourists when they begin arriving.  ''apple has never been on the leading edge of technology,'' said nicholas kaiser, a portfolio manager at the saturna capital corporation. ''they've always waited to figure it out a bit to see how it works for the average schmo.''  apple's strategy is to bundle hardware, software and content into a seamless combination of product and service, as with its ipod music players. apple's equipment ''is not just cool, it works coming out of the box,'' said kevin landis, a portfolio manager for the firsthand family of technology funds. ''that's going to be big when you start carrying all your media around in an iphone, you come in the door and you watch the same thing on an apple tv.''  it takes complicated individuals to build simple products, and apple's offices and labs are filled with designers and engineers who are anything but average schmos, mr. kaiser said.  ''apple always had people that they called visionaries and evangelists that they have wandering around with crazy ideas,'' mr. kaiser said.  one of them, mr. jobs, counts for far more than any others. how much he is worth to the company no one can know for sure, but mr. kaiser acknowledges that he is willing to pay far more for apple, his largest portfolio holding, than he would for another company with similar financial results.  ''it's always hard to value genius,'' he said. ''we try to follow a value investment philosophy, and here you've got a company trading at 40 times earnings.''  high price-earnings multiple or not, he thinks the stock is worth buying at $100 a share or less. ''i don't know if it's worth $150, but there's more risk in not owning it than in owning it,'' he said.  while mr. jobs's ideas do not always work out, he has been on a spectacular winning streak this decade, and the company would not be the same without him.  unfortunately, investors have had to contemplate that possibility since apple acknowledged irregular practices involving stock options.  mr. kaiser said his estimate of the company's worth could change radically if mr. jobs were to leave, calling that possibility ''one of the huge risks'' to his forecast.  charles wolf, an analyst at needham & company, quoted odds of ''close to zero'' that the controversy would force mr. jobs out, but he conceded that the stock would be hammered if he left. while pointing out how tough it is ''to put a value on the genius of one person,'' he has a price target of $115, assuming the boss stays. if not, mr. wolf said, ''my guess is instead of a $90 stock, it would be a $50 to $60 stock.'' it trades at $88.50.  mr. landis called the options controversy ''one great cloud of uncertainty, which could potentially be really bad.'' what is especially troublesome for investors is that there is no way to know if regulators will implicate mr. jobs in wrongdoing -- the company absolved him in an internal investigation -- and so there is no way to calculate damage.  ''it's a digital event, a 1 or a 0,'' said mr. landis, betraying his many years working in silicon valley. ''if he doesn't have to leave it's a footnote; if he has to leave it's a total game changer. the temptation is to say it's already baked into the stock price, but i don't see how it can be, given that you can't calculate the probability of it.''  market values  