it's up, it's good, maybe too good for n.f.l.   place-kickers in the n.f.l. have never been this good, and they are becoming better every season.  in 2006, they made 81.4 percent of their regular-season field-goal attempts. that broke the record of 81 percent, set in 2005, which broke the mark of 80.8 percent, set in 2004.  the n.f.l.'s age of the kicker has extended into this season's playoffs; kickers have made 34 of 36 field-goal attempts -- a 94.4 percent clip that is higher than the percentage of successful extra points 30 years ago.  three of last weekend's four second-round playoff games were decided by 3 points -- two requiring late kicks to be settled -- and the fourth featured no touchdowns but a 7-for-7 field-goal performance by the kickers.  in an era of parity in the n.f.l., when it seems that more and more games are being decided by field goals, more and more kicks are sailing between the uprights.  each kick carries the national football league toward a difficult question: should anything be done about it?  ''i imagine that it is something that will come up at our next session,'' said john mara, the giants' president and a member of the league's competition committee. ''but i can't imagine enough sentiment to make any radical changes.''  the n.f.l. has long had an uneasy relationship with the players who put the foot in football. it has occasionally tried to slow their impact, but never with a lasting effect on accuracy. the upward trend has been so steady that the 18 best seasons for overall field-goal accuracy have come in the past 18 seasons.  ideas for rules changes are running out. the uprights could be narrowed, a notion discussed briefly in the 1990s. or the hash marks on the field could be widened to create more difficult kicking angles. (they were narrowed by the n.f.l. in 1972 to give more room to the offenses.)  such proposals, for now, would probably not garner the necessary three-quarters approval of the league's 32 teams, but they would certainly incur the wrath of kickers.  ''i don't think you can punish a group for collectively achieving a high level of performance,'' giants kicker jay feely said in an e-mail message.  he added: ''you don't penalize quarterbacks when they break records. what happens is you have to play better defense and not allow field-goal attempts, because we are going to make them.''  what makes kickers different -- beyond the outdated-but-enduring image of a quirky bobble-headed player with a single bar on his helmet, no stain on his uniform and, sometimes, no shoe on one foot -- is that they do not compete player versus player, but player versus goal post.  there is little doubt that players at all positions are more skilled than ever. but as quarterbacks become better, so do defenders. as offensive tackles become bigger, defensive ends become faster. more broadly, when a certain offense looks unstoppable or a defense impenetrable, the other side adjusts. in the tug of war of football, there is a natural state of balance, sometimes tweaked by rules adjustments.  but rules are all that can counteract the steady improvement of kickers. and the n.f.l. has tried.  in 1999, the league required kickers and punters to use fresh-from-the-box balls, called k balls, to prevent doctoring that would help balls fly farther. (kickers were accused of everything from fiddling with air pressure to cooking balls in microwave ovens.)  there is little statistical proof that k balls have an impact on field goals, but circumstantial evidence showed they might have affected holders. two weeks ago, dallas's tony romo dropped a shiny ball as he tried to place it on the ground for a possible game-winning kick in a playoff game against seattle.  in 1994, the league made missed kicks more costly. rather than place the ball back at the line of scrimmage when the opposing team took possession, the ball was placed at the spot of the kick -- usually a negative 8-yard difference for the team that had attempted the field goal. the rules change dropped the number of attempts of 50 yards or more to 66 in 1994 from 120 in 1993, but attempts have risen again as kickers have become stronger and more accurate. two of the six longest field goals in league history were kicked in 2006.  the 1994 change was an extension of a rule started in 1974, the year the uprights were moved from the goal line to the back of the end zone.  ''i think kickers will always adjust,'' the former n.f.l. kicker raul allegre, now a commentator for espn's spanish-language n.f.l. coverage, said in a telephone interview friday. ''i don't know if there is anything the n.f.l. can do.''  changes in n.f.l. rules have typically been made to increase offense. if the n.f.l. ponders making field goals more difficult, it will also have to consider if a rules change would spark more aggressive play calling, or just more missed field goals. more touchdowns or fewer points?  jan stenerud is the only full-time place-kicker in the pro football hall of fame. he converted 66.8 percent of his field-goal attempts in a 19-year career, a rate well above that of his contemporaries but far below what is needed to retain a job today.  stenerud, in a telephone interview thursday, offered a list of reasons accuracy has improved: more consistent field conditions, more indoor stadiums, more practice time devoted to special teams and full-time long snappers. he noted his own improvement; in 1981, the season he turned 39, he made 22 of 24 field goals for green bay, including 2 of 2 from 50 yards or more.  stenerud was a norwegian skier who stumbled into a kicking career at montana state. since then, place-kicking has evolved from a point-after afterthought to a career choice, with dozens of camps teaching children how to kick. place-kickers will only get better.  still, stenerud said he did not think the league should make kicking more difficult. ''i don't think you should penalize excellence,'' he said. ''it's not that easy.''  with improved accuracy, stenerud said, comes bloated expectations and pressure. with more than four of every five kicks being made, the ones that miss are amplified.  when buffalo's scott norwood missed a 47-yard field goal in super bowl xxv, letting the giants escape with a 20-19 victory, he was ostracized despite the fact that a 47-yarder was roughly a 50-50 proposition. the pressure is even higher now; in 2006, kickers made 73.5 percent of their field-goal attempts from 40 to 49 yards, a new high.  the former coach dick vermeil was the first special-teams coach in n.f.l. history, with the los angeles rams in 1969, and he has an appreciation for the craft's difficulty. he said he did not think the league should make kicking more difficult -- ''nothing is automatic,'' he said thursday in a telephone interview -- but he agreed that it was becoming more important to the game.  ''with parity, the win margins, the loss margins, are closer than ever before,'' vermeil said after rattling off an encyclopedia's worth of kicking statistics. ''the importance on the kicks is bigger than ever before.''  actually, that may just be the best argument against changing the rules. the age of parity may have had the effect of allowing bad teams to become good quickly, but, oddly, it has not made games closer.  the average margin of victory since 1983 has ranged from 12.7 points in 1985 to 10.5 points in 1994, and there has been no perceptible trend, according to data from aaron schatz of footballoutsiders.com. in 2006, the typical game was decided by 11.4 points, he said.  but the percentage of points being scored on field goals, as opposed to touchdowns, is slowly rising-- not because more kicks are being attempted, but because more are being made.  thirty years ago, there were 2.12 offensive touchdowns scored for every field goal made. the ratio in 2006 was 1.38 to 1.  no current place-kicker is more respected than adam vinatieri, whose clutch kicks helped the patriots to three super bowl victories in the past five seasons, and who kicked five field goals for the colts in a 15-6 playoff victory over the ravens.  vinatieri could end up as the second full-time kicker in the pro football hall of fame. but is he a great kicker, or just a product of his time?  the answer, of course, is both. and as others come along, looking more like vinatieri than stenerud, the n.f.l. will have to decide at what point is a great kicker good enough.  pro football  