at murder trial, both sides portray abusive marriage   it was a surprising killing for the neighborhood, hidden behind the doors of a dignified town house in the same orbit as gracie mansion and the metropolitan museum of art, where affluence is high and the crime rate is low.  and the mystery has only deepened in the first week of the murder trial of benjamin odierno, a 72-year-old landlord accused of stabbing his 57-year-old wife, christine, to death with a broken-tipped kitchen knife as she prepared dinner.  as mr. odierno, a tall, portly man with slicked-back graying hair and a vacant expression, has sat staring into space in state supreme court in manhattan, both the prosecution and the defense have portrayed a deeply troubled relationship that was coming apart at the seams, but one in which husband and wife shared a deep dependency after 27 years of marriage.  neither side disputes that the marriage was abusive. but who was the abuser and who was the abused? on that, they disagree, and their conflicting interpretations of the same evidence suggest how hard it can be for outsiders to see inside an abusive marriage.  in the first week of what is expected to be a five-week trial, mr. odierno's lawyer, jack litman, has portrayed his client as a simple man, a high school graduate, the son of a barber. mr. odierno went into the business of buying real estate and fixing it up himself in the 1950s, when real estate was relatively cheap, and owned a small apartment building on the upper east side, his lawyer said.  mrs. odierno stopped working as an assistant manager at saks fifth avenue when she married her husband. they had two sons, marcus, now 25, who lived at home, and stephan, now 28, who lived a few blocks away in his father's rental building.  a lutheran minister who lived next door to the odiernos testified that he heard arguments through the walls and that mrs. odierno gave him the address for her mother in allentown, pa., in case anything ever happened to her.  mrs. odierno's mother, jennie kramer, testified, ''she seemed to be getting thinner and more worried about the boys, because they were her whole life.''  but the defense has been building a case that mrs. odierno was suffering from her own internal demons, which made her paranoid and gave her an eating disorder (a medical examiner testified that she was 5 feet 6 and 116 pounds). mr. odierno loved his wife, mr. litman has told the jury, and the problems in the marriage were mostly in her head.  the winter before her death, mr. litman said, mrs. odierno ''started to openly browbeat her husband'' in front of their sons.  mrs. odierno's divorce lawyer, michael calabrese, testified yesterday for the prosecution, describing her as a frightened woman, who came to him in the fall of 2004 seeking a divorce, but who wanted to protect her children. he said she told him that her husband had hidden large amounts of cash in the basement ceiling and had moved money out of their joint accounts.  ''did she tell you that she was abused physically and psychologically by her husband?'' asked the prosecutor, kerry o'connell.  ''yes, she did,'' mr. calabrese said, without offering details.  she was hoping to file for divorce after the two sons moved to hawaii, where they were supposed to attend flight school, mr. calabrese said. but when the sons stayed in new york, she changed her mind, asking the lawyer to draft separation papers instead, which the lawyer gave her about four days before she died.  in cross-examination, mr. litman tried to enter the separation agreement into evidence, but the judge refused. still mr. litman was able to establish that the separation agreement called for the odiernos to continue to live together after the formal separation, perhaps for as long as a year.  ''did you put in a clause that the husband and wife will live together at 422 east 84th street?'' mr. litman asked.  ''yes, i did,'' mr. calabrese replied.  on april 24, 2005, as mrs. odierno was cutting lettuce for dinner, the odiernos argued. the prosecution has hinted that mr. odierno was enraged that his wife wanted a separation. mr. litman claims that mr. odierno had accepted the inevitable, but was angry that the separation agreement called for him to get their country house during the winter months, and his wife to get it during the summer months.  ''can't i go at least one month during the summer?'' he said his client asked.  yesterday, a medical examiner, andrea coleman, described what followed as ''an energetic struggle.'' with ms. coleman narrating, the prosecutor spent hours showing the jury photographs of mrs. odierno's naked body, which was marked by pokes, scratches, cuts and stab wounds from the bridge of her nose to her ankles, in back and in front. she had deep defensive wounds to her fingers, and a fatal wound to the heart, ms. coleman said.  mr. litman is arguing that mrs. odierno stabbed her husband first, and then mr. odierno struck back in self-defense, so disoriented that he held the knife blade-side up.  a prosecution expert testified that the wounds to mr. odierno's abdomen fit the classic pattern of self-inflicted wounds, first shallow ''exploratory'' wounds, then deeper ones.  in the end, as ms. o'connell has pointed out to the jury, it was mrs. odierno who lay dead in the morgue, and mr. odierno who survived to come to court.  