robbins: one toeshoe in bach, the other in kern   jerome robbins choreographed two of his late ballets to bach in the first few months of 1994, and both were on the third themed program of the new york city ballet's winter season, ''jerome robbins: an american icon.''  in a sense, the two pieces are very different: ''2 & 3 part inventions'' is an ensemble, created for teenage students at the school of american ballet; ''a suite of dances'' is a solo for mikhail baryshnikov, then in his 40s. but both works capture the radiance of spirit and the translucent purity of intention of thoroughbred bodies dedicated to joyous motion.  in ''2 & 3 part inventions,'' set to some of the piano exercises bach wrote for one of his young sons, mr. robbins provides an effect of simplicity and playfulness. his choreography is studded with unusual rhythmic dynamics and inconspicuous technical difficulties throughout the 12 sections. and although there are solos and pas de deux, the emphasis is on counterpoint and canon within the group.  on sunday afternoon the dancers -- rebecca krohn, tyler angle, sterling hyltin, tiler peck, ana sophia scheller, jonathan stafford, amar ramasar and seth orza -- paid tribute to robbins's famous perfectionism with an impeccably polished and charming performance. the equally fine pianist was nancy mcdill, who had played at this work's premiere.  damian woetzel was no less charming in ''a suite of dances,'' performed to excerpts from bach's suites for solo cello, played onstage by ann kim. the beginning is tentative and inward-looking, as mr. woetzel sketches out the steps. by the end, however, he is flirting with the audience, spinning through bravura pirouette sequences and finally cartwheeling into place at the cellist's feet. mr. woetzel often seems hesitant about being a star, but there was no doubt about it here.  a young girl doomed to an untimely death is the theme of ''in memory of ,'' to berg's violin concerto from 1935, beautifully played by kurt nikkanen. the ballet can feel formulaic, but wendy whelan, tenderly partnered by seth orza and threatened by a subtly menacing charles askegard, was quietly luminous in the central role.  ''i'm old fashioned,'' to a score by morton gould, based on a theme by jerome kern, is an unabashed crowd pleaser that is also a serious ballet, perhaps a little too serious, as robbins dissects the lovely duet by fred astaire and rita hayworth, shown on film as the ballet begins, at considerable length.  but ms. krohn, maria kowroski and jenifer ringer, partnered by mr. angle, philip neal and stephen hanna, were just as glamorous as they needed to be, and the showstopping finale -- a plethora of astaires and hayworths dancing beneath the film -- is sigh-worthy pleasure. maurice kaplow led the orchestra, in fine form.  the new york city ballet performs through feb. 25 at the new york state theater, lincoln center; (212) 870-5570, nycballet.com. ''jerome robbins: an american icon'' will be performed again tomorrow night.  dance review  