an unthinkable crime, till someone thought of it   three crumpled dollars and two quarters, tugged from the pocket of a puffy coat on a cold night, brings four hot chicken wings with french fries or fried rice. the most expensive dish on the restaurant's menu is no. 71, the lobster meat chow mein, at $8.95 a quart.  the happy house chinese takeout restaurant in bedford-stuyvesant does not feed the rich, or put on airs, and maybe that is why, in the seven years it has fed its busy and occasionally even violent corner of malcolm x boulevard, it was never robbed. maybe the thought simply never occurred to anyone. it would be like holding up one's own kitchen.  that all changed, twice, in recent weeks, in two vicious attacks on the restaurant's workers, two botched robberies that caused serious injury and yielded no cash.  last month, the son of the owners, man seng wong, 25, was beaten while delivering $24 worth of food, and spent the night in the hospital, his sister said. the young boys who hit him took the food, and there have been no arrests.  then, last saturday, during the generally calm lunch hours just after 1:30 p.m., a man entered the happy house and, when the newly hired cashier -- the first stranger the wong family had ever taken on -- turned her back, he leaped over the counter and drew a pistol, the police said.  the woman screamed, and the man shot her in the face. another shot struck a relative of the wongs by marriage, hoy wang, 37, piercing the palm of his hand. the shooter fled without any money and, in a final touch of carelessness, left behind his cellphone.  there are four members -- the parents, the son and the daughter -- of the wong family of immigrants from hong kong. they live where they work, in an apartment behind the happy house.  the attacks left them feeling rattled and vulnerable in a part of the city where chinese restaurants -- their steaming dishes in tin trays long a staple of poor and working families -- line malcolm x boulevard, but where few chinese people live.  ''they worry about it, especially my mother,'' said gigi wong, 19, on wednesday night, standing in the same spot behind the counter where the cashier was shot four days earlier.  closing the store, even for a week, was never an option. ''they still have to do whatever they were doing before. they're scared, but they still have to do it.''  her parents moved to queens from hong kong seven years ago. ms. wong followed in 2001, and started working at happy house herself a year or two later, she said. the family spends most nights in the brooklyn apartment.  she knew practically no other asians her age, not even the ones from other restaurants, but blended into the predominantly black neighborhood.  ''i have a lot of black friends,'' ms. wong said.  ''from 7th grade to 12th grade, i only went to black schools. i just switched to a chinese school to make some chinese friends.''  ms. wong is quick to smile, remarkably cheerful several hours into a 12-hour workday this week. ''i know a lot of people, and a lot of people know me, and they've got a lot of love for me,'' she said.  customers tell her they are glad she was not at work last saturday, but she replies: ''i wish i was here. it wouldn't have happened.''  a detective called the restaurant on wednesday to speak to ms. wong. he needed her to translate something for her relative, shot in the hand.  she is the only member of the wong family fluent in english.  there are video cameras watching the counter all the time. the monitors are wrapped in clear plastic to keep them clean.  most of the other chinese restaurants nearby also have thick plexiglass shields between the cashier and the customer, like a gas station or a liquor store, but not happy house.  longtime customers, presumably the very people who would be the most offended by beefed-up security, tell ms. wong they need more.  ''they need, like, a partition here with a window,'' said a matronly woman who gave only her first name, lorna.  ''people are stupid,'' she said. ''they always kill the ones that help them.''  to ms. wong, she said, ''if that was you they shot, i would have cried.''  so new was the cashier that, after the shooting, no one in the wong family seemed to know her full name, only her last name, lin.  before the shooting, when gigi wong had tried to speak to her at work, they would be constantly interrupted by customers.  later, through the police, the wongs learned the cashier was named aizen lin, 34, and tracked her first to the nearby woodhull medical and mental health center and then to bellevue hospital center in manhattan, where she was in critical condition.  several nights this week, after closing the restaurant at midnight, the wongs piled into their car to visit ms. lin.  half of her face is badly swollen, and while she appears alert, ms. wong said, she cannot speak with the tubes in her throat.  ''we went at 1 o'clock in the morning. my mother, my father and me,'' she said on thursday morning. ''she still has the straw, the plastic thing in her mouth. she saw, and she opened her eye. i said, 'i came to see you,' that's all. i can't think of anything to say.''  ms. wong's parents held ms. lin's hand. they stayed about 15 minutes, then drove back to brooklyn.  the police took the gunman's cellphone and managed to contact him, pretending to be men willing to sell the phone back to him. it worked: the suspect met officers at an arranged spot, and they arrested him, the police said.  the man, raymond wiliams, 21, was identified on the security video tape as the gunman leaping over the counter, according to a criminal complaint filed in court.  the police are looking for another man who may have been involved, the complaint says.  mr. williams has been charged with attempted murder, assault, menacing and harassment, and remained in jail as of yesterday. he admitted he leaped over the counter and fired two shots, according to the complaint.  ms. wong did not recognize his name.  but she was stunned to learn of his address, 210 stuyvesant avenue, right around the corner from the restaurant.  ''we deliver to that address,'' she said. ''every single day.''  bedford-stuyvesant journal  