nets will lose jefferson for 6 weeks   the nets will be without richard jefferson, their starting small forward, for about six weeks after he has arthroscopic surgery today to remove loose fragments from his right ankle.  jefferson is the team's second-leading scorer, and the news comes during one of the nets' most promising stretches of the season. they beat the orlando magic on saturday night for their ninth victory in 11 games and got back to .500 for the first time in two months.  the nets (20-20) start a five-game trip to the west on monday night with a game against the kings in sacramento. the trip could be an indicator of what direction the nets, the leaders of the atlantic division, will take for the remainder of the season.  jefferson, who has been bothered by ankle problems all season, chose to have the surgery now because his ankle was not getting better, said rod thorn, the nets' president. jefferson took two cortisone shots earlier this season, and thorn said they were not working. having the surgery now avoids the possibility of jefferson's ankle becoming so bad that he would have to miss the rest of the season.  ''he's just not able to do the type things that he can do,'' thorn said during a telephone interview yesterday. ''he's playing about 50, 55 percent. it's tough for him. he's a young guy, still in the early part of his career. it's mentally a tough situation.''  if jefferson recovers in six weeks, he should be back by early march, when the nets have a six-game trip.  coach lawrence frank said his team needed to find a way to cope with jefferson's absence.  ''injuries happen throughout the course of the season, so regardless of how you're playing, where you're playing, that's the unfortunate reality of pro sports,'' he said by telephone.  regardless of who plays in place of jefferson, frank added, ''we understand we have to be consistent.''  jefferson missed five games early in the season after rolling his left ankle, and the second-year swingman antoine wright started in his place.  but wright has fallen out of the rotation and frank said he was not sure who would replace jefferson. frank said matchups could dictate his starting lineup, which may change from game to game.  jefferson was averaging 16.1 points, 4.5 rebounds and 2.9 assists this season, all below his career averages. but he seemed to be battling through the pain and was showing flashes of his usual explosiveness. in a victory against the knicks on friday night, he scored 21 points.  many credited jefferson's improved play at times for the team's turnaround from an 11-18 record.  jefferson's problems date to last season's playoffs, when he sprained his right ankle in the second round against the miami heat. he tweaked the ankle again in the off-season. the problems with the ankle resurfaced during a game against the milwaukee bucks in mid-december. jefferson sat out the second half of that game because it was sore, and he missed the next game, at toronto.  jefferson, 26, has always prided himself on his ability to play through pain, and the nagging injury has frustrated him.  last month, jefferson said of his statistics: ''we're looking at some of the lows of my career. it's not acceptable.''  and after saturday night's game, jefferson dismissed a question about whether he would make the trip, saying: ''you're not asking me any questions about this. come on, guys.''  thorn said he did not believe that jefferson's ankle problems would threaten his career.  jefferson will be the fifth nets player to have surgery this season. the most serious injury has been to their starting center, nenad krstic, who will miss the rest of the season after tearing the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee in late december. krstic was the nets' second-leading scorer at the time of his injury.  ''you can't lose players like richard now, on top of nenad,'' thorn said. ''it's going to affect your team, obviously. we are just coming into one of the most difficult periods of our schedule. the players are going to have to play an increased role.''  pro basketball  