the vroom of the engines, the pride of the clubs   at times some behaved like gossipy girls, eyeing a rival clique as they passed by.  heads turned whenever members of the many motorcycle clubs sauntered through the crowded jacob k. javits convention center over the weekend, as other bikers checked out their ''colors,'' or the patches stitched across the back of vests and jackets.  there were dozens of clubs, more than ever at the 25th annual cycle world international motorcycle show, with new names like god's outcast and frontline riderz sprinkled among familiar ones like crazy pistons and ruff ryders.  for members of clubs, which are cropping up across the country in greater numbers, their colors are a symbol of pride. but they also have been a source of trouble. disputes among clubs have escalated into violent brawls at motorcycle shows or rallies and have sometimes led to killings. some shows ban colors. ''no weapons. no colors. no attitudes,'' read a flier for a motorcycle show two weekends ago in somerset, n.j.  but at the show in manhattan, thousands flaunted their colors. robert pandya, a spokesman for the motorcycle show, said that clubs were encouraged to attend.  ''it's not that old gang stereotype, that's a thing of the past,'' he said, adding that the family-oriented show helps to combat stereotypes about the biker culture.  there are clubs formed around gender, religion and military service. new york sanitation workers have their own club.  some were less than a year old, drawing snickers from members of more established clubs.  ''they're imposters,'' said chris montesione, 32, nicknamed psycho, of legion of doom, a club founded 12 years ago in brooklyn that has more of a rough-edged reputation.  it is described as an outlaw club in the world of organized riding, which, according to the american motorcyclist association, represent only 1 percent of the riding population.  at the event, members of outlaw clubs like the hells angels and law enforcement clubs like the blue knights peacefully perused the showroom.  local chapters of the hells angels sold shirts and stickers with sayings like ''angel power'' at three booths.  meanwhile, ed cutinello, 57, a retired new york city police officer, was checking out motorcycles on display with other members of the blue knights. he said the club's colors, blue and white, not only signify law enforcement, but also distinguish it from outlaw clubs, which often display old english lettering and three or more patches.  ''it's like the mason-dixon line; we don't cross their line and they don't cross ours,'' mr. cutinello said.  for john lofranco, 52, a hells angels member for 30 years, whose nickname is john the baptist, bike clubs -- old and new -- are all about ''the right to associate.''  ''that's the bottom line,'' he said. ''it's all about freedom.''  ink  