recognizing a sacred bond sometimes obscured   i carry the card in the glove compartment of my car. it is not a valentine's card from my wife, or a graduation card from my mother. it is a simple greeting card, with a cheerful watercolor of wildflowers, sent to me by a patient i cared for after moving to memphis.  she was an attractive 34-year-old medical detailer who was engaged to be married until she became inexplicably short of breath. first her doctors thought it was asthma, then bronchitis.  finally, after admission to the hospital and a bronchoscopy (a scope to wash her lungs), we discovered that she had pneumonia, of a type common to patients with aids. my patient was h.i.v. positive.  she recovered from the initial pneumonia, but her cd-4 count -- a measure of the strength of her immune system -- continued to drop, falling as low as 5. (normal is 500; a count below 200 is defined as aids.) we tried several h.i.v. medicines and enlisted her in a trial of experimental drugs. a few years later she moved out of the state.  the card reads:  ''dear dr. jain,  ''i just wanted to drop you a note to say hello. it's hard to believe i met you nine years ago this summer! i have enjoyed wonderful health & a happy life with my husband. my viral load has been undetectable (h.i.v. infection is fully controlled) for several years & cd-4 over 400 -- vs. 5 when we started. i have so much to be grateful for & wanted to let you know how much i appreciated all you did for me.  ''i hope this finds you & your family happy and well. all the best.''  on days when my patients are feeling overwhelming pain, suffering or grief -- or on days when the violence in the middle east becomes unbearable, or when i have done my best and the patient's family threatens a lawsuit -- i pull out the card and reread it.  her simple words help me to reconnect to this truth: it is an honor and a privilege to help and heal people, not just because i am trained to prescribe drugs, administer injections and wield the scalpel, but because i am able to help them at the most difficult time of their lives. by the same token, my patient let me know that she realized the privilege and security of being cared for and treated by a doctor.  the doctor-patient relationship is more than a commercial transaction between retailers and customers; it is a sacred bond in which both parties are interdependent. it is the place where doctors and patients become allies.  much has happened in the medical profession and in society at large to loosen and misfocus that relationship. medical technology has led to a certain estrangement between doctor and patient, there is the constant threat of malpractice suits, medicaid (tenncare in our state) has unraveled, and then there is confusion over medicare part d and the management of the uninsured. all these have contributed to doctors and patients being thrown together almost as adversaries, rather than the allies they are meant to be.  and yet, as i drive home each evening, the greeting card and a sentence from an ancient jaina scripture reminds me of my purpose in life.  parasparopagraho jivanam, it says: souls render service to one another.  cases  