blockbuster marries stores to internet   netflix has upped the ante in its push to outwit its chief competitor, blockbuster. this week, netflix, which rents movies by mail, introduced a service to deliver movies and television shows directly to pcs as streaming video. blockbuster is fighting back and plans to roll out its own digital distribution service. john f. antioco, 57, the chairman and chief executive of blockbuster, spoke recently about the challenge from netflix and the shifting marketplace, new programs that address those shifts and how oscar buzz is good for business. following are excerpts:  q. when will your new digital download service begin?  a. this year. while we don't see digital downloading as becoming a big business in the next year or two, our mission is to provide customers with completely convenient access to movies.  q. you recently started a program that competes directly with netflix called total access, which gives customers the option of returning dvds through the mail or exchanging them at a store. how is that going?  a. we launched total access on nov. 1, and in the last two months of last year we added 700,000 subscribers.  q. you are giving customers a two-week free trial. do you know how many are staying on and paying for the service?  a. we believe it's somewhere between 70 and 75 percent. and that's a much higher conversion rate than any of our previous programs.  q. why is this plan catching on?  a. the program takes the best of online, which is a very large selection of movies -- 65,000 titles -- and convenience, and adds the ability to take the movie to your local blockbuster store and exchange it for any movie in the store that is available free. so it meets the spontaneous need of customers.  when a customer exchanges a dvd at the store, it immediately signals our online service to ship another movie from the subscriber's preselected list of films.  q. blockbuster has stores in europe and asia. are you dealing with similar challenges internationally?  a. we are. and we deal with them differently in those markets. the u.k. blockbuster business has an online service, but we have not added the total access program. still, we are looking at ways for competing more effectively there.  q. what are the growth prospects overseas?  a. we are going to focus on the united states, canada and mexico. and if the right opportunity came, we would probably divest some of our international businesses and take that money and spend it toward initiatives here at home or buy back shares.  q. blockbuster's share price has doubled since early 2006. how are you gaining the confidence of investors?  a. i think they are recognizing two things. first, though the in-store business will remain under pressure, blockbuster, because of our brand, will pick up market share through consolidation. second, our online initiative is a growth business.  q. do you feel as if you are in a restructuring mode or a growth mode today?  a. i wouldn't use the word restructuring. i would say that we are continuing to dissolve our old business model. and we are adding a third leg to our business this year: digital distribution. so, we have taken blockbuster from an in-store-only rental business to in-store rental, online and mail-delivery rental and now digital download.  q. how important are high-definition dvds?  a. they are available to all of our total access customers. we think the format war in this segment is going to become less of an obstacle now that companies are making high-definition dvd players that will play either blu-ray or hd-dvd. we think that high-definition dvd is going to be a significant part of the business starting in late 2007 and then picking up real momentum in '08.  q. this is oscar season. some movies getting oscar buzz are already out on dvd. do the high-profile awards shows matter to business?  a. oh, absolutely. especially in the past couple of years. for instance, the no. 1 rented movie in 2005 was ''crash,'' which won the best picture oscar last year. and a number of the nominated movies are not necessarily the biggest theatrical releases, so when they get oscar buzz it's a good thing for the rental business.  saturday interview  