in austin, echoes of a distant war in an opera's american premiere   the state capital of texas takes great pride in a live music scene that cherishes tradition while also valuing innovation. the city is a hotbed of both roots music and experimental rock; classical music, by comparison, claims a considerably smaller share of attention. austin lyric opera has long been overshadowed by older, larger, better-financed companies in dallas and houston.  but in recent years the company has begun to carve a niche by presenting contemporary works new to texas, including jake heggie's ''dead man walking'' and andré previn's ''streetcar named desire.'' on friday night, austin lyric opera offered its first american premiere, ''waiting for the barbarians'' by philip glass, in bass concert hall on the university of texas campus.  theater erfurt, the german company that commissioned the work, staged the premiere in september 2005, and the opera was subsequently staged in amsterdam. richard buckley, the artistic director of austin lyric opera, secured the rights to the work's united states premiere, making it a highlight of the company's 20th-anniversary season.  there were hometown connections as well. mr. glass based the work on a 1980 novel by the south african author and nobel laureate j. m. coetzee, a university of texas alumnus. guy montavon, who directed the erfurt production and adapted it for austin, staged mr. coetzee's thinly disguised allegory of apartheid in a manner that suggested parallels to the current situation in iraq -- a provocative image in the city where president bush served as texas governor.  ''waiting for the barbarians'' is filled with disquieting and timely resonances. the story deals with the comfortable magistrate of a frontier town at the outer limits of a nameless empire. he comes into conflict with a military force sent to wage war against the ''barbarians'': wild outsiders who have been deemed a threat to the empire's security.  the sinister colonel joll extracts confessions from prisoners through torture and whips the townsfolk into a jingoistic fury in a scene redolent of the images that emerged from abu ghraib. for acting with compassion toward a barbarian girl who was orphaned, maimed and nearly blinded by her interrogators, the magistrate is branded a traitor, imprisoned and tortured. in the end, an ill-equipped and dispirited military abandons the broken, depleted town.  mr. glass's opera largely sacrificed one of mr. coetzee's most compelling inventions: the magistrate's intensely physical yet sexless obsession with the barbarian girl, which was limited to a single scene and a few wayward suggestions. when joll denies the magistrate's moral rectitude near the end of the opera, calling him ''the lazy lie we tell ourselves when times are easy, prosperous and fat,'' the impact is diminished by the absence of his civilian counterpart's more questionable actions and motivations.  even so, the librettist, christopher hampton, fashioned a taut, dramatic condensation of mr. coetzee's novel. mr. glass responded with some of his most agile, vivid music, setting scenes with a genuinely impressive emotional specificity, as well as a keen ear for beguiling sonorities.  the baritone richard salter, who created the role of the magistrate in erfurt, conveyed outrage and weary defiance in his riveting portrayal here. eugene perry, a baritone, was a commanding joll; the bass wilbur pauley was menacing as his henchman, officer mandel.  as the barbarian girl, the mezzo-soprano adriana zabala sang with a bright, penetrating voice. she was a vivid, fearless presence in the physically demanding role, which required her to perform one scene completely unclothed and covered with bruises. georgia pickett, a soprano, brought charm and a sweet sound to her portrayal of the cook who serves as the magistrate's confidante.  mr. buckley's conducting underscored the lyricism and pervasive melancholy of mr. glass's music. his alert players were especially effective in a series of ghostly dream sequences. the chorus occasionally struggled with fast-paced barrages of syllables but mustered a chilling force in mob scenes. mummified mannequins dangling above the set, illuminated from within, were a heavy-handed touch, but the designer george tsypin's translucent scrims and painted drops beautifully conveyed the passage of sun-blasted days and bone-chilling nights on the edge of civilization.  ''waiting for the barbarians'' will be performed again on saturday and next monday at the bass concert hall in austin, tex.; (512) 471-5401.  music review  