susan marber, herbert fixler   susan carol marber and herbert b. fixler were married by rabbi ronald b. sobel last evening at the river café in brooklyn.  the bride, 52, is a freelance marketing consultant in manhattan. until 2002, she was an executive vice president for account management at grey worldwide, the advertising agency in manhattan. she graduated cum laude from city college and received a master's degree in psychology from tufts. she is the daughter of the late ethel marber and albert marber, who lived in manhattan.  the bridegroom, 63, works in manhattan as a partner in wolf, block, schorr & solis-cohen, a philadelphia law firm; he specializes in estate planning and trust and estate administration. he is also the chairman of the hyde leadership charter school in the bronx. he graduated from villanova university and received his law degree from american university. his first marriage ended in divorce. he is the son of the late claire s. fixler and herbert fixler, who lived in new brunswick, n.j.  the couple met 11 years ago at a dinner with mutual friends, a married couple. it was more of a slip-up than a fix-up, the husband and wife having intended to dine apart, she with ms. marber and he with mr. fixler. but because a communications lapse, they all wound up dining together.  ''we had a great time,'' mr. fixler said. ''i thought she was terrific and fun and beautiful and i was very very attracted to her. and the fact that we had three bottles of champagne might have helped.''  ''but, it was not a good time for me,'' he continued. ''i was divorced and involved in a relationship. so i walked her home and said, 'maybe we could have lunch.' ''  her reaction: ''i thought, 'what a turkey,' '' ms. marber said.  a year later, his relationship over, he left a phone message in her office. ''i had no idea who herb fixler was but i was sufficiently intrigued to call back,'' she said. ''we went out for dinner, and again it was terrific.''  with that, ms. marber's and mr. fixler's romance got its start, and continued for more than a decade. during that time they began to refer to each other as ''spouselike objects.''  ''i coined that phrase because we always considered ourselves as married,'' mr. fixler said. ''when we planned a dinner for our 10th anniversary, i started to think maybe we should really get married. i always knew i wanted to be with her forever.''  weddings/celebrations  