olympics are still a dream for some female athletes   starting with the 2010 winter olympics in vancouver, british columbia, both men and women will win medals in ski cross, a somewhat gladiatorial freestyle event that was conceived in the 1990s.  but ski jumping, which has been an olympic event since the first winter games in 1924, will remain a stag party -- unless a long-shot discrimination complaint achieves its objective.  female ski jumpers have been pressing their case. at the same time, sports with greater youth appeal are pushing to be added to the olympic roster, much the way snowboard cross was added for the 2006 games in turin, italy.  despite having a long-term goal of reaching gender equity, the international olympic committee's executive board rejected women's jumping for vancouver at its meetings nov. 28 in kuwait. but the board approved ski cross as an event for both men and women. (women accounted for 38 percent of the participants at the turin games and for 41 percent at the 2004 summer games in athens.)  ski jumping and nordic combined, which is made up of ski jumping and cross-country skiing, are the only disciplines in the winter games without women's events.  saying that women's ski jumping was still in the early stages of development, the i.o.c. suggested that the women could perhaps reapply in 2014, when they will probably have met the criteria for inclusion in the event.  a summary of the kuwait meetings on the organization's web site said that the i.o.c. board ''noted that it would be closely following the development of women ski jumping with a view of its inclusion in future olympic games.''  that did not do much to console jessica jerome, a 19-year-old jumper from utah, who was inspired by the 2002 salt lake olympics.  ''it's hard to keep yourself motivated for so long for just a maybe,'' she said in a recent telephone interview.  jerome is one of five members on the tight-knit united states women's jumping team. she and other young women have flocked to ski jumping in the past decade, earning financing and support from the united states ski team. the sport has also earned its own circuit from the international ski federation, known as the f.i.s.  jerome's teammate lindsey van, who at 22 is perhaps the united states' top female jumper, said there was a certain adventure in being part of a growing sport, with its out-of-the-way sites. one event in austria included a stay at a barn.  ''the sketchiness of it all makes it more interesting,'' van said. ''it's an indescribable feeling. that's why i keep having to go up there again and again.''  van and jerome are keeping a close eye on a last-ditch effort to have their event on the 2010 olympic program. this month, a canadian lawyer plans to file a complaint with the canadian human rights commission, arguing that the exclusion of women constitutes discrimination under the nation's human rights act.  ''the essence of the complaint would be that public funding is going into the funding of the ski-jumping facilities, and that women won't be allowed to use them,'' the lawyer, nina reid, said in a telephone interview last week from her home in calgary.  reid is working fast because the vancouver organizing committee is already drafting its intricate plans for schedules, tickets and television coverage. the jumping site is under construction in the callaghan valley near whistler, british columbia, and will have 90- and 120-meter jumps. the women frequently use 90-meter hills on their premier circuit, the f.i.s. continental cup.  reid is looking for the human rights complaint to result in a political chain reaction, forcing the canadian government to put financial pressure on olympic officials. but that appears to be a long shot.  for one thing, adding women's jumping to the program now would violate the i.o.c.'s own charter. a sport's governing body is required to have held at least two world championships to be eligible to become a new olympic event. women's ski jumping, for all its rapid growth, will not have its first world championship until 2009.  this was the chief obstacle that gian-franco kasper, president of the international ski federation and an i.o.c. member, said he ran into last year when he lobbied to have the women's ski jumpers invited to vancouver.  yet female jumpers and their advocates have accused kasper of insufficient enthusiasm for including women. several years ago, he said in a radio interview that because of repeated hard landings, the sport ''seems not to be appropriate for ladies from a medical point of view.''  kasper says his words -- widely cited as evidence of chauvinism -- were taken out of context. he says he was simply describing antiquated beliefs that had hindered the sport's development.  in a telephone interview last week, kasper said, ''i can tell you our medical commission, which is made up only of doctors and experts, have informed us years ago that there was no medical risk.''  kasper is more defensive about charges that he campaigned harder on behalf of ski cross. in ski cross, also known as skiercross, racers compete head to head on an obstacle course. less than a decade old and promoted largely by the winter x games and a ski equipment company, the event rates highly with younger television audiences.  the f.i.s. has fought hard to bring it under its jurisdiction and into the olympic program. the f.i.s. freestyle committee even adjusted its world cup schedule to include the requisite number and distribution of events and competitors.  meanwhile, the ski federation's 15-member jumping committee, made up exclusively of men, campaigned hard for women's ski jumping to be included in the olympics.  whether its efforts pay off remains a long shot. anita defrantz, an american member of the i.o.c., said that when it came to including sports, olympic history was full of exceptions made and rules adjusted.  ''we've worked very hard to establish gender equity over these last 15 years, with great success,'' she said. ''it seems to me we should finish the work.''  ski jumping  