from beer man to return man   on one side of the victory fellowship church is the local budweiser plant. on the other side is the new orleans saints' practice field.  michael lewis has worked both sides.  at 25, he was driving a truck for budweiser, delivering kegs to bars and house parties. at 35, he is returning kickoffs for the saints, defying both age and reason.  the guys at the plant like to say that lewis has gone far. but, in fact, he has only gone two doors down.  lewis has spent most of his professional life on the 5700 block of airline drive, a stretch like many in new orleans, specializing in beer, faith and football.  when lewis worked at the plant, he would look at the practice field for motivation. now that he works at the practice field, he looks at the plant for perspective.  ''everything i have done has been totally different than what everyone else has done,'' lewis said. ''i sometimes can't believe it all worked out.''  he played one season of high school football. he never went to college. he never received formal training. but even when lewis was driving a truck all day, he could get out at night and run 40 yards in about 4.3 seconds.  lewis did not know much about football. but he always knew that he was fast.  he played his first professional game when he was 26, for an indoor team called the louisiana bayou beast. then he went to the new jersey red dogs, theoretically a promotion. on sunday, lewis and the saints will face the chicago bears in the national football conference championship game.  lewis may be the only player on the saints' roster who understands the significance of this moment, mainly because he is the only player on the roster who is from new orleans. but lewis is not simply from here. he embodies the place.  saints fans admire drew brees, reggie bush and deuce mcallister for their talent and grace. but they relate to lewis because of his perseverance. his story is so well chronicled in new orleans that he is known around town simply as beer man. he is greeted almost like another worker punching the clock at the superdome.  even lewis's teammates refer to him as beer man, shouting the nickname as he walks through the locker room. to some, this could sound like an insult, a reminder that he is not as pedigreed as his peers. but to lewis, it is the highest praise.  he talks about the plant the way other n.f.l. players talk about their alma mater, with pride and a little nostalgia. many of his former co-workers were displaced by hurricane katrina, but some are still two doors down. lewis sometimes visits.  ''i'd rather they call him bud man, but i still think it's awesome,'' said bryan armstrong, the plant's director of fleet and delivery. ''here is a guy who was taking a completely normal path in his life and then changed it completely. it could be a movie.''  the movie was actually released last year, about a bartender named vince papale who tried out for the philadelphia eagles and improbably made the team. the movie was called ''invincible,'' but it could have easily been titled ''beer man.''  at 5 feet 8 inches and 173 pounds, lewis is the saints' smallest player and he may be the only one with gray hair. because he spent the so-called prime of his career with budweiser, he did not really emerge with the saints until he turned 30.  lewis set franchise records for punt and kickoff return yards in a season. he once returned a punt and a kickoff for a touchdown in the same game. he was voted to the pro bowl. but early last season, in a game that the saints probably should not have even been playing, lewis tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee.  the circumstances of the injury made it even more painful. the game was supposed to be at the superdome against the giants, but because of the hurricane, it was moved to the meadowlands and classified as a saints home game.  lewis came back midway through this season, but he is no longer the most celebrated return man in town. bush handles most of the punts now. he is 14 years younger than lewis and he's a first-round pick, one of the most celebrated rookies in league history.  ''my age doesn't matter,'' lewis said. ''i still have the body of a 25-year-old. by not playing four years of high school and four years of college, i'm not beat up like most other guys. i haven't taken all those hits.''  the most anticipated matchups sunday involve the saints' offense versus the bears' defense and the saints' offense versus the chicago weather. but the return men -- devin hester for the bears, bush and lewis for the saints -- are obvious difference makers.  excitement in new orleans is such that the budweiser plant was even busier than usual thursday afternoon. in preparation for the big game, drivers were delivering kegs to houses and bars around the city. super bowl parties seemed to be starting early.  meanwhile, a few young men sat on sofas in the lobby, filling out job applications.  ''michael is proof that you never know how things are going to wind up,'' said jerry peters, the plant's marketing manager. ''we have a lot of guys here who love the saints. a couple of them are talking about trying out next year.''  pro football  