miler is 6 years older and 3 seconds better   six years ago, in the new balance games at the armory track and field center in upper manhattan, alan webb ran 3 minutes 59.86 seconds in the invitation mile. it was the first time a high school miler had broken four minutes, and, as webb recalled, it was exciting.  now a world-class runner at 24, webb ran the same race yesterday in the same meet. this time, he won by 10 yards in 3:56.7, and he was excited again.  ''it's a personal record indoors,'' he said (he has run 3:48.92 outdoors), ''and it's only january. it's the first time i've won in new york since high school. i couldn't believe it. it's just what i wanted. it's not perfect, but it tells me i'm moving in the right direction. the competition gets more and more competitive.''  on the next three weekends, webb will run in three major indoor meets: the reebok boston indoor games, the 100th millrose games at madison square garden and the tyson invitational in fayetteville, ark. he will face world-class runners like bernard lagat of the united states and craig mottram of australia.  here, webb ran an even race, with quarter miles of 58.7 seconds, 60, 60 and 58. entering the final turn on the banked 200-meter track, he pulled away from eliud njubi of kenya.  in the past two years, webb has run world-class times for 2 miles, 5,000 meters and 10,000 meters. ''it was part of my plan for the mile,'' he said. ''i wanted to get so strong that even if i wasn't ready, it wouldn't matter.''  for njubi, webb was strong enough. a 27-year-old graduate of texas christian, njubi ran a 3:58.78 mile last weekend at the arkansas invitational in fayetteville. of his race here, njubi said: ''i was always right on alan's tail, and i thought i could beat him. but when i started moving on the last lap, my turnover wasn't good and i couldn't go. but i'm happy with my race, even though i lost.''  njubi smiled, as did webb when njubi's words were relayed to him. ''i was ready for something,'' webb said. ''i was ready for him. i wasn't going to let him pass me. i'm moving forward.''  notes  the other elite races were won by mary cullen, a providence graduate from ireland, in the women's mile (4:32.29); adrian finley of barbados in the men's 400 meters (48.21 seconds) and dalilah muhammad of cardozo high school in queens in the women's 400 meters (54.28 seconds).  in the high school miles, danielle tauro of southern regional in stafford township, n.j., won the girls' race in 4:46.13, an armory record, and chris moen of walter johnson in montgomery county, md., won the boys' race in 4:16.76.  jamaica of queens was announced as the winner of the $10,000 marty glickman award, given to a high school team for academics, team spirit and community service. the award is named for glickman, a track star and sports broadcaster who died in 2001.  track and field  