boogie till dawn   night life present is always on the verge of becoming night life past. so for its own sake, it is good that love, an unassuming west village club around the corner from babbo, thrives on being a bit of living, kicking history. it is an amalgam of references: the black lights and day-glo graffiti rainbows, suns and ankhs of the '60s and '70s, the rage-all-night ethos of the '80s, and the house music and d. j. worship of the '90s.  ''we like this club,'' said kyla catlett, 28, a fashion designer, who came with her friend shanna tallarico, 29, a law student, last saturday night, ''because it reminds us of clubs in the old days -- like the early 2000s.''  o.k., so frequent partiers can't be expected to have long memories, especially when confronted by the hyperstimulating décor at love. ms. catlett and ms. tallarico were ensconced in a multilevel, carpet-covered structure full of cubbies to crawl around and hide in: picture a chill-out room as envisioned by a cat. a misty waterfall was illuminated by kaleidoscopic prisms of light. elsewhere, the walls were made to look like rock, the crevices fitted with spotlights.  ''it's very psychedelic,'' said jennifer brown, 25, a nurse. ''it's almost like you're in a playground.''  but this playground is populated by ex-ravers and others whose main concern is movement and music. the club is known for its sound system, and the d. j.s spin actual records.  ''for me it's all about space to dance,'' said woody wood (really), 34, a ponytailed massage therapist who said love reminded him of parties in the desert. ''this is hot. it's not, like, huge, but it's not small. it's not a meat market. you have space to move and to groove.''  of course, not everyone feels the hippie vibe. ''you read the posters, it's like 'love is back, blah, blah,' '' said andi prastowo, a video editor from brooklyn. he shrugged. ''at least it's downtown.''  still, most of the crowd is content to sip water and dance till dawn. (at 3 a.m., people were still on their way in.) there is little pretension. at love, women in sneakers and t-shirts or even -- gasp! -- big pants will not feel like rejects from the sisterhood.  ''it's not about, are you in the money or not,'' said dominique feneyrou, a french-born photographer. ''i like that the dance floor is pure.'' a cheer went up for the d. j. ''he went house, deep house, now he's tribal,'' mr. feneyrou said, awed. ''this is beautiful.  listen!''  love  179 macdougal street (at eighth street); (212) 477-5683  getting in -- open weekends and some weekdays; cover $5 to $25.  dress code -- anything that looks good under black lights.  d. j. picks -- house, deep house, detroit techno, funk, soul, punk.  signature drink -- varies; generally, red bull and vodka, $10.  boÎte  