in this rivalry, manning takes role of winner   peyton manning walked into the interview room with bare feet, his ankles still taped from the game, as he stepped to the microphone. the floor was his, no burden, no detractors, no tom brady to overshadow him.  manning was solo at the end of a virtuoso performance. call it a version of ''dreamboys'' instead of ''dreamgirls,'' with the way manning finally overcame his jennifer hudson moment as the drama of the american football conference title game unfolded last night in the rca dome.  manning had always been the n.f.l. quarterback with the best pipes, the greatest arm and the most talent. and yet brady had forever emerged as his beyoncé, the beautiful one, always out front. brady is the dimple-chinned patriots quarterback, a perpetual prom king with a supermodel on his arm and three super bowl rings on his fingers.  peyton has never been as cool or as charmed, never the star on stage when everyone is watching and everything counts. the ending to the story was turned upside down this time. as manning repeatedly tugged the colts from deficits -- some self-inflicted -- he separated himself from brady by leading his team to a 38-34 victory for a date in the super bowl.  manning manufactured his own version of the drive; he threw off his back foot and on the run while picking apart the patriots' secondary on a magnificent 80-yard venture to the end zone in the final minutes of the game. with a minute left, the colts had their first lead of the night.  ''tom brady with two timeouts,'' manning said. ''that's not a situation you want to be in.''  for once, brady was imperfect. he ended the patriots' hopes by throwing an interception in the last seconds. it was manning, not brady, who revealed his finest touch in a playoff situation. whether or not he wins a super bowl, manning deserves the validation as a winner under pressure.  ''there will always be something else to be talked about,'' manning said, smiling. ''there's always something.''  it was a victory for the careerists, for the players like manning who do not give up on vindication. to fulfill his thespian side, manning craved an opportunity to look into the face masks of the patriots at the end of the game and say, you complete me, as he finally skipped off to miami for super bowl xli.  it was nemesis interruptus for manning. the patriots slipped into town with the colts under their playoff spell. the patriots stood as a dynastic obstacle, as the yankees to the ''idiot'' red sox, or the cowboys to steve young's 49ers, or michael jordan's bulls to the knicks.  the hex could be overcome, the colts believed. after all, the red sox had toppled the boss, and the 49ers had pried jerry jones's fingers from the lombardi trophy. of course, the knicks never did emerge with jordan around.  ''look at jordan or john elway,'' the colts' owner, jim irsay, said. ''it was peyton's time.''  our time, that's the message coach tony dungy preached as he prodded his team to have faith in the fourth quarter. sometimes, faith was tenuous. even manning, with his head down and eyes closed as brady took the field in the final moments, had a word for the lord.  ''i'm not sure you're supposed to pray in times like that,'' manning joked.  divinity delivered, so did manning. no player with a lucky horseshoe on his helmet has been more bewitched by the patriots over the years than manning. no other colt has been more upstaged by brady's uncanny serendipity than manning.  it was happening again before the game was a quarter old. the patriots' first touchdown came when brady botched a handoff to laurence maroney on the colts' 4-yard line. the ball spun on the field. it squirted through the hands of three colts and ended up in the end zone, where new england's logan mankins swallowed it up for a touchdown.  on the bench, staring at the jumbo screen, manning just covered his shaking head. the patriots were up, 7-0. brady surfaced from the drive unscathed, without blame for a bungled play.  then there was a manning interception and a 21-3 hole. suddenly the dome was as quite as a snow globe. manning was withering. but manning, in a second half that will be remembered for his incredible poise, proved the toll of his talent is more than his regular-season statistics.  ''i was very happy for peyton,'' dungy said. ''he had to bring us from behind. i thought it was fitting.''  this was a chance for manning, who once called mike vanderjagt an ''idiot kicker,'' to deliver a comeback, to enjoy the splendor of the same idiocy that once washed over the red sox.  ''certainly you feel the clock ticking,'' manning acknowledged friday, adding that, as a veteran quarterback, he was ''definitely living in the moment.''  it had been an odd phenomenon to see a commercial star like manning -- a player accustomed to cameras and teleprompters and movie sets -- botch his lines so routinely against the patriots.  manning lived up to his exposure last night. on its celebrity 100 list of 2004, forbes rated manning as the third-highest-paid athlete, behind tiger woods and michael schumacher. you can see the money at work. manning owns commercial timeouts, shown in disguise for sprint and in his bathrobe for mastercard.  his ubiquity was lucrative, but it had done nothing to get him past the patriots, to overcome brady. in bare feet last night, he stepped from brady's aura and into his own as a playoff virtuoso.  sports of the times e-mail: selenasports@nytimes.com  