an unseeded czech foils mauresmo's repeat bid   the excellent news just kept coming for lucie safarova at the australian open. no sooner had she stunned herself and second-seeded amélie mauresmo by winning their fourth-round match, 6-4, 6-3, when she was informed that her boyfriend, tomas berdych, had also won his match.  ''wow! great,'' she said. ''we're going to have to celebrate.''  mauresmo was the one celebrating in melbourne last year, after winning her first grand slam singles title 13 years after she turned professional.  but this season is off to a much less auspicious start for mauresmo, thanks to safarova, a 19-year-old left-hander from the czech republic who generates plenty of racket-head speed with quick cuts at her ground strokes and first serves.  the match was not the only women's upset sunday. third-seeded svetlana kuznetsova of russia, the 2004 united states open champion, fell to no. 16 shahar peer of israel, 6-4, 6-2. peer will play the winner of sunday's late match between 11th-seeded jelena jankovic of serbia and serena williams.  playing her first match at rod laver arena, safarova served notice that she was a threat by forcing mauresmo to save two break points in her opening service game. mauresmo appeared to take the hint, stabilizing her game to take a 4-1 lead, but her lack of depth on her topspin ground strokes soon became a problem. safarova began finding the corners and pushing forward to the net with success.  safarova won 18 of the last 21 points of the set, and she soon took a 4-1 lead in the second. but mauresmo did not go meekly. she broke safarova's serve in the next game, then held her own after a successful challenge of a serve that had been called out. the momentum was shifting, and it was soon 4-3 -- often a cue for the inexperienced player on the verge of a major upset to begin overthinking and overhitting.  but safarova held firm to hold serve, then held even firmer in the final game of the match, recovering from the disappointment of failing to convert her first two match points on mauresmo's serve. the last point was a microcosm of the match as safarova nailed a short forehand into mauresmo's backhand corner and followed it into the net, getting a passing shot into the net as a reward.  ''it's amazing; i still can't believe it,'' safarova said. ''warming up in the morning, i was saying like, wow, this a big court. but i felt really comfortable here.''  until this tournament, safarova's record in grand slam tournaments was 1-5, but her comprehensive 6-3, 6-3 victory against the combative italian francesca schiavone, seeded 14th, in the second round was a sign of major progress. and now she is into the quarterfinals, where she will face no. 10 nicole vaidisova of the czech republic, who defeated seventh-seeded elena dementieva of russia, 6-3, 6-3.  after six days of difficult weather, sunday's conditions were blustery but relatively cool and sunny. there was no play at all on the outside courts on saturday because of rain, a challenge for the organizers.  eighth-seeded david nalbandian of argentina saved three match points before beating sébastien grosjean of france in five sets saturday. nalbandian will face tommy haas, who defeated his fellow german florian mayer in straight sets sunday.  the huge-hitting berdych, safarova's boyfriend of four years, also had to wait a day before facing dmitry tursunov, but he should not be too leg weary when he plays no. 3 nikolay davydenko on monday. berdych, seeded 13th, needed little more than an hour to eliminate the ailing tursunov of russia, 6-2, 6-1, 6-1.  li na of china, seeded 19th, advanced quickly sunday, defeating ninth-seeded dinara safina of russia, 6-2, 6-2. li has reached the fourth round or better in three consecutive grand slam events, and she could pose a serious threat to her next opponent, martina hingis.  patty schnyder will face the rising russian anna chakvetadze, who defeated jelena kostanic tosic, 6-4, 6-4. kim clijsters will face daniela hantuchova of the slovak republic, who survived a threat from the unseeded american ashley harkleroad. down by a set and by 0-4 in the second, hantuchova went on to win, 6-7 (6), 7-5, 6-3, leaving harkleroad sobbing into her towel in her chair on show court three.  tennis  