in the region/long island; 21st-century plan nods to the 19th   two architects circled around the back of the william sydney mount house in stony brook on a recent misty morning, pointing out elements of the 19th-century structure that might influence their design of a modern 309-unit development of condominiums, town houses and single-family homes proposed for nearby former fairgrounds known locally as flowerfield.  among the important elements of the historic house, named for the 19th-century painter who once owned it, are the slope of the roof, the natural and painted wood siding and shingles, and the sections added over the years that jibe with the whole, according to one of the architects, samuel g. white.  but then there was also the craggy old tree, shored up by a meandering stone wall that carved out a natural sitting area in the yard. ''what an incredible asset,'' mr. white said, in thrall, as only an architect could be, to the position of the tree relative to the house.  mr. white's colleague, charles a. platt, connected the scene to the fairgrounds, which have neat lines of tall mature trees dividing the property into sections. ''that's what we're trying to get,'' mr. platt said. ''move the structures closer to the trees to make it seem like they've been around for a long time.''  it is too early for the architects to draw up renderings of the homes and three-story condominium buildings that they hope to design for the gyrodyne company of america if its preliminary plans are approved. the company recently submitted a detailed proposal to the town of smithtown for a zoning change from industrial to residential, though hearings have not been scheduled.  gyrodyne, which once manufactured helicopters for the united states navy on about 300 acres straddling the towns of smithtown and brookhaven, lost its navy contracts in the 1970s and has been leasing out its buildings since then for both industrial and office use.  beyond trying to develop the fairgrounds, which it owns, the company is in contract to buy a complex of 10 office buildings in port jefferson and is a partner in a 3,900-acre mixed-use development in palm beach, fla.  ''we've definitely transformed over the years from defense manufacturer to real estate company,'' said peter pitsiokos, chief operating officer of gyrodyne. about 1,000 workers were needed to build navy helicopters, he said, but today gyrodyne's employment rolls number only eight.  in its application for the zoning change earlier this month, gyrodyne outlined its proposal for a development restricted to residents 48 years or older, on 62.4 acres in the st. james section of smithtown. according to the plan, there would be 30 single-family homes, 69 town houses and 130 single-floor condominium apartments in two-story buildings. another 10 buildings would have 80 two-story condominium units.  in some cases, the process of creating a development can drag on for years as planning boards hash out its pros and cons. in this case, the request is even more complex.  in 2005, new york state condemned a 246-acre chunk of the property owned by gyrodyne, adjacent to the land now proposed for development. the state university of new york at stony brook had been trying to buy the land for two years, finally offering $26.3 million. gyrodyne rejected the offer. the university then acquired the property by eminent domain; it has already begun construction on one of 10 research facilities planned for the site.  gyrodyne says the land is worth more than $26.3 million, and it has sued the state university. frank derubeis, the smithtown planning director, declined to comment on the application for the zoning change, citing the lawsuit.  the land's zoning category would be key to its value, residential being greater. right now, nearly all the 308 acres -- the university's property and the gyrodyne land planned for development -- are zoned for industrial use.  a residential development of expensive homes where residents' children must be older than 18 (a requirement of the planned development district zoning code that gyrodyne is seeking) would provide the town with considerable tax revenue, but no additional students to the school district, according to mr. pitsiokos.  prices of the homes are expected to be about $850,000 for a condominium, $1.25 million for a town house and $1.45 million for a house, according to the proposal.  the company had planned a bigger development surrounding a golf course before the state acquired the 246 acres through eminent domain, mr. pitsiokos said.  but gyrodyne had already conducted traffic and ecological studies and had held public meetings to get the input of local residents, and these details are part of the new proposal.  gyrodyne's plan also includes a clubhouse, tennis courts, a pool and three parking spaces for each unit. the homes will be clustered, leaving 40 acres of open space, mr. pitsiokos said.  as for the design of the homes, he said, the intent is to have modern structures that respect the many historical homes and buildings in the st. james area and neighboring stony brook.  mr. platt and mr. white, partners at the manhattan firm of platt byard dovell & white, have personal experience with historic long island homes, as well as long professional histories in restoration.  mr. platt is a third-generation architect who served for five years on the new york city landmarks commission and is a director of the municipal art society and chairman of its preservation committee. his grandfather designed the john t. pratt mansion in glen cove, and his father designed many of that family's other homes.  mr. white, a great-grandson of stanford white, who designed some of the island's most distinctive homes, led the restoration of the william sydney mount house. he grew up in a 1760 house now owned by the smithtown historical society. stanford white redesigned the facade of that house in 1897.  though a finished design is a long way off, mr. pitsiokos said, the firm wanted architects who have ''a great deal of appreciation for and sensitivity to historic characteristics of the area.''  in the region | long island  