chemical insecurity   the new democratic leadership in congress has a chance to finally do what the republican congress and the bush administration failed to do after sept. 11: to protect the nation's chemical plants from an attack. lawmakers should stop the homeland security department from adopting new regulations that would block state and local governments from doing more to protect their residents and should pass a federal law with teeth.  an attack on a single plant could release deadly chemicals that could put hundreds of thousands of people at risk of death or serious injury. but since sept. 11, the chemical industry -- a major campaign contributor -- has managed to ward off any significant new federal rules that might require it to spend money to increase security.  now it is going a step further by trying to get the federal government to ''pre-empt,'' or invalidate, state and local efforts to impose safety standards. supporters of pre-emption always claim that they just want a uniform standard. but in situations like this one -- where the federal law is absurdly weak -- it is obvious that the real agenda is to block serious safety measures at every level of government.  congress wisely refused to include a pre-emption provision in legislation it adopted last year. now, however, the homeland security department has proposed regulations that would give itself the authority to pre-empt state and local laws. if the proposed regulations were adopted, they could wipe away the serious chemical plant security law that new jersey has passed, and prevent other states and cities from requiring the chemical industry to do more to protect their residents.  it is up to congress to act. it should block these deeply flawed regulations and move quickly to pass a comprehensive law that imposes tough requirements on chemical plants to harden their facilities.  last year congress passed a bad rider, backed by the industry, that gives the chemical industry far too much leeway to decide on its own how its plants are vulnerable and how to protect them. the new law should contain specific requirements for plant safety. it should also require companies to switch to safer chemicals when the cost is not prohibitive, a key safety measure that the industry has resisted. and it should clearly state that federal chemical-plant laws do not pre-empt state and local laws. congress should finally put the public's safety ahead of the chemical industry's bottom line.  editorial  