grossman puts struggles behind him and repays coach's faith   with fog and doubt shrouding soldier field on sunday, bears coach lovie smith kept unbending faith in his quarterback. a lead had shrunk. the bears and quarterback rex grossman, backs to the end zone, faced another in a season's worth of uh-oh moments.  grossman, battered by skeptics who saw him as a detriment to the bears' championship hopes, not a reason for them, had completed only 5 of 20 passes for 64 yards, 30 of them with one throw, against the new orleans saints.  it was late in the third quarter and the lead was 4 points. the bears were at their 15. the snow fell harder, and the chicago skyline disappeared into low clouds and the looming dusk.  the bears' 39-14 victory against the saints in the national football conference championship game threatens to dim the memory of the moment. the bears were in trouble, and what everyone outside of their locker room saw as their most troublesome part, the quarterback, was having another difficult day.  ''nobody -- nobody -- has more mental toughness than rex grossman,'' said ron turner, the bears' offensive coordinator.  turner called the plays. grossman threw again. and again. and again. and again. with four completions, he lifted the bears to the super bowl and validated the unwavering faith that smith and grossman's other coaches and teammates have had in him.  smith quietly deflected detractors during the season by measuring grossman on victories, not passing numbers.  the bears will play super bowl xli on feb. 4 in miami against the indianapolis colts, who defeated the new england patriots, 38-34. smith and the colts' tony dungy are the first black coaches to reach a super bowl.  ''i feel blessed to be in that position,'' smith said. ''but i'll feel even better to be the first black coach to hold up the world championship trophy.''  he was doused by a cold bucket of water at the two-minute warning, and he later embraced grossman.  ''i just kind of hugged him and told him that i loved him,'' smith said.  grossman, at game's end, happily heaved a football deep into the stands. later, amid the celebratory buzz of the locker room, grossman acknowledged that he might have thrown it to people who spent much of the season wishing he were not the bears' quarterback.  ''that's all right,'' he said. ''i've got believers in the locker room.''  the bears scored three fourth-quarter touchdowns, none more important than the 33-yard completion from grossman to bernard berrian, allowing 61,047 frosted fans to exhale in relief.  before and after that series, it seemed that the bears had pulled their game plan from somewhere deep in their history, perfectly suited for the weather conditions and the stakes: run the ball, stop the run, and turn the ball over less often than the opponent.  they did it to near perfection. the bears had no turnovers, committed one penalty (for 5 yards), and outrushed the saints, 196 yards to 56.  the saints played right into chicago's plans. the opponents knew that in n.f.l. history, teams that played their home games indoors were 0-9 in conference championship games played outside. the saints, removed from the climate-controlled superdome and placed into subfreezing, blustery soldier field, had never won a playoff game away from home.  they tried to beat those odds while keeping alive the hopes of their broken city, still reeling from hurricane katrina nearly 17 months ago and clinging to the saints as a sign of progress and pride.  but the league's top offense could not maneuver through the bears, whose once-vaunted defense had frayed toward the end of the season. the bears allowed an average of 12.5 points in the season's first 12 games. but in the next five, including a 27-24 overtime victory against the seattle seahawks in the divisional playoff game, the bears allowed 25.8 points a game.  whether because of nerves, hard hits or cold fingers, the saints fumbled three times in the first quarter. two were recovered by the bears, who converted the turnovers into field goals, then added another on a short drive that started at midfield.  the saints committed four turnovers. their dynamic top-ranked offense showed flashes only twice, on touchdown drives that sandwiched halftime and turned a 16-0 deficit into a temporarily taut 16-14 game. quarterback drew brees threw eight times in leading the saints 73 yards to their first touchdown, a 13-yard touchdown to marques colston.  on the saints' second play of the third quarter, brees quickly flipped a pass down the left sideline for running back reggie bush, who had sprinted past safety chris harris. bush caught the ball, then cut diagonally past safety danieal manning and past a herd of pursuers for an 88-yard touchdown.  but the saints never got their running game going. deuce mcallister gained 18 yards on six carries, and bush added only 19 yards on four carries.  the bears, by contrast, used bullish cedric benson early, then seemed to catch the saints off guard by changing to the shiftier thomas jones when the score was 9-0.  jones had two carries on the bears' first five drives but ran the ball on every play during an eight-play march late in the second quarter. he gained 14 yards, then 2, then 33. he gained 7, 2 and 2 to give the bears a first-and-goal for the third time. but rather than being held to a field goal, as they were the first two times, the bears handed off twice more to jones. the first play gained 7 yards, the second only 2 because he pushed past the goal line.  ''when we do that stuff, you know you're beating the other team down,'' said benson, who had 12 second-half carries. ''you're wearing them down. you're stamping that message in their heads.''  but as has been the case all season for the bears, there was the rex factor. for most of three quarters, all the worries about grossman had proved to be worthy ones. he completed 3 of 12 passes in helping -- or limiting -- the bears to a 16-0 second-quarter lead. when the saints tightened the score, the doubts covered the stadium like the falling snow.  late in the third quarter, after brees was called for intentional grounding while standing in his end zone, resulting in a safety, the bears held an 18-14 lead.  grossman had endured a season's worth of criticisms, his persona divided into good rex and bad rex so much that many bears fans clamored for smith to replace him with brian griese.  smith never budged. on the way to a 13-3 regular-season record, smith believed that there was only a loose correlation between grossman's statistics and the team's success. and his trust was being put to the test.  for grossman, the absence of interceptions against the saints served as his only redeeming statistic. but smith and turner liked what they saw. ''if he's making the right decisions and he's decisive and he's seeing the field well, i don't care what the situation is,'' turner said.  grossman completed a 13-yard pass to berrian. he lobbed a 20-yard pass to muhsin muhammad. the fourth quarter began, and grossman, throwing into the wind, completed a 12-yarder to berrian. finally, he lobbed a ball toward the low clouds, and it fell like a snowflake into the arms of berrian, who fell near the goal line as he caught it, then stood and raised his arms as an official did the same.  grossman was 4 of 4 for 78 yards on the drive. the bears, mired in comparisons to coach mike ditka's team that won the super bowl 21 years ago, created their own championship history.  ''i told him numerous times, don't worry about what's being said on the outside,'' turner said of grossman. ''you know what you can do. i know what you can do. the people in that locker room know what you can do. i said: 'listen to the people in this locker room. listen to us. don't listen to all that stuff. you're a great player. you know it, we all know it, and you're going to show it.' ''  he did. and a city cheered him like never before.  pro football  