news summary   international a3-11  violence soars in baghdad as new u.s. troops arrive  two powerful car bombs ripped through a market in baghdad, creating one of the worst scenes of carnage since the war began. the bombs killed at least 88 people and wounded 160 others even as the first of some 21,000 extra american troops ordered by president bush began arriving there. a1  somali islamist surrenders  sheik sharif ahmed, the head of the islamist courts union executive council and the second in command of somalia's defeated islamist forces, has surrendered to the kenyan authorities and is staying at a hotel in nairobi. a8  iran blocks nuclear inspectors  iran is barring 38 nuclear agency inspectors from entering the country in retaliation for a united nations' resolution aiming to curb iran's nuclear program, a senior iranian lawmaker said. a7  turkey and armenia reach out  the killing of hrant dink, an armenian-turkish editor, and the sorrow it has generated are leading to rare gestures between turkey and armenia, historic enemies.  a6  coalition may govern serbia  two leading democratic parties emerged as the groups most likely to form a government in serbia, despite a first-place showing for a nationalist party in the parliamentary elections.  a8  national a12-17  bush will now push his domestic agenda  president bush is heading into his state of the union address seeking to revitalize his domestic agenda but facing stiff resistance over the initiatives that the white house has previewed so far.  a1  change in financing campaigns  the public financing system for presidential campaigns may have quietly died over the weekend, with senator hillary rodham clinton becoming the first candidate since 1976 to forgo public financing for the primary and general election.  a1  sentencing law struck down  the supreme court invalidated california's criminal sentencing law, ruling that the 30-year-old statute gave judges authority that the constitution places with juries.  a15  arab-american candidates fail  a flock of arab-american candidates stepped forward in the hopes of claiming city hall in dearborn, mich., after the death of longtime mayor michael a. guido. but though roughly one in three dearborn residents are of arab origin, most of the arab-american candidates had dropped out by mid-january.  a12  florida to cut insurance rates  florida lawmakers approved a series of measures that would reduce home insurance rates -- modestly, for the most part -- by having the state take on billions of dollars in additional insurance risk.  a12  new york/region b1-6  workplace tracking alarms city unions  the bloomberg administration is devoting more than $180 million toward state-of-the-art technology to keep track of when its employees come and go, with one agency tracking its workers by scanning their hands each time they enter and leave the workplace. city unions are calling the use of such technology degrading, intrusive and unnecessary. b1  wanted: police academy  the new york police department, which has long clamored for a new police academy, may soon get its wish. the city is searching for a site that would consolidate the department's far-flung firearms, classroom and training grounds. but before a new academy is built, police and city officials have to figure out how to pay for it.  b1  neediest cases  b4  business day c1-12  illinois to sell its lottery  the state of illinois took the first steps toward selling its state lottery system, hoping to attract as much as $10 billion from investors who, in return, would own a government-sanctioned monopoly.  a1  business digest c2  obituaries b8  abbé pierre  a priest who mobilized france to attend to its homeless, he was 94.  b8  editorial a18-19  editorials: chemical insecurity; from pakistan, with jihad; nicotine manipulation confirmed; watching the energy watchdog.  columns: stacy schiff, nicholas d. kristof.  crossword e4  tv lisitngs e10  weather a14  