local officials are cool to corzine's tax plan   municipal officials were polite but largely pessimistic and worried when gov. jon s. corzine addressed more than 200 of them on his property tax reform measures at a league of municipalities meeting here last week.  calling themselves the ''bottom of the food chain'' in state politics, they publicly praised some aspects of the governor's effort to cap local tax increases at 4 percent a year, encourage cost-saving consolidations among municipalities, raise money to retire state debt by selling or leasing some assets, create a state comptroller's office and institute a tax credit that would return money to 95 percent of the state's property tax payers.  but they seemed to believe that the upward spiral of taxes would not change without a constitutional convention of delegates more distant from special interest groups than the legislature is and free of the kind of political give and take going on between mr. corzine and legislative leaders.  the disquiet among local elected officials may have quickened as reports emerged that in negotiations on a bill to create a comptroller's office, legislative leaders might have persuaded mr. corzine to exempt a host of state authorities from the comptroller's auditing purview.  the governor confirmed that the exemptions had been talked about but insisted it was a minor change. he pointed out that the exempted agencies would not be immune to review because the state office of inspector general already had statutory power to investigate any state agency's activities -- which raised the question of why, then, a comptroller was needed.  ''if you look at what is happening with the comptroller's bill, it is a pretty good indicator of the road ahead,'' said brigid harrison, a professor of political science and law at montclair state university. ''we're going to get watered-down versions of what the governor said he wanted.''  dr. harrison said the fact that a constitutional convention remained such a viable option with local officials and some others highlights ''the fact that there is something fundamentally wrong'' with how the state finances government and schools.  in his state of the state address, mr. corzine referred to the possibility of a constitutional convention only once, instead stressing his optimism that negotiations with legislative leaders on his tax package would succeed. some local officials said they feared the constitutional-convention option was buried so deep in his speech that it was practically off the table.  ms. harrison speculated that mr. corzine's low-key approach to a constitutional convention was part of the gamesmanship of working with legislators on cutting property taxes. but if the process collapses, she said, ''he tends not to blink in confrontations,'' recalling mr. corzine's closing down of state government last year in a budget battle with the legislature.  ''that cost him politically,'' she said, ''but he has not been reticent to make a stand that could cost him.''  on politics  