a friendship muddled by attraction   ''a beautiful view,'' a play by the talented writer and director daniel macivor that is part of the public theater's under the radar festival, is a remarkable achievement in incongruity. purely experimental in form, it is romantic in substance and cozy in impact, without gloom or hard angles.  within the context of contemporary avant-garde theater mr. macivor, the artistic director of the toronto company da da kamera, has produced what amounts to an act of defiance. ''a beautiful view'' is about the dangers of sexual categorization, but mr. macivor wears his politics as lightly as silk. the transcendent quality of close friendship compels him most. i left looking forward to the prospect of human company and a warm bowl of soup.  mr. macivor's story is in some ways simple, his structuring of it an impressive gymnastic feat that moves the two heroines back and forth through important moments in their 20-year relationship. tracy wright and caroline gillis play two nameless women who first meet at a camping store in their 20s, strike up a rapport over their mutual fear of bears, drop out of each other's lives and then embark on a long, nurturing friendship muddled by a sexual tension that they each, in their own different ways, are ill equipped to understand. their fixed notions of identity confuse their already muted attraction. ''i couldn't go getting bisexual on myself,'' ms. gillis's character announces to the audience at one point. ''trust me. i'm just not that organized.''  mr. macivor's script is full of funny lines like that, and his stars do them wry justice. beyond its most obvious thematic interest, his play is about the way people narrate the events of their lives, how they repackage the truth in hopes that a new version will exculpate them from the minor sins committed in and out of love. mr. macivor knows what a fool's game that is.  the subtlety displayed by mr. macivor is nowhere on view in the performance artist mike daisey's new monologue, ''invincible summer,'' which opened as part of the festival thursday night. mr. daisey has built a piece around an exhilarating but trying time in his own life, the summer of 2001, when he moved to new york from seattle with his wife, began writing a book and confronted the demise of his parents' marriage. had he stuck to the touching story of his own emerging adulthood, the result would have been a piece considerably less narcissistic in sentiment.  instead mr. daisey dooms himself to seek profundity in coincidence. on the morning after he stayed up all night to turn in the first portion of his book, he stopped off at a downtown starbucks, he explains, just before the world trade center was attacked. he approaches this moment and its aftermath with much emotional crescendo, asking his audience to understand 9/11 in terms of his own anxious existence, all of which has the effect of overhearing a healthy man tell a cancer patient how much he hated having a biopsy.  ''invincible summer'' is also meant to read as a mea culpa for political opinions mr. daisey would now like to denounce. he was initially for the iraq war and now he is adamantly against it, and he assumes that this is something the world should know. he is a warm presence onstage, and he can be wildly funny about his own deficiencies -- laziness, procrastination -- but until now it would have been hard to imagine that naïve arrogance would have counted among them.  the under the radar festival continues through next sunday at the public theater, 425 lafayette street, at astor place, east village, and other locations; publictheater.org/utr.  theater review  