spotlight n.b.a.; a finals rematch: where's the heat?   vivid scenes depicting the miami heat's n.b.a. championship run against the dallas mavericks last june line the redecorated tunnel to the american airlines arena floor, creating a triumphant cocoon.  it is only when the players step onto their home court that the spell is broken.  dwyane wade will look at those celebratory photographs for inspiration today in miami on the way to meeting the mavericks for the first time since being named the most valuable player of the finals. forgive him if he does a double take. neither team is the same.  ''it seems like forever ago,'' said wade, who last saw the mavericks as he blew by them in four games.  these days, dallas and miami are as different as their conferences. the heat (18-21) has managed to climb to eighth place in the east despite the gaping losses of its two franchise pillars, pat riley and shaquille o'neal.  the mavericks (33-8) have won 19 of their past 20 games, storming into first in the ferociously competitive west.  ''they're a very focused group,'' miami's antoine walker said of dallas on thursday. ''they're taking every game very seriously and they're trying to have a dominating season.''  miami, struggling with injuries and complacency, has taken the regular season as seriously as the preseason. perhaps the players are just following their absent leaders.  riley, the 61-year-old master motivator who chose to return as the coach this season, abruptly left the team jan. 3 to have knee surgery and a hip replacement. the pain, apparently, had become as unbearable as watching his team lose. when -- or if -- riley will return is not known.  ''my job is to hold the fort,'' the interim coach, ron rothstein, who has a 5-4 record, said last week.  the fort will soon get its primary reinforcement back. visibly leaner and starting to sharpen his interview quips, o'neal is on the verge of returning. surgery on his left knee kept him out of the past 33 games.  he could be back as early as today. or not. o'neal, 34, wanted to feel ''1,000 percent,'' he said, knowing what the extra recuperating time could reap.  ''every time i've missed some games, i've won championships,'' o'neal said wednesday. ''that's somebody's way of telling me to get some rest.''  last season, he missed 18 games in november and december, coinciding with the heat's slide to 11-10, a downturn that caused riley to take the coaching reins from stan van gundy.  ''i absolutely believe, and nothing against stan van gundy, but i think pat could push this team like nobody else could,'' heat general manager randy pfund said in a telephone interview. ''i think it will be the same way this year -- we all feel that having him back pulling the strings is important to our success.''  when will he be back? riley, who has not been to the arena since his hip surgery, was unavailable for comment. when pfund asked riley how he felt the other day, pfund said riley responded, ''just fine!'' end of discussion.  but riley's team, which lost to lowly philadelphia in overtime friday, is not fine.  despite wade's inspired play since returning from his sprained right wrist -- he has averaged 30.3 points in the last seven games and miami has gone 5-2 -- there are still questions about how a veteran (read: aging) team can become motivated after achieving its elusive goal.  alonzo mourning has been taxed while filling in for o'neal, having to log more minutes than he has in the three seasons since his kidney transplant. yet, typically, mourning swatted away the suggestion that time is short for a team below .500.  ''we got the rest of this month, february, march, we got plenty of time,'' mourning said with a scowl. ''all we need is a playoff spot. that's it. i don't think any team wants to see us in the first round.''  that's it, then. to the heat, the 82-game season in the east is little more than a formality.  ''that's not the attitude that you take on the court every night,'' wade said. ''you want to win. but at the end of the day, all that really matters is that when you get to the playoffs, it's another season.  ''it's tough to beat the miami heat in a seven-game series, especially coming off a championship. we have pride.''  perhaps lately that pride has returned. but early was ugly. a 42-point defeat on opening night, when diamond-studded rings were awarded and the banner was raised, turned out to be the first of 13 blowout losses.  before riley left, he made an example of walker and james posey, deactivating them for failing to meet their prescribed conditioning goals (they missed their body-fat marks by 1 percent).  ''this year, it's hard to put everything in a capsule and feel good about it,'' pfund said. ''i don't know if it's at a point where you say we have to win. sometimes you realize it's too late and there's no push that gets you there. you can always come out of a little bit of a hole. but you don't want the hole to get too large.''  the chasm threatened to swallow the heat around the new year when wade sprained his wrist, riley took his leave and the team lost four in a row. wade, feeling the season slipping on a western road swing, said this week, ''i came back a little earlier than i wanted to.''  when he did, the heat won four consecutive games, wade was named the eastern conference player of the week and the team started to find some rhythm.  walker used his ''timeout'' to get used to the leather ball again. when posey came back, he was ready to contribute from the bench. jason kapono turned into a bona fide 3-point threat. point guard jason williams's knees seemed healthy again; he is swiftly directing traffic and making shots. the conditions seem ripe for o'neal's return.  ''when shaq is in, it's a whole different team, he opens it up for everybody else,'' washington guard gilbert arenas said after the wizards won in orlando on friday to go five games ahead of miami in the southeast division.  ''everyone -- us and orlando -- we're trying to get some distance before the diesel gets back in town,'' arenas said. ''once he gets back, they're going to go on a roll. they're still the reigning champs.''  the champions returned the same core from last season. will riley's loyalty to a slowing veteran like gary payton hurt the team in the spring? again, will riley be there?  ''i don't have any idea,'' pfund said. ''pat is a hard-working guy. he's not a guy that's looking for a cakewalk. it wouldn't surprise me if he walked in here a week from now -- or maybe he'd have a natural break after the all-star game.''  o'neal says he speaks to riley every day -- in his mind. ''i get mental e-mails,'' he said.  mourning is more literal. ''behind the scenes, pat is orchestrating a lot of what's going on,'' he said. ''he hasn't distanced himself from what we're trying to get done. he's going to be back. trust me.''  the heat's steely confidence may change after today's game.  ''it's the best time for us to meet up,'' wade said. ''now we get an opportunity to see how good we are.''  then again, the heat lost both regular-season games to the mavericks last season by a combined 49 points. miami remembers how much that mattered.  