another weekend of death in iraq   to the editor:  re ''u.s. toll in iraq is 27 for deadly weekend''(front page, jan. 22):  there were 27 more unwelcome knocks at the door in the united states this past weekend, following more than 3,000 others since this war began.  each one revealed to a loving family the devastating death of an american soldier, and to the nation a painful yet significant opportunity to stop, reassess what's gone wrong in iraq and do whatever possible to prevent a bad situation from becoming much, much worse.  president bush, can you hear the knocking? the sound reverberates constantly, dreadfully and with deafening force in those of us with loved ones in iraq. my husband is currently deployed in iraq. please, for our families' and country's sake, stop, end the escalation and get our men and women out of iraq.  emma greenwood  new york, jan. 22, 2007  to the editor:  re ''lying like it's 2003,'' by frank rich (column, jan. 21):  there are only two viable plans for iraq: stay and play to win, or acknowledge failure and pack it in.  there is no political will for the first option, since it would require a draft to achieve a force nearing, if not exceeding, a million troops, as well as years of effort to secure the borders, provide security and give the iraqis time to build a viable government -- something they've shown little talent for so far.  there is some growing political will for the ''pack it in'' option, if only to stop feeding the meat grinder that this occupation has become. the bush administration's mendacious treatment of its ''strategy'' serves only to delay acknowledgment of our failure.  derrell durrett  boulder, colo., jan. 21, 2007  to the editor:  the white house has called speaker nancy pelosi's comments about president bush's motives for moving the surge troops into iraq quickly ''poisonous'' (news article, jan. 20).  here is what ms. pelosi should have responded:  ''poisonous? i'll tell you what poison is: a misbegotten war in iraq that drains our treasury, decimates our military readiness, undermines our prestige in the world, splits our nation and proceeds contrary to the message the voters sent in the election. that, my friends, is poison. what i'm looking for is an antidote.''  earl hudson  carrollton, tex., jan. 20, 2007  