with history made, smith reflects on his roots   the mentor and the protégé spoke briefly by telephone monday. nothing groundbreaking there. bears coach lovie smith keeps in touch with tony dungy, the indianapolis colts' coach, who gave him his first n.f.l. job more than a decade ago.  the context is what made the conversation meaningful. smith and dungy were talking for the first time since becoming the first african-american head coaches to lead teams to the super bowl.  though the 51-year-old dungy blazed the trail for smith, it was smith who preceded dungy to super bowl xli, if only by a matter of hours. smith's bears dispatched the saints on sunday in chicago in the national football conference championship game, 39-14, before dungy's colts edged the patriots, 38-34, in the american football conference title game 180 miles away in indianapolis.  after mentioning having talked to dungy, smith said monday during his daily news briefing, ''of course, you could hear the excitement in his voice right away, you know when i finally let him speak a little bit.''  the line drew laughs, as smith, 48, must have known it would. he and dungy are soft-spoken men not given to garrulousness, particularly when they are talking about themselves. an unassuming nature is one thing they have in common. a shared dream fulfilled is another.  ''this is a time we both wanted going into the weekend,'' smith said. ''when people asked me, i let everyone know that we wanted the colts to win. we wanted an opportunity to play them, and that dream came true.''  dungy was the tampa bay buccaneers' newly hired, first-time coach in 1996 when he hired smith away from ohio state to be his linebackers coach. they worked together for five seasons in tampa bay.  after the 2000 season, smith left to become the defensive coordinator of the st. louis rams. two years later, dungy was fired by the buccaneers and hired by the colts. after three seasons in st. louis, smith was hired by the bears in 2004 to become the 13th head coach in team history.  as the two old friends prepared to meet on football's biggest stage, another dungy protégé, mike tomlin, was hired as coach of the pittsburgh steelers. he is the fourth head coach to emerge from dungy's staff in tampa bay (herman edwards of the kansas city chiefs and rod marinelli of the detroit lions are the others).  ''how much do i owe tony for having made it to this position?'' smith said, repeating a question. ''you know, quite a bit.''  smith described dungy as a ''defensive-genius-type guy'' and said, ''i was able to learn a lot of football through him.''  dungy does not belittle his players or scream at them. he guides instead of goads, and smith found that perhaps the most instructive thing of all. ''we talked about how to do it, being a teacher instead of screaming and yelling, all that stuff,'' smith said.  ''i think what guys like tony dungy show men is be yourself. just believe in what you know and just stay with that through the storms and different things like that, and you can get the job accomplished.''  smith stayed the course this season, remaining calm even when all of chicago was bewailing the erratic play of bears quarterback rex grossman. he did not lose his cool when cornerback ricky manning pleaded no contest to a felony assault charge in september or his patience when defensive tackle tank johnson was arrested on misdemeanor gun charges in december -- johnson's third arrest in 18 months.  no matter what other people thought of his handling of grossman, manning and johnson, smith let his instincts be his guide. he grew up in the small town of big sandy, tex., (population: 1,500) believing that people were inherently decent, and in his speech and actions he gives the impression that nothing he has seen over the last five decades has caused him to reconsider.  roughly four dozen people showed up to hear smith speak monday, which was more people than were in his high school graduating class (34). many times over the past three years, smith has looked uncomfortable in front of such crowds. on this day, though, he looked relaxed.  ''you know, a dream of mine was to have a chance to play the colts,'' smith said. ''my dream was for tony dungy to get to the super bowl. that dream has been fulfilled. now it's about the chicago bears trying to win the super bowl.''  he added, ''it will be a big challenge for us, but that's how it's supposed to be.''  pro football  