grand jury hears evidence in killing by police   a queens grand jury began hearing evidence yesterday in the police shooting of sean bell, an unarmed black man who was killed in a hail of police bullets on his wedding day in november.  the grand jury will weigh evidence and determine whether the officers involved in the shooting will face criminal charges.  in response yesterday to a freedom of information act request, the police department released photographs of four of the five police officers who fired 50 shots in the nov. 25 shooting, killing mr. bell, 23, and wounding two of his friends outside a strip club in jamaica. some people involved in the case used the photos to reiterate that it is impossible to apply any racial tinge to the shooting because two of the officers are black and one is black and hispanic.  ''the photos of the officers indicate that racism had absolutely nothing to do with this shooting,'' said michael j. palladino, president of the detectives' endowment association. ''the photos nullify the racism aspect of the shooting because at least three of the five officers are people of color.''  yesterday, paul j. browne, the police department's chief spokesman, released the photos of detective michael oliver, officer michael carey, detective marc cooper and detective paul headley. he declined to provide a photo of the fifth officer, who fired the first of the 50 shots, ''because of his undercover status.''  the bell case has concerned civil rights leaders as well as black elected and religious figures who believe that the shooting, in which even mayor michael r. bloomberg said the number of shots seemed excessive, would further strain what some contend are often fragile relations between the police and minority residents. some legal representatives of the bell family and others involved in the case said they would push for legislative change to provide for the appointment of a permanent special prosecutor in such cases.  the office of the queens district attorney, richard a. brown, declined to answer questions about the grand jury proceeding or to say where the panel is meeting. ''we're withholding any comment until the investigation is complete,'' said kevin ryan, a spokesman for mr. brown.  but people involved in the case said the panel was meeting in a high-rise building on queens boulevard not far from the queens criminal court building.  lawyers representing the police officers; the two wounded men, trent benefield and joseph guzman; and others in the case have said the grand jury process could take weeks. grand jurors come from the usual jury pool of county residents and are broken into groups of 23 by a judge. but 16 people must be present for evidence to be presented in a case, and indictments require a vote by 12 of them.  family members and those who knew mr. bell held a news conference outside the courthouse yesterday. neville o. mitchell, a lawyer representing mr. bell's parents, said a daily vigil would continue at the courthouse.  