a soft landing and a push on global warming   buoyed by encouraging economic news, the stock market bobbed near a record high this week. congress acted to rein in oil drillers' subsidies, and some of the country's biggest companies joined traditional foes to address some of the country's thorniest problems.  the frothy mergers-and-acquisition market bubbled along, with bids, battles and, well, one bomb.  touch and go -- the american economy seems to have made a so-called soft landing after the housing market peaked last year, and appears to be taking off again, the latest economic data suggested.  a tight labor market is pushing up many workers' wages, consumers are spending more at shopping malls and the skid in the housing market is easing in some areas of the country.  a survey of industrial production showed unexpected growth last month, and the consumer price index, the nation's best-known inflation gauge, rose at its fastest pace in eight months -- on the surface, at least, an indication of robust demand.  the numbers suggest the federal reserve will not lower interest rates when it meets at the end of this month, and may actually have to raise rates later in the year.  rolling back breaks -- house democrats passed legislation to rescind $14 billion in tax breaks and subsidies for domestic oil producers and use the money for alternative energy and conservation technologies.  the bill would rescind $7.6 billion in tax breaks for oil companies that congress passed in 2004 and 2005 and add $6.3 billion in royalties from companies that pump oil and gas in publicly owned waters of the gulf of mexico and off alaska.  it would also correct errors in drilling leases signed by the interior department in the late 1990s that will let oil companies avoid paying billions of dollars in royalties over the next decade.  senate leaders say they have the votes to send the bill to president bush. the president opposes the measure, but is not expected to veto it.  strange bedfellows -- general electric, dupont, alcoa and seven other major companies joined with leading environmental groups to call for a firm nationwide limit on carbon dioxide emissions that would lead to reductions of 10 to 30 percent over the next 15 years.  members of the group -- which also includes the utilities duke energy in north carolina, pg&e in california, the fpl group in florida and pnm resources in new mexico -- have expressed concern that the absence of a national policy could lead to a scattershot system of state-by-state regulation or to even harsher measures, like a stiff tax on fossil fuels.  earlier, a coalition of 16 business, medical and consumer groups -- including aarp, the american medical association, pfizer and the chamber of commerce of the united states -- proposed to extend health coverage to people now uninsured by expanding federal benefit programs and offering new tax credits to individuals and families.  the environmental group's formal announcement is scheduled for monday, a day before president bush is to deliver his state of the union address.  burst of buying -- general electric announced a pair of big acquisitions, agreeing to pay $8.13 billion for two abbott laboratories' diagnostics units and $4.8 billion for smiths aerospace, an aviation electronics maker in london.  including its offer earlier in the month to buy vetco gray, an oil and gas drilling services company in houston, g.e. has committed itself to almost $15 billion worth of takeovers in january alone.  the new york times reported on jan. 9 that g.e. was in talks to sell its plastics unit, a slow-growing business that could nonetheless sell for as much as $10 billion.  additional deals may have to wait for a decision on the plastics business because g.e.'s chief executive, jeffrey r. immelt, said last month that g.e. had $7 billion in cash on hand for industrial acquisitions this year.  just say no -- in a rare example of a board denying a request by a controlling shareholder, the directors of cablevision systems rejected an $8.9 billion buyout offer from its founding family, the dolans.  the board said in a letter to the family that the offer ''does not represent fair value for the company's public shareholders nor does it contemplate a transaction that is in their best interest.''  cablevision remains publicly owned, but the dolans, who own 20 percent of its equity but control 70 percent of its votes, have said they will not sell the company to anyone besides themselves.  tribune bids -- two firm bidders stepped up with offers to buy the tribune company, a media company with television stations and newspapers in the nation's biggest media markets, but neither offered much of a premium over the company's flagging stock price.  one bid came from eli broad and ronald w. burkle, two billionaires in los angeles, where the tribune company owns the los angeles times and kttv. the other came from the chandler family, which sold the los angeles paper and several others to tribune in 2000.  a private equity firm, the carlyle group, offered to buy only the tv stations.  tribune directors will review the situation this weekend and may ask for new bids.  raising the stakes -- express scripts began a $24.8 billion hostile takeover attempt for a rival pharmacy benefits manager, caremark rx, prompting a competing bidder, the cvs corporation, to raise its offer.  caremark rebuffed express scripts in favor of cvs's lower offer. some shareholders sued caremark's board, saying the directors put their financial interests ahead of shareholder interests.  cvs, the drugstore chain, said it intended to conclude the takeover by april.  stiff sentence -- a federal judge in bridgeport, conn., sentenced walter a. forbes, the former chairman of the cendant corporation, to 12 years and 7 months in prison and ordered him to pay $3.275 billion in restitution for leading the largest accounting fraud of the 1990s.  a jury convicted mr. forbes in october of conspiracy and making false statements in a fraud that cost cendant and its investors $3 billion.  mr. forbes has asked to serve his time at a minimum-security federal prison camp in otisville, n.y.  most popular -- following are the most-popular business news articles on nytimes.com from jan. 13 through jan. 19:  1. want an iphone? beware the ihandcuffs  2. what $1.2 trillion can buy  3. magical or overrated? a food additive in a swirl  4. netflix to deliver movies to the pc  5. atop tv sets, basic black boxes face competition  links are at nytimes.com/business.  five days  