paid notice: deaths   barr, peter n.   barr--peter n., of westwood, ma, formerly of wellesley hills, retired chairman of the board of barr & barr, inc. builders of new york and boston, died monday, january 15, 2007 at his home in westwood at the age of 86. he was the husband of the late barbara stuart barr. born in new york city on november 1, 1920, he was the son of the late joseph r. barr and the late marguerite thomson barr. mr. barr spent his entire childhood in bronxville, ny where he graduated from the public school. he was a captain in the field artillery and served in the european theater during world war ii. after the war, he returned to cornell university and graduated with an engineering degree. before moving to wellesley hills, ma in 1969, mr. barr living in hastings-on-hudson, ny where he was a member of the town planning board, urban development board, president of the school board, member of the first reformed church building committee, active in boy scouts and a member of the riverview manor volunteer fire company. after moving to wellesley, mr. barr continued to serve, as he had in new york, with the american arbitration association. he was a member of the wellesley country club and a former member of the broomstone's curling club. he has served as a trustee and a corporator of the new england baptist hospital and on the building committees of both the wellesley hills congregational church and the wellesley country club. he was a member of the massachusetts prison design building selection board and served as director of the associated general contractors of massachusetts. he is the father of michael s. of walpole, ma, thomas d. of huntington, ny, and the late david t. barr. peter also leaves his brother, thomas a. barr of westwood, his sister, elizabeth henry of nantucket, ma, nine grandchildren, and two great-grandchildren. his brother robert t. barr predeceased him. a memorial service will be held on tuesday, january 30, 2007 at the wellesley hills congregational church, 207 washington st., wellesley, ma at 11am. inurnment at woodlawn cemetery, wellesley. in lieu of flowers, gifts may be made to the tufts-new england medical center, development office, tufts-nemc #  