al jazeera english: what it is, and isn't   to the editor:  re ''another perspective, or jihad tv?,'' by judea pearl (op-ed, jan. 17):  had i space and time, i would rebut all of mr. pearl's charges against al jazeera english, but let me engage a few of them here.  we do not mix ''news coverage and extremist propagandizing.'' in fact, we present nothing but the highest-quality news and documentary material and no ''extremist propagandizing,'' except when such content is labeled as such in news coverage. suicide attacks have never been called ''martyrdom'' operations, ''commando attacks'' or, most absurd of all, ''paradise operations.''  neither the presence nor the ideology of the cleric sheik yusuf al-qaradawi has ever appeared on our programming. nor do al jazeera english's editors portray a struggle between an ''evil-meaning western oppressor and its helpless, righteous arab victims.''  for example, our aggressive coverage holding both fatah and hamas responsible for recent gaza violence has drawn criticism and threats from both sides.  on my own behalf, the suggestion that this ''well-respected western anchor'' has ''pumped subliminally'' to my viewers a confusion of information and deception is unsupported by any evidence, because there is none.  we welcome the scrutiny of news organizations, and even more, the criticisms of viewers. all we ask is that they be based on the reality of our work and not some nightmare cartoon of it.  david marash  washington, jan. 18, 2007  the writer is an anchor at al jazeera english.  to the editor:  judea pearl writes that ''it is important for our news organizations to scrutinize'' al jazeera's ''content and let its viewers know when anti-western wishes are subverting objective truth.''  but ''our'' news organizations have let western governments mislead them about intelligence on weapons that iraq did not possess, and have lost the respect of many in the arab world for failing to report on the israeli-palestinian conflict in an even-handed manner.  many news organizations give over their airwaves or printed pages to those calling for more violent attacks on muslim countries like iran.  it is simply delusional to believe that the western media have a monopoly on ''objective truth'' that they can employ to evaluate those with a different perspective.  steven sherman  carrboro, n.c., jan. 17, 2007  to the editor:  judea pearl makes an important point in noting the risk that al jazeera english may simply be a propagandist mouthpiece that speaks impeccable english.  but he does not mention an equally -- or perhaps more -- important point: what al jazeera english broadcasts to the west, in our language, is simply not what al jazeera broadcasts to its arabic-speaking viewers.  yasir arafat was often accused of offering peace in english while simultaneously urging jihad in arabic. news stations are certainly not immune to these same tendencies.  ory sandel  berkeley, calif., jan. 17, 2007  