helping small businesses get bigger   mitchell goss is a very busy businessman. so busy running his small but growing digital-age business that he did not have time to hunt for the loan he needed to continue expanding.  ''i'm running the day-to-day aspects, and it's very time-consuming to go out and find the right financial institution,'' he said.  so mr. goss sought help from an organization that he had heard about: the small business development center at pace university in lower manhattan. his move paid off; an adviser at the center narrowed the list of potential lenders to half a dozen ''that she really felt would sit down with me and listen to my story and take me seriously,'' he said. one agreed to provide the money.  mr. goss, 30, is the founder and owner of zeroin media, a three-year-old new york company that installs and manages digital-screen signs. the screens carry general advertising in heavily trafficked public spaces, or, in locations like supermarkets and banks, convey information to patrons about products, prices and services.  in going to the pace center for help, mr. goss tapped into a network of more than 1,100 locations across the country where an owner of a small business, or someone wanting to start such a business, can receive free planning, management and technical assistance as well as help in the search for financing.  the sites are part of the small business development center program, a national effort that is financed by the federal small business administration, the states and co-sponsors like universities and colleges, where many of the centers and their satellite and outreach offices are located.  new york, new jersey and connecticut have a total of 35 centers as well as additional branch offices where centers cover large geographical areas. there are seven centers in new york city, including the pace operation.  although the national program has grown steadily since 1980, when it was established to help spur economic and job growth, and the centers have assisted many entrepreneurs and business owners, many are still unfamiliar with them, economic development experts say.  this is especially true in immigrant communities, they say, even though many centers are seeking to make themselves better known. (locations are available through the locator link at sba.gov/sbdc or from the small business administration at 1-800-827-5722.)  moreover, some businesspeople who do hear about the centers ''think that we can't be good because we're free, and they will go to their accountants for advice,'' said ira davidson, director of the pace center.  but most accountants focus on tax-related matters, like maximizing revenue by reducing tax liabilities, he said, while the basic challenges in starting or enlarging a business -- or simply avoiding red ink -- are broader, involving issues like the soundness of the business plan and marketing strategies. the individual counseling offered at the centers is meant to help develop such plans and strategies.  the pace center says that since its start in 1986, it has been consulted by about 12,000 business owners and would-be owners. mr. davidson, the director since 1992, said recently that he did not know how many of those hoping to start or expand businesses actually did so, but that more than $120 million had been invested in the area's economy through start-ups or expansions by clients the center knew about.  mr. goss said he went to the center last year because he needed money for additional operating capital and to add staff members to the dozen he now has.  he said his company had installed and operates a network of several hundred digital signs around the country, generally ranging in size from 42 inches to 8 feet. among those that carry general advertising in new york are four in the pier 17 mall building at the south street seaport and about a dozen in the empire state building.  catalina castano, an adviser at the pace center who helped mr. goss search for a loan (they both declined to disclose the amount), said, ''we looked at his business's financial situation and his financial situation, and i knew he had a strong case.''  home front this column about the local economy appears every other week. e-mail address: homefront@nytimes.com.  