grisly details bared as serial killing trial begins in canada   the murder trial of the man accused of the largest number of serial killings recorded in canada began here on monday with grisly details of how the police found the dismembered hands and feet and severed heads of women on his pig farm.  robert william pickton, 57, is accused of killing 26 women who were prostitutes and drug addicts in the roughest part of downtown vancouver over the course of nearly a decade before his arrest in february 2002. he has pleaded not guilty.  the opening session was the first public glimpse of the details of the investigation because a court order barred the news media from reporting on the preliminary hearings.  beyond laying out the details of how the victims were found, prosecutors also said they would show jurors a video of mr. pickton telling an undercover police officer, placed in mr. pickton's cell after his arrest, that he had killed 49 women and had planned to kill one more.  ''mr. pickton states that he had one more planned, but that was the end of it, that was the last,'' derrill prevett, a crown prosecutor, told jurors in his opening statement.  mr. pickton sat expressionless in a prisoner box surrounded on three sides by bulletproof glass. he wore a gray shirt and black jeans with his thinning hair slicked back.  the murder charges stem from the discovery of women's remains and dna during an 18-month excavation of the farm mr. pickton owned with his brother. the authorities found the heads of three women sliced in half vertically, the hands and partial feet of the same three women, and dna, clothing and belongings that have been traced to the other women he is accused of killing.  before the trial, the evidence was deemed too much for one jury to handle, so the case was split up. mr. pickton faces six counts of first-degree murder in the trial that began monday. he is to face the other 20 in a subsequent trial.  the case has taken nearly five years to go to trial while the authorities conducted an extensive investigation that began with reports that mr. pickton had an illegal firearm.  the royal canadian mounted police arrived at the pig farm on feb. 5, 2002, to search mr. pickton's double-wide trailer. he was arrested on the weapons charge and later released.  but during the search, the authorities found an asthma inhaler, used syringes and documents belonging to sereena abotsway, one of dozens of prostitutes who had been reported missing over two decades.  those discoveries led to the search that continued until november 2003 and involved an excavation led by a team of archaeologists. mr. pickton was initially charged with two counts of murder, but the number grew as the excavation turned up more human remains and dna.  investigators used thousands of dna fragments and articles of clothing and accessories to identify the women. after mr. pickton's arrest, the police issued a tainted meat warning for pork from the farm for fear that it may have contained human remains.  the lead crown prosecutor, michael petrie, told the jury that investigators had to separate human bones from animal bones and that a human jawbone was found in a trough near a slaughterhouse. several relatives and friends of the victims left the courtroom sobbing during some of the grisliest accounts.  mr. pickton's lead defense lawyer, peter ritchie, addressed the jury briefly, asserting his client's innocence. ''mr. pickton did not kill, nor did he participate in the killings, of the six women,'' mr. ritchie said.  the victims were connected by their lives in the downtown eastside, a section of vancouver that has become even more notorious because of the accusations against mr. pickton. just blocks away from the boutique-filled tourist district, the downtown eastside is a world of its own, where the streets are lined with huddled figures, many buildings are abandoned and boarded up, and the pawnshops, taverns and rooming houses are fortified with thick metal bars. drugs are bought and sold openly.  women working in the area insisted all along that disappearances were somehow linked, but the authorities were slow to investigate because the women involved led such itinerant lives.  the first trial is for the killings of ms. abotsway, mona wilson, andrea joesbury, brenda wolfe, georgina papin and marnie frey.  one of the other women mr. pickton is accused of killing wrote extensively in journals about the fear on vancouver's streets during the period when women were disappearing.  ''am i next?'' wrote the woman, sarah de vries. ''is he watching me now? stalking me like a predator and its prey? waiting, waiting for some perfect spot, time or my stupid mistake?''  ms. de vries disappeared in april 1998, and traces of her dna were later found on mr. pickton's farm.  the trial is expected to last a year.  