an alternative to long irons (and it's legal)   in the early days of the 1999 golf season, two engineers from taylormade began showing up at tournaments with a golf club shaped like a weeding tool. the club was made from small, expensive pieces of titanium and tungsten, and by many accounts, it was ugly.  ''like something i'd garden with,'' said tom olsavsky, one of the engineers, recalling the initial comments from tour players. but when the golfers were allowed to swing the club, sending high shots that traveled more than 200 yards with ease, they said something else: ''is this legal?'' he said.  eight years later, the club -- often called a hybrid because it has characteristics of a wood and an iron -- has become a staple on professional golf tours and in everyday foursomes. tiger woods and annika sorenstam have tried hybrids. retief goosen won two united states opens with a hybrid. se ri pak, in winning the 2006 l.p.g.a. championship, launched a shot from 201 yards away -- with a hybrid -- to within inches of the cup and leapt into her caddie's arms. ''first time i jumped on the golf course,'' she said.  the hybrid club has become so popular that many companies manufacture them for tour professionals, average players and anyone else looking for an alternative to using long irons, traditionally among the most difficult clubs to hit.  the science of the hybrid was born of the frustrations of scratch golfers and 30-handicaps alike, with a push from marketing and technology battles between rival golf-club manufacturers.  off the course, golf companies unveil new products several times a year -- perhaps a new driver with a clubface the size of a hubcap or a ball that, at last, will fetch, sit and heel on command. the companies will be nose to nose beginning jan. 25 at the annual p.g.a. merchandise show in orlando, fla., a three-day super bowl of golf equipment.  through years of scientific advances and advertising hype, however, some constants in golf remain: long irons, like the 2- and 3-irons, have bedeviled even the most proficient golfers, while giving players who can hit them comfortably a decided advantage over those who cannot.  because long irons are longer clubs that have lesser degrees of loft than shorter irons, they take more body speed, power and precision to elevate a golf ball.  not everyone can hit a 1-iron like jack nicklaus or a 2-iron like woods.  ''all players struggle with that, even the best players,'' said olsavsky, the director of product creation for taylormade. ''they don't have a lot of loft. the top line of the club is thin and the club isn't substantial. it's just you and your club and your ball and that's when the demons come out. you lack confidence and you don't swing as well.''  the hybrids are designed to instill that confidence. they mimic an iron in loft -- a 3-iron hybrid, for example, is often 19 degrees, a 4-iron is 22 degrees -- while giving players a club with a thicker, cambered sole and a center of gravity that is lower and toward the back of the club, which helps get the ball higher than an iron can.  on a recent afternoon at the taylormade offices, tucked among the foothills to the north of san diego, a scratch golfer named will miele and a radar device called trackman showed how.  at the company's driving range, miele hit 3-iron and 3-iron hybrid shots into a stiff wind beneath a gray sky. time after time, miele unfurled high rainbow shots with the hybrid that traveled about 190 yards in the air, while the iron shots lagged about 10 yards behind and traveled on a much lower trajectory.  other numbers favored the hybrid as well: the vertical-launch angle (53.2 and 53.7 degrees with the hybrid; 39.9 and 45.7 degrees with the iron) and the flight time (6.13 and 6.40 seconds with the hybrid; 5.74 and 5.44 seconds with the iron).  ''i hit my 3-iron low and it comes in hot,'' said miele, who works for taylormade product marketing.  shots with the hybrid, he noted, drop more softly and hold greens better.  ''it's just a lot more forgiving,'' he said. ''it definitely looked different to me, but after one or two shots it was an easy adjustment.''  other companies' tests have yielded similar results, including those at wilson golf, which makes hybrid clubs from a 1-iron to a 6-iron. some companies have even manufactured ''iron-replacement sets'' with hybrids replacing all of the irons in the bag.  ''the hybrids have credibility to consumers because there are a lot of tour players using them,'' bob thurman, the research director at wilson golf, said in a telephone interview. ''for most people that play pretty well, it's a 200-yard club that helps them hit the ball higher, with more clubhead speed, and it's a more stable club at impact.''  many players -- professionals and amateurs -- are already using the clubs. according to a trend analysis provided by taylormade, of all the hybrids in the marketplace, 141,000 hybrid units were sold in 2003, 344,000 in 2004 and 986,000 in 2005. the estimated sales for 2006 are 1,500,000.  the use of hybrids has grown on the tour as well, but some players have needed some convincing. in a sense, the mind-set of the professionals has had to catch up with the manufacturing of the clubs.  for tour players, the ability to hit a 2-iron off a tight lie is a reason to poke their chest out, a nod to their elite skill level.  some have come to hybrids grudgingly.  ''my caddie talked me into it,'' said paul stankowski, a pga tour player. ''i didn't like them and my caddie said, 'you've got to try this,' but my pride kept me from doing it.''  after enough prodding, stankowski finally gave in. he tried one recently and liked it so much that he took out his 2-iron and replaced it with a hybrid. he said that the pga tour greens were so fast that the players needed a club they could hit from long distances and still get the ball to stop quickly.  ''it's so easy to hit out of the rough, even crappy rough,'' said stankowski, who, like many tour players, has also used the club to hit chip shots around the greens. ''it's so versatile. the bottom line is putting up good numbers, and i'm all about finding the easiest road.''  joe ogilvie, another tour player, said by phone: ''i figured once tiger went to a 5-wood, i needed to go to a hybrid. eventually, i think you'll have a lot of guys with six traditional woods -- a driver, 3-wood, 5-wood and three hybrids.''  while the majority of professional players have at least tinkered with hybrids, they have not all made the leap.  woods, for example, offered this explanation, with a laugh.  ''i think i'm still strong enough to hit a 3-iron in the air,'' he said. ''most amateurs can't get a 3- or 4-iron in the air. that's one of the reasons why i changed to a 5-wood instead of a 2-iron because the balls just are not quite lifting as high.''  with the hybrid, woods said, ''i actually had a hard time keeping the ball down.''  in the eight years since the clubs were born, sorenstam has tried to hit them, but she does not have one in her bag, either.  ''they're very easy to hit,'' she said. ''i'm sure you all know that. i think it's tough to get used to the look a little bit.''  golf  