paid notice: deaths   taylor, paul, jr.   taylor--paul, jr. the rogosin institute's board of directors and staff members mourn the loss of esteemed board member, paul taylor, jr. he was a creator of the institute and a member of the original rogosin institute advisory board. he and his wife, anne cote taylor, have been devoted friends and benefactors of the institute for over 20 years. the institute will miss greatly his friendship, commitment and guidance. we extend heartfelt sympathy to anne and the entire family.  $(6$)taylor--paul edward jr., was a beloved friend, trustee, and generous benefactor of the silvercrest center for nursing and rehabilitation in queens, ny. we celebrate his life, which reflected our mission of giving quality to life. he enriched everyone and everything he touched. mr. taylor was chairman of silvercrest's board of trustees from 1992 to 1994 and continued to serve on the board until 1997. he was instrumental in the new york-presbyterian healthcare system's acquisition of the silvercrest center and our transformation into the region's preeminent skilled nursing facility. together with his wife, silvercrest trustee anne alexis cote taylor, their benevolence initiated the silvercrest beautification project which has transformed the landscape of the campus to a more patient-friendly and peaceful environment which ultimately led to the creation of the silvercrest healing gardens. as a successful businessman and philanthropist, mr. taylor was well accomplished, but the testimony of his success lies in his legacy as a devoted family man with a dry sense of humor, full of dignity and an abiding faith. on behalf of all the patients/residents, employees, and the board of trustees of the silvercrest center our sympathies and prayers go to his loving wife and his entire family. george f. heinrich, m.d., chairman. stephen s. mills, fache, president & chief executive officer. cosmo j. lacosta, fache, senior vice president and administrator  $(6$)taylor--paul edward jr. the medical staff society of new york hospital queens, mourns the loss of its distinguished colleague and extends its heartfelt sympathies to his family. david h. snyder m.d., president gabriel f. deangelis m.d., vice president jack m. mann m.d., secretary treasurer  $(6$)taylor--paul e., jr. colonnade properties llc acknowledges with deep sorrow the passing of our friend, colleague, and former chairman, paul e. taylor, jr. we extend our deepest sympathies to his beloved wife, anne, and his family. colonnade properties llc  $(6$)taylor--paul edward jr., died in peace on january 21, 2007, at his home in new york city surrounded by his family. beloved of ann somers taylor (deceased) and anne alexis cote taylor, paul is mourned and celebrated by his sister, six children, their spouses, and his nineteen grandchildren of whom he spoke with intense pride to whomever he met, as well as countless friends, and pets. born july 2nd, 1930, paul graduated from the university of pennsylvania in 1952 and harvard business school in 1958. gifted with exceptional intelligence, common sense, and discipline, he prosecuted a career which saw him named as, at the time, the youngest partner in the history of lazard freres, co., and later as founding president of corporate property investors, and chairman of taylor simpson group. a member (and frequently chairman) of over a dozen boards of directors, his tenures as a 30-year governor of new york -presbyterian hospital and founding trustee of the block island club were particularly distinguished. more than for his numerous business and philanthropic achievements though, he will be remembered primarily as a devoted family man possessed of a self-deprecating sense of humor, dignity, and an abiding roman catholic faith in the loving and wise god to whom his family commends him with profound gratitude. viewing will be at frank e. campbell funeral home on wednesday, january 24th from 2:00pm to 5:00pm , and 7:00pm to 9:00pm. mass of christian burial to be celebrated on thursday, january 25th at st. joseph's church, yorkville at 10:00am. in lieu of flowers, contributions may be made to the new york weill cornell medical center fund., inc. for the e.w. davis, jr. professorship in medical ethics.  $(6$)taylor--paul e. jr. we mourn the passing of our life trustee, friend, and advisor, paul edward taylor, jr. mr. taylor was a member of our hospital's board of trustees since 1992, and served as chairman in the early 1990s. he was the first chairman of new york hospital queens after the transition from its roots as booth memorial medical center. he was also a member of the hospital's corporation. the value of his commitment to our organization has been immeasurable and is irreplaceable. among mr. taylor's countless contributions to improving healthcare for queens county residents was his bold leadership during a period of enormous change in our institution's sponsorship and management that enabled the hospital to emerge as the medical center it is today. he was an objective and brilliant mastermind of strategic modernization programs during the 1990s, and earlier this decade. in fact, he was instrumental in planning our current modernization program up until several months ago, and we will miss him greatly when we break ground for construction next month. on behalf of all of our trustees, administration, and clinical leadership, we offer our condolences to his wife, anne alexis cote taylor, trustee for the silvercrest center for nursing and rehabilitation. we also extend our sympathies to his sister, his beloved children, and his many grandchildren. george f. heinrich, m.d. chairman stephen s. mills president & ceo john e. sciortino chief operating officer kevin ward chief financial officer terence m. brady, m.d. interim chief medical officer cosmo lacosta senior vp, continuum of care michaelle williams, rn senior vp, patient care services william p. wisseman, esq. senior vp & general counsel new york hospital queens  