orbitz's parent company hires adviser for possible offering   less than six months after leaving the public markets, the travel web site orbitz.com may be contemplating a return trip.  orbitz's parent company, travelport, has hired the investment bank ubs to explore an initial public offering for the subsidiary, according to a person briefed on the plan.  travelport hopes to hold an offering for orbitz in the second quarter and is considering listing the shares on the new york or london stock exchanges, this person said, adding that it expected to sell about a third of orbitz's equity at a price that could value the entire business at $2.5 billion to $3 billion.  orbitz, which allows customers to find and book airline and hotel reservations online, was part of the publicly traded cendant until august, when a private buyout firm, the blackstone group, took travelport private for $4.3 billion in cash. the sale was part of cendant's split into four companies, which resulted in cendant's being renamed the avis budget group.  in addition to orbitz, travelport owns galileo, a reservation-booking service for travel agents and corporations, and gullivers travel associates, a wholesaler. travelport recently agreed to buy worldspan, a service that competes with galileo, in a $1.4 billion deal.  travelport's business-to-consumer segment, which includes orbitz and cheaptickets, reported net revenue of $193 million in the quarter that ended sept. 30 -- about 30 percent of travelport's total revenue during the period.  a spokesman for travelport declined to comment on the potential orbitz offering.  orbitz competes with consumer travel sites like expedia, which was spun off from iac/interactivecorp as a public company in 2005, and travelocity, which is owned by sabre holdings.  late last year, two private equity firms, silver lake partners and the texas pacific group, agreed to take sabre private for $4.3 billion.  cendant paid $1.25 billion in cash for orbitz in november 2004. at the time, orbitz was publicly traded but controlled by an alliance of major airlines that created it.  