g.e. says profit rose 11%, but its shares still fall   the general electric company reported yesterday that its earnings in 2006 were up 11 percent, buoyed by favorable tax rates and strong performance in several industrial and finance units.  ''we feel we delivered a strong 2006,'' jeffrey r. immelt, g.e.'s chairman, said on a conference call. he noted that strong orders for diagnostic imaging equipment and services, aircraft engines and other products boded well for 2007. ''we have a high-quality portfolio, tremendous financial capability, and we are building a better g.e.,'' he said.  still, investors responded with a thumbs down, sending shares down 2.76 percent, to close at $36.95. the reason, analysts say, was discomfort with the quality of earnings and with accounting issues.  g.e. restated earnings for 2001 through the first three quarters of 2006 for the second time, after the securities and exchange commission questioned its methods for hedging commercial paper.  the restatements have not had a significant impact on earnings. the first, in may 2005, added $318 million to earnings, but the current one reduced them by $343 million. thus, the net impact was only $38 million spread over six years.  the restatements did not affect fourth-quarter earnings, which came in at $6.6 billion, up 12 percent from the quarter last year. and it added a penny to earnings per share for 2006, bringing them to $1.99 a share, up 13 percent. for the year, g.e. posted earnings of $20.7 billion from continuing operations, revenue rose 10 percent from 2005, to $163.4 billion.  keith s. sherin, g.e.'s chief financial officer, said he was ''disappointed'' that g.e.'s accounting for interest rate swaps did not meet ''technical requirements,'' but assured analysts that the problem had been corrected.  still, investors may be hard to convince. ''the restatements are relatively immaterial, but investors find two of them frustrating,'' said matt collins, an analyst at edward jones, who rates g.e. shares a buy.  mr. collins noted that investors were also concerned that lower taxes associated with the sale of g.e.'s advanced materials unit last year played a large part in the strong earnings. g.e. said that it had used the money from the tax gains to pay for restructuring activities like retirements, not to fuel profits. investors seemed to perceive it differently.  ''healthy organic growth is overshadowed when a lower-than-expected tax rate seems to be a key driver to earnings,'' mr. collins said.  nevertheless, analysts have not lost faith. according to thomson financial, 16 of the 20 analysts that cover g.e. rate it a buy.  ''their operating margins, their growth in revenues and orders, all are indicative of an underlying high quality of earnings,'' said deane m. dray, an analyst with goldman sachs who rates g.e. a strong buy.  g.e. did report a lot of good news. orders companywide rose 19 percent in the quarter, and orders for major equipment rose 35 percent. revenues and profits were strong in health care and commercial finance as well. and nbc universal showed a small profit increase for the first time in more than a year.  g.e.'s plastics business, besieged by soaring raw materials costs, saw earnings decline 49 percent in the quarter. but g.e. said that it expected to sell the unit this year.  analysts also applauded three big deals that g.e. announced this month: the purchase of vetco gray's oil and gas operations for $1.9 billion, smiths group's aerospace business for $4.8 billion, and a diagnostics business from abbott laboratories for $8.1 billion.  ''they didn't get anything at a bargain basement price, but these deals help them shift their center of gravity to faster growing parts of the global economy,'' said nicholas p. heymann, an analyst at prudential securities who rates g.e. shares a buy.  richard tortoriello, who follows g.e. for s.& p. equity research, upgraded his recommendation yesterday, to strong buy from buy.  ''jeff immelt has identified the long-term global trends, and he's getting into businesses that can capitalize on them,'' mr. tortoriello said.  g.e. ended the year with $4.5 billion in cash and expects to reap as much as $10 billion from the sale of its plastics business this year. thus, it says it can comfortably handle $15 billion in acquisitions and still make good on its promise of buying back $5 billion to $7 billion in stock this year.  the company raised the lower end of its guidance for 2007 by a penny, and now predicts earnings of $2.18 to $2.33 for this year. and mr. immelt said g.e. was ''on track'' to reach its goal of 20 percent return on total capital by 2008.  but executives concede it may take time for investors to respond to the good news.  ''we're improving our strategic position, we're reinvesting capital, and we're promising high-quality earnings growth of 10 to 12 percent,'' mr. sherin said in an interview. ''we just have to get that message out.''  