new jersey senate passes two bills meant to cut costs   the new jersey state senate passed bills on monday intended to save money by consolidating local governments and by taking away portions of pensions of public officials convicted of corruption.  the two measures were part of gov. jon s. corzine's multipronged efforts to slow down increases in local property taxes.  another part of the governor's plan, the creation of a state comptroller, faltered after senators from both parties complained that amendments had weakened the investigative and auditing powers that the office would have over local governments.  but richard j. codey, the senate president, and a democrat like the governor, predicted that the senate would pass the measure to create the comptroller's office before the end of the week.  ''they are wrong,'' he said of the critics. ''the comptroller would be able to do just about anything.''  the consolidation of local governing bodies in a state with 566 municipalities, 616 school districts, 486 local authorities and 792 fire districts had long seemed to be an easy and obvious cost-cutting move. still, the mere existence of so many governmental entities is an obstacle, a sign of the strength of local-control sentiment in the state and of the entrenched nature of the political offices.  under the measure passed in the senate, a commission appointed by the governor and legislative leaders would spend two years studying which entities should be merged and which may save money by sharing personnel and resources. the commission's recommendations, however, would not be carried out unless approved by the voters of affected municipalities.  the intention was to pattern the commission in part on a federal commission that determines the closing of military bases. but new jersey's consolidation commission would have less power, since it would first submit recommendations to the governor and legislature and then to the affected voters.  some earlier versions of the senate measure would have given the state commission the authority to compel consolidation. but that proved difficult in a legislature where many members are also mayors and city council members.  state senator bob smith, a democrat who represents somerset and middlesex counties, said that by including the requirement to put all recommendations to a vote, the democratic majority in the senate had removed a ''major impediment'' to the bill's passage. they had also removed penalties in the form of decreases in state aid for localities that ignored clear savings from consolidation and sharing services.  ''i believe that with this bill, we will actually stimulate consolidation,'' mr. smith said.  state senator joseph m. kyrillos jr., a republican from middletown, said that he would have preferred to create a commission that had the ultimate power to order consolidation, believing that the state's ''clamoring for property tax cuts'' made this year the right time for such a change.  however, he voted for the watered-down version. ''what we end up with is something that puts a spotlight on the issue of consolidation and that is more than we have ever done before,'' mr. kyrillos said.  asked what may be ripe for consolidation should the commission pass the assembly and be signed into law as the governor has vowed, mr. kyrillos said that the most obvious target would be ''doughnut communities'' -- municipalities like princeton borough and princeton township, or freehold borough and freehold township, where a newer, suburban area has grown around an older, urbanized area.  the other measure that passed the senate on monday was a bill that would deny public officials convicted of corruption a portion of their pensions. but in a state where some of the officials who have pleaded guilty to corruption hold more than one public job, the forfeiture of the pension would be restricted to the portion earned in the position where the corruption occurred.  for example, a town councilman who also held a county job in the transportation department and was convicted of selling his council vote for a bribe would still keep the pension from the county job but lose the pension from his council service.  some members had wanted the forfeiture to be retroactive and to cover all state-administered pensions. others, like senator nick sacco, opposed the bill and predicted that it would ''be an attorney's dream'' and result in costly litigation.  