a punch line in detroit, milicic finds a niche in orlando   the screaming blond streaks in darko milicic's thick black hair have long since faded. he is back to his natural color.  here in orlando, milicic says he has no time to sit and have his highlights done, as he did when he was bored in detroit. he would rather have his highlights appear elsewhere -- on television.  that may be possible now that milicic is playing -- rather than sitting -- in the n.b.a.  he was supposed to be doing so much more, of course, considering the pistons chose him no. 2 over all in the 2003 draft behind lebron james and ahead of carmelo anthony, chris bosh and dwyane wade.  for two seasons in detroit under coach larry brown and then a half-season under coach flip saunders, milicic, the 7-footer from serbia with the smooth shooting touch, was permanently attached to the bench as his attitude and confidence atrophied.  he alternated between trying to improve and wondering why he should bother. by his third season in detroit, when his draft classmates were becoming superstars and fans were chanting his name to enter games in mop-up situations, milicic just wanted to go home.  instead, the pistons traded him last february to the magic.  ''i am excited now i get a chance to play,'' milicic said after the magic's morning shootaround before playing washington on friday night.  ''when you don't play for three years, it's difficult,'' he said. ''you got to get your game back and your feelings for your game back. sometimes, i don't look like i'm supposed to. i look funny to myself.''  he is still coming off the bench, but through thursday he was averaging 7.2 points, 4.9 rebounds and 21.8 minutes a game.  the magic is the most improved team in the eastern conference, and milicic has provided more than a token contribution. some nights, when he complements the franchise's burgeoning star, dwight howard, milicic flashes the passing and shooting potential scouts still attach to him; on other nights, milicic fades into ineffectiveness and vindicates his critics. in the magic's 114-93 loss on friday, he had 6 points, 4 rebounds, 3 assists, 3 blocked shots and 3 turnovers in 26 minutes.  ''before, when i used to play in serbia, i used to play up and down,'' he said. ''sometimes i got tired.''  milicic still has a tendency to dwell, angrily, on the past. he blamed brown's unwillingness to play him for why he no longer feels comfortable from 3-point range, as he did in europe.  ''for me, sitting on the bench in detroit was nothing; it didn't help me at all,'' he said.  but what kind of responsibility does milicic take for his career?  ''everybody wants darko to be very good,'' magic general manager otis smith said in a telephone interview this week. ''but darko will only be as good as he wants to be.''  both smith and coach brian hill view this season as milicic's rookie campaign, as he played only 30 games for the magic after the trade.  ''i think part of darko's inconsistency is the fact that those first two and a half years, all he did was practice,'' hill said friday morning. ''at the end of last year, he gave us 25 good games. then the challenge after that is, now can he do it for 82?''  hill said milicic was becoming more aggressive defensively and offensively, and was developing a low-post game. milicic is playing for a contract next summer, when he becomes a free agent. the magic decided not to offer him an extension -- which all the other top players of the class of 2003 signed. orlando wants to see him improve and gauge his market value. ''i really want to stay here,'' milicic said. he insists that, unlike his time in detroit, he understands the work ethic that he needs to be successful.  ''the first year, i was still working hard, but i used to go out a lot,'' milicic said.  if milicic was once the target of laughter, he now displays the ability to have people laugh with him. ask him for an impression of another outsider, albeit a fictional one, and he will hilariously mimic borat, the sacha baron cohen character in a popular movie.  ''he is a great guy, a fun person to be around, keeps us laughing,'' howard said. ''he's always looking to clown around. once he gets his confidence, the sky's the limit for him.''  at times, milicic ponders how his career may have been different had he not gone to detroit.  ''maybe if i were the third pick, for denver, i'd be playing more minutes,'' he said. ''but i can't go back.  ''who knows,'' he added, shrugging, ''maybe it would be the same.''  pro basketball  