testimony to be heard on shooting by the police   a queens grand jury that will weigh evidence in the fatal police shooting of an unarmed black man on his wedding day in november will begin hearing testimony next week, lawyers involved in the case said yesterday.  two months after the unarmed man, sean bell, was killed and two of his friends were wounded in a fusillade of 50 police bullets, prosecutors are expected to begin presenting evidence and calling witnesses before the panel, the lawyers said.  ''my understanding is that they should begin presenting on monday,'' said michael hardy, a lawyer who represents the woman mr. bell was to marry, nicole paultre bell (she took his name after his death), and the two men wounded in the shooting.  the office of the queens district attorney, richard a. brown, declined to comment or answer questions about the grand jury process. ''the investigation is continuing,'' said meris campbell, a spokeswoman.  mr. hardy, lawyers representing some of the five officers involved in the shooting and others said they expected the grand jury's work would last at least three weeks. the two men wounded in the nov. 25 shooting, trent benefield and joseph guzman, intend to testify, said mr. hardy, and will most likely do so toward the end of the grand jury process.  ''they are crucial witnesses,'' he said. ''and that, obviously, will present a very significant challenge to whatever testimony is given by the officers who did the shooting, if any.''  of the officers who fired at mr. bell, two are black, one is black and hispanic, and two are white.  in recent weeks, four of the five officers have given investigators for the queens district attorney's office their version of events. the fifth, detective michael oliver, who fired 31 of the shots, has not spoken to prosecutors, according to one lawyer involved in the case.  but it remained unclear yesterday if detective oliver planned to testify before the grand jury or speak with prosecutors, and his lawyer did not return phone calls seeking comment.  paul p. martin, a lawyer who represents detective marc cooper, said his client would testify before the grand jury. ''my client's actions were reasonable under the circumstances and justified,'' he said.  it is unclear if detective paul headley will testify. a lawyer for another officer, the undercover detective who fired the first of the 50 shots, has said his client intended to testify. stephen c. worth, a lawyer for officer michael carey, said he was ''reserving judgment'' on whether his client would testify.  officers who face grand juries in queens can find themselves in one of several rooms that look like college lecture halls, with seats in tiered rows. there are some grand juries that sit for a month at a time, and one that sits for six months, though each can be extended. it is unclear which type will hear the bell case.  