strangled by the light   first there were the tree lights at new york city's famous tavern on the green. the single big elm and several london plane trees there have been wrapped with 10 miles of white mini-lights for decades.  the glow through the woods of central park is pretty wonderful -- sort of a ghost-tree vision in the darkest months of the year. christmas carols have faded from the air but the tree lights remain until the days get considerably longer than the nights and we have green leaves again.  walking west in the dark from the tavern on the green tree spectacle a couple of weeks ago, i came upon a block just off the park where almost all the street trees had cords of small white lights wrapped around their skinny trunks and around the branches up to the tips. this phenomenon is not limited to here in manhattan; these tiny white lights outline trees in front of restaurants and stores throughout the suburbs on main streets and in shopping malls.  i'm absolutely in favor of tree lights strung in plain old christmas-tree fashion. and even more in favor of lights along fences and around windows. god knows we're starved for light this time of year. but tree-wrapping, winding the cords round and round each trunk and branch, seems to have become a pandemic. it's beginning to look like bondage, especially when the tree in question is a young thing trying to stay alive in a sidewalk tree pit. street trees are already being urinated on by dogs and wounded by cars and starved by poor soil, to mention only a few of their miseries.  i thought at first that the heat and light through the winter might hurt the tree, but it turns out the problem is more mechanical than physiological. touch the little bulbs and you'll see they're not very hot. the extra light could have some effect, but most of the trees have lights put on them when they're already deeply dormant. the problem for the tree starts when people lay hands on them. they're at risk when people are putting the lights up and at more risk when people are taking them down. the greatest risk is when the lights aren't taken off at all.  professional decorators put the lights on with care. it takes six weeks and a cherry picker to put the lights on the trees at tavern on the green. the same head gardener, a person with a stake in the trees' continuing good health, is in charge of putting the lights up and taking them down. in spring the cords are sheared and the lights are thrown away. (the area's two most distinguished exemplars of good horticulture practices, by the way, do not indulge in this kind of tree-wrapping. the brooklyn botanic garden doesn't wrap any of its living trees. at the new york botanical garden, a lighting engineer puts lights on three small cherry trees in containers by the visitors' center with watchful horticulture staff standing by.)  as for taking the cords off, it's almost impossible to unwind them gently come spring. if you've ever undressed a christmas tree you know how tempting it is to give a yank. on a cut tree that's not a big deal; on a live tree it could pull off branch tips or whole branches. while professional decorators working on other trees have probably put the lights on attentively (with their invoices still to be presented), they note that they're not removed with the same care.  the worst damage to the tree occurs when the strings of lights are simply left on to shine again next winter. as the trunk and branches grow thicker, the circling cords dig into the bark and impede the movement of food and water up and down the tree. girdling trees (not with light cords, but by taking off a thin strip of bark all the way around the trunk) is what early american farmers did when they wanted to kill off trees and clear a field. nowadays you can see cords cutting into the trunks of banyan trees in honolulu and palm trees in miami beach, which are wrapped with lights year-round.  my husband refuses to see what i've come to term ''tree-throttling'' as an outrage, and of course there are more terrible crimes against nature. the lights are pretty, he says, and they highlight the shape of the tree. yes, but plain old christmas-tree-style lights strung along -- but not around -- the branches are also pretty and without the garrote effect. a river birch or maple or palm or banyan is beautifully highlighted with a spotlight shining on it from the ground below.  glowing trees fill a need. what bothers me is that in trying to cheer ourselves in winter we're not fully taking in the fact that these trees are alive, that given care they will be useful and beautiful in other seasons -- and that they're more than our accessories.  op-ed contributor constance casey, a former new york city parks department gardener, writes about gardening for slate.  