if clinton should win, who would take her place?   the choice -- if it had to be made -- would be two years away, but senator hillary rodham clinton's decision to run for the white house in 2008 has already touched off some early speculation about who would succeed her in the senate if she wins.  if mrs. clinton resigned to become president, gov. eliot spitzer, a fellow democrat, would be responsible for naming a temporary replacement. a special election would then be held in 2010 to complete the remaining two years of mrs. clinton's term.  a senate vacancy is not so rare; it has occurred three times in new york in the last 70 years. but no sitting senator from new york has ever been elected to the white house.  while insisting that it was far too early to start thinking about names, several political observers, when pressed, yesterday sketched out a few scenarios.  h. carl mccall, a former state comptroller, said mr. spitzer would face considerable pressure to name a black democrat, like lt. gov. david a. paterson or representative gregory w. meeks of queens.  mr. mccall, who is black, was widely mentioned as a possible senate candidate -- long before mrs. clinton entered the race -- when senator daniel patrick moynihan announced in 1998 that he would not run again in 2000. (mr. mccall decided instead to run for governor in 2002; he was unsuccessful.)  ''i think that that would still be a concern for many people, that the senate could be more diverse and that therefore the governor could look to a minority candidate,'' mr. mccall said.  there have been only five black senators, and none from new york. the only incumbent black senator, barack obama of illinois, is a rival to mrs. clinton for the democratic nomination for president.  other black or hispanic candidates whom mr. spitzer might consider, mr. mccall said, include the new york city comptroller, william c. thompson jr.; mayor byron w. brown of buffalo; representative josé e. serrano of the bronx; and representative nydia m. velázquez, whose district comprises parts of brooklyn, manhattan and queens.  hank sheinkopf, a political consultant, said that mr. spitzer might do well to look upstate for geographic balance, given that the state's other senator, charles e. schumer, is from brooklyn. possibilities include representative maurice d. hinchey, whose district spans eight counties and includes poughkeepsie, binghamton, and ithaca, and representative louise m. slaughter, whose western district includes parts of buffalo and rochester.  ''that would be a very appealing choice for him,'' mr. sheinkopf said. ''he's made a commitment to upstate and non-new york city voters. it's a way to prove he kept it, by honoring them with a senator.''  other members of the state's congressional delegation who would be among the top contenders for a senate vacancy, mr. sheinkopf said, are representatives jerrold l. nadler, who represents parts of manhattan and brooklyn; joseph crowley, who represents parts of queens and the bronx; and nita m. lowey, who represents parts of westchester and rockland counties. (ms. lowey considered running for the senate in 2000 but stepped aside when mrs. clinton announced her candidacy.)  a bold, if unlikely, choice would be thomas r. suozzi, the nassau county executive, who ran against mr. spitzer last year in the democratic primary for governor. choosing mr. suozzi would show great magnanimity, but, said douglas a. muzzio, a professor of public affairs at baruch college, ''it ain't likely after all the nasty things he said about eliot during the gubernatorial campaign.''  a spokeswoman for mr. spitzer, christine anderson, said only that ''we would endeavor to fill the open seat with the most qualified candidate up to the task of filling senator clinton's shoes.''  since senators began to be popularly elected in 1914, a senate seat for new york has become vacant three times.  the most recent was the assassination of senator robert f. kennedy, a democrat, in 1968, during his presidential campaign. gov. nelson a. rockefeller named a fellow republican, representative charles e. goodell, to complete the last two years of mr. kennedy's term; mr. goodell was defeated when he ran for a full term in 1970.  after senator royal s. copeland, a democrat, died in 1938, representative james m. mead won a special election to complete the remaining two years of the term; he was re-elected in 1940.  to replace senator robert f. wagner, the legendary new deal democrat who resigned because of ill health in 1949, gov. thomas e. dewey, a republican, appointed the diplomat john foster dulles. mr. dulles served only four months before losing to a democrat, herbert h. lehman, a former governor, in a special election.  if mrs. clinton succeeds, she would be only the third sitting senator in united states history to be elected president, after warren g. harding of ohio, in 1920, and john f. kennedy of massachusetts, in 1960.  only one senator from new york has ever made it to the white house: martin van buren, who was senator from 1821 to 1828, then governor of new york until 1831 and, later, andrew jackson's vice president.  other senators from new york have sought the presidency, without success: rufus king was a federalist candidate in 1816, william h. seward a republican candidate in 1860 and david b. hill a democratic candidate in 1892. aaron burr had completed a senate term and been defeated for re-election when he ran for president in 1800.  