coach vs. coach, progressive vs. brutish   the enlightened depths of the n.f.l. can be measured by which tree it wants to hug.  in an rca dome cavernous enough to be a biosphere, two coaching trees will be rooted in the artificial turf during today's american football conference title game, one with tony dungy at the top and another represented by bill belichick.  you know coach hoodie. as bill parcells's estranged coaching grad, belichick is the patriots' socially awkward football savant dressed in the wardrobe from the teenage flick ''clerks.'' he grunts answers disdainfully and has perpetuated parcells's cranky lineage by delivering to the n.f.l. a disingenuous nick saban and an impassive eric mangini.  dungy gave us a genial man named lovie, as in smith, coach of a bears team that is in today's national football conference championship game. and dungy couldn't be more thrilled for smith, his former tampa bay assistant and lifelong friend.  this is dungy. he is like the best man at every wedding. under pressure, with everyone around him on the verge of a flop sweat, he is the serene sideline caretaker of others.  ''he's a man that's strong,'' colts receiver reggie wayne said friday, adding, ''you never want to put him nor the colts out there for something negative, because he's so nice to us all.''  dungy values relationships over victory. as many know, he, smith and another past dungy hire, herman edwards, all recently dined together in an indianapolis restaurant when their teams made the playoffs.  smith and dungy remain. if smith's bears end the saints' feel-good journey, if dungy's colts finally crack the patriots playoff code, it will be the first time a black coach, much less two, advanced to the super bowl.  it shouldn't have to be a big deal, but there would be no diminishing the social significance of dungy's and smith's potentially coaching in the largest television event of the year. almost everyone with a remote -- even folks normally anchored to either lifetime or mtv or pbs -- will witness the game.  and as it is in so many cases, a societal shift has to be seen to be absorbed, be viewed to be felt. in one super sunday, a league forever led by an ant trail of white coaches could finally find a comfortable seat aboard the soul train.  would the league then officially become colorblind? only if coaching perceptions do. somewhere today, a voice from a tv booth will celebrate smith and dungy for their motivational skills but not their mental acuity, leaving the thinking-man's adjectives for belichick or the saints' sean payton.  it's not purposeful, or meant to be disrespectful, but think of it as black quarterback stereotyping when applied to coaching.  ''i guess the media and everybody else kind of gives you credit when they want to give you credit and kind of not when they don't want to,'' the colts defensive star dwight freeney said. ''it's kind of a funny thing. but tony has done a great job. every place he's been, he's turned teams around. he comes up with great schemes and kind of lets the players be the type of players they can be.  ''it's not always, 'o.k., draw a line here, you go here,' like a bunch of robots.''  and yet, rigid systems are celebrated more than a football coach's mental ability to fit plays around players. belichick will easily discard past stars for interchangeable parts to plug into his design. dungy is more fluid in his math, able to adjust a team's persona as well as its scheme. dungy's revamped colts defense -- described as soft until it out-ravened the ravens -- has saved indy in the playoffs.  ''i think he should get probably a lot more credit for what he does as a mind in the game,'' freeney said.  yet, the game-day rhetoric is often pitched as belichick versus peyton manning. as the colts' quarterback, manning -- never one to shy from a theatrical marquee moment -- finds such billing absurd. ''i think it's never an accurate way to phrase it,'' he said.  the phraseology pinned on dungy, and every head coach under his umbrella, is the backhanded praise of players' coach. this is narrow casting considering the league's ubiquitous cover 2 defense was borne from dungy's blueprint years ago.  almost every parcells disciple is called a schematic genius (belichick is coach mensa and mangini is mangenius) or a disciplined tactician (see tom coughlin or saban spit cleat spikes).  so the parcells bullies probably took pride in a sports illustrated poll this month that queried 361 n.f.l. players on which coach was the hardest to play for. the top 10 dictators included parcells, coughlin, saban, belichick and mangini.  among the top 10 easiest to play for? dungy, edwards and smith.  if dungy or smith, or both, land in the super bowl, this would not be a referendum on new-age coaches versus throwback coaches, but about progressive versus oppressive.  this is not to shortchange belichick's aura; he is deserving of his dynastic coach status. but it would be a refreshing change to welcome a hybrid coach in a prius-driving world, to see a trend of do-no-harm leaders who mix humanity with intellect on the super bowl stage.  this would prove that genius and grace aren't mutually exclusive traits in coaching. but even if belichick's patriots win and smith's bears lose, there is no doubt the n.f.l. is better for having an alternative coaching tree to hug.  sports of the times e-mail: selenasports@nytimes.com  