the underdog days of winter   the appeal of the underdog is a longstanding one that has most often been applied to sports but long ago spread into public consciousness. the badge of the underdog is (figuratively) adorned with blood, guts and perseverance, and worn with pride -- especially when an underdog inexplicably succeeds.  this football season, however, the underdog is a symbol of money. big money, for las vegas bookmakers: they've raked in an estimated hundreds of millions of dollars extra betting on the underdog in the national football league. this is because in the 2006 regular season, nfl teams that were given points (those ''+'' or ''-'' symbols that indicate the spread, as determined by bookmakers) walked off with an overdog-worthy 140-106-7 (55 percent) record against the point spread. in addition, underdogs that were given double-digit points in the plus column (the under-underdogs, if you will) were 20-14-2 (59 percent).  according to analysts from covers.com, a canadian web site devoted to betting news, these are the highest winning percentages in those categories in the last 10 years. and because the vast majority of the betting public usually, foolishly, plays the favorite, this season's pack of underdogs probably outfitted most of the bigger casinos with some lofty accoutrements. if you find the mirage's urinals suddenly gold-plated or the bellagio golf carts equipped with g.p.s. systems, it's most likely courtesy of the tennessee titans or the buffalo bills, which had the best records of all of the underdog teams this season.  this trend has continued into the playoffs -- last weekend's divisional rounds saw all four underdog teams (colts, eagles, seahawks and patriots) beating the point spread in their respective games and, in some cases, winning outright. with these percentages, alongside rocky balboa's return to cultural legitimacy, does this mean that underdogs are a safe bet through super bowl sunday in miami?  unfortunately, no.  keith glantz of covers.com gives the sobering news: playoffs are a ''different animal'' altogether. he says that teams with big leads in a playoff game used to play it safer than they do now, thanks to the classic 1993 playoff between the houston oilers and the buffalo bills: houston led 35-3 at halftime but switched from its touchdown-happy, run-and-shoot offense to a more conservative ground attack -- and lost in overtime, 41-38. the 49ers, the texans and, on a few occasions, the pitiful oakland raiders beat their odds this year, but none of those teams are actually in the playoffs. and playoff teams -- those of the last 15 years, at least -- pile up points until they see zeros on the clock.  however, in the playoffs the quality of the teams does matter. remember, the salary-capped nfl prides itself on pete rozelle-era ''parity,'' and some experts have declared that because of that, the nfl is handicapped with across-the-board mediocrity. yet in this case it makes for exciting football. it's becoming tougher and tougher to blow a team out in the nfl, regardless of what all the gambling trends indicate and, sometimes, what common sense indicates. to fans and, most notably, to non-gamblers, a game becomes epic regardless of whether your team is playing in it or you're betting $1,000 on it.  but, parity or not, good gamblers know it wasn't that crazy to bet the battle-scarred new england patriots, with 5 points last weekend, against the up and coming san diego chargers, a team saddled with one of the classic playoff deadweights in coach marty schottenheimer. and even though there wasn't a total implosion, trusting rex grossman's bipolar quarterbacking with your $100 and laying 9.5 points to last year's nfc champions, the seattle seahawks would not be a smart bet. finally, the saints are a marvelous feel-good story, and playing at home, but it was still a little tough to have vegas giving a surging, playoff-savvy philadelphia eagles team points and expecting a blowout. this year, at least.  regardless of what the numbers say, or what the trends indicate, or how good so-and-so's defense is when it's 46 degrees or below in a month that has an r in it, there's always something that could go horribly, horribly wrong. (mr. romo, please pick up your head and step forward.)  the best gambling advice going into the final weekend of actual football -- before the super bowl spectacle of football -- is to veer away from the allure of the underdog trend (and the promise of a personalized gold-plated urinal).  the safest bet, however, is that these games are going to be good.  op-ed contributor a. j. daulerio is a columnist for the web site deadspin.  