back to a future unmade: glittering, playful varèse   in the 1920s and 1930s and in the 1950s edgard varèse wrote music of the future. it was the same future that the spires and silvery arcs of the empire state and chrysler buildings were pointing to, streamlined and shining, later outlined in visions of flying cars and mechanized houses and space travel. but that future never came; and seen from the vantage point of the future that happened instead, those visions can seem both farsighted and slightly, wistfully dated. so can varèse's music.  there was a rare chance to hear it on saturday night, when varèse was the latest subject in the miller theater's series of composer portraits. one reason chances are rare is that there is not much of it. the grove dictionary lists only 15 works; saturday's program presented nine of them, and one, the seminal ''poème Électronique'' (one of the earliest tape pieces in the repertory), was played in two different versions.  but the ensemble alarm will sound, under the vivid leadership of alan pierson, demonstrated that the work, if limited in quantity, remains bracing, distinctive and avant-garde -- still, if you will, futuristic.  there is no question that varèse was ahead of his time. he embraced different kinds of sounds, from percussion (''ionisation,'' 1929-31, is among the first works written exclusively for percussion; students from the manhattan school of music performed it competently) to nontraditional instruments like sirens; he essayed electronic music; he explored rhythm, pitch class and what he called ''sound masses'' rather than melody or counterpoint. his music, evoking the sounds of the city and modern life, is often driven by an initial propulsive figure, rather like the yank that starts an outboard motor. (in ''octandre,'' it is provided by a different instrument in each of the three movements.)  curiously, alarm will sound took a somewhat cautious approach. the musicians played with appealing vitality -- jessica johnson shone in the flute piece ''density 21.5'' -- yet they also seemed to hold the music at a slight distance. before the original taped ''poème Électronique'' (written as an installation piece for le corbusier's philips pavilion at the brussels world exposition in 1958), mr. pierson told the audience that varèse dreamed of freeing himself from the limitations of melody, traditional instruments, even performers. but the orchestrated version by evan hause, played later, seemed to go against these wishes; earnest, it also stripped the work of some of its antic humor. and the taped interludes of ''déserts,'' a signature element, were, confusingly, not included.  the music's quirkiness may have come across best in ''intégrales,'' subtly staged so that each player embodied the character of his or her music and moved around the auditorium to provide the spatial component that was lacking in these readings of ''poème.'' the performance conveyed defiance, the sense that music is something done to someone -- an aggression that it may be difficult, in our postfuturistic world, to recapture.  the next composer portrait, on frank zappa, is scheduled for feb. 2 at the miller theater, 2960 broadway, at 116th street, morningside heights; (212) 854-7799.  music review  