shareholders? what shareholders?   caremark rx is a large pharmaceuticals benefits manager. generally, this means that it makes money by denying benefits of various kinds, especially prescriptions, to patients and employees, thus supposedly saving money for employers and keeping a big chunk of that money for itself. (i know this is an oversimplification, but it's basically true.)  since roughly 1998, caremark rx's chief executive has been a wonderful, kindly gentleman named edwin m. crawford who revived the company and made it an industry leader. his son, andrew, also works at the company as the senior vice president for industry analysis and underwriting.  roughly one and a half years ago, the elder mr. crawford decided to talk to people about a business combination with caremark. one of the first entities he talked to was the fine drugstore chain cvs, whose watergate store in washington is one of my own main hangouts. cvs said it was interested, but only if it acquired caremark and cvs was the surviving entity.  discussions went on, and mr. crawford made sure that as part of the deal, he would be chairman of the new company. time passed, and serious backdating allegations involving hundreds of millions of dollars of caremark stock options for mr. crawford and his colleagues surfaced; shareholders sued caremark and mr. crawford in nashville, where the company is based.  last month, the louisiana municipal police employees' retirement system also sued caremark, in delaware, accusing its officers of favoring themselves over shareholders when considering the cvs offer.  according to that suit, mr. crawford apparently made it clear that any company acquiring caremark would have to indemnify him against such claims. cvs agreed to do so. caremark's board was told that merger talks were going on, but cvs was not mentioned, nor was the board asked to approve specific terms early on.  by april 2006, caremark's executives brought the board into the loop and mentioned cvs, according to the suit. then, in september, mr. crawford told his board by telephone that he thought he might have reached a deal with cvs -- though the outline of the deal had apparently been set weeks before, the suit alleges.  in october, medco health solutions asked to talk to mr. crawford about a deal, according to the wall street journal, citing people familiar with the situation. but the lawsuit says that when mr. crawford learned that he and his caremark directors would not be part of the new company, he blew off the medco people.  in late october, caremark's directors were briefed on the cvs deal, and were told that they would all, or almost all, be staying on as directors of the new company and that mr. crawford would remain chairman, even though the new company would be called cvs and cvs shareholders would own roughly 55 percent of it.  in addition, while senior caremark executives and directors would keep their jobs, the transaction would trigger change-of-control provisions that would shower them with money as if they were all thrown out of work.  the deal was approved by the board at the beginning of november and immediately made public. the deal involved cvs paying no premium at all to ordinary caremark shareholders, but it did call for paying mr. crawford more than $50 million, giving his son a major job at cvs and providing him with that indemnity he wanted in the backdating lawsuit.  the caremark owners were originally to get roughly $48.50 a share in cvs stock. (amid the outcry, cvs last week added a $2-a-share special dividend in cash to be paid after its takeover closes, if it does.) the $48.50 offer came despite two fascinating facts: a month before, caremark stock traded at $59, and in the third quarter of 2006, caremark bought back 1.8 million shares of its stock at an average price of about $57 -- usually a sign that management thinks it's a good price. it closed on friday at $59.31, still well above even the revised cvs offer, suggesting investors think caremark is worth more and that someone is likely to offer more.  the agreement had a ''breakup fee'' of $675 million, to be paid to cvs if the deal did not go through. the deal also had a ''no shop'' clause preventing caremark from actively seeking higher offers, although it could consider better offers that arrived unsolicited.  wall street hated the deal. thestreet.com labeled it as no. 1 of the ''five dumbest things on wall street this week.'' analysts were puzzled by the low price, and particularly that cvs would pay no premium for controlling the combined company.  shortly after the cvs deal was announced, another benefits manager, express scripts, made a hugely better offer: $26 billion, compared with cvs's original offer of roughly $21 billion. that was 23 percent more for the shareholders, but caremark's board turned it down flat.  even allowing for a dip in express scripts' cash-and-stock offer to $25 billion, it still beats even cvs's recently increased offer. but the caremark board cares not, and the cvs deal is barreling toward completion.  this is still a developing story, though. the market has worked to raise the caremark price even with the caremark board fighting it. it's interesting to think how much caremark could have gotten if it really worked toward a higher price for its shareholders.  it's almost unbelievable. how could caremark's directors have planned to sell the company for virtually no premium when their duty is to maximize returns for holders in every situation? how can they allow management to accept a generous payout from cvs while effectively selling out the ordinary stockholders?  why did the caremark board not require management to sell the company to the highest bidder, as required by case law in delaware, where the company is incorporated? how can the board permit cvs to get that staggering $675 million breakup fee when cvs has spent at most a few million on legal and banking fees so far?  how can caremark's management sign any deal-blocking clauses at all -- breakup fees or no-shop pledges -- when their duty is not to stop bidders but to encourage bidders?  i called caremark's representatives. they confidently said that delaware law about companies ''in play'' does not apply to this deal because it is a ''merger of equals'' and caremark is not ''in play'' even though cvs is basically taking over caremark. (cvs will own 55 percent of the combined company, and its c.e.o. will run it.) the caremark representatives stressed that the company was seeking the best deal for shareholders and said there was nothing unusual about breakup fees.  as i see it, this is a deal in which managers -- the hired help -- apparently put themselves totally ahead of the stockholders. managers will come out like kings; the stockholders will come out like pound animals.  the case is going to court in delaware. a court of chancery can stop this embarrassment, with language guaranteeing stockholders' rights. or it can be business as usual. we know what mr. crawford expects.  everybody's business ben stein is a lawyer, writer, actor and economist. e-mail: ebiz@nytimes.com.  