suit contests rent increases in complexes metlife sold   the $5.4 billion sale of stuyvesant town and peter cooper village was hailed by wall street and the real estate industry as a bountiful coup for its owner, the metropolitan life insurance company.  but yesterday a group of tenants at the vast brick complexes overlooking the east river charged in a lawsuit in state supreme court that metlife had illegally charged market-rate rents for more than 3,000 apartments in the manhattan complexes. the suit accuses the company of ''wrongfully pocketing nearly $25 million in new york city tax benefits.''  the tenants contend that metlife received $24.5 million in tax breaks since 1992 under the city's j-51 property tax program, which, they say, prohibits a property owner from removing apartments from rent regulation.  the program, intended to encourage landlords to refurbish their properties and make capital improvements, gives tax breaks in return for pledges to keep rents relatively low. most of the 11,200 apartments in the two complexes still have regulated rents, at one-third to one-half of market rate.  the class-action lawsuit, which names both metlife and the new owner, tishman speyer properties, seeks to roll back rents at stuyvesant town and peter cooper village. it also seeks a formal declaration that the other 3,000 apartments remain subject to rent regulation at least until the tax breaks expire, in 2017 or 2018. the suit also asks for $320 million in damages, or three times the rent overcharges for the past two years, as calculated by the plaintiffs.  if it is successful, the legal action could cost metlife about 6 percent of the sale price. it could also pose problems for tishman speyer and its partner, blackrock realty, which paid a record-breaking price for the complexes, based in part on the assumption that they could raise rents over time to market levels. it is unclear whether tishman speyer would reconsider the deal, but the lawsuit could hamper its financing efforts.  ''even though this was the largest real estate transaction of all time, and metlife certainly had a right to make as much profit as it could, the tenants who have rights under the law need to be protected,'' said stuart m. saft, a lawyer for the tenants.  a spokesman for tishman speyer, steven r. rubenstein, said, ''we believe the suit to be without merit.'' a spokesman for metlife, john calagna, declined to comment, saying the company had not seen the lawsuit.  ''it could have broad implications for market-rate tenants,'' city councilman daniel garodnick said of the lawsuit. ''metlife took advantage of certain tax benefits, which may have prevented them from deregulating apartments.'' mr. garodnick, who lives in a market-rate apartment in peter cooper village, had sought to organize a tenants' bid on the complexes.  a spokesman for the city's housing commissioner, shaun donovan, declined to comment on the lawsuit.  at the time of the sale last fall, both tishman speyer and metlife dismissed the idea that j-51 tax benefits barred an owner from deregulating apartments.  now, mr. saft said, many market-rate tenants at stuyvesant town and peter cooper village have been ''priced out'' of their apartments. tom shamy, a jewelry designer and one of the tenants who brought the lawsuit, said that he and his wife had to move out of stuyvesant town on dec. 31, after the new landlord raised the rent on their one-bedroom apartment by 28 percent, to $2,750 from $2,150. he said they were temporarily living with a friend in the east village.  ''the whole new york rental market system is broken,'' mr. shamy said. ''there needs to be some changes in the law, or something. anything i can do to call attention to the broken system, i'm willing to do.''  dan irizarry, a spokesman for the state's department of housing and community renewal, said that the spitzer administration was reviewing the issues of j-51 tax abatements and affordable housing. this month, the new governor, eliot spitzer, rejected changes to the j-51 program that his predecessor, george e. pataki, had proposed only days before leaving office.  metlife built stuyvesant town and peter cooper village in 1947 as housing for returning veterans, and it became known as an affordable option for middle-class people. the company received a 25-year exemption from property taxes in exchange for agreeing to maintain below-market rents. in 1974, the city extended the tax breaks for 10 years and the apartments became rent regulated.  under state laws passed in the 1990's, an apartment can be decontrolled after it becomes vacant and is renovated, or if the rent reaches $2,000 a month and the existing tenants' household income rises above $175,000 for two years. in the last four years, metlife has done extensive renovations to vacant apartments, taking a total of 3,037 apartments out of rent regulation.  leonard grunstein, a lawyer for the tenant association, which had tried to buy the complexes, learned that metlife had obtained j-51 tax breaks and began researching the issue. the tenant association is not involved in the lawsuit, and mr. grunstein ultimately turned the case over to mr. saft.  mr. saft said the law was fairly clear.  a 1995 operational bulletin by the state's housing agency states that ''deregulation provisions'' do not apply to apartments or buildings ''which are subject to rent regulation by virtue of receiving tax benefits.''  the lawsuit also cites the city's regulations governing j-51 benefits, which state that apartments receiving the tax breaks ''shall remain subject to rent regulation until the occurrence of the first vacancy'' after the tax benefits expire.  