breakfast at tiffany's. at least for now.   just after sunset on a cold, clear afternoon, a young couple sat in a corner booth at the tiffany diner on the corner of fourth avenue and 99th street in bay ridge, talking awkwardly around the state of their relationship. looming behind the diner, and looking close enough to touch, stood the blue eastern tower of the verrazano-narrows bridge.  in the next booth over, a man in a dark suit shuffled papers and a calculator back and forth to his companion over a pair of chicken caesar salads. someone at a table nearby was sketching his landscaping plans on the back of a paper placemat, and at the counter, a white-haired regular greeted the waitress familiarly and ordered chicken à la tiffany, a special of the day featuring pasta and cream sauce.  it was, in short, part of a normal day at the diner, which has played host to the everyday business of bay ridge -- the first-date milkshakes, late-night omelets and quick lunchtime burgers -- since 1968. its days, though, may be numbered. commerce bank, a chain that has opened 57 branches in the city since september 2001, has plans to tear down the diner and open a new branch in its place.  tom dilos, the diner's owner, said this month that nothing was official yet. but the bank, which reported in an april filing with the department of city planning that it holds a long-term lease on the property, is seeking a zoning change that would allow it to build the branch.  in the first step in the city's review process, the members of community board 10 are to discuss the matter, perhaps next month. howard hornstein, a lawyer for the bank, said that he expected that the rezoning would be approved and the diner would close.  as word has spread around the neighborhood, residents have been thinking about the diner's years as a hub of neighborhood activity.  ''if me and my husband were out on a saturday night with a whole group, we always went to tiffany's,'' recalled frances loftus, 74. ''back in the '70s and the '80s, if you were out late, at 1 or 2 in the morning, you had to wait in line.''  diner food being diner food, ms. loftus said that the tiffany has never exactly been a culinary destination; a meal there was less a big event than something you did immediately before or after a big event. the whole family went after her nieces' first communions, her sons went after their basketball games, and her daughters would stop in on dates for a slice of the thick, creamy cheesecake.  josephine beckman, 38, the district manager of the local community board, who went to high school in bay ridge, recalled going to tiff's -- as it was known in her circle -- after her prom and seeing the parking lot filled with limos at 3 a.m.  ''kind of like on that show 'happy days,' '' she said. ''you couldn't drink, so you'd go for coffee or soda, french fries with cheese on them.''  and fran vella-marrone, president of the dyker heights civic association, said many patrons had stayed loyal into adulthood. local civic groups have been known to gather around a table and hold a board meeting over dollar cups of coffee (with free refills), and when families from the neighborhood need a place to gather and reminisce after a funeral, the diner is often the choice.  one day this month, the dinner crowd trickled in past wood-and-brass doors adorned with a stained-glass ''t'' and settled into booths with tabletop jukeboxes. chris weber, a bay ridge sixth grader who was sliding back and forth on wheels in the soles of his sneakers, said he and his mother were frequent visitors. ''basically every time we do laundry, which is twice a week,'' he said, before recommending the cheesecake.  his mother, nancy sprague-weber, said losing the diner would be sad. ''it's a warm and fuzzy place,'' she said.  if the bank's proposed zoning change goes through and the diner does go, ms. vella-marrone said in a separate interview, there are plenty of people who will feel the same way. ''no offense to commerce bank,'' she said, ''but i think people will think, 'well -- another bank.' ''  street level/bay ridge  