today's matchups   new orleans saints (11-6) at chicago bears (14-3)  3 p.m., fox  the saints have never reached the national football conference championship game. no team with a record as bad as the saints' 3-13 last season had ever made the conference championship the next season. but here are the saints, and, tailback deuce mcallister said, ''this may be destiny.''  it may be many things, but two stand out:  can the bears' celebrated defense rise from the doldrums and handle mcallister, quarterback drew brees, the all-around threat reggie bush and those dangerous receivers?  which rex grossman will show up at quarterback for the bears?  last week, grossman was mostly good in an overtime victory against the seahawks, and the saints' secondary has been vulnerable to the long pass. grossman was erratic during the regular season, with 23 touchdown passes and 20 interceptions. ''what's important is those players have a belief in him,'' saints coach sean payton said.  although the bears' defense has lost some of its dominance because of injuries, linebacker lance briggs said, ''we tweak a little, we're right back where we were.''  the bears will have an advantage from a home crowd, and chicago weather in january can be shocking to a dome team from a warm-weather city.  reporter's pick: saints  new england (14-4) at indianapolis (14-4)  6:30 p.m., cbs  history favors the patriots. they have won three of the last five super bowls, coach bill belichick is 13-2 in playoff games and quarterback tom brady is 12-1. colts quarterback peyton manning is 4-10 against the patriots. in two playoff games this season, he has thrown one touchdown pass and five interceptions.  or maybe history will favor the colts in the american football conference title game. they beat the patriots 11 weeks ago, when brady threw four interceptions, and he threw three last week against the chargers.  still, the patriots have won five straight games, and they always seem to come up with defensive innovations. they will need offensive fire because the colts, who have suffered on defense all season, have turned into a defensive power.  reporter's pick: patriots  pro football  