reform, finally, in the senate   the senate has finally passed credible reforms of its shabby ethics code, reining in lawmakers' more egregious quid pro quo dealings with their fund-raising cohorts in the lobbying industry. the republican minority had second thoughts about how its transparently obstructionist tactics would look to constituents. and an overwhelming majority then approved the first serious anticorruption strictures since the watergate era, banning gifts, entertainment, travel and other inducements that lobbyists and their employers use in greasing privileged access to lawmakers and their staffs.  the senate action is particularly praiseworthy for zeroing in on the money-sweet heart of the matter: lobbyists will have to disclose the way they ''bundle'' multiple corporate donations as campaign sweeteners for grateful lawmakers. also, senators must henceforth pay full charter rates for the lobbyist-catered corporate jets they have been flying for token fees. and they will have to own up to the purpose and cost of their last-minute ''earmarks'' -- lucrative contracts for favored pleaders that are stealthily approved without debate.  the senate also voted to end the lavish parties paid for by fawning fat cats to ''honor'' key politicians at the presidential conventions. and it voted against a growing scandal closer to home, barring spouses of newly elected members from lobbying the senate. lawmakers also banned members from secretly negotiating for prized jobs in industries too often under their official purview.  these are strong measures, and harry reid, the majority leader, deserves credit for prevailing with a bipartisan approach despite his lobbyist-friendly instincts. unfortunately, the senate again failed to create an independent anticorruption monitor to reach beyond the clubby traditions that have masked abusers. mr. reid should join house speaker nancy pelosi in pursuing this needed measure.  it was heartening to see that the bill was toughened, not undercut, by amendments from two democrats and a republican. notably absent from the infighting was john mccain of arizona, a past advocate for reform who may be too busy placating g.o.p. powers for his expected bid for the presidency. the senate did well enough without him.  editorial  