neighbors' scowls place a dog spot in peril   chelsea, a young wheaten terrier, bounded in unleashed abandon across the fenced-in yard, sending pebble gravel flying in all directions, and threw herself on top of a slimy tennis ball.  no matter that the ball was in the jaws of another dog. fortunately, that dog was brady, one of chelsea's friends, said her owner, rachel dorf.  ''this is the best place for my dogs to get rid of their energy,'' said ms. dorf, who has two terriers. ''and they have a lot.''  the upper west side residents who live opposite chelsea's romping ground, known as the bull moose dog run, would emphatically agree. but they say that the high off-leash excitement of the hundreds of dogs a day that visit the run has meant excessive barking, poor maintenance and overuse by paid dog walkers.  some of the residents hired a lawyer and petitioned the local community board, and now the future of the dog run, one of the city's largest, is in question.  community board 7, which covers the area, ''found that nobody was minding the store,'' said antonia bryson, the residents' lawyer.  and the parks department has ruled that users of the run, on west 81st street near the american museum of natural history, must create a committee by the end of the month to handle the complaints and enforce rules, or else it will be closed at the end of march.  explaining the timing, namshik yoon, the department's director of operations, said volunteers needed to form a committee for the run before the weather grows warmer. ''we wanted a resolution before people start opening up their windows,'' he said.  a core group of volunteers is hoping the camaraderie inspired by the dog run, and the passion new yorkers have about their hounds and about scarce outdoor space, will rally people to join the committee.  ''i think we all have a common cause,'' said norman naval, who has been taking his dog, chotchke, to the run for about eight years and is trying to organize the committee.  penny ryan, the district manager for community board 7, said the committee would have to assume responsibility for raking the run, replacing gravel, setting rules and raising money to finance improvements.  a user of the dog run named lynn, who declined to give her last name, said, ''i was really kind of horrified by the ultimatum.''  referring to her dog, she added, ''she would be very sad if it closed.''  ms. bryson, the neighbors' lawyer, said her clients did not want to reach that juncture. she stressed, however, that the matter would not be dropped with the forming of the committee and that proper behavior must be enforced.  ''it will be a judgment call on how much they solve the problem,'' she said.  christine hauser  neighborhood report: upper west side  