in chicago, an inhospitable blend of snow and history   the kickoff was more than an hour away, but up on the big video screens during the warm-ups at soldier field, the bears were reminding the saints of their history.  in mostly grainy black-and-white film, many of the bears' record 26 pro football hall of famers were in action. papa bear george halas growling, sid luckman passing, mike ditka catching. red grange, gale sayers and walter payton running. bulldog turner blocking, dick butkus and mike singletary tackling.  the bears' history as one of pro football's flagship franchises was also in the game program in the saints locker room: nine n.f.l. championships, including super bowl xx when quarterback jim mcmahon and his fun-loving teammates on the 1985 team danced and sang -- what else? -- ''the super bowl shuffle.''  the saints had no warm-up rebuttal. for all the romance of their revival this season after hurricane katrina blew them into nomads in 2005, the saints, who joined the n.f.l. as an expansion franchise in 1967, not only have never been measured for super bowl rings, they have won only three division titles.  the saints' only hall of famer is jim finks, the general manager who put together their first division champion more than two decades ago. but part of finks's résumé in the canton, ohio, shrine was his role as the bears' general manager who assembled much of the team that won the super bowl in, yes, new orleans.  and in yesterday's snow flurries, the saints also had no rebuttal. most of the bears in their big bad blue uniforms will never be confused with any of those famous hall of famers up on the video screens, but they were efficient enough to dominate the saints, 39-14, and qualify for super bowl xli against the indianapolis colts on feb. 4 in miami.  enhancing the bears' reign as the new national football conference champions, virginia mccaskey, a member of the team's board and the daughter of the papa bear who was the player-coach of the original bears in 1921, was presented with the george s. halas trophy at midfield.  told by the hall of fame running back tony dorsett, the trophy presenter, that it was a ''most special day,'' mccaskey said, ''the most special day -- so far.''  lovie smith, the bears' coach, mentioned later how happy mccaskey was, and added, ''but after the next game, she'll be even happier.''  against the american football conference champion colts, the bears will need a more consistent performance from quarterback rex grossman, who completed only 11 of his 26 passes for 144 yards (only 3 of 12 for 37 yards in the first half). but his one touchdown pass, a 33-yard arrow to wide receiver bernard berrian early in the fourth quarter, opened a 25-14 lead that finished the saints.  ''that was my best drive of the game,'' grossman said. ''all game i had been making good decisions and i just missed a few throws. i normally don't do that. i'm a little frustrated by the fact that i missed the throw, but i was making good decisions, seeing the field well. i knew eventually the throws would come, and that's what happened.''  sean payton, the saints coach who had been a spare bear replacement quarterback for three games during the 1987 labor stoppage after a determined career at eastern illinois, had hoped to upset the team he had grown up rooting for in nearby naperville, ill. but three lost fumbles (one by quarterback drew brees) and an inopportune interception sabotaged his offensive game plan.  with the bears jumping to a 16-0 lead, brees had to throw early and often. he completed 27 of 49 passes for 354 yards and both of the saints' touchdowns, notably a short toss that the rookie reggie bush turned into an 88-yard dash to narrow the bears' lead to 16-14. bush taunted his bears pursuers before somersaulting into the end zone. what did middle linebacker brian urlacher think of that?  ''i think we're going to the super bowl,'' urlacher said.  for the bears, that's all that was important. throughout their 13-3 season, they had been dismissed as a first-place team in the weak n.f.c. north with a relatively easy schedule. after a bye in the opening round of the playoffs, they barely eliminated the seattle seahawks, 27-24, prompting many critics to doubt that they could thwart the saints' high-octane offense.  but just as the bears' defense, anchored by mike singletary and devised by the coordinator buddy ryan, was the core of the super bowl xx champions, defense is the core of this bears team.  ''we wanted to be aggressive; we talked about that all week long,'' urlacher said. ''we thought we could match up their receivers with our corners. we did. our d-line got a lot of pressure.''  the 1985 team, of course, was coached by mike ditka, the hall of fame tight end who pounded past tacklers on the video screens before the game and who also coached the saints a decade ago. but judging by one of yesterday's homemade banners, bears fans don't hold his new orleans sojourn against him.  ''ditka,'' it grunted, ''is a god, not a saint.''  sports of the times  