nuances illuminate tales from stringed storytellers   music is a kind of narrative. some performers take it on like a good story, moving through its plot points. the takacs quartet, at the metropolitan museum of art on friday night, took on narrative in a poetic sense, expanding the action to pick up the nuances and subplots. the effect was music expressed not in clear black-and-white lines but in washes of sound color accruing to -- and enhancing -- the outlines of the work.  the narrative of the group itself is not straightforward: founded in hungary in 1975, the quartet later moved to the united states and has had three major personnel changes, most recently in 2005, when geraldine walther, a violist, replaced roger tapping. two members of the original quartet remain, karoly schranz, the understated, firm second violinist; and andras fejer, the warm cellist, and they still arguably form the core of the group's sound: warm yet light, intensely expressive yet with a kind of gentlemanly restraint.  in debussy's quartet, which opened the evening with changing cloudscapes of golden music, tinged with a buzz of coffeelike bitterness, mr. schranz and mr. fejer began the third movement alone in a clear, quiet exchange of phrases. when ms. walther joined in, she echoed mr. schranz almost perfectly but added her own round depth to the conversation. the widespread consensus that the quartet has only improved seemed eminently supportable.  the programming demonstrated a degree of conservatism. it ran from early debussy to late beethoven, with the ''modern'' piece sandwiched in the middle. ''modern'' in this case was 1966, the year when shostakovich completed his 11th quartet, here played with beautiful articulation and without heavy anguish, presenting a very grown-up kind of suffering.  following accepted programming conventions, the evening ended with a symphony, or rather beethoven's op. 132, symphonic in length and scope. beethoven is a recent calling card of the takacs; the group won a 2003 grammy for one of the entries in its recent traversal of his complete string quartets.  on friday, where debussy buzzed and shostakovich sounded of clean metal, beethoven came closest to singing. the first violinist, edward dusinberre, played with a sense of restraint and of accuracy, but in places the music tore from him a sweetness that sounded almost illicit. the pivotal central movement passed with the hush and ache of held breath. it underlined the common theme of the program, which emerged as a pervasive sense of nostalgia, a show of brave brightness in the face of an uncertain future.  music review  