a very bad day   the best seat in the house  how i woke up one tuesday  and was paralyzed for life.  by allen rucker.  230 pp. harpercollins publishers. $24.95.  ellen rucker, a baby boomer with a career as a self-described hollywood hack, was always ''an inveterate catastrophizer,'' he writes in this slender memoir, anxious of having to repeat high school, of financial ruin, and of one of his sons becoming a terrorist.  then, at the age of 51, he was given something real to worry about. one minute, he was lolling around his california manse reading the new yorker and nursing a sore throat; the next, he felt a sharp pain around his midsection. then he couldn't feel anything from the waist down. in the space of 90 minutes, transverse myelitis, an illness that affects about one person in a million each year, had rendered him a t-10 paraplegic, unable to move below his 10th vertebra, or waist.  terrified by the prospect of never walking again and by new sources of humiliation like his ''skinny friend the urinary catheter,'' rucker crumples into a long depression. he repeatedly lands back in the hospital with infected sores and begins to identify with the eunuch husband in ''lady chatterley's lover'' (he casts the u.p.s. guy as mellors, the lover).  rucker plays his beta-male career -- writing snappy patter for 10th-rate productions like ''the world travel awards'' -- for laughs. one lowlight is a talk show starring george hamilton and alana stewart. the pitch: '' 'they're divorced, see, so they go on tv every morning and fight and bicker just like divorced people! it'll be a hoot!' '' the outcome: ''it was not a hoot.''  paralysis takes him to a new low. in a scene worthy of a very special episode of ''curb your enthusiasm,'' rucker has a fight with an able-bodied but mentally unsound woman who parks in a handicapped spot. even his tv viewing is compromised. when a woman on ''nypd blue'' steps out of a shower and wraps herself around a half-dressed jimmy smits, rucker finds himself yelling, ''hey, where's the damn crime plot here? when are you going to arrest someone?''  eventually, his black mood lifts and he has the obligatory epiphany. but it's hardly sentimental. rucker realizes that as bad as his life is after paralysis, in many ways it was worse before. after all those years spent feeling victimized, being a victim turns out to be comparatively o.k. immediately, the universe rewards him with a new career highlight: writing ''sopranos'' companion books.  rucker makes repeated allusions to his demographic -- ''76 million strong, slouching toward aarp status.'' he casually quotes bob dylan and uses boomer-speak more often than is strictly necessary, as in: ''i was messed up, man'' and ''you're stuck, dude.'' so it's with authority that he foretells his generation's next act: ''the age of aging.'' rucker predicts that as his fellow baby boomers lose their health, stem cell research will go from ethical dilemma to moral imperative and adult diapers will be designed by ralph lauren in a ''rugged, wyoming rancher motif.''  by the end of this savvy contribution to a sappy genre, rucker is sanguine about being ''a front-runner in the race toward decrepitude and death,'' an expert in the burdens of age that await his fellow '' 'experience junkies' of the 1960s.'' at long last, the aging hack is ahead of the curve.  ada calhoun is the editor in chief of babble.com and a frequent contributor to the book review.  