in a field of heavy hitters, no sure thing   compared with the other democrats who plan to run for president in 2008, senator hillary rodham clinton is the most battle-tested, has the biggest fund-raising network and can walk into the job with a unique set of skills and perspectives gleaned from eight years in the white house as first lady.  yet none of that guarantees mrs. clinton will steamroll her opponents, or manage and master the issues that have long vexed her, like the war in iraq and universal health insurance. far from it: she has told friends that she is more worried about winning the democratic nomination than winning a general election against a republican.  with this presidential campaign starting far earlier than any in history, mrs. clinton, senator barack obama of illinois and their five democratic rivals find themselves facing 400 more days before the nomination is sealed up. each of those days could bring a surprise or flub or senate vote or controversy that might change their political fortunes. the field is still growing, too: gov. bill richardson of new mexico is expected to jump in today. and whither john kerry? wesley clark? al gore?  ''given the high velocity of the campaign at this early stage, it's incredible to think what the race will look like a year from now, and who will be standing out,'' said steve elmendorf, a democratic political consultant who supports mrs. clinton.  mrs. clinton has also told friends that she does not think of herself as the democratic front-runner, nor does she like the word -- which are both things that front-runners tend to say, political analysts note. (her new campaign wasted no time yesterday sending an e-mail message about a new washington post-abc poll giving mrs. clinton a 41 percentage point lead over her closest rival, mr. obama, who had 17 points.)  still, unlike 1988, when the so-called seven dwarves were running for the democratic nomination, the current field is full of heavy hitters, and mrs. clinton faces formidable challenges. mr. obama is mrs. clinton's strongest rival thus far in attracting crowds of screaming fans; john edwards, the former senator from north carolina, was the 2004 vice presidential nominee, and has staked out a clear antiwar position; and senators joseph r. biden jr. of delaware and christopher j. dodd of connecticut are seasoned lawmakers who lead powerful committees, giving them access to donors and the media spotlight.  ''democrats are going to have a real opportunity to see some of the best and brightest in the party,'' said kathy sullivan, the chairwoman of the new hampshire democratic party. ''we're a wait-and-see state, and while a lot of people are very excited about senator clinton -- including me -- very few people have made up their minds.''  mrs. clinton's advisers say she knows full well, from long and sometimes painful experience, the challenges to come. she will have to convince people that another clinton in the white house will bring more of the successes, and fewer of the shadows and scandals, that marked her husband's administration, her advisers say. she will have to figure out the role that mr. clinton will play, a question that republicans will almost certainly highlight.  ''i have never been afraid to stand up for what i believe in or to face down the republican machine,'' mrs. clinton said in a statement on her new campaign web site. ''after nearly $70 million spent against my campaigns in new york and two landslide wins, i can say i know how washington republicans think, how they operate, and how to beat them.''  in her statement, she also called for ''bold but practical changes'' in national policy, a four-word formulation that her advisers said was carefully chosen, given that she has sought to portray herself as both a pragmatist and someone who thinks big. some democrats dismiss the latter image, finding her too cautious. yet her pledge of boldness reflects her well-known desire to disprove the notion that she is hesitant or calculating.  and she will have to show people that she is not the person her critics describe: radically liberal, ruthlessly ambitious, or ethically compromised. her friends say she is none of these; some of them still chide her for being the ''goldwater girl'' of her youth.  political analysts say that part of her challenge will be letting voters see the full her and not just a rehearsed politician, no easy task for such a private person.  ''people consider her to be capable and smart, even those who hate her, but have taken issue over the years with her hardness and lack of warmth,'' said ruth sherman, a political communications specialist who spent time yesterday watching mrs. clinton's video announcement on the campaign web site. ''if she can keep it up and persuade people it is authentic, they will have a hard time remembering the hillary they loved to hate.''  mrs. clinton will also have to persuade enough people to trust a woman as commander in chief at a time of war, and to view her as a steady, forward-thinking critic of the iraq war and not as indecisive. her years on the senate armed services committee, and her ties to military leaders on new york bases and in washington, should help, advisers say.  ''i would say she is more qualified to be commander in chief than any other democrat or republican running, given her years of international experience and her work with the military,'' said ellen r. malcolm, the president of emily's list, a political and fund-raising organization that endorsed mrs. clinton yesterday.  indeed, one reason mrs. clinton chose to make her announcement on a saturday morning, when the political world is usually in slumber, was to dominate the news cycle, her advisers said, and contrast herself vividly as a leader with president bush before his state of the union speech on tuesday night. they waved off the appearance that she was announcing to catch up with mr. obama, who declared his plans to run on tuesday. they said they had determined in mid-december that, if mrs. clinton decided to run, they would announce the decision on the saturday before the state of the union address.  mrs. clinton spent yesterday at home in chappaqua with mr. clinton, making calls to crucial democratic officials across the country, including michael gronstal, the majority leader of the iowa state senate, as well as to some supporters.  she plans to attend mr. bush's speech on tuesday and hit the campaign trail for the first time soon after, traveling next weekend to iowa, the site of the first presidential caucuses in january 2008. after that, she will visit the early primary state of new hampshire, where mr. obama and mr. edwards have been recently. mr. dodd and former gov. tom vilsack of iowa have visited the state in the last few days.  news analysis  correction:  january 23, 2007, tuesday  a news analysis article on sunday about senator hillary rodham clinton's presidential prospects misstated the results of a recent washington post/abc news poll and erroneously attributed the incorrect number to a statement by her campaign. mrs. clinton led senator barack obama in the preference poll of likely democratic primary voters by 41 percent to 17 percent; she did not hold a 41 percentage point lead over mr. obama. the campaign's statement correctly reflected the polling data; it did not contain the incorrect percentage.  