a true friend and a good writer   letters of e. b. white  revised edition.  originally edited by dorothy lobrano guth.  revised and updated by martha white.  foreword by john updike.  illustrated. 713 pp.  harpercollins publishers. $35.  i'm the father of two robins,'' e. b. white writes to his stepson in l964 from his farm in maine. the baby birds had been orphaned, ''and without really thinking about what i was doing i casually dropped a couple of marinated worms into their throats as i walked by. ... this did it. they took me on with open hearts and open mouths, and my schedule became extremely tight.'' he has fed these robins a formula of ''hamburg, chicken mash, kibbled worm and orange juice'' for several days from a ''yellow bamboo stick, split at one end, like a robin's bill.'' and now the birds ''come streaming at me from bush and tree, trying for a landing on shoulder or cap, usually overshooting me in the fog and bringing up against a wall. this exhausts them and me.'' next, says white, he will have to ''hop about on the lawn with my head cocked to one side, to show them how to get their own living.''  that's pretty good. it's not twee or just whimsical, is it? no, it's pretty good.  later that summer white writes, to a grandson, that when he went outdoors in the morning, these robins would be waiting for him. ''one would fly up and sit on my head, and the other would perch on my shoulder.''  st. francis of assisi, over here. he nurtures robins, and he writes fine affectionate letters to his loved ones, who include many old friends, like the humorist frank sullivan: ''thank you, thank you, sweet my frank, for your lovely letter.'' pretty darn warm and genuine, is how andy, as white's friends called him, comes off in these letters. and danged peculiar.  to scott elledge, who would become his friendly but thoroughgoing biographer, he writes: ''i was interested in your remarks about the writer as poser, because, of course, all writing is both a mask and an unveiling, and the question of honesty is uppermost, particularly in the case of the essayist, who must take his trousers off without showing his genitals. (i got my training in the upper berths of pullman cars long ago.)''  sometimes a thing ''casually dropped'' by white is not only unexpected, like ''his genitals,'' but also passing strange. when he came upon those robins, he happened to be carrying worms? that were marinated?  in 1929, when he was 29 and a half, white wrote to his brother stanley: ''sometimes in writing of myself -- which is the only subject anyone knows intimately -- i have occasionally had the exquisite thrill of putting my finger on a little capsule of truth, and heard it give the faint squeak of mortality under my pressure, an antic sound.''  the redundancy of ''sometimes'' and ''occasionally'' aside, that's not very good, is it? he loves to squash capsules of truth? humor these days is obliged to induce a cringe, but it's supposed to do it knowingly. under white's name in the index to elledge's biography there's an entry, ''mice in life of.'' white enjoyed the company of an actual mouse in his workroom, but he was troubled by, and saw a doctor about, ''mice in the subconscious.'' a poem he wrote entitled ''vermin'' seems to be about his need, and reluctance, to elicit that ''faint squeak of mortality'' from some psychic mouse, which he couldn't put his finger on.  white is remembered as one of the old new yorker's formative stylists, and any comprehensive anthology of american humor or prose is likely to include one of his graceful essays about small matters that made him uneasy, down east. like the mouse-boy hero of his children's book ''stuart little,'' white loved canoeing. in a recent new yorker cartoon, the host of a book-chat show is saying to an author, ''i found your book 'canoeing the small puddles of maine' really stupid.'' i'm not saying that was a dig at white. but it made me think how horrible it would be if old andy -- who was phobic about appearing publicly anywhere but on a page under his admirably obsessive control -- had to do tv.  though he died, at 86, in l985, white is still read by young people. his books for children remain popular (on amazon.com recently, ''charlotte's web'' was outselling most, though not all, of the captain underpants novels), and ''the elements of style,'' his reworking of an old professor's rule book, is still sometimes recommended to college students as a handy, in fact an elegant, guide to sharp, sensible writing.  but is any recovering teenage solipsist taking him as a role model today? i did, in l958 or so, but by the '70s i was off him. he had come to seem a bit -- well, white, for one thing, but also cozy. from ''letters of e. b. white'' (l976) and the elledge biography (1984), i gathered that the old boy was an outrageous hypochondriac, with enough money put away that he could indulge in nervous breakdowns and long fallow periods. as a boy he'd been the beloved baby of a large, well-off family, and as a man he was sustained by his wife, katharine s. white, a distinguished editor whom other people found formidable but who doted on her husband's vocation. you didn't have to share tom wolfe's ''tiny mummies'' disdain for the new yorker's heritage to feel that the times demanded madder humor and stronger stimulants. my old hero was a hothouse flower.  or maybe i was just going through a phase. white's granddaughter, martha, has expanded the previous edition of his letters by just about 10 percent -- almost 100 additional letters, from the last nine years of his life. the only new commentary of note is an unsurprisingly well-turned foreword by john updike, a friend and admirer of yore. and yet white, for me at least, is brought suddenly up and about.  a number of the late letters are to elledge. white granted access to his papers on condition that he be allowed to read and comment upon the biography in progress. if, in the end, white disapproved of the book, anything in it that relied upon those papers had to come out. white's point-by-point notes are deftly genial. ''i was in stitches much of the way,'' he writes after reading elledge's take on his youth, ''recalling my early ineptitude, my early sorrows, my immaculate romancing. what a mess i was!'' then: '' 'doesn't like to be touched.' do you mean for money? i couldn't be sure what this meant. i like to be touched by a pretty woman.'' if the reference to white's aversion to being touched survives in the biography as published, i can't find it. a young person who aspires to create and to maintain an authorial identity could do worse than to study white's letters to publishers, readers, movie people and elledge. in one of his last letters white defends his hypochondria: ''i don't regret the time i spent worrying about myself.''  white may never have got in touch with all his feelings, but he dealt with the world on his own, honorable, terms. and discouraged inappropriate illusions. ''i was alarmed at your idea of suggesting to a child that he model himself after me,'' he wrote in an otherwise agreeable letter to a librarian. ''writing is a form of imposture; i'm not at all sure i am anything like the person i seem to a reader. and you certainly wouldn't want to urge a child to model himself after an impostor!''  as a young man i felt white owed it to me to bring more of his mess or mice into play. now i admire his self-preservation. robert benchley, the humorist who inspired both white and his friend james thurber, died in his 50s, of frustration and drink. thurber succumbed in his 60s to comparable demons. white, on the evidence of his letters, put away quantities of gin himself, but lived to father robins.  and to write a letter about granddaughter martha's duck, which ''has crossed the road, laid 15 eggs at the base of a fence post about two feet from the shoulder of the road, and is sitting, while cars whizz by so close it ruffles her feathers.'' a family dog ''took me across the highway, pointed the duck, then stuck her head under the cable (guard rail) and rested her chin on the back of the sitting duck, who never stirred.''  roy blount jr.'s most recent book is ''feet on the street: rambles around new orleans.''  