a choreographer takes her daughter to work, with a famous friend   in early 1990 the choreographer tamar rogoff had an idea for two very young dancers. her daughter, ariel rogoff flavin, and ariel's best friend, claire danes, were 10. neither girl was quite like the others in their class at p.s. 3.  ''they were so gloriously odd,'' ms. rogoff said, sitting in a cafe in soho, blocks from where ms. danes had grown up. ''so sensual and full of imagination, and so 'out' at school. they didn't quite understand what they were supposed to do to be part of the crowd.''  she was fascinated, and immediately inspired. ''i looked at claire and ariel and thought, 'i must do a piece for them,' '' she said. so despite an imminent trip to estonia for performances of her work, ms. rogoff flipped open her notebook and began to storyboard a piece called ''brink,'' a duet for the two girls reflecting on their entry into adolescence.  the idea was short-lived; a central cast member was unable to participate, and ''brink'' was shelved. but ms. rogoff still carries her notebook with red stick figures labeled ariel and claire.  now, 17 years later, ''brink'' has been reborn as ''edith & jenny,'' a new work that opens on monday at performance space 122 with the same two girls -- now grown into women -- dancing the parts that were created for them. ''i don't like to lose a piece,'' ms. rogoff said. ''i like doing what i want to do, when i want to do it.''  this time the audience will not be seeing a conventional duet; ms. danes and ms. flavin will dance alongside their 11-year-old selves via video clips of their first films (in ms. flavin's case, her first film was also her last), superimposed on huge screens. ms. flavin, who is now a dancer and social worker, played jenny, a girl who runs away from home, in ''coyote mountain''; and ms. danes, who would go on to a distinguished acting career, played edith, who is trapped in an incestuous relationship with her father, in ''dreams of love.''  ''it's my imagined story of how, if these two girls in these movies could have found each other, this friendship might have helped them through the dysfunction in the films,'' ms. rogoff said.  but it's the real story behind ''edith & jenny'' that makes ms. rogoff's piece especially believable.  ''i think claire was my first real friend,'' ms. flavin said as the two women curled up on a couch in a soho studio during a break in rehearsal. ''i remember she had this sweater from the gap she'd wear every day, with corduroys and keds, and i just thought she looked really cool.''  they both danced as children, taking classes from ellen robbins at dance theater workshop. at school they would leave the other children at recess and converse in the stairwell. ''we were always very intimate, very close,'' ms. danes said.  then one day ms. rogoff and ms. flavin met jeff mueller, a film student at columbia. he cast ms. flavin in his independent film ''coyote mountain,'' a less than ideal experience that took her to new mexico.  ''i grew up on avenue c, so being on a horse was exciting,'' ms. flavin said. ''but i was slightly overwhelmed by the grandiosity of film production.''  ms. danes felt differently. ''i wanted to act from 5 on,'' she said. ''i saw madonna dancing onstage on television, and my fate was determined.''  she had been taking classes at the lee strasberg theater and film institute, and, ms. rogoff said, she could already see that ''she was bound for other stuff.'' so when mr. mueller needed a girl for his next film, ms. rogoff recommended ms. danes.  ''i was thrilled, and i felt pretty comfortable,'' ms. danes said of the difficult role.  ms. flavin recalled visiting her friend during the making of that film: ''when i showed up and saw claire on that set, it was like something in her head settled, like she got home.''  ms. danes had indeed found a home on film. as a teenager she would move to california, and she and ms. flavin eventually lost touch.  ''our relationship sort of imploded,'' ms. danes said. ''we kind of had to break up to grow up. then one day i was on broadway, and i saw ariel walking towards me. i thought: 'oh, god, do i invite her back into my life? yes, duh, of course i do.' ''  the girls reviewed the breakup, as they now affectionately call it. soon, ms. flavin said, ''it was like making a new friend, but someone you already love.''  still, the women had never danced together until ms. rogoff stepped in. last year she choreographed ''christina olson: american model,'' a solo for ms. danes at p.s. 122. ms. danes threw herself into the rigorous piece and emerged, according to ms. rogoff, transformed.  ''her vocabulary has increased, and she's become not only a very strong dancer but my dancer,'' ms. rogoff said, pointing out that ms. danes's only serious study occurred under her tutelage. ''often you want dancers to leave certain influences or mannerisms behind, and for her this is just what she understands to be dance.''  a duet seemed the natural next step. ''i had fantasized about it.'' ms. danes said. ''it's really lonely to do a solo.''  ms. rogoff said: ''claire needed to learn, what is another body onstage? how do i relate to it? ariel could take her through all that.''  over seven months, while ms. danes was finishing the film ''evening'' in rhode island, the three created ''edith & jenny.'' the process was surprisingly smooth. ''when you grow up with someone,'' ms. flavin said, ''you almost feel your body is their body.''  ms. danes welcomed the change from the usual fractured process of moviemaking. ''i'm always acclimating to a new culture,'' she said, ''and by the time i develop a shorthand, the shoot's over. with tamar and ariel, we already had so much experience together, it was that much more efficient.''  in ''edith & jenny'' the two women at times act as partners, whether dragging each other across the floor or entwining in an embryonic embrace. they awkwardly move to their favorite childhood music: for ms. flavin, rod stewart (when she was frustrated on the film set, ms. flavin said, ms. rogoff always told her to ''dance it out'' to ''hot legs''); for ms. danes, ''a chorus line'' (''i was a nerdy 11-year-old,'' she said).  but ms. rogoff also calls on them to enact steps driven by animosity: intense push-pulls, violent kicks. ''i'm asking for conflict, and they're not used to that,'' she said. ''they're always comfortable spooning or hugging, but there are parts here that are not chummy, and that doesn't come naturally to them.''  when the women began the run-through rehearsal in soho, there was an eerie echo of years past. bound by their first costume, frilly white dresses connected by a two-person corset, ms. danes and ms. flavin whispered to each other before their intro music, ''thank heaven for little girls,'' then enacted a silly, almost vaudevillian lip-sync routine. they looked like a bizarre two-headed dancer, yet the image was somehow endearing: two best friends performing for their parents, perhaps, not rehearsing for an opening night that was days away. ms. rogoff sat, taking notes.  ''i'm not a mother to my dancers,'' she said with a smile, ''but i'm not quite a director either.''  dance  