two power plants win a lawsuit, and property taxes rise drastically in several towns   barbara bodnar, a retired nurse having lunch one recent afternoon at sparky's diner in this rockland county hamlet of 9,000 people, saw her annual property tax jump $7,200 in the fall. david clark, the owner of rec supply, a hardware store in haverstraw, said his taxes doubled. danny li's rose 93 percent -- and seven neighbors put their houses up for sale.  ''i want to stay here,'' said christine garcia, 19, who works at a local cvs drugstore and was among a table of recent graduates of north rockland high at sparky's talking about the recent tax increases. ''but even my mom and stepfather are having problems now. i don't think i'll be able to.''  these sharp spikes in property taxes stem from a decade-old lawsuit with mirant corporation, an atlanta company that owns two local power plants and is the area's largest taxpayer. after an august 2006 ruling by the state supreme court favoring mirant, the county and several towns in the region recently settled the case by agreeing to pay the company $275 million to make up for tax overcharges dating back more than a decade.  so depending on the town, taxpayers in this largely working-class area are looking at 20 percent to 100 percent increases over last year. residents who have lived here all their lives, or were drawn here largely because the tax revenue from the two power plants kept residential rates manageable, are now concerned that they may not be able to stay.  ''it's like a natural disaster,'' said state assemblyman ken zebrowski, a democrat who represents the area. ''this town to some extent has been a blue-collar, lunchbox community where young people who worked in the trades could afford to buy a home and raise a family because of the low taxes,'' he said. ''the municipalities thought the power plants would stabilize the tax base forever.'' since the court decision, he added, ''people are selling their homes, or trying to sell them and having difficulty.''  mirant acquired the two power plants in 2001, and with them a lawsuit initiated in 1995 by the previous owner that challenged the tax assessments for the two facilities.  the company claimed that the value of the plants was going to decrease substantially because the new york state power authority was deregulating the industry, and that energy rates would be determined in the marketplace. at the same time the plants, built in the 1970's, were becoming obsolete.  most of the settlement cost, $220 million, is owed by the north rockland school district, with the remainder to be paid by rockland county, the towns of haverstraw and stony point, and the villages of haverstraw, which includes garnerville, and west haverstraw.  to meet the terms of the settlement, the north rockland school district is issuing a 30-year bond to pay mirant approximately $220 million by march 15. in the meantime, the district is operating on an austerity budget. the school superintendent, brian d. monahan, said he had recommended that the school board eliminate 30 full-time positions, mostly by attrition, for the 2007 school year, and make cuts in several travel and staff programs.  ''this goes to the heart of education funding,'' said the county executive, scott vanderhoef. ''these plants basically were supporting a substantial piece of the funding of this expanding school district.''  dr. monahan said he was worried that residents would reject school budgets ''for many years to come because of frustration over taxes.''  the affected area is a mix of densely settled villages and industrial sites, wooded suburbs, mobile home parks and housing developments situated in the northern corner of rockland county, bordered by the hudson river to the east and harriman state park to the west. haverstraw is set in a valley along the hudson river below outcroppings of the palisades escarpment to the south. the river opens up at haverstraw, where one of the plants, the bowline oil-powered generating station, is situated. just to the north is the coal-powered lovett generating station. the indian point nuclear plant is several miles north, on the other side of the river.  the two large chimneys of the brick-and-cement bowline power plant tower over the village of haverstraw, where clapboard houses and three-story apartment buildings line the narrow streets.  ''i think the communities that host these power plants should have a substantial benefit,'' said mayor francis j. wassmer, a lifelong resident. ''we see it, we smell it and we hear it. when one of those fuel nozzles breaks it sounds like a jet engine. you also have the fallout, which we have been breathing for 30 years. you can see it on the snow, and when a nozzle breaks you see little black specks on your car.''  last year, north rockland's state representatives arranged a meeting in albany with assembly speaker sheldon silver, the senate majority leader, joseph l. bruno, and representatives of the municipalities and school district to discuss a bailout.  ''it was in the state's best interest that the plants be sited where they were sited to give energy to the whole region,'' said state senator thomas p. morahan. ''we are asking for $8 million to $10 million for approximately 10 years.''  assemblyman zebrowski said the legislative leaders indicated that they would try to help and that the school district would be the main beneficiary.  the five municipalities and the school district worked together to negotiate the final settlement with the mirant corporation, but that alliance has begun to fray as angry taxpayers demand to know why the energy company was overcharged so much for so long, and why there was no contingency plan.  ''people are fed up,'' said jeannie nicolakis, the owner of sparky's diner for 31 years. ''everybody's blaming the school district, but it's not the school's fault. what happened in the '90s? all of a sudden we have to pay back $275 million. who messed up?''  joan abrams, a retired office worker who lives in stony point, said she was struggling to keep her home.  ''my husband built that house, and we raised our two kids there,'' she said. ''''i'm a widow on a fixed income, and these taxes are really difficult.''  correction:  january 26, 2007, friday  an article on tuesday about sharp spikes in property taxes in northern rockland county, n.y., stemming from a settlement of $275 million that several municipalities and a school district agreed to pay to a power company as compensation for tax overcharges, misidentified the state agency that deregulated electric utilities in the 1990s. it is the public service commission -- not the new york state power authority, which is an electricity producer.  