new shuffle, old turmoil at citigroup   citigroup shuffled its management ranks yesterday for the second time in a little more than a month in a shake-up that raises questions about the bank's ability to turn itself around.  todd s. thomson, 45, was ousted as head of global wealth management, while sallie l. krawcheck, 42, the chief financial officer, will take over that job, returning to the position she had when she first arrived at citigroup in 2002.  the shake-up comes amid years of lackluster operating results and a languishing stock price under its chairman and chief executive, charles o. prince iii. and it now leaves citigroup looking to fill two significant executive posts.  ms. krawcheck will remain as chief financial officer until a successor arrives, a search process that those inside the company expect to take several weeks to several months.  concerns about the performance of the global wealth management business had dogged mr. thomson. and over the last year, there were questions about his judgment and he appeared to have lost mr. prince's trust, say people close to the situation. they say that there have been concerns within the bank about mr. thomson's use of citigroup corporate jets, including at least one occasion when he used the jet to ferry maria bartiromo, a correspondent for cnbc, to an event in asia.  in a brief interview, mr. prince declined to comment on mr. thomson's departure. ''i am trying to focus on the positive side,'' mr. prince said.  citigroup is still in negotiations over mr. thomson's severance package.  ''maria asked in advance and was given permission, and billing was arranged in advance for cnbc to pay for the asia trip,'' kevin goldman, a cnbc spokesman, said.  mr. thomson and ms. krawcheck had once been rising stars at the bank and were seen as potential successors to mr. prince.  but yesterday's moves were an implicit acknowledgment of criticism that they were not the ones to lead a turnaround at citigroup. to bolster his team and to try to rein in expenses, mr. prince last month promoted robert a. druskin, the head of the corporate and investment bank, to become chief operating officer.  mr. druskin, however, who is a few years older than mr. prince, is not seen as a potential successor to mr. prince, and ms. krawcheck's reputation has been bruised by her stint as chief financial officer. as a result, investors will be paying close attention to citigroup's choices to fill the posts of chief financial officer and the head of its alternative investment business, which has been vacant for more than a year.  for both positions, mr. prince has said he is looking for the ''right person,'' but it is still unclear what kind of leader citigroup has in mind.  for the alternative investment job, citigroup is interested in a well-known private equity or hedge fund manager with at least 15 to 20 years of experience, according to executives briefed on the search.  the prospect of one day running a prestigious public company might be used to offset the substantial drawback of taking a substantial pay cut. ms. krawcheck was casually asked about her interest in the position but ultimately passed.  other outside candidates have similarly fallen out of the running as the search has waxed and waned over several months, according to executives briefed on the search.  for the job of chief financial officer, mr. prince faces a similar problem: finding a proven financial operator who is a career chief financial officer, or a senior manager who might be tapped within a few years for the chief executive job. but he is keeping his cards close to the vest.  while the bank has engaged prince goldsmith, a boutique executive recruiting firm that specializes in financial services, there is still a small possibility it would promote somebody from within.  ''we are always looking for the best person,'' mr. prince said yesterday. he noted that ms. krawcheck ''set a high bar for the next c.f.o. to get over.''  wall street investors, however, have not always agreed. ever since she took over the chief financial officer role, she has faced a barrage of analyst and investor complaints. disappointed about the company's high expenses and poor financial results, some suggested that the former analyst was in over her head. the drumbeat of criticism worsened this fall, when rumors suggesting that she might be ousted were rampant.  citigroup denied the reports. but when mr. prince elevated mr. druskin to chief operating officer, he said in december only that ms. krawcheck would remain at the company. he did not address how long she would remain in her role as chief financial officer.  two and a half years ago, this was not the way mr. prince's plans were expected to work out. when ms. krawcheck and mr. thomson were named to their posts in september 2004, citigroup suggested they were ''trading places'' to give them broader management experience as potential heirs to mr. prince's throne.  ms. krawcheck, a star analyst with sanford c. bernstein who had become one of the most influential women on wall street, was lured to citigroup after its smith barney unit had run-ins with regulators over conflict of interest issues. mr. thomson, a former consultant and general electric executive, was citigroup's chief financial officer at the time.  both were young, talented and ambitious; both were personally recruited to citigroup by sanford i. weill, mr. prince's predecessor.  at the time, mr. prince said yesterday, he and ms. krawcheck had discussed a ''two-year rotation,'' where she would take on the chief financial officer role and help him shape the company's strategy but would eventually head back to an unspecified operating role.  when that timetable arose this fall, the two had casual discussions about her next move but plans were not completed.  ''i know people want to make a big deal if i was happy,'' ms. krawcheck said in an interview. ''but look, there were days when we would report earnings or finish up the budget and maybe they weren't my favorite days, but i enjoyed my experience'' on the whole.  by moving ms. krawcheck back to what is essentially her old job as head of global wealth management, mr. prince is installing a trusted lieutenant. smith barney in the united states is a powerful franchise, but the brokerage arm and private bank are smaller and less competitive than wall street rivals overseas.  moreover, citigroup's consumer strategy in the united states largely hinges on mr. prince's ability to get the smith barney brokerage and retail groups to work together. the company is currently testing its plans in the boston and philadelphia markets, but if they are successful, it could lead to a broader rollout.  if ms. krawcheck is successful in this role, she might still have a shot some day at the top job.  the relationship between mr. prince and mr. thomson, meanwhile, steadily worsened over the last two years. whereas mr. thomson praised mr. weill's ability to stamp out bureaucracy from the system, he grew frustrated with the new layers of management and unnecessary controls added by mr. prince. the two men disagreed about potential deals and the business's strategic direction.  there were also concerns about the performance of the global wealth management division. while the division posted impressive revenue and income growth, there were concerns about an unusually large number of smith barney financial advisers who were leaving. the division's net flow of assets under management, meanwhile, treaded in negative territory during the 2006 third quarter for the first time in years.  