he uses blood to get under your skin   jan fabre knows that not everyone shares his passion for blood. for years this belgian artist, director, writer and choreographer has been a provocateur in europe, stunning and seducing audiences with his inventive creations, including some drawings for which he used his own bodily fluid.  on this continent, however, his work (and his fluids) remain all but unknown. now americans will have a rare chance to decide for themselves whether they share his obsession when his staged spectacle ''je suis sang'' (''i am blood'') runs for three nights -- thursday, friday and next saturday -- at montclair state university in new jersey.  eighteen performers inhabit this hallucinatory, sometimes disturbing, canvas, which is subtitled ''a medieval fairy tale.'' a battalion of armored knights parade alongside bloodied brides, satyrs and medieval surgeons. symbolic figures are pierced with arrows; aggressors mutilate genitalia. mr. fabre disperses these figures across a stark panorama as they might appear in a vast hieronymus bosch tableau.  ''we are living in 2007,'' mr. fabre said in a telephone interview from his studio in antwerp. ''it's even more cruel than in the middle ages. people are still torturing each other, in wars, for religion. it's not a very pleasant thought. of course our body is still the same.''  still, he insists that his underlying vision is redemptive. ''i think the connotation of blood at this moment for americans is something negative -- aids, war,'' he said. ''but this piece talks about something else. it's about the positive side of blood,'' as a vital and renewing source of life.  mr. fabre's intensely visual stage works have led critics to compare him to directors like robert wilson, pina bausch and romeo castellucci. yet he defies categorization, having worked in disparate disciplines from opera to video, and experimenting with materials from bic pens to bones.  ''je suis sang'' originated in 2000, when mr. fabre was invited to create a production for the mammoth avignon festival. the stage was the grand cour d'honneur, a central courtyard in the medieval papal palace. when mr. fabre went to see the fortresslike space, he thought of its history of brutality, and its religious and political prisoners over the centuries. ''a lot of blood is on the walls,'' mr. fabre said, ''you cannot see the blood anymore, but you know there were many killings.'' so he wrote a nonlinear text in french and latin, a meditation on human fate with an incantatory quality. ''it's a kind of poetic manifesto,'' he says. ''a lot of elements in the text refer to the middle ages, a lot of symbols, like the pelican as an idea of christ.''  french critics were conflicted but impassioned. calling it a ''bacchanal of the subconscious,'' le monde's dominique frétard wrote: ''bursting with life, death and sex, is the piece unbearable? is it simply fake? that is not the issue. the piece represents what living theater should be. it confronts us with disturbing questions, an exciting form, a distressing text. it deals us a blow beyond the petty-bourgeois reality that so often poisons the arts.''  jedediah wheeler, the executive director of the peak performances series at montclair, was not deterred from staging the work despite its shocking aspects. ''when you talk to jan fabre, you're beginning to understand not only theatrical history but political and social history going back centuries,'' said mr. wheeler, who also presented a dance solo choreographed by mr. fabre at montclair in october. ''it may not end up on the stage in a way that makes you feel comfortable, but you can't deny the investigation, the thought process, the creative process. you just can't.'' (montclair state recently won a $40,000 grant from the national endowment for the arts, in part to help support its presentations of unconventional artists.)  mr. wheeler said he hopes mr. fabre's company, troubleyn, will appear more frequently in the future and wants audiences to experience the work in a university setting with a spirit of open inquiry. still, he added, ''it is definitely risky.'' a weekend shuttle will take people from chelsea in manhattan to the alexander kasser theater on campus.  mr. fabre is not without detractors. at the 2005 avignon festival, where he was the guest of honor, his monologue ''the king of plagiarism,'' was described as ''sheer imposture, bloated by its own importance, and of unfathomable tedium'' by le monde.  now 48, he said he had been haunted by ''the idea of blood, the liquid of the body,'' ever since he was 18 and visited the groeninge museum in bruges, where he discovered flemish master painters like rogier van der weyden and bosch, and depictions of christian stigmata.  in february 2008 mr. fabre will have the opportunity to revisit that moment. he is scheduled to install his new and old works alongside the flemish masterpieces he loves at the louvre, the first contemporary artist to mount a solo exhibition there.  aside from blood mr. fabre is also fascinated with insects. in 2003 he covered the hall of mirrors in the royal palace in brussels with the wing cases of nearly a million glowing beetles. he spent three years at the museum of natural history in london as an artist in residence studying the shapes found in nature. (it also took three years to collect the carapaces from entomology departments of universities, researchers, and restaurant kitchens in indonesia, malaysia and thailand.)  despite the long résumé, mr. fabre retains his sense of discovery. ''i feel like an embryo,'' he said, ''i'm just starting.''  je suis sang  alexander kasser theater  montclair state  montclair, n.j., (973) 655-5112; jan. 25-28  theater  