just call it airport insecurity   to the editor:  in ''once more into the security breach'' (op-ed, jan. 15), kathryn harrison describes how she was able to return to her plane at newark liberty international airport to look for her wallet without being stopped.  it boggles the mind to think that a person can walk onto a plane without detection, and go through checkpoints and alarmed doors without encountering security or airport personnel.  this is an open invitation to those seeking to harm the public. an investigation is in order.  harold yasgur  hewlett, n.y., jan. 15, 2007  to the editor:  i'm not surprised by kathryn harrison's security breach. in november, i went to la guardia airport for a flight to orlando, fla. i cleared security and headed down the concourse, checking my boarding pass for the gate number. i was shocked to see that the name on the pass was not my own.  as it turned out, i was ticketed to fly out of kennedy airport and had mistakenly gone to la guardia, where i checked my luggage and was given a boarding pass under another name at curbside check-in.  my id was ''checked'' against the name on this boarding pass at security, and i proceeded to the gate. but, they did get my lip gloss!  marci k. greenberg  winter park, fla., jan. 15, 2007  to the editor:  less than a year ago, i reached into my backpack midflight from new york to los angeles and was horrified to find an eight-inch carving knife. i had placed the knife there the day before. it was my fault that i forgot to remove it, but how could the security workers miss it?  with airport security procedures having become such an imposition on traveling, shouldn't we reconsider whether they are working?  ari b. rubin  venice, calif., jan. 15, 2007  to the editor:  in 2004, i flew from philadelphia to dallas with a penknife in my pocket. it was my grandfather's, and i have carried it since my mother gave it to me after his passing almost 20 years ago.  i hadn't flown since before 9/11 and did not think about the penknife until i approached the security gate.  realizing that my heedlessness could result in the loss of a precious family heirloom, i decided to say nothing and hope it would not be detected. it wasn't.  whether that is a happy ending to the story is debatable.  j. b. lewis  winthrop, me., jan. 15, 2007  to the editor:  i read kathryn harrison's article with a little smile on my face.  i recently flew home from washington, d.c. at the airport, my make-up and the little jar of fancy honey i was bringing home for my daughter were confiscated.  they put me through the air-puff machine, swabbed my duffle bag down for residue, and carefully examined my laptop.  imagine my surprise as i was unpacking a bag at home and found an eight-inch lighter gizmo that we used on our last camping trip. so much for security.  diane l. young  rochester, mich., jan. 15, 2007  