paid notice: deaths  buchbinder, norman thomas   buchbinder--norman thomas, died peacefully in his home in new york city on january 20th. mae's beloved husband of fifty years, loving and magnificent father of lori and susan, dynamic father - in - law of william abramson and raymond mcdaniel, and amazing grandfather to jake, david, jade and mia. norman was born on february 27, 1922 in the lower east side of manhattan to isidore and fannie and was predeceased by his sister viola. norman lived his entire life in new york city, attending dewitt clinton high school and new york university. during world war ii, he served as a lieutenant in the u.s. army. he began his professional life in the millinery business with his father, before becoming involved in new york city real estate. with his beloved partner and very dear friend, gene warren, he founded buchbinder & warren in 1958, and was one of the early proponents of converting rental properties into cooperatives and condominiums as well as having been a visionary founder of the 14th and 8th street business improvement districts. with another beloved partner of over forty years, zohar ben-dov (tatala), he invested in numerous real estate properties and restaurants, including the riviera cafe in greenwich village. norman lived each moment of his life to the fullest, with passion for his family, business, heritage and city. ''do not stand at my grave and weep, i am not there, i do not sleep. i am a thousand winds that blow, i am the diamonds glint on snow, i am the sunlight on ripening grain, i am the gentle autumns rain. when you awaken in the mornings hush, i am the swift uplifting rush, of quiet birds in circled flight, i am the soft stars that shine at night. do not stand at my grave and cry, i am not there, i did not die. my joie de vivre is within you.'' services will be held on monday, january 22nd, at the riverside memorial chapel in manhattan. for information please call 212-362-6600. $(6$)buchbinder--norman. the partners, associates and staff of goldberg, weprin & ustin llp join with his family in mourning the death of our loyal friend, norman. we will treasure the memories of his visits and miss his astute advice and business acumen. his energy, sense of humor and wit will be a model for each of us. to mae, lori, susan, and their families, we extend our heartfelt condolences and unending friendship. $(6$)buchbinder--norman. norman was a gentle giant, he was unpretentious, sharing, imaginative, kind, and a loyal, very loyal friend and business partner for over 40 years. he enjoyed every minute of his life and showed us how to enjoy ours. he was the brightest light of the four stars. lisa and i will sorely miss you norman. good-bye tatale. zohar and lisa  