the 2008 race heats up early   to the editor:  re ''clinton enters '08 field, fueling race for money'' (front page, jan. 21):  now that senator hillary rodham clinton has finally announced, one week after senator barack obama, the presidential primaries bode to be more fun and more interesting than the general election to come.  the possibility of mrs. clinton, who could become the first woman to be nominated for president by a major party, squaring off against a charismatic and popular african-american seeking to become the first black president -- in a field broad enough to include a variety of socially sensitive icons with urgent messages of their own (john edwards on poverty, plus joseph r. biden jr. and christopher j. dodd, among others) -- offers the promise of a contest of ideas that will be exciting, edifying and instructive, raising the electoral process to new heights of democratic vitality.  meyer rangell  lake worth, fla., jan. 21, 2007  to the editor:  back in 1992 when bill clinton ran for president, he talked about his wife, hillary rodham clinton, saying that she was an outstanding partner. during the campaign we heard talk of getting ''two for the price of one.''  now that senator clinton is running for president, she, too, can run a ''two for the price of one'' campaign, because her husband is a proven great president.  so i'm glad to see her get into the race, because things were a lot better with the clintons in the white house.  i think it's time to bring the clintons back. i'm looking forward to returning to a debate over how we are going to spend the surplus rather than how we are going to stop the deficit.  marc perkel  san bruno, calif., jan. 21, 2007  to the editor:  as much as i would otherwise like to support hillary rodham clinton, i cannot. as a senator, she voted to authorize the invasion of iraq.  we have had six years -- with two more to go -- of leadership by a president with even poorer judgment than that of herbert hoover. hoover brought us the great depression. george w. bush has brought us the unmitigated condemnation and hatred of much of the world.  mrs. clinton supported president bush's illegal war in iraq. she must fall because of that huge lapse in her own judgment.  ted towles  fincastle, va., jan. 21, 2007  to the editor:  when george w. bush leaves office in two years, the office of the president will have been occupied by members of only two families, the bushes and the clintons, for two decades. hillary rodham clinton's candidacy raises the possibility that this situation could be extended into a third decade.  this concentration of so much political power into the hands of two families does not reflect well on the health of our democracy or republican government.  joseph g. morgan  new rochelle, n.y., jan. 21, 2007  the writer is an associate professor of history at iona college.  to the editor:  i know that the united states of america is the land of opportunity, but the entrance of so many members of congress into the '08 presidential campaign has me wondering about the policies of the house and the senate. don't these people have to go to work in the jobs they already hold in congress?  in recent years, many states, including mine, have lost the services of an elected representative as he or she missed votes while seeking higher office.  we vote for these men and women to serve a term representing our state in congress. perhaps there are no attendance rules in congress, but don't they value the contract they have made with their constituency?  apparently not.  joan baldwin chapman  cheshire, conn., jan. 21, 2007  to the editor:  re ''shushing the baby boomers'' (week in review, jan. 21):  as a baby boomer born in 1956 who for at least a decade has been sick to death of the self-pitying and self-aggrandizing claims made by and for the baby-boom generation, i applaud senator barack obama's willingness to tell my generation to get over itself.  our country has done its best when no generation lorded it over its predecessors or successors.  r. b. bernstein  new york, jan. 21, 2007  the writer is an adjunct professor at new york law school.  to the editor:  someone ought to remind senator barack obama that it was the boomers' ideological battles of the 1960s that got him to where he is today.  we ain't dead yet, mr. obama. your youthful exuberance may smack of arrogance.  stephany yablow  north hollywood, calif.  jan. 21, 2007  