watching the energy watchdog   a scathing report from the state's public service commission about last summer's electrical blackout in western queens took some well-deserved shots at consolidated edison. the utility certainly failed spectacularly as it left 174,000 people sweltering in the dark for as long as nine days. but the report ignored a critical part of the problem: the commission itself, which has been incompetently monitoring the energy monopoly.  the commission's draft report correctly blames con ed for a performance that was ''unacceptable and a gross disservice'' to its customers. the utility underestimated the problem and made bad decisions that prolonged the blackout. it compounded its shortcomings when it issued a 600-page report last fall that failed to acknowledge its own errors. for its poor performance, con ed should pay a hefty penalty, which should be charged to its shareholders, not its customers.  the bigger picture, though, is that con ed could not have been so mismanaged if the public service commission had been doing its job. the commission is supposed to oversee the state's utilities, but it somehow remained blissfully blasé about the problems in queens, despite ample warnings. an earlier blackout in washington heights in manhattan prompted eliot spitzer, then the state's attorney general, to identify lurking trouble in the queens network, where some components dated to the middle 1900s. service quality reports from con ed should also have caused alarm.  the commission's failure is, sadly, not surprising. the just-departed governor, george pataki, treated this important body as a collection of plum six-figure sinecures, and he stacked it with cronies ill suited to the job, including, most recently, a former public relations executive, cheryl buley, whose husband has been a major republican donor. mr. pataki may also have been trying to slant the commission in favor of the energy industry, which, according to common cause, gave him $316,000 in campaign contributions from 1999 to 2006.  the public service commission is badly in need of reform. as governor, mr. spitzer now has the opportunity to make his first appointment to the five-member body. he should choose someone qualified and independent, with the determination to fight for safe, reliable and reasonably priced energy.  editorial  