pacers' o'neal must now adjust to roster changes   jermaine o'neal's head is spinning from the wholesale changes the indiana pacers made in this week's trade that sent his friends al harrington and stephen jackson to the golden state warriors.  this was not the answer o'neal said he sought when he expressed frustration two weeks ago about his team's performance and suggested that changes, maybe even involving him, might be in order.  four former warriors -- troy murphy, mike dunleavy, ike diogu and keith mcleod -- are expected to join indiana's lineup saturday night, when the pacers play host to the knicks. and o'neal said he would try to make their transition as easy as possible. but o'neal, who is in his seventh season in indiana, second-guessed the trade thursday night.  ''i felt like we had a crew of guys who could make it work,'' o'neal, 28, said after the pacers' failed comeback in a 104-101 loss to the heat in miami. ''with al and those guys, i felt like we had the best five in the league. and the east was struggling, and it was up for grabs. you could see it, but we couldn't reach it because we were still struggling.  he added: ''at times we didn't focus in as a team. now, it's a new challenge. we got four new guys. we're starting all over again.''  o'neal is a franchise player who says he wants to win and wants to stay in indiana, but is unsure if that is possible with the pacers' organization, which no longer commands the respect around the league it once did. his feelings and his messages are mixed.  ''everybody keeps saying that i'm hinting at being traded,'' he said. ''i'm not hinting at being traded. i want to retire a pacer, but i want to retire a champion in a pacers uniform.''  along with harrington and jackson, the pacers sent sarunas jasikevicius and josh powell to golden state.  o'neal said: ''i love al, i love jack, i love sarunas, i love all those guys. ''especially al. i fought all summer to get him back, and three months into it he's gone. i was a little hurt by that, personally, but it's a business, too.''  harrington, who returned to indiana after being acquired in a sign-and-trade deal with the atlanta hawks in august, was said to be what made the trade with the warriors work in the late stages of the discussions. he and o'neal had been out of sync on the court, and o'neal acknowledged that harrington had not been able to get comfortable in coach rick carlisle's system.  carlisle said: ''we want to fit the right kind of guys behind jermaine o'neal. he's a franchise player and one of the top players in the league.''  in commenting on the trade, donnie walsh, the president of the pacers, said that jackson needed a change of scenery. jackson is awaiting trial for an incident outside a strip club in october; he was charged with criminal recklessness, battery and disorderly conduct after the police said he fired a gun. the incident did not help his image, which had taken a battering because of his prominent role in the november 2004 brawl between the pacers and the detroit pistons.  o'neal said that the pacers' organization could still be paying for that brawl, suggesting that it could have been a reason his team had not appeared on national television this season until thursday night. ''are we still on probation?'' he said.  o'neal said he hoped the trade with the warriors would spur the pacers to an eastern conference title. he seemed encouraged that danny granger, a second-year small forward, stepped into the starting lineup and scored a career-high 28 points against miami.  o'neal said he was unsure what it meant to be a pacer anymore.  ''last year was the first time in my career i walked out of the arena with my head down,'' he said. ''we're not elite anymore. teams are not afraid of us anymore.''  pro basketball  