bills would track sex offenders' web use   monitoring of sex offenders that would extend beyond megan's law to include computer use is the focus of several bills that have been introduced in the state legislature.  while the state now requires sex offenders to register with the local police under the terms of megan's law, legislation sponsored by assemblywoman linda r. greenstein would require them to notify the authorities of online identities used in chat or instant messaging conversations and to give the police their user passwords.  another bill, sponsored by ms. greenstein, a democrat from monroe, and senate president richard j. codey, a democrat from west orange, would severely limit sex offenders who used the internet to commit their crimes from gaining access to the internet in the future. a bill with provisions similar to ms. greenstein's has been introduced by assemblywoman jennifer beck, a republican from morganville.  ''this is an attempt to try to strengthen megan's law and to prevent the use of computers in stalking children, when they're obviously being used in many cases for that purpose,'' ms. greenstein said. ''the home computer is obviously the place where solicitation takes place.''  there are 2,166 sex offenders registered in new jersey, according to the attorney general's office.  a prohibition on internet use by sex offenders may raise questions about the right to privacy and the law's enforceability. ''it's one thing for you as a parole officer to read my mail, and it's another to say that you can't write letters,'' said george c. thomas iii, a professor of criminal law at the newark campus of the rutgers school of law.  prof. vera bergelson, who teaches a course called the moral puzzles of criminal law at rutgers in newark, said that the proposed restrictions on sex offenders participating in online social groups like myspace might be written too broadly. ''it could prevent people from participating in political discussions and joining book clubs or movie clubs,'' she said.  ms. greenstein said she assumed that the bills would run into opposition. ''obviously anytime you're going to put restrictions on people, it at least raises questions, but we've already placed limitations under megan's law and it's passed constitutional muster,'' she said.  all of the bills are in committee and have yet to be scheduled for a vote, ms. greenstein said.  the week  