in the end, why it makes sense to go for 2   one of these days, an n.f.l. coach in a playoff game is going to face a choice similar to the one boise state coach chris petersen had at this year's fiesta bowl.  there will be no time left on the clock, and, having just scored a touchdown to pull within a point, the coach will have a chance to go for a 2-point conversion that could win the game then and there. petersen, after electing to kick an extra point to send the game to overtime, went for 2 at the end of the first overtime to allow his team to upset oklahoma, 43-42.  in the conservative world of the n.f.l., it is hard to imagine a coach taking the same risk. ''as a general rule, i feel like i have an obligation to my team to give them a chance to win the game in overtime by kicking an extra point,'' jeff fisher, the tennessee titans' coach, said, ''not by winning or losing the game on one play.''  but there is now a good argument that coaches should seriously consider being as bold as petersen was. in each of the last two seasons, n.f.l. teams have made slightly more than half of their 2-point conversions, up from less than 40 percent in the late 1990s.  so by going for 2 at the end of a game, a coach may actually be giving his team its best possible chance for victory -- especially if its offense is stronger than its defense.  imagine that the colts and the saints were facing each other in next month's super bowl, and that the saints, who have one of the league's best offenses, found themselves in boise state's position. an all-or-nothing 2 would allow the game to be a decided by a confrontation between one of the saints' strong points and one of the colts' weaknesses: their defense.  kicking the extra point and sending the game into overtime, on the other hand, would forfeit that advantage and make the overtime coin flip -- a 50-50 proposition if ever there were one -- hugely important. if the colts won the toss, peyton manning might then march through the saints' own mediocre defense without new orleans ever getting another possession.  in fact, the logic behind going for 2 is probably less compelling in college football; overtime is not sudden death and the 2-point conversion is spotted on the 3-yard line rather than the 2. still, petersen went for it.  ''oklahoma is one of those teams -- they're so physical, and it's just a matter of time before they impose their will on you,'' he told the idaho statesman after the game. ''so i knew right away if we got down there we were going to go for 2 and try to put an end to that.''  the 2-point conversion became a part of the college game in 1958, and the n.f.l. introduced it 1994. during that first season, pro teams succeeded on about 51 percent of their 2-point attempts, just as they did this season and last season, according to stats llc.  in 1995, though, the success rate fell to 39 percent and remained below 45 percent for most of the next decade. defensive coaches apparently learned how to react to the plays that offenses were calling.  when their success rate is well shy of 50 percent, 2-point conversions produce fewer points on average than extra points, which are almost always successful. a number of commentators, including phil simms of cbs and a rutgers statistics professor named harold sackrowitz, picked up on this fact and argued during these years that teams were too quick for try for 2.  the problem, they said, was that coaches had become dependent on a chart -- created around 1970 by u.c.l.a. coach tommy prothro and his offensive coordinator, dick vermeil -- that dictated when to go for 2. trailing by 5 points after a touchdown, for instance, a team should go for 2 to cut the lead to a field goal, according to the chart.  but the critics pointed out that the advice did not make sense before the very end of the fourth quarter. until a coach knows exactly how close a game will be, he should simply try to score as many points as possible.  the carolina panthers might have cost themselves a championship by not understanding this. in the 2004 super bowl, both carolina and new england scored four touchdowns and had one field goal, and the patriots won in large part because carolina failed on both of its 2-point conversion attempts.  slowly, n.f.l. coaches seem to have come to the same conclusion as the 2-point critics. between 2002 and this season, the number of 2-point attempts during the first three quarters of a game fell by 79 percent.  but a funny thing has been happening at the same time: offenses have regained the upper hand on conversion attempts. (sackrowitz says teams now do not go for 2 often enough.) and the success rate has not risen because coaches are pickier about which defenses they test. teams were just as likely to go for 2 against a good defense this season as a bad one, according to football outsiders, an analytical web site.  instead, more creative play-calling, including more passes, seems to be the main reason that teams are again succeeding more than half the time. ''offenses have become more sophisticated and more unique with what they do in that situation,'' vermeil, who coached the rams and the chiefs over the last decade, said. ''more time is devoted to it.''  today, the biggest reason an n.f.l. coach might shy away from doing what petersen did, vermeil said, is ''fear of failing.'' if a coach ended his team's season by failing on a conversion, he would face a torrent of abuse, even if he had given his team its best shot at winning.  that said, there were two n.f.l. games last season that came down to coaching decisions almost as gutsy as petersen's. on nov. 13, 2005, buccaneers coach jon gruden went for a game-winning 2-point conversion after the redskins were called offside on the extra point and the ball was moved to the 1-yard line. a week earlier in kansas city, with the chiefs on the raiders' 1-yard line and only five seconds left, vermeil turned down a chance to kick a game-tying field goal and instead tried to win the game on a running play.  each gamble was rewarded with a victory.  keeping score e-mail: keepingscore@nytimes.com  