in buffalo, detectives celebrate a breakthrough in a cold case after years of frustration   notes on the student's murder filled more than a thousand typed pages. for years, six detectives worked the case full time, alongside dozens of other investigators. the telephones rang with tips 10 times a day, and more often after the case was profiled on the television program ''unsolved mysteries.''  by the time tom gould retired from the amherst police department in 1997, his detectives had interviewed hundreds of people, including, at one point, altemio sanchez. it was mr. sanchez who was arrested last week in connection with the 1990 murder of the student, linda yalem, as well as two other murders and a string of rapes attributed to the ''bike path rapist.''  what detectives call ''good arrests'' are often collisions of hard work, timing and luck, a combination that paid off a week ago for the task force of state and local investigators assembled last september after the third murder to hunt for the killer.  some part of that mix had eluded mr. gould and others who had poured years into the case. for them, news of the arrest was more bittersweet; there was great relief that a long-running fear had lifted, but also regret that they could not have ended it sooner.  ''we did all we could,'' said larry j. bainbridge, a retired detective who worked on the case of ms. yalem, a student at the state university at buffalo. ''we never gave up on her.''  detective bainbridge picked up ms. yalem's relatives from the airport on sept 29, 1990, the day she was found on a jogging path near the university's campus in amherst, raped and strangled.  then he drove them to the morgue to identify the body.  ''it's one i'd have liked to solve,'' he said in an interview in his home.  on friday, a grand jury indicted mr. sanchez for the murders of ms. yalem and majane mazur, whose body was found in 1992 in a deserted part of buffalo. prosecutors have said that dna evidence ties mr. sanchez to both killings. mr. sanchez has said he is innocent of the charges, and his lawyer has questioned the way the dna evidence was gathered.  members of the task force that built the case against mr. sanchez got together on friday night at pettibones grille, a restaurant in downtown buffalo, for crudités and cocktails. the group was celebrating the arrest in a case that had stumped investigators since the 1980s.  ''nothing in 35 years has made me prouder,'' said timothy b. howard, the erie county sheriff.  detective ed monan of the amherst police, sitting at the bar, recalled following mr. sanchez and his wife, kathleen, to a restaurant where the police retrieved dna from a glass used by mr. sanchez.  josh keats, a 35-year-old investigator with the new york state police, jokingly complained that he had left the stakeout too early that day and missed the dramatic end of the chase.  everyone spoke of the great team effort, and as the investigators told stories, their personalities emerged. there were nicknames, including columbo and monk, and archetypes, like dennis delano, the buffalo cold-case detective who wears black and favors small-brim hats.  detective monan was a veteran who bridged the eras in search for the bike path rapist: he took over the yalem case in 2003.  detective alan rozansky spoke of a telephone call he received this month from mr. sanchez's uncle. the man, wilfredo sanchez caraballo, said his nephew borrowed his van on the day in 1981 when a rape victim followed a man she thought resembled her attacker to the vehicle.  when the police first questioned him, he said the van had not been driven for a month; he did not acknowledge that he had let his nephew use it on the day in question.  some of the investigators said that it was just fresh eyes on a cold case, including the bringing together of different agencies, that produced an arrest.  detective mike rose of the amherst police department pointed to changes in technology since the 1990s, especially in dna testing, as a reason it had been harder for the previous group of investigators, and why it would only get easier in future cases. ''we're getting to the point where it's going to be instant,'' he said of the testing.  mr. gould was chief of detectives of the amherst department when ms. yalem was killed. he lives in florida now and has lost touch with many of his colleagues from that time. when mr. sanchez was arrested, however, he received 30 or so calls.  ''i was so relieved when i heard,'' he said in a phone interview. ''then i heard that we had looked at him before. it bothered me. we did all we could.''  in 1990, detectives interviewed mr. sanchez after a co-worker reported seeing him lurking on a bike path. the police took his fingerprints, but the prints did not match evidence found at the scene of the yalem murder. so they let him go.  ''i remember looking at him,'' mr. gould said. ''dna was so hard to get back then.''  indeed, he said, dna testing took so long -- perhaps six months -- that he and his detectives were urged not to request it unless they had a particularly strong lead.  according to frank clark, the erie county district attorney, the first case in the area in which dna evidence was used was not until 1991, and at the time a single dna test cost up to $4,000.  in 1992, the body of majane mazur, attacked in the same manner as ms. yalem, was found in a field by some railroad tracks. charles t. fieramusca, then the chief of homicide detectives in buffalo, has also retired to florida. the crack epidemic had boosted the murder rate at the time, and ms. mazur's murder was not seen as part of any pattern, he said.  ''we did not develop any particular leads or suspects,'' he said by telephone. ''it stayed an open case, but what happens after a couple of weeks is that they get old.''  to hear mr. gould and others tell it, the police spared no effort to keep the yalem case from going cold, surveying the bike paths for months.  ''we put people on the roof with telescopes,'' mr. gould said. ''we had people in camouflage in the woods. we tried everything -- we even put a decoy out there, a female officer.''  mr. bainbridge, the retired detective who drove the yalems to the morgue, keeps a scrapbook in a large binder. among the hundreds of pages in it, one has fixed to it a card from ms. yalem's family, written less than a month after the murder, thanking him for his efforts.  mr. gould said, ''what really bothered me was when i retired knowing it wasn't solved.''  