the marriage ideal and unwedded bliss   to the editor:  re ''the elusive altar'' (column, jan. 18):  david brooks keenly observes two very different pictures of life for unmarried women, largely determined by socioeconomic status. but i take issue with his proposed remedy for folks down the social scale: to view marriage ''more as a social machine'' that ''can be useful for achieving practical ends,'' instead of as an unreachable ''state of sacred bliss.''  mr. brooks has got it backward. successful marriages indeed start out as a state of ''sacred bliss,'' and their practical achievements and social benefits flow from the mutual love, respect and fidelity spurred by that commitment.  in my roman catholic faith, that's why we deem matrimony a sacrament -- an outward sign of god's grace to the entire community. (of course, the trick is sustaining the bliss long enough to reap the benefits.)  brenda l. becker  brooklyn, jan. 18, 2007  to the editor:  david brooks prefers to shame and stigmatize, rather than help real individuals, relationships and families to thrive.  being unmarried is not being ''trapped in a no man's land between solitude and marriage.'' it is often a smart, life-affirming choice. using marriage as ''a social machine'' penalizes the unmarried.  government policies reward marriage by withholding benefits from unmarried people. given that one-third of children live in unmarried households, better policy would offer all parents the relationship skills, economic opportunities, health insurance and so on they need to succeed.  three cheers for unmarried people who ''don't want to marry until they are financially secure and emotionally mature.'' ideally, people should be secure and mature when they have children, too.  but pushing marriage on unprepared parents simply increases the chances that children will live through divorce. it makes more sense to help single parents succeed as parents than to push them into risky marriages.  nicky grist  executive director  alternatives to marriage project  brooklyn, jan. 18, 2007  to the editor:  david brooks recommends that we strengthen marriage by encouraging people to value it less and engage in it more. but he doesn't discuss the ''except gay people'' clause.  in our country, children of gay couples are deprived of the same civil rights and protections afforded to my child by the legal institution of marriage. they are a nebulous population, governed by no consistent legal policy by the family court system if their parents' relationship fails. it's bad for those kids, and it's bad for our country.  either the social fabric matters, or it doesn't. either marriage is good for our social fabric, or it's not.  robert m. charde  bloomfield, n.j., jan. 18, 2007  