son of dogs playing poker   few ideas have caused as much academic navel-gazing as kitsch. an unfathomable amount of highbrow ink has been spilled in the name of explaining why so many people prefer paintings of dogs playing poker to the masterworks of abstract expressionism.  among those fascinated by this conundrum of taste is sander mulder, a product designer in eindhoven, the netherlands. rather than write a dissertation, however, mr. mulder chose to comment on the kitsch debate by creating the woofer, a semi-lifelike statue of a headless dog that's as tacky as a lawn gnome. ''if you're a true design lover, you wouldn't be caught dead with such a statue,'' mr. mulder said with a laugh.  but concealed in the woofer's neck is a sophisticated speaker system, capable of transmitting the decidedly nonkitschy sounds of brahms or thelonius monk. ''in a moment, it transforms from a truly ugly piece into a truly desirable piece,'' said mr. mulder, a co-founder of the dutch design studio buro vormkrijgers. or, as the woofer's marketing write-up puts it, ''the wrong becomes the new right.''  the woofer was born on a 2004 road trip to germany, where mr. mulder and a few friends were to attend a design fair. their conversation turned to hi-fis and their boxy, boring speakers, which in turn led mr. mulder to pose a stumper of a question: why are the bass-producing components of speakers called woofers, while the treble drivers are called tweeters?  no one knew the answer, but the discussion inspired mr. mulder to sketch speakers that took these nicknames literally: he envisioned cases that resembled dogs or birds in lieu of wooden rectangles. pleased with the concept, he placed the sketches in a desk drawer for future reference. then he forgot all about them.  a year later, he was perusing a local flea market when he came across a merchant whose wares jogged his memory. ''the guy was selling statues of animals -- horses, elephants, crazy stuff, and all really awful in a kitschy way,'' he said. among the statues were several ceramic dogs, which reminded mr. mulder of his speaker idea. so he bought two of the faux dogs -- one a greyhound, the other akin to a labrador retriever -- and used them as models for the woofer.  he quickly decided to pattern the woofer after the labrador-like statue; the sleeker greyhound, he explained, appeared too fragile and not ''doggy'' enough. he also chose to have the woofer assume a tighter crouch, so that its neck -- where the speaker is located -- would be angled more toward the ceiling, and its paws would be more secure on the floor.  though he initially hoped to build the woofer out of the same ceramic as its two models, mr. mulder realized that this wasn't feasible: the material was too expensive, and too easily broken by rambunctious children or drunken party guests. he opted for a tough polyester resin.  while working on the woofer's case, he hired a nearby audio engineering lab to develop the actual speakers. the lab's main challenge was to create a speaker that contained both woofer and tweeter in the same oval; these two components are usually physically separated.  the woofer was introduced last april at the salone internazionale del mobile, an annual furniture fair in milan, as part of a buro vormkrijgers product collection called cultivate  mr. mulder estimates that he has sold around 100 two-speaker sets so far, priced at 599 euros (about $775). most of the sales have come through the collection's web site, at  cultivate.nl.  a few shoppers, mr. mulder said, have been offended by the woofer's slightly macabre sensibility. ''sometimes there are animal lovers who take it very seriously, and they say, 'how could you behead a dog?' '' he said. ''but no animals were harmed in the making of these speakers.''  the goods  