anatomy of misery   paula spencer  by roddy doyle.  281 pp. viking. $24.95.  paula spencer, a widowed working mother in north dublin, has an exhausting job and four kids to fret about. at 47, she's still a ''good-looking woman'' who makes time to keep abreast of popular trends: taking in the odd white stripes or coldplay concert, googling her name on the internet, contemplating yoga and nursing the hope of one day meeting a suitable partner -- like joe, a retiree in a nike hoodie whose wife left him for another woman.  guilty admission: the above summation is a capricious concentration of the scarce cheering bits that dot the lumpy gruel of paula's life, like raisins scavenged from a happier woman's larder. before you mistake paula for a with-it new player in the budding genre of ''mom lit'' -- the baby-on-board successor to chick lit, spearheaded by allison pearson in her very funny best-selling novel, ''i don't know how she does it'' -- bear in mind that the author of ''paula spencer'' is roddy doyle, and remember that the roots of mom lit began long before sarah handpicked hagar to be her surrogate. remember too that medea was also a mother, one whose story was told by others.  doyle first introduced readers to paula a decade ago in the gripping faux-memoir, ''the woman who walked into doors,'' told in paula's blindered first-person. back then, she buoyantly recalled the rapture she felt on meeting her future husband: ''i swooned the first time i saw charlo. i actually did.'' a tough guy in a bomber jacket with a cigarette hanging from his mouth, charlo ''blew a gorgeous jet of smoke up into the light,'' and hooked her. ''it got me then and it gets me now: cigarettes are sexy -- they're worth the stench and the cancer. ... i wanted to go over there and bite him.''  one way or another, she did. and charlo bit back. and punched and kicked and head-butted her, blacked her eyes, ripped out her hair, sent her to the hospital year after year. early on, paula took to drink, her spin on mother's little helper. by the time charlo was killed during a botched hold-up, 17 years into the marriage, paula was ravaged, her family in ruins, her identity shredded, her spirit coiled in a perpetual defensive crouch.  it's a testament to the incantatory power of doyle's writing in that earlier book that paula's valiant will to glorify, not horrify, her past and to survive her present overshadows her husband's campaign to crush her. back then, doyle's narrative cunningly guided the reader with a trail of crumbs that took a meandering route before forking off into the torture chamber. satisfyingly, the torturer died. the reader had hope that the victim would recover her full strength.  but in this sequel, we meet paula, roughly a decade on and only four months and five days sober. her two older children, the gratingly self-sufficient nicola and the former junkie john paul, have their own kids and households; but the two youngest still live at home: leanne, a scrappy, bed-wetting 22-year-old alcoholic, and teenage jack, the pet, who is miraculously addiction-free. paula catches him sniffing her breath to make sure she's clean and mourns the watchfulness her weakness has forced on him.  as she struggles to dig herself out of the pit of alcoholism, to brush the dust off her bonds with the children who grew up under her damaged care, her failures overwhelm her. ''you can't leave things behind,'' she thinks to herself. ''they come with you. you can manage. that's the best you can expect.'' she knows she can't have her slate wiped clean, but she wishes it weren't so thickly marked. ''i'm sick of feeling guilty,'' she rages inwardly, as leanne baits her, slaps her. ''get over it! she wants to yell. grow up and get out of my house,'' she thinks, ''so i don't have to face you every day and feel guilty all over again.'' in a word: yeesh.  as paula's months of sobriety pile up, her efforts begin to gain traction. still, it's slow going. ''i haven't been a good mother,'' she says to her son in a moment of cautious rapprochement. ''no, he says. -- you haven't. ... but i don't have another one.'' later, she torments herself: ''alcoholics can stop drinking but what is there for the children of alcoholics? is it always too late? probably.''  the thought is enough to drive you to drink. nonetheless, paula soldiers abstemiously on, determined to improve her family's lot, taking the sort of cleaning jobs only immigrants sign on for -- ''the only white woman in the van'' -- too late to catch the wave of prosperity that visited ireland in the '90s. ''she's been left behind,'' she realizes. ''she knows that. but she's always known it.'' listening to u2, whose members grew up in her own dublin neighborhood, she recognizes the irony that ''she was being hammered, battered to the floor, while they were becoming famous.'' paula's story feels ageless, but it's not. the white stripes concert she hears (she went to clean the stands, not to rock out) actually took place. paula would have been 48 then, and 50 now.  the ineluctable suffering of wives and mothers has been a time-honored staple of fiction from classical times to the present. the literary imagination insists that hecuba must endure her children's deaths while medea, betrayed, must kill hers. anna karenina strays from her marriage and pays; so does madame bovary. dostoyevsky created one of the most gruesome images of female misery in ''crime and punishment,'' in a dream about an overburdened mare whose cruel owner beats her to death after a lifetime of service.  in other books (notably ''the snapper''), roddy doyle has sometimes cut his heroines more slack, without depriving them of the authenticity of misfortune. it's a tragic fact that abused, alcoholic women exist in abundance, and telling their stories in unsparing detail, as doyle does, is both important and noble. but is it any wonder that some 21st-century writers have been recasting the female-lead template, multiplying the varieties of fiction written about women?  in a freakish coincidence, doyle's paula spencer has a real-world double whose fortunes contrast starkly with those of her fictional namesake. when jack helps his mammy google her name, they find 575,000 hits. it turns out that (quite literally) there is an american mother of four named paula spencer who has not remotely been ''left behind.'' she's a mom-lit pathbreaker: a woman's day columnist and the author or co-author of numerous books, the most recent of which is titled, ''momfidence! an oreo never killed anybody and other secrets of happier parenting.''  it's all very well to titter ... but which paula spencer would you want for a mother?  liesl schillinger is a regular contributor to the book review.  