bulletin! washington post decides to go for the satirical   in what might be taken as a sign that the washington post believes in keeping its enemies close, the paper will sell local advertising for the humor weekly the onion and print and distribute it in the washington area.  the onion, which parodies the kind of earnest reporting that you find in real newspapers like the washington post itself (a recent example: ''rumsfeld leaves most recent job off resumé'') will keep control over its editorial content, including its (unsatirical) entertainment reviews.  the washington post already publishes a free daily, called express, and will take advantage of the relationships it has with local advertisers to sell space in the onion's washington edition. the onion has had previous experience partnering with mainstream papers, like the journal-sentinel in milwaukee.  sean mills, the president of the onion's business operations, said in an interview friday that the paper also plans to introduce local entertainment content to its web site later this year. as mr. mills described his perspective on the advertising market, ''i don't see it as print and online, i see it as national and local.''  the onion has 3,000 local advertisers for its various print editions, mr. mills said, adding that the paper's total circulation is 615,000 and would go up by 100,000 when the washington edition appears.  ''print is our best product now, but there's an increased interest in the web. we have a strong web product. when we launch local web content, we'll start to migrate readers and advertisers there.'' the onion already has several online partnerships including one with slate, which is owned by the washington post.  mr. mills said that entry into the washington market, the 10th city where the onion is published, was ''long overdue'' and that the deal with the post marked a new type of joint venture. the agreement was signed jan. 4 and reported in the washington post on thursday.  ''i think we attract a pretty influential audience,'' said mr. mills. he characterized the average reader of the onion as ''the one out of 10 who tells the other nine what movies to see and what music to listen to,'' and, with an average age of 21 to 34, younger than readers of the post or the washington city paper, an alternative weekly.  ''we plan on manipulating elections,'' he added.  matthew healey  media talk  