those property tax cuts: maybe not for everyone   in his state of the city address last week, mayor michael r. bloomberg proposed a cut of $750 million, or 5 percent, in the city's property tax rate to ''pump money back into our neighborhoods, create jobs, lower the burden on property owners.''  but the property tax rate is only one of many moving parts in the city's complex tax system, and a look at newly published city assessment figures shows that many taxpayers -- from fifth avenue co-op dwellers to the owners of bronx tenements -- will still end up paying more than ever when tax bills arrive.  while the tax rates may be going down, the preliminary assessment rolls show that officials have sharply raised assessments and their estimates of the market values of buildings across the city.  calculations made using the city's summary of the preliminary assessment rolls show that for many groups of taxpayers, the cut in rates has been more than offset by the increase in assessments.  it appears that the owners of apartment buildings, including private landlords, condo associations and co-op corporations, would pay $216 million more in taxes, even after the mayor's cuts went into effect. owners of office buildings would pay $370 million more. analysts at the city's independent budget office said they had found similar trends.  sam miller, a spokesman for the department of finance, acknowledged that some tax bills would go up, but he said that the average tax bills for owners of one- to three-family homes would go down because of the mayor's tax cut. he added that the average tax bills for condo and co-op buildings would rise much less than those for rental buildings. but he acknowledged that tax bills for one- to three-family homes could be adjusted upward later in the year as they have been in many recent years.  paul korngold, a tax lawyer who reviewed the tax rolls, said that mr. bloomberg was ''doing the right thing,'' but he is warning his clients not to think they are going to get a reduction in their taxes.  ''it's the same old story,'' he said. ''it comes out of one pocket and goes into the other pocket.''  properties in new york are divided into different classes, with different tax rates for office buildings, large apartment buildings, utilities and private houses. every year, the rates are adjusted to reflect the relative changes in property values. this has usually led to higher tax rates for owners of one- to three-family houses -- between 2 and 4 percent of late, enough to push up these tax bills. revised tax bills usually go out in the fall.  homeowners of one- to three-family houses get preferential treatment in assessments under the tax laws, but this has been partly offset by heavy tax rate increases. since mr. bloomberg took office, tax rates for homeowners have gone up by nearly 39 percent, including an 18 1/2 percent increase imposed by the mayor and the city council on all taxpayers in 2002. (mr. bloomberg has also proposed continuing a $400 annual rebate to individual homeowners to offset some of the rate increase he imposed in 2002.)  mr. bloomberg promised only a one-year reduction in the tax rate, citing future budget uncertainties. but the huge run-up in market values and assessments could mean large future increases as well, since assessments are phased in over time.  big deal e-mail: bigdeal@nytimes.com  