low prices abound on the high seas   looking for a cheap caribbean getaway? with bookings up at many resorts, deep discounts are hard to find on land -- but there are plenty out at sea. weak demand for caribbean sailings is leading many cruise lines to slash prices -- as low as $189 for some three-night cruises -- in an effort to spur sales.  celebrity cruises has been advertising four-night caribbean sailings from miami for as low as $249 a person under ''special promotions'' on its web site, www.celebritycruises.com. royal caribbean, www.royalcaribbean.com, was offering a five-night western caribbean cruise on splendour of the seas, departing feb. 3, for $297 a person. carnival cruise lines, www.carnival.com, has been offering weeklong caribbean cruises from florida and san juan starting at $499 a person. on top of that, the company is offering a two-category upgrade for many bookings through feb. 15.  during the first 10 days of january, prices for more than 460 caribbean cruises were reduced, according to surecruise.com. savings averaged about $74 a person, with some cutting rates by thousands of dollars.  the best bargains are for short itineraries. a recent search on expedia.com turned up a four-night royal caribbean cruise to the bahamas starting at $189 a person for an inside cabin or $239 a person for an ocean-view room. prices are typically 10 percent less than they were last year for three- and four-night caribbean cruises, according to expedia, with a few as much as 30 percent off.  and because many cruise lines have been introducing new ships or refurbishing aging vessels, ''you're getting a better selection at better prices,'' said mark kammerer, expedia's cruise expert.  the weak demand and subsequent discounts are being driven, in part, by reductions in disposable income for some less affluent cruise passengers and by lingering confusion over new passport rules that take effect this week. prices for summer cruises to alaska and europe are about the same as last year's.  ''it's a bit of a dichotomy,'' said tim conder, a leisure analyst at a. g. edwards & sons. the caribbean cruise market, he said, consists mostly of first-time cruise passengers, who typically have lower incomes than the more experienced travelers who tend to sail outside the caribbean.  the more affluent customers have generally felt less impact from rising interest rates on adjustable mortgages and home equity loans, while many caribbean cruise passengers are being pinched. ''they don't have as much left over in their wallets,'' mr. conder said.  on tuesday, new security rules go into effect that require americans returning by plane from mexico, panama, the caribbean and canada to carry passports. an early draft of the rules would have required caribbean cruise passengers to carry passports too, but after heavy lobbying by the travel industry, congress voted to postpone the deadline for travel by sea. before that decision was made, however, many would-be travelers who didn't have passports made other plans.  an increase in outbreaks of gastrointestinal illness -- including two recent occurrences during caribbean sailings on the world's largest cruise ship, royal caribbean's freedom of the seas -- hasn't helped demand, either. there were 33 outbreaks aboard cruise ships last year, more than in any other year, according to the centers for disease control and prevention, which tracks outbreaks that affect 3 percent or more of either passengers or crew members. and norovirus, the highly contagious group of viruses that can cause a miserable one- or two-day bout of vomiting, diarrhea and cramping, was either confirmed or suspected in nearly every case.  though often associated with cruise ships because it thrives in close quarters and because cruise lines are required by law to report all gastrointestinal illnesses onboard, the risk of contracting norovirus is hardly confined to ships. it is the most common cause of such illness in north america, sickening an estimated 23 million americans each year. the rise in shipboard outbreaks is associated with the rise in passengers sailing on more ships at sea, which increases the risk for spread of illness between passengers, the centers for disease control and prevention said.  cruise companies say they clean ''high-touch'' areas of ships like banisters and elevator buttons several times a day if there is an outbreak and offer sick passengers rebates if they promise to stay in their rooms. some cruise lines even question passengers before boarding to see if they have any symptoms.  but such measures can't prevent a sick passenger from knowingly or unknowingly coming aboard and infecting others. after more than 380 people on the freedom of the seas were sickened by norovirus during a caribbean cruise nov. 26 to dec. 3, the ship was cleaned and subsequently inspected by the centers for disease control. even so, more passengers and crew members fell ill on the next trip, the following week. (the best defense against catching a stomach bug aboard ship is simple: keep washing your hands.)  thinking of booking? don't wait too long. while cruise deals to the caribbean could linger, planes that carry passengers to the port cities are filling up quickly, pushing air fares higher. average january air fares to and from many big ports are up compared with those a year earlier, according to sabre airline solutions -- by 3 percent to tampa and orlando, fla., 9 percent to miami, and 10 percent to fort lauderdale, fla., where many caribbean cruises depart.  ''the earlier you book, the easier it is to get all the accommodations you want,'' said mark kammerer of expedia. ''people who wait until the last minute typically ''don't get the flexibility on dates of departures, itinerary, ships or cabin that meet all their needs.''  among the most coveted are rooms with balconies, mr. kammerer said, which allow passengers to sit outside their own rooms and ''have the sea go by.''  practical traveler: caribbean cruises  