paid notice: deaths   martin, morgan graham, m.d.   martin--morgan graham, m.d., of gravel street, mystic, died friday, november 3rd. he was 85. dr. martin was a psychiatrist, and from 1966 through 1978 he was the superintendent of norwich hospital. dr. martin was born in hamilton, ontario on april 19, 1921. he received his medical degree from queens university in kingston, ontario. this was during the second world war, and he earned his degree in 34 months of continuous schooling. while at queens, dr. martin earned the professors prize for excellence in preventive medicine and then served as a captain and medical officer in the royal canadian army medical corps. he earned the hayunga scholarship for top marks in the canadian officer's training corps. from 1952 until 1959 dr. martin was director of psychiatric services at regina general hospital in saskatchewan. he then earned a master of science degree in administrative medicine at columbia university, and completed his internship at bellevue hospital in new york city. dr. martin was a fellow of the royal college of physicians and surgeons, the american psychiatric association, and the american college of psychiatrists. from 1961 through 1967 dr. martin served as chief of the mental health division of canada's department of health and welfare. in 1962 he was appointed as canada's delegate to the world health organization expert advisory panel, and traveled extensively throughout the world. in 1966 dr. martin moved to norwich, connecticut and was superintendent of norwich hospital for 12 years. in 1968 he received an academic appointment to yale university school of medicine. while at norwich hospital, dr. martin joined the national accreditations committee, and for the next 20 years traveled throughout the united states helping psychiatric facilities gain and maintain federal accreditation. in september of 1978 dr. martin moved to spokane, washington, to become superintendent of eastern state hospital. while there, dr. martin collaborated with washington's commissioner of mental health to make substantial improvements to the care of the mentally ill. they followed the 500 year old program in gheel, belgium, and as a result many people left inpatient care and successfully adapted to productive lives in their communities. in 1981 dr. martin returned to connecticut and was staff and attending psychiatrist at lawrence and memorial hospital until 1990. dr. martin then combined private practice and work as a psychiatric consultant to both the norwich and new london probate courts until march of this year. dr. martin's published works include over 50 scientific papers, many of which were published in the journal of the american medical association. in 1966 dr. martin's book ''the mental ward, a personnel guidebook'' was published. it was under his tenure as editor-in-chief that the connecticut psychiatric newsletter was judged newsletter of the year in a national competition. dr. martin also wrote short stories, poetry and limericks. he had a keen and curious mind, and studied architecture, photography, history, science and native american culture. he had a well-developed sense of humor, and a hearty laugh. dr. martin was an avid gardener and a dedicated volunteer and member of mystic seaport. dr. martin married the former mary coverdale folger on may 6, 1944, at st. andrew's presbyterian church in kingston, ontario. in addition to his wife of 63 years, he is survived by three daughters; susan battles of mystic, sally m. martin of wethersfield and nancy burnett of norwich. he also leaves four grandchildren and one great-grandchild. the memorial service will be private. those who wish, may make a donation to the connecticut humane society, 701 russell rd., newington, ct, 06111.  