off to miami, no baggage   to reach the super bowl, to finally fill in the blanks on the glittering résumés that lacked postseason glory, even the indianapolis colts conceded it was only appropriate that they would have to vanquish their greatest tormentors.  the new england patriots had used the colts as doormats on two of their three super bowl runs, stepping over them on the way to constructing a dynasty. but sunday night, like the kids who had had enough of being beaten up by the class bullies, the colts fought back. they rallied from an 18-point deficit, then traded scores with the patriots in a thrilling second half to win the american football conference title, 38-34, and advance to super bowl xli on feb. 4 in miami.  there, the colts will play the chicago bears, who won the national football conference championship game earlier in the day, creating a meeting of great significance: colts coach tony dungy and bears coach lovie smith, dungy's close friend, will become the first black head coaches to lead teams at the super bowl.  the victory also sent quarterback peyton manning to the super bowl for the first time, and he and dungy can leave behind some of their baggage -- that their successful careers may never be capped by their sport's greatest honor. this was an especially meaningful performance by manning (27 of 47 for 349 yards and a touchdown), who was criticized for his previous postseason failures as much as he was praised for his statistical dominance.  but he recovered from a shaky start to produce scoring drive after scoring drive in a relentless second half that included a total of eight scores, four of them colts touchdowns.  the comeback was the biggest in championship game history, and the brilliance of manning's regular-season play finally transferred to the postseason with a winning drive that may rival the one produced by john elway against cleveland 20 years ago. the seven-play, 80-yard drive, which included a pinpoint-perfect 32-yard pass to tight end bryan fletcher on the left sideline, ended with the winning touchdown -- a 3-yard run by joseph addai with one minute left. it was the first time the colts led in the game.  celebration of dungy's historical milestone, he said, could wait for another day. he wanted the colts, who had struggled with a leaky run defense all season and had lost three of their last five regular-season games, to enjoy their first trip to the super bowl since the colts moved to indianapolis in 1984.  ''we had to do it the hard way,'' dungy said. ''we had to go through a great champion. it's fitting. our team went the hard way the whole year.''  the colts endured a remarkable early onslaught by the patriots, who took a 21-3 lead in the second quarter when patriots cornerback asante samuel returned an interception 39 yards for a touchdown. manning said later that he had wanted to make up for that play, and he would get his chance much later. but the beginning of the comeback was nearly unnoticed by colts fans, who were stunned into silence by the yawning deficit.  the colts kicked a field goal just before the end of the first half, cutting their deficit to 21-6, and that, dungy said, infused the locker room with energy during halftime. he spoke to his players about being just two scores down, and said that if they could get a good kickoff return and score on their opening drive, they would trail by just one score. dungy's calm permeates the colts, and when manning scored on a 1-yard sneak on the first colts drive of the third quarter, a blowout was on its way to becoming an instant classic.  ''you don't envision getting down, 21-3, to the new england patriots,'' manning said. ''it didn't feel like things were going that bad. it was my fault it was 21-3.''  it was the defense's fault that the colts had played so poorly at the end of the regular season, losing their bid to have home-field advantage throughout the playoffs. but the defense, with the fireplug safety bob sanders back from a knee injury, righted itself when the playoffs began, carrying the team to victories against the chiefs and the ravens even as manning struggled. the colts relied on the defense again to start the comeback.  when they held the patriots to three downs and out on their first drive of the third quarter, dungy's halftime speech proved prophetic in the most improbable way. the colts are laden with offensive talent, but manning's first touchdown pass of the game did not go to one of his high-profile receivers. it went instead to dan klecko, a backup defensive tackle who used to play for new england. manning rolled to his right and hit klecko for the 1-yard touchdown pass.  when marvin harrison, who was held to four receptions for 41 yards by the patriots, spun around to catch a 2-point conversion, the score was suddenly -- and very briefly -- tied.  patriots cornerback ellis hobbs had set up that touchdown when he bumped receiver reggie wayne in the end zone, giving the colts first-and-goal on the 1. redemption came quickly. hobbs returned the ensuing kickoff 80 yards to put the patriots at the colts' 21.  on third-and-goal from the 6, patriots quarterback tom brady saw jabar gaffney in the back of the end zone. gaffney leaped and caught the pass, coming down with his left foot inbounds. officials ruled that he was pushed out, so the touchdown counted. but a replay on the rca dome's video screen indicated that gaffney might have stepped out of bounds before he leaped for the ball. the touchdown stood and the patriots led again.  the scoring continued until the colts finally halted the patriots at the colts' 25. the patriots rookie kicker stephen gostkowski kicked a 43-yard field goal to give the patriots a 34-31 lead with 3:49 remaining.  ''we let too many opportunities get away,'' brady said. ''we had the ball in good field position at certain times. we should have got the ball in the end zone.''  in years past, a 3-point lead would have been enough for the patriots to cling to. but they have been unusually erratic this season, and of all things, their defense failed them this time. they looked exhausted, and that was just enough of an opening for manning, whose record-setting career had lacked a defining moment.  by hitting fletcher on a play that fletcher called for himself, the triumphs that had so often belonged to brady and the patriots in the past six years were finally snatched away by manning. when addai ran in untouched to put indianapolis ahead, manning worried that the colts had left too much time on the clock. he got to the bench and bowed his head, praying, as the patriots took over with only a minute left.  when cornerback marlin jackson intercepted brady's pass at the colts' 35 with 16 seconds to play, the patriots' stranglehold on the colts was over, and so was manning's postseason futility. the dynasty was put aside while the monkey was removed from manning's back.  ''i don't know if you're supposed to pray for things like that,'' manning said. ''i can remember the disappointment of three years ago, when we lost the a.f.c. championship in foxborough. i don't get into monkeys or vindication. i don't play that card.''  but manning had gotten those 7 points back. and he had, at long last, led the colts to the super bowl. prayers answered.  pro football  