u.s. financial sector is losing its edge, report says   adding to a chorus of concern that the united states is losing its edge as the leading financial center, senator charles e. schumer and mayor michael r. bloomberg will release a report today urging the country to take a series of steps to improve its legal and regulatory environment.  if not, the report warns, it could lose 4 to 7 percent of the global financial services market over the next five years.  ''the last thing that new york and the country, for that matter, need is to wake up one morning and find we are no longer the financial capital of the world,'' senator schumer, democrat of new york, said. ''this report shows that could happen not just for i.p.o.'s, but for all financial services, all too easily and all too soon.''  the committee's primary recommendations echo those of a similar report released in november, focusing on easing or eliminating provisions of the sarbanes-oxley act for small and foreign companies -- some steps that the securities and exchange commission is currently undertaking -- and curbing securities-related litigation. the latest report is one in a series commissioned in the public and private sectors voicing concern that the united states is falling behind because of a burdensome legal and regulatory environment.  the report adds some new dimensions to the debate, however, making recommendations to ease immigration restrictions facing skilled professionals from other countries, urging convergence on international accounting standards and recommending the adoption of basel ii, an international accord on capital standards, without increasing capital requirements as some united states banking regulators have suggested.  taking pre-emptive steps to address concerns about regulation and litigation might halt the country's loss of market share and add $15 billion to $30 billion in revenue in 2011 alone, the study said. it would also allow for the creation of 30,000 to 60,000 jobs in the securities sector.  like all reports focused on american competitiveness, the latest report, entitled ''sustaining new york's and the u.s.'s global financial services leadership'' and conducted by mckinsey, addresses the fact that the united states now commands a significantly declining share of the global market for initial public offerings.  but it also examines the broader financial services arena, including the fast-growing derivatives and structured product markets, the gigantic loan market as well as the traditional markets in stocks and bonds.  the report shows foreign markets closing in on the united states in size and certain product offerings. for example, in 2005, american investment banking and sales and trading revenue totaled $109 billion ($69 billion in sales and trading and $40 billion in investment banking) compared with $98 billion in europe and $37 billion in asia.  the united states remains the largest financial market in the world, as measured by what is called ''financial stock'' -- equities, private debt, government debt and bank deposits -- with $51 trillion in 2005, but its pace of growth was significantly slower than in other markets, especially the asia-pacific (excluding japan) and britain.  emerging markets will naturally grow faster than the more developed united states market. but administration officials for mr. bloomberg and mr. schumer said the report aimed to address factors particular to the united states, namely litigation and regulation, which might deter businesses from coming here.  critics of easing regulatory standards and the ability to bring securities class-action lawsuits point out that litigation costs have been unusually high because of settlements related to the frauds that caused the collapse of enron and worldcom.  europe has a larger share of some of the more innovative areas of finance, including derivatives, the report concludes. europe has a 56 percent share of the $52 billion global revenue pool from derivatives and a 60 percent or greater share of revenue in interest rates, foreign exchange, equity and fund-linked derivatives. the united states leads only in commodity derivatives.  short-term recommendations include improved guidance on sarbanes-oxley implementation, including the ability for small companies and foreign companies within certain ''sophisticated'' markets to opt out of some requirements as long as it is disclosed.  the report suggests that the s.e.c. use certain exemption powers to limit liability for foreign companies to securities-related damages and impose caps on auditors' damages. like the capital markets committee report in november, the latest study recommends that the s.e.c. allow companies to mediate conflicts through arbitration rather than litigation.  mckinsey interviewed 50 financial service chief executives and business leaders, received surveys from an additional 30 financial service chief executives and separately polled 275 other senior executives in the field.  the pace of job creation in london far outstripped that of new york city, the report says. from 2002 to 2005, london's financial services work force grew by 4.3 percent, to 318,000, while new york city's shrunk by 0.7 percent, or 2,000, to 328,400 jobs.  london has been gaining an edge in attracting the largest hedge funds. in 2002, london was home to only 3 of the largest 50 hedge funds, compared with 12 today. in that same period, new york had a decline: today 18 of the largest 50 hedge funds are based in new york, compared with 28 in 2002 (connecticut has gained two over that period, from 6 to 8).  reiterating oft-cited figures related to market share of global initial public offerings, the report highlighted that the united states controlled 16 percent of the global stock-offering volume, exceeding $1 billion, in 2006 (through the beginning of november) compared with 57 percent in 2001. europe's share has leaped from 33 percent in 2001 to 63 percent through the beginning of november.  ''let's be clear: the financial services industry is one reason that the 20th century was the american century and that new york became the world's capital,'' mr. bloomberg said. ''we've outlined a range of practical yet innovative steps to ensure the 21st century is just as bright.''  