blue jays try to stay with the big boys   by slipping ahead of boston in last season's final week, toronto enjoyed its best division finish since winning successive world series in 1992 and '93. for a dozen years the blue jays had finished no better than third in the american league east. now only the yankees finished ahead of them. where do they go from here?  last year the mets ended the atlanta braves' unparalleled run of 14 consecutive division championships. can the blue jays terminate the yankees' nine-year reign as a.l. east champions?  not even the blue jays would be so bold to predict that, but they are intent on continuing their ascent, if not in the standings, at least in the victory column. ''i just would like to see us keep improving,'' toronto general manager j. p. ricciardi said. ''maybe 87 games gets you into the playoffs. i don't think so, but if we could up the 87, maybe we can get there.''  the st. louis cardinals won 83 games last season, got into the playoffs as the national league central champions and won the world series. that sort of development is less likely in the american league. the last time an a.l. east first- or second-place team won fewer than 87 games was in 2001, when the red sox won 82 and didn't make the playoffs.  the blue jays will be hard pressed to repeat their second-place finish, let alone topple the yankees. as usual, they are at an economic disadvantage. their 2007 payroll is projected to be $90 million, while the yankees are expected to be at $197 million and the red sox at $152 million.  the boston figure doesn't include any portion of the $51 million it spent to get the negotiating rights to daisuke matsuzaka of japan, whom the team then signed to a $52 million contract, making a total expenditure of $103 million to bolster the starting rotation. the red sox have also been trying for seven weeks to complete a $70 million contract with right fielder j. d. drew.  the yankees have, in effect, swapped randy johnson for andy pettitte in their starting rotation and have shed gary sheffield, but they had sheffield for only 39 games last season, and hideki matsui for only 51, and still led the league in scoring.  the blue jays have fortified their offense with the addition of frank thomas (two years, $18 million), whose comeback with oakland last season was impressive. with 39 home runs and 114 runs batted in, thomas had his best season in three years. he replaces frank catalanotto (7 homers, 56 r.b.i.).  ''we like catalanotto,'' ricciardi said. ''he did a lot of good things for us. but we've upgraded in power. one through eight we're very strong. we added a guy who would have led our team in home runs last year.''  troy glaus led the blue jays with 38 home runs last year, and vernon wells hit 32. adding thomas to those two gives the blue jays as potent a middle of the lineup as the league has. ''from an offensive standpoint,'' ricciardi said, ''we think we're even with the yankees and the red sox, though we're not going to match boston's 3-4.''  that would be manny ramírez and david ortiz, but the red sox scored only 11 more runs than the blue jays last season. the red sox gave up five more runs than they scored while the blue jays scored 55 more runs than they allowed.  with their offense expected to be potent again, the blue jays will need their pitchers to stay healthy and to upgrade their performances. roy halladay, the staff leader, had late-season problems with his forearm. elbow problems limited a. j. burnett to 21 starts, and gustavo chacín started only 17 games because of elbow and forearm ailments.  those three pitchers will make up the core of the rotation. shaun marcum, who made 14 starts last season, and john thomson, who had a 2-7 record for atlanta and has a history of injuries, will join them. missing will be ted lilly, who defected to the cubs for $40 million.  ricciardi won't let himself roam into the realm of unrealistic expectations. ''we know what we're up against,'' he said. ''we like competing against the yankees and the red sox, but if you look at the american league, it's a league where everybody beats up on everybody else. in the a.l. east, everybody beats up on the other teams and pounds each other and it makes it tough.''  nationals shift after soriano  in december 2005, the washington nationals acquired alfonso soriano from texas. in december 2006, the nationals traded josé vidro to seattle. the first trade gave the nationals too many second basemen. the second trade left them without a second baseman.  the nationals obtained soriano without knowing if he would or could play the outfield. he balked at going to left field, then consented to the move, had a terrifically diverse offensive season (46 home runs, 41 stolen bases) and has now moved on to the cubs with a $136 million contract, one of the richest in baseball history.  vidro, whose presence at second prompted soriano's move to left, was traded to the mariners to shed the $16 million left in his contract.  with a hole at second, the nationals have shifted shortstop felipe lópez there even though he has played only 12 of his 572 major league games at the position. the designated left fielder is kory casto, who in his four-year minor league career has moved from the outfield to third base and back to the outfield.  pierre's negative numbers  juan pierre had an enigmatic year in his single-season tenure with the cubs. he stroked 200 hits for the third time in four seasons and led the national league in hits, but he led the major leagues by making 528 outs, according to the elias sports bureau. he made 20 of those outs when he was caught stealing a major-league-high 20 times.  jimmy rollins of philadelphia was second in outs made with 512.  pierre played all 162 games, and his 699 times at bat were the most in the majors. a center fielder who has moved on to the dodgers, pierre does not walk often; his 32 walks tied for 198th among 975 batters. so despite his .292 batting average, he had a .330 on-base percentage, which was 351st in the majors.  his .388 slugging percentage was 397th, but he had the lowest strikeout ratio: once every 19.7 times at bat. the dodgers did not dwell on the negative numbers. they liked the positives and gave him $44 million.  kicking about the evil empire  a report here last week about devern hansack, a nicaraguan pitcher for the red sox, prompted an e-mail message from sergio maltez of managua in which he recalled the head-to-head competition the red sox and the yankees waged for josé contreras four years ago. contreras had defected from cuba and had established residence in nicaragua so he could be a free agent.  the yankees won the bidding, prompting severe vocal reaction from larry lucchino, the red sox' chief executive, and severe physical reaction from theo epstein, the red sox' general manager. lucchino called the yankees the evil empire. epstein chose a different response.  ''it was true,'' maltez wrote, ''that theo epstein broke the door of the hotel with a kick when the yankees signed contreras and not the red sox.''  union weighs appeal options  the players union continues to reviews its options on the appellate court decision that enables the government to retain the results and identities of the 104 players who tested positive for steroids use in 2003.  ''we still have time to make a decision; we're still doing research,'' said donald fehr, the union chief.  the union primarily has two avenues of appeal of the decision of the united states court of appeals for the ninth circuit in san francisco. it can ask the court to rehear the case before a 15-judge panel, or it can appeal directly to the supreme court. fehr didn't say if the union was leaning in either direction, but the feeling here is it will go back to the ninth circuit and ask for a rehearing.  the court has 26 judges, 2 short of a full house, and 14 of the judges would have to vote to accept the case for rehearing by 15 judges. a 2-to-1 decision last month overturned three lower-court decisions that went in the union's favor.  on baseball  