using the newsroom to represent honesty   at a time when many deem newspapers to be going the way of hair tonic, tail fins and land lines, madison avenue still uses reporters and editors as role models for consumer behavior -- to a point.  since october, a joint venture of bristol-myers squibb and sanofi-aventis has been advertising plavix, a prescription drug that reduces the risk of blood clots, with a campaign that features an actor who plays a newspaper editor. in a television commercial and a print advertisement, created by saatchi & saatchi consumer healthcare in new york, the editor is presented as a busy and important figure, working with his employees to publish the next issue of a newspaper named the daily herald.  ''delivering the news to millions of readers every day, carl is a formidable man,'' the headline on the print ad declares. ''but he was no match for something smaller than a drop of ink. a clot.'' (wonder what a real version of carl and his copy editors would think of that two-word sentence.)  journalists, imaginary and actual, have long been staples on madison avenue as their reputations for accuracy and honesty recommended them as product endorsers, overt or implied.  for instance, the gossip columnist walter winchell delivered commercials for brands like jergens lotion on his radio and television shows in the 1930s through 1950s. from 1937 to 1956, a drama series, ''big town,'' about a crusading newspaper editor, ran on radio and tv, sponsored by products like bayer aspirin and lifebuoy soap.  an ad for lucky strike cigarettes that ran in 1959 in magazines including the saturday evening post featured a photograph of three models posed in a newsroom above text that began, ''straight story: lucky gives you the full, honest taste of rich, fine tobacco.'' and a commercial from 1978 presented a harried young reporter pausing for a snack break with a milky way candy bar.  all those ads appeared, however, when americans depended on newspapers for information far more than they do today. first television, then the internet, eroded the readership and ad revenue of newspapers.  even so, a newspaper editor remains among the people ''who are formidable in their worlds,'' said justin harrington, executive vice president and group account director at saatchi & saatchi consumer healthcare, part of the saatchi & saatchi division of the publicis groupe.  for the plavix ads, which the agency refers to as the ''formidable'' campaign, mr. harrington said, the goal was to dramatize the lives of people in ''professions of respect'' who are nevertheless ''relatable authority figures'' -- that is, archetypes with whom consumers could identify so they would think, ''if a clot can happen to these people, it can happen to me.''  ''the newspaper editor tested well'' as the campaign was being researched, he added, ''because people have seen editors going back to lou grant.'' the reference was to the gruff editor played by ed asner on ''the mary tyler moore show'' and ''lou grant.''  ''we also tested authority figures that did not work,'' like a united states senator, mr. harrington said. they were rejected because the intended audience believed ''they reached out too far,'' he added.  the bristol-sanofi partnership spent $14 million to advertise plavix in october, according to tns media intelligence, which tracks ad spending in major media. for the first 10 months of last year, spending totaled $108 million, tns reported, close to the $110 million spent during all of 2005.  the newspaper editor is one of several jobs featured in the campaign. the others include a hockey coach, a construction foreman, a principal and a nurse who runs a hospital emergency room.  all the professionals are portrayed by actors rather than actual holders of those jobs, mr. harrington said, because the style of the campaign is ''more a dramatization'' than a testimonial.  (it also may have been difficult to find a real journalist to appear in plavix ads because the drug has been in the news. in a trial scheduled to begin today in a manhattan federal court, apotex, a canadian company, is challenging the patent of plavix. mishandled efforts to settle the patent case before going to trial led to the ouster in september of the chief executive of bristol-myers squibb, peter r. dolan.)  just as the editor is fictitious, the daily herald newspaper portrayed in the ads is also make-believe, mr. harrington said, and is not intended to represent any one of ''the over 40 newspapers with similar names'' around the country.  although the newspaper is imaginary, the setting for the ads is real. after ''scouting quite a few locations,'' mr. harrington said, the omaha world-herald was selected for what he called its state-of-the-art newsroom.  but before newspaper editors and reporters begin celebrating the plavix ads as good news for their struggling industry, there is a caveat to consider.  the target audience for the plavix campaign ''is anybody in their 50s or older who've had a heart attack'' and is worried about blood clots, mr. harrington said.  ''our audience, being older, still believes in the evening news and still believes in the daily newspaper,'' he added.  if the target audience had been much younger, mr. harrington said, it would have been inappropriate to use the editor for the campaign.  that may give poor carl another heart attack.  advertising  