how daisy mae's charm finds a home at the met   kristin chenoweth made a zany entrance onto the stage of the metropolitan opera house on friday evening, outfitted in a new york mets baseball shirt and cap, waving a banner and pretending to be a ditsy sports fan arriving late for a game.  after this clever feint ms. chenoweth, the tiny, explosively talented blond tornado from oklahoma, whirled offstage for a few seconds before bouncing back looking like daisy mae, in a tight pink dress and grinning ear to ear.  for the rest of the evening, for better and sometimes for worse, ms. chenoweth embodied ultimate musical comedy stardom in 2007. that means a performer who polishes the brassy surface of everything to a blinding gleam. she has slabs of raw vocal talent, the drive of a race car that can accelerate from zero to 200 in 10 seconds, and acres of determined cuteness; she is an entertainment jumbotron.  the show's initial wordplay on the mets and the met made deeper metaphorical sense because the concert -- directed by kathleen marshall with musical direction by andrew lippa, who led a small orchestra from the piano -- had the feel of an all-american sporting event.  if there were a broadway version of ''american idol,'' ms. chenoweth would win hands down, since nobody else can toss off vocal stunts with an agility that suggests a rubber-bodied 13-year-old gymnast with a shelf of gold medals. her most spectacular trick is to segue from a piercing baby-voiced cry into a light operatic coloratura and back, maintaining perfect intonation as she pirouettes around high c.  every number was directed to a different audience bloc. ''popular,'' from the hit musical ''wicked,'' played to the visible claque of upscale teenage girls of the kind who have helped make that show a box-office phenomenon. for male couples (also abundant), a comic dance number found the star romanced by two dancing men who abandon her for each other.  middle-aged tourists from the heartland were handed a gospel-style version of the old styx hit ''show me the way.'' adam guettel's ''how can i lose you?'' and ricky ian gordon's ''run away'' acknowledged newer musical theater composers while ''gorgeous,'' from ms. chenoweth's current broadway show, ''the apple tree,'' honored an older composing generation (bock and harnick).  looking even further back were a gilbert and sullivan medley and stephen foster's ''hard times,'' arranged as the kind of parade march in which you could imagine ms. chenoweth as the lead twirler on a small-town main street.  i don't imagine ms. chenoweth cares all that much about the quality of her songs, so long as they hit their demographic bull's-eyes. if she did, she would drop songs like ''taylor, the latte boy,'' a moony folk-pop trifle about a wistful flirtation with a starbucks employee. it seems aimed at the same fans who treasure ''popular.''  and what, you may wonder, lies beneath the glare of ms. chenoweth's formidable talent? is there buried treasure, or is the center hollow? the concert offered no clues.  music review  