comforting the afflicted (and others)   ''nobody wants you, but we want you,'' murray lightburn of the dears sang on friday night at webster hall, heedless of the contradiction. the dears have a mission. they are determined to console underdogs and befriend the alienated, and they stayed steadfastly on message throughout their set.  the dears, from montreal, understand the pride within self-pity, the feeling of being more sensitive, more noble, more profound and more misjudged than so many contented dullards. with their 2006 album, ''gang of losers'' (arts and crafts), and onstage, they zero in on that attitude.  ''you and i are on the outside of almost everything,'' mr. lightburn sang, and it was anything but a plaint.  the dears hark back to the self-conscious majesty of britpop. mr. lightburn's voice combines the quivering croon of morrissey, from the smiths, with david bowie huskiness. the songs stoke drama methodically; they announce themselves with stately drumbeats and pop hooks -- the two keyboardists, both women, sing a lot of doot-doots and nah-nahs -- and climb toward big, blunt choruses, in which mr. lightburn might work himself up to a keening falsetto or a raw shout as each song reaches its inexorable payoff.  every so often, there's a touch of cabaret theatricality, a nod to the dears' professed fondness for the french rocker serge gainsbourg. but where mr. gainsbourg and morrissey could be wry as well as morose, the dears have grown more unambiguous with each of their three albums. that can make songs more telling; ''we can have it,'' stripped of the anachronistic orchestral setting that it had on their 2003 album, ''no cities left,'' became more emphatically disaffected, insisting, ''it won't ever be what we want.''  the dears' set at webster hall never winked; the closest it came was when mr. lightburn greeted applause by saying, ''you're too kind,'' and repeatedly insisted, ''really.'' the dears are now on the brink of pop melodrama -- the kind that could carry them to arenas full of angst-ridden adolescents, all feeling like outsiders.  the annuals, from raleigh, n.c., who shared the bill, were as blithely diffuse as the dears were focused. in songs from their album, ''be he me'' (ace fu), adam baker's lyrics tend to be conundrums: ''should you talk of the son on the run, your tongue will be ripped out by ducklings.''  the music kept metamorphosing, from gauzy, rippling brian wilson textures to progressive-rock intricacies to circus-flavored waltzes to shouts and stomps underlined by multiple drummers -- and sometimes back to the ripples. vital, ambitious and anything but single-minded, the annuals left open all sorts of possibilities.  music review  