what's on tonight   8 p.m. (fox) prison break -- well, that's one way to save your life. the show picks up where it unexpectedly left off: with michael (wentworth miller) and lincoln (dominic purcell) forming a tenuous alliance with kellerman (paul adelstein, above right, with mr. purcell, left, and mr. miller), who turned his gun on mahone in revenge for ruining his life. tonight, the threesome heads to montana to track down terrence steadman, the president's brother -- and the man lincoln was framed for murdering. meanwhile, t-bag insinuates himself into the hollander household. and bellick finds out what life is really like on the other side of the bars.  9 p.m. (vh1) i love new york -- the juicy new york likes her men rich, the better to provide her with the lifestyle to which she could easily become accustomed. tonight, the pursuers have to prove their earning potential.  9:30 p.m. (mtv) engaged and underage -- ready or not, here they come: in this new series, young couples between 18 and 22 prepare to walk down the aisle.  9:30 p.m. (cbs) the new adventures of old christine -- give the woman some credit, won't you? richard wasn't always a good boyfriend, and the old christine (julia louis-dreyfus) wants the new christine (emily rutherfurd) to know that.  10 p.m. (nbc) studio 60 on the sunset strip -- the show returns from a five-week hiatus with this three-part meta- episode in which the staff comes back from the holiday break to prepare for the first show of the year. the boys are busy: danny (bradley whitford) is in full pursuit of jordan (amanda peet), and matt (matthew perry) bids in an online auction for a date with harriet (sarah paulson, above), not realizing that this is the beginning of the end.  10 p.m. (we) extreme skinny celebrities -- maybe you can't be too rich, but you can be too thin, as the recent spate of anorexia-related deaths in the modeling world indicates. this special explores the cult of the skinny celebrity -- and its potentially devastating health effects -- by putting the habits, and portions, of renée zellweger, nicole kidman, teri hatcher, geri halliwell and victoria beckham under a microscope.  10:30 p.m. (e!) boulevard of broken dreams -- here's to the ones that didn't make it -- the actors, musicians, models and writers who were on the fast track to success when their careers suddenly veered off course. this new series salutes you.  11:35 p.m. (cbs) late show with david letterman -- alicia keys (right), who makes her film debut alongside ben affleck, jason bateman, common, ray liotta, jeremy piven and ryan reynolds in ''smokin' aces,'' out friday, performs.  kathryn shattuck  