suicide bomber kills 4 and wounds 23 in pakistan   a suicide bomber rammed his explosive-laden car into a military convoy near mirali in the restive north waziristan tribal region on monday, killing 4 people and wounding 23, witnesses said.  the dead included two paramilitary officers, a member of the military and a woman civilian, the witnesses said, and 20 of those wounded were soldiers.  the attack occurred at a checkpoint about a mile east of the town of mirali when a joint convoy of army and paramilitary soldiers was heading from a garrison in bannu to miramshah, the restive region's administrative headquarters.  witnesses said three army vehicles and a passenger car were damaged in the attack, the first to cause fatalities since the government and taliban-backed tribal insurgents signed a peace agreement on sept. 5, 2006.  army and paramilitary troops had vacated the checkpoint as a condition of the peace agreement, and it is now managed by a tribal force.  militants in miramshah who had signed the peace agreement promptly denounced the episode and said they were not involved in the attack.  a statement that said it was issued from the ''security office of the taliban north waziristan'' said: ''we do not have a hand in the bomb attack. we want to maintain the peace agreement and the government should also do so.''  taliban leaders in the region had called a meeting in miramshah to discuss the situation, the statement said.  a militant commander in the neighboring south waziristan tribal region, baitullah mehsud, had vowed to avenge an airstrike last week on what the government said was a militant training center in which, government officials said, more than 20 people were killed and eight wounded.  a government official familiar with events in the region said monday that the signers of the peace agreement had little influence over militants beyond miramshah.  ''this brings into question the efficacy of the whole agreement,'' he said, adding that the bombings could be expected to increase tensions in the region after a lull in hostilities since the agreement.  ''there had been warnings to security forces to avoid traveling in the tribal region after baitullah's warning unless absolutely necessary,'' the official said.  a spokesman for the north waziristan governor told reporters that the government was making efforts to maintain the peace agreement and attributed the attack to criminal elements trying to derail the peace efforts.  pakistan officials said that a paramilitary soldier was killed and two others were wounded on monday when an american helicopter from across the border fired rockets at a border post in the shawal region on monday.  a military spokesman in islamabad said pakistan would lodge a strong protest with the united states and demand an investigation. a nato spokeswoman said aircraft had attacked insurgents who fired on a nato base near the border and there may have been casualties, reuters reported.  