aide to militant shiite cleric held after u.s.-iraqi raid   a senior aide to the shiite cleric moktada al-sadr was detained here in a joint american-iraqi raid before dawn on friday, iraqi and american officials said, in the latest high-profile arrest of a shiite militia member.  the aide, abdel hadi al-daraji, a powerful cleric whose official position is as a spokesman for mr. sadr but who also is accused of running a mafia-style crime empire in northeast baghdad, was arrested in a mosque close to his house in the neighborhood of baladiyad. he was detained with two of his guards. a third was shot dead in the raid.  the american military did not identify mr. daraji by name, saying only that it had captured ''an illegal armed-group leader,'' and that he was suspected of having been involved in ''the organized kidnapping, torture and murder of iraqi civilians.'' a spokesman for mr. sadr confirmed that mr. daraji was the aide who was arrested and denied the charges of criminal activity.  mr. daraji, an elfin man who came from poverty into the shiite religious community after the american invasion, had been in hiding since the fall, when the military began actively pursuing members of mr. sadr's militia, the mahdi army, a central driver of sectarian violence here.  the detention will be a test for the government of prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki. mr. maliki has generally avoided confrontation with mr. sadr, whose tremendous political influence helped him win the prime minister post last year. and as recently as october, iraqi government officials persuaded the top american military commander, gen. george w. casey jr., to release a senior aide to mr. sadr from american custody.  mr. daraji was a central figure in mr. sadr's organization during its battles with the american military in 2004, leading his vast army of spokesmen and media advisers. but as the years passed, he staked out territory of his own in his native sadr city, a sprawling grid of cement-block houses in northeast baghdad, and local residents said he had been involved in some of the worst militia crimes.  iraqis who knew him said he had grown rich from his power in the neighborhood. he was known as a middleman, arranging government contracts with local businessmen and taking commissions, and also receiving secret iranian financing. he had built a fancy new house in baladiyad, near the mosque where he was arrested friday morning.  his involvement in crime became well known in the neighborhood and in recent months mr. sadr disavowed him, but some still consider him a top aide. he went into hiding, and in october had all but stopped answering his cellphone and responded only to previously arranged agreed-upon patterns of rings.  many welcomed the news of his arrest.  ''it's a good thing,'' said one iraqi who knew people around mr. daraji and who spoke anonymously out of concern for his family's safety. ''he's no. 1 in all this city.''  in sadr city, the arrest stirred some discontent, but not the mass protests that such an arrest would have provoked in past years. muhammed al-musawi, a cleric speaking at friday prayer, said the government should instead spend its time looking for sunni militants, like those who engineered a bombing at a university this week.  the struggle for iraq  