another tasty addition to a restaurant family   coromandel in orange is the third in the coromandel family of indian restaurants in this area. the first is in darien, the second in new rochelle, n.y. (the same owners also have dakshin, in stamford, and kolam, in newtown).  coromandel is further evidence of the trend i've been following now for a few years, as indian restaurants start diverging from the inexpensive and predominantly north indian cuisine most americans have grown used to and introducing other regional styles served in a more upscale atmosphere.  coromandel is a pretty, contemporary place with white tablecloths, a reasonably priced wine list and a comfortable ambience that is due in no small measure to the classy, generous service. the menu features dishes from around the subcontinent, specializing in south indian cuisine, particularly from the southeastern coromandel coast, for which the restaurant is named.  we ordered a number of south indian appetizers, all successfully executed, starting with the unusual shaam savera, a chef's original made with paneer (a mild, white indian cheese) sheathed in a spiced spinach mixture and presented in a pool of creamy, sweet-and-savory tomato sauce.  the traditional masala dosa -- a crisp, paper-thin rice crepe, so large it hangs off the plate -- enclosed a soft, mild-tasting mixture of potatoes and peas. it was accompanied by a rather bland coconut chutney and a fiery hot sambar. sambar is a soupy lentil dish with chunks of tomato, carrot, and eggplant, seasoned with the ubiquitous south indian trio of black mustard seeds, chiles and curry leaves; coromandel's version was every bit as good as the sambar i looked forward to each morning while recently in india. (i also tried sambar vadai for the first time here one night: light, bready lentil dumplings floating in a bowl of sambar -- delicious.)  the rasam, a spicy south indian soup, was thicker than i'm used to but nonetheless tasty; often served in a glass, here, it came in a bowl. bagari jhinga, from the southwest coast, combined mustard seeds, red chili and curry leaves with shrimp and a sweet, creamy tomato sauce.  among offerings from the north of india, we liked the ragata patties, a lively mixture of cumin-spiced potato, chickpeas, raw onion, tomato, cilantro and chutney; and tawa paneer, grilled slices of indian cheese and vegetables, seasoned with a hearty masala of cumin, coriander, cardamom, turmeric and fenugreek leaves.  of the entrees, several of our favorites were north indian specialties, like the satrangi kebab, a straightforward rendering of tandoor-cooked meats and vegetables; the murgh shahi korma, a tender, moist, tandoor-cooked chicken breast served in a rich, creamy sauce; the familiar rogan josh lamb stew; and achari chops, sweet, spicy tandoor-cooked lamb chops.  from elsewhere in india, kozhi chettinad (a chicken stew, hot with black pepper) was lovely, as was the mangalorean prawn (shrimp in a sweet, spicy coconut sauce). both were better than the galina xacutti (goan chicken stew), in which the spices tasted raw, or the chicken biriyani, which tasted reheated, the spices strong, and the grains of rice no longer separate.  breads here were some of the best i've tasted, including light, deep-fried poori (not often available) and crisp, feathery, layered paratha.  desserts at coromandel are predominantly traditional. the kheer (a saffron-flavored cream, lightly thickened with rice, studded with sultanas and cashews) was served in an off-kilter, blue martini glass. it was sweet and rich, as was the unusual south indian version, parippu payasam, made like a kheer but with lentils and coconut milk.  though the style of cooking is not my favorite -- many dishes are sugared and sauces are often oily -- coromandel cooks this kind of indian food very well. the dishes are appealing and tasty, characterized by big, hearty flavors, and most of my guests were wild about them. the stewed meats could be more tender, but it's a fantastic deal -- particularly the weekend all-you-can-eat brunch. and the service is wonderful.  coromandel cuisine of india  185 boston post road (hitchcock plaza)  orange  (203) 795-9055  www.coromandelcuisine.com  very good  the space -- spacious and colorful, divided into two comfortable rooms with some banquettes. wheelchair access.  the crowd -- casual and quiet; large indian clientele. terrific wait staff goes out of its way to make this exotic cuisine accessible.  the bar -- full bar, wine list, specialty cocktails.  the bill -- entrees, $9.95 to $19.95. lunch buffet, $8.95; weekend brunch buffet, $11.95.  what we like -- shaam savera, masala dosa, sambar vadai, ragata patties, bagari jhinga, tawa paneer, poondu rasam; satrangi kebab, mangolorean prawn, kozhi chettinad, rogan josh, salli boti, achari chops, bhindi do pyaza; tamarind rice, breads; kheer, payasam. if you go lunch: monday to friday, noon to 2:30 p.m. saturday and sunday brunch: noon to 3 p.m. dinner: sunday to thursday, 5 to 10 p.m.; friday and saturday, 5 to 10:30 p.m.  reviewed jan. 21, 2007  dining/orange  