from last-minute write-in to mr. mayor   one day soon after returning from iraq last january, jim sekelsky climbed a rocky path through the snow-dusted hemlocks to a ridge of sparta mountain called mcentee rock -- the spot where he camped as a boy, where he proposed to his wife, and where he could see the town he had dreamed of while overseas, spread out before him like a gift.  ''this is what you fought for,'' he said, standing up on the windswept ridge again one recent weekend, almost exactly a year later. ''all this, you have all this, and i think if people could just appreciate more what you have. ''  the view stretched for 20 miles across the highlands of sussex county, from lake mohawk in the south to the high point monument in the north, but mr. sekelsky kept looking straight down, at the 2.3-square-mile borough of 2,700 people where he had just become mayor a few days earlier, after an improbable campaign that started with just three write-in votes in the democratic primary in june.  ''it's not a political thing,'' he said before climbing back down. ''it's a love for the town.''  mr. sekelsky, 40, joined the army in 1987 and spent much of the next decade and a half away from the town where his family's roots run so deep that a ride through it inevitably turns into both a genealogy lesson and a meditation on the meaning of home. ''there's a dolan right there,'' he said, gesturing toward the house of a cousin on his mother's side, just a few blocks from where he himself lives with his wife, his two children and his mother. he was 9, the youngest of four boys, when his father died. ''and there's another fitzgibbons, and another dolan.''  in the town museum on main street, an old brick building that has done duty as both a schoolhouse and a firehouse, he pointed out a picture of his great-grandfather patrick j. dolan, who became the first mayor of ogdensburg when it broke away from surrounding sparta township in 1914.  ''this was my uncle john's, with the pond,'' he said of another house across the valley, near the old zinc mine where his grandfather worked. it closed in 1986 and is a sprawling museum now.  an r.o.t.c. graduate of arizona state university, mr. sekelsky first served overseas in the persian gulf war of 1991. trained by the army as a linguist, he later spent six months as a united nations observer in the former soviet republic of georgia, then eight months in bosnia. when he left active duty in 2001, he was an instructor at west point.  at the cemetery that surrounds the small catholic church, he straightened the veteran's medallion at the grave of his grandmother rose mcentee, an army nurse in world war i, just one family member among the several generations buried here. ''i'm very proud of her,'' he said. ''this is ogdensburg to me. i want to be lying here.''  mr. sekelsky moved back to ogdensburg in 2003. he worked as an r.o.t.c. instructor at seton hall university while studying in its graduate program for international relations, then as new jersey finance director for john kerry's presidential campaign. he was just starting a new career as a school business administrator when the western union mailgram arrived, recalling him to active service.  his children were 6 and 3 when he left for a yearlong tour as a major assigned to the 155th brigade combat team of the mississippi national guard, 31 of whom did not come home. mortars rained regularly on their base 25 miles south of baghdad. the humvee just ahead of his hit an explosive device while they were driving in a convoy south from tikrit, carrying concrete barriers to place around polling places to help protect voters.  ''we were making a huge effort to allow people to vote,'' mr. sekelsky said.  then, when he came home, he saw another in a long series of uncontested mayoral elections looming in ogdensburg. on the day of the primary in june, he called some friends and asked them to write in his name. in november he defeated the two-term republican incumbent, jacqueline pietrodangelo, by 38 votes.  driving through town now, he pointed out where a soccer field might fit, and a stretch of town-owned land on main street where he would like to see stores, pulling in some of the traffic that cuts between two main arteries of the highlands, routes 15 and 23. swinging back around past the mine again, he stopped to talk to a cluster of old friends in camouflage and orange vests, back from hunting deer.  ''mayor!'' one of the hunters exclaimed, as if saying it for the first time, and liking the way it sounded.  jersey e-mail: jersey@nytimes.com  