who is this child? and what will he be next?   my son, at age 8 1/2, changed his name to penguin s' ice, and he has kept that name for almost a year now, un-bratty in his corrections, but adamant.  the ''s'' stands for  i don't know. the apostrophe is equally vague but definite. when he is asked what his name is -- as kids are a half-dozen times a day -- he says, ''penguin'' or ''penguin s' ice'' with a trace of discomfort but no explanation.  ''you know what i hate about grown-ups?'' he asked me the other day. ''grown-ups always want to know what you want to do when you grow up.''  my son couldn't, or wouldn't, explain why this disgusted him so much. perhaps he realizes that the kinds of responses he would give -- say, designing video games -- would meet with condescending smirks. perhaps he doubts he'll ever be a grown-up, in the sense the speaker uses the term.  or maybe it's just the way adults constantly feel the need to ask children their ages, where they go to school, and what their goals are, as if our young live in a perpetual state of inspection or border crossing.  not at all inspired to make his name change by ''march of the penguins'' (a film he considered a near-atrocity due to its scenes of penguin death), the kfkaj (kid formerly known as jin) is adopted, born in seoul, south korea. sometimes when people encounter his new name, they assume it's asian.  ''oh, so that's your original name?'' they ask. ''what does it mean?''  he responds with an incredulous look. ''it means penguin.''  i remember my son's infancy, first the days of napping together and baby slings, the smell that's somehow both individual and baby -- milk, mild soap. nothing comforted him other than my body or my body in pieces, my hand or my hair -- the latter of which he wrapped around his thumb before sticking the upper part of it into his mouth.  if i was otherwise engaged, my husband bruce's skin could calm. many things seemed possible: that we would never sleep again, that my husband and i would never make love again, that i would never again have clothing without mercator maps of pea or tomato stains. what did not seem possible, in those infant days, was that i would ever find this beautiful child mysterious.  but i suppose the arrival of children should clue us in that we must abandon any sense of certainty about how things will unfold. i have been through it with pregnant friends, due dates passing as they rub their stomachs with absent but intimate exhaustion.  because of visa delays, my son arrived two months late. the agency told us we would have three days' notice of his flight from south korea. this notice came in november, though jin had been scheduled for a september arrival. he flew to us at seattle-tacoma international airport.  i had passed those months before nov. 21 in a state of unimaginable frustration: every baby i saw reminded me of my son's life passing without me. i pestered the social worker to let me fly to south korea and take custody there. no, he explained, that would just slow things down. i tried to go brain dead by watching much stupider television than i ever had before. i rewashed baby laundry and ate kimchi.  mostly, my husband and i sat around saying, ''i can't believe someone's going to give us a baby.''  of course, like adoptive parents around the world, we had been vetted in every possible way: checked, rechecked, fingerprinted and examined. we had demonstrated the kind of expertise you absorb from zombie-staring at every page of ''what to expect the first year.''  but what if none of it worked? what if the books' magical comfort schedules never put our baby to sleep? what if he never burped? never ate?  and there were deeper worries: what if he just doesn't like me? what if i somehow don't love him? i wanted desperately to have somebody i could ask such questions, but even voicing them to myself made me feel creepy. what sort of person longs for a baby and then imagines not loving him?  when the call of his impending arrival finally came, we made reservations to spend the night before at a seattle hotel. friends came with us to do the driving, believing that we would be too excited or too sleep-deprived to handle it ourselves. that night we sat in a restaurant called wild ginger downing ginger martinis.  ''think about it,'' said our friend dawn. ''this is your version of labor.''  at 6 a.m., out of customs, came the baby himself, a wad of hair, a high forehead and leaf-shaped eyes. we changed his clothes at the airport; his arrival clothes were too small (at 17 pounds he was far over the charts for his age) and the tight sling he was in practically required that he be extracted by the jaws of life. we three stared at one another, fumbled: the ultimate blind date.  we spent a few weeks in that new-parent state of exhilarated bafflement, with every diaper change a challenge.  then, suddenly, the phase of bafflement ended; jin was no longer an enigma. if you rocked him, he went to sleep. if you lay on the floor with him and played leaning tower of baby, he belly-laughed. if you gave him a blueberry, he put it between his teeth like a jeweler testing a pearl, then spat it out.  when he asked for food, we knew what he wanted and could fetch it for him. when he cried for my hand or my hair, there wasn't a whole lot of doubt about what to do. i can find those parts of my body, and once he had them, he was happy.  when nothing else worked, we could always let him play with the vacuum cleaner, which he adored. once, bruce scheduled salespeople from an upscale vacuum company to visit our house when only jin and i were home. jin, 18 months, climbed onto my lap, jammed his thumb into his mouth and stared at the two-hour demo of the vacuum and its many parts -- along with the accompanying ''dust mite video'' -- with the intensity of someone viewing his own version of pornography.  whatever jin needed, we had. the whole situation, i think, led to a certain overconfidence on our part.  i realize that children are little independent people right from birth, a fact that i think is even clearer to adoptive parents, with physical difference and birth parents serving as reminders. jin and i have only dark eyes and olive skin in common. he arrived on a plane, already a few months old, our family having to get acquainted like compatible kin meeting up at a family reunion.  it took us a few days to get over our shyness and fall absolutely in love, though bruce and i fell so hard we began conversing as if nothing but jin -- his every bite of mashed avocado, new consonant babble and oddity -- had ever existed.  recently we had a conference with the penguin's teacher and she mentioned how much he loves doing long division. really? news to me. then i picked up a few things in his room and found sheets of paper filled with division, which he had been doing at night, by flashlight, for fun.  who is this child? when did this happen? this kid used to react to math homework by screaming as if some ancient roman emperor was flaying him.  jin surrounds himself with emblems of his new being -- stuffed penguins, plastic penguins, emperor and rockhopper penguins. at one of those build-a-stuffed-animal workshops, we buy him yet another penguin, designed with a glowing heart and a chip that makes it talk. when we go to pay, the kindly middle-aged saleswoman asks my son his name.  ''penguin,'' he says.  ''not yourdoll, honey,'' she says with a smile, leaning over with her spectacles dangling. ''you.''  ''penguin,'' he repeats, knowing this answer will not make sense to her. i can see him choose not to explain himself; she and her spectacles live in another world. his world he constructs for himself, lining up giant stuffed emperor penguins against little plastic adélie penguins in the fort that's overtaken his room, constructed over the summer and based around an old tv box. for who knows how long.  now that we have adjusted to this new child, clumsily trying to support the project with totems of his new identity, we had better batten down the hatches and wait for the next.  i suppose i've come around to the beginning, to the anxious and delicious waiting and who-is-this-going-to-be? we know these children in the way we know the heavens, basing our knowledge on the lights that arrive in our orbit possibly already extinguished at the source.  like a star's light, the flickerings of a child's mind may well be gone by the time they reach our understanding. we fumble with our faulty equipment to find that they love dragons as they discover bionicles and robots. we remember their care for animals as they suddenly become, like a niece of ours, a poet. we besiege their fort with our questions, little harmless arrows breaking against the portcullis. i find myself doing it.  ''what did you do in school today?'' i slip a few times a week, with a question that, most kids will tell you, can only validly be answered with ''nothing.''  for them, ''doing'' is stringing the rooms and corridors of their own lives in the way they choose, becoming penguin on the nameless ice of the people they are turning into. mine is only the job of going along -- to extend a hand maybe and assert his right to be properly introduced.  modern love suzanne paola lives in bellingham, wash. under the pseudonym suzanne antonetta, she wrote the book ''a mind apart: travels in a neurodiverse world.''  