flying behemoth may find its way home   if a group of aviation buffs can find a way to raise $1 million, a gigantic vintage seaplane known as the martin mars may soon fly home to the baltimore area, circling the city and tipping its wings toward downtown before landing in chesapeake bay.  the plane was designed and assembled at a plant here during world war ii by the glenn l. martin company, which employed 52,000 people and built about 7,000 aircraft, including the b-26 bomber and the china clipper.  if the mars returns, it will make a water landing on chesapeake bay, taxi into the middle river and eventually be moved onto dry ground, where it will become the centerpiece of a small aviation museum at martin state airport.  but the group, led by the glenn l. martin maryland aviation museum, must first raise the money to buy the plane. it is one of two put up for sale in november by the timberwest forest corporation of vancouver, british columbia, which has been using them to fight forest fires.  the prospect of returning the mars to its birthplace has set off a scramble to raise money. in the first three weeks, $52,000 in donations came in, many from former factory workers who helped build the seaplanes.  ''it's the mother of all acquisitions,'' said stan piet, archivist at the aviation museum, where the mars would be exhibited. ''this plane is an icon.''  mr. piet said the glenn l. martin company, now part of the lockheed martin corporation, built seven mars planes for the navy beginning in the early 1940's. the mars is the largest operational seaplane ever built, according to a museum flier, with a wingspan of 200 feet, wider than that of a standard boeing 747.  during world war ii and the korean war, the 10,000-horsepower mars -- with its 13,200-gallon fuel tank -- transported supplies and wounded soldiers on long hauls over the pacific. over the years, three of the planes crashed, one was destroyed in a typhoon and one was scrapped.  the remaining two planes are kept on sproat lake near port alberni on vancouver island. steve lorimer, a spokesman for timberwest, said the company put them up for sale because of the enormous cost to maintain and operate them.  ''they are expensive and are not a core part of our business,'' mr. lorimer said.  the company has received about 20 inquiries and expects to complete the sale by late march, he said.  such a timetable motivates and intimidates the group at the aviation museum here. competition for the mars includes the national museum of naval aviation in pensacola, fla., where bob rasmussen, the museum's director, said he had met with a third party interested in buying a mars and donating it to the museum.  members of the maryland group are soliciting donations from individuals and businesses. the local government may donate money as well, said james t. smith jr., the baltimore county executive.  ''it's a symbol of pride,'' mr. smith said. ''its return would be tremendous for the men and women who actually built the historical world war ii warplane to be able to show it off to their grandchildren.''  gilbert f. pascal, chairman of the board of the martin aviation museum, said the news that the mars planes were for sale took him by surprise. the museum's archives are filled with mars memorabilia, including plastic models of the four-engine plane and the original sept. 27, 1941, press release announcing its debut.  ''for its size, capability and endurance, that plane fit like an old shoe,'' said andy serrell, 83, of berlin, md., who as a navy pilot flew the mars on pacific runs from 1953 to 1956. ''it's a regular romance to be around it. coming back to middle river would be a fantastic opportunity.''  