pfizer, hurt by rival generic drugs, will lay off 7,800   pfizer said yesterday that it would cut 7,800 workers, close several manufacturing and research sites and overhaul its business practices in hopes of coping with competition from cheaper generic drugs and setbacks in developing new products.  the new layoffs are in addition to 2,200 that pfizer announced last month, when it cut its american sales force by 20 percent. the 10,000 job reductions, involving all parts of the company around the world, account for about 10 percent of pfizer's global work force.  the cuts will include closing a plant in brooklyn that employs 600 people, and research sites in michigan employing about 2,400 people. [page c6.]  ''incremental evolution is not enough,'' jeffrey b. kindler, pfizer's new chief executive, said at a four-hour meeting with analysts near pfizer's headquarters in midtown manhattan. ''fundamental change is imperative, and it must happen now.''  many of pfizer's competitors have similar problems to some extent, and some of them are also engaged in cutbacks and reorganizations.  big-selling drugs introduced by the industry in the 1990s are now losing patent protection, opening them to generic competition. at the same time the pharmaceutical companies have not been able to develop new products quickly enough pace to continue their rapid growth.  sales forces had also grown in a sort of arms race, often with multiple sales representatives from a single company calling on the same doctor. ian read, pfizer's president of worldwide pharmaceutical operations, said yesterday that the company was exploring ways to deepen relationships with doctors without bombarding them with sales representatives. ''we need to listen and work differently,'' he said.  the 600-employee manufacturing plant in brooklyn is where pfizer started as a chemical maker in 1849. it will also close a factory in omaha, eliminating about 25 jobs.  although three research facilities in michigan will close, pfizer said many of those 2,400 or so workers would be moved to other positions. a plant in germany and research sites in japan and france are also scheduled to close.  the company also said it would reorganize its sales force and research and development to focus on specific disease categories.  the company did not announce management changes but at least one high-level executive is losing his job. a pfizer spokesman confirmed that peter c. brandt, the 49-year-old executive who headed united states pharmaceutical operations and had been given extra responsibilities as recently as august, would retire because his job was being eliminated by the sales overhaul.  over all, pfizer said the moves would save $1.5 billion to $2 billion in yearly expenses, on top of $4 billion in cost reductions the company had previously announced it was trying to achieve by 2008.  the stock slipped by 1 percent yesterday, closing at $26.95. the moves announced yesterday are an effort by mr. kindler, a relative newcomer to the pharmaceutical industry, to bolster the earnings of the world's largest pharmaceutical company.  a lawyer by training, mr. kindler came to pfizer only five years ago and served as general counsel, having worked previously at mcdonald's and general electric. after being named chief executive last july to replace hank mckinnell, who was forced to retire early, mr. kindler pledged to review all of pfizer's operations.  ''he's allowed the company to look at itself with fresh eyes,'' said barbara ryan, pharmaceutical analyst at deutsche bank. ''pfizer was a company that was pretty steeped in its ways.''  ms. ryan, whose firm does investment banking for pfizer, said the plan announced by pfizer yesterday was a good one, provided it was executed well. however, she added, cost-cutting could go only so far and the company needed to develop new drugs. ''they can't cut their way to prosperity,'' she said.  pfizer executives acknowledged that, saying the company was seeking to develop new drugs. it will concentrate research in four main laboratories, and all research on a particular disease will be located in a single laboratory. that is meant to speed work and eliminate waste, allowing the company to develop more drugs while keeping its research and development budget at $7.5 billion.  pfizer also said it would seek to license products from smaller companies, or buy such companies, and would move more into the protein-based drugs typically made by biotechnology companies. pfizer now mainly makes chemical-based pills. those same strategies are being pursued by virtually all the big pharmaceutical companies, to the extent that the acquisitions of biotech companies are at an all-time high and the prices they are fetching are on the rise.  pfizer's announcement came on the same day it announced that its earnings for the fourth quarter of 2006, excluding special items, fell to 43 cents a share, from 49 cents in the same period a year earlier.  the company said that in 2007 and 2008 it expected its revenues to be roughly comparable to the $48.4 billion recorded in 2006. but with the cost cuts, it said, expected earnings would increase 6 percent to 9 percent in each of those years.  pfizer's earnings were hurt by the loss of patent protection over the last two years of its antidepressant zoloft and the antibiotic zithromax. sales of both drugs plummeted more than 70 percent in the fourth quarter.  this year norvasc, a blood pressure and angina drug that had $4.9 billion in sales in 2006, will start losing patent protection. and the biggest blow could come in 2010 or 2011 when the anticholesterol pill lipitor, the world's biggest-selling drug, begins losing patent protection.  pfizer suffered a huge blow in december when safety concerns forced it to halt development of torcetrapib, a cardiovascular drug it had considered the most promising experimental drug in its pipeline and a successor to lipitor.  sales of lipitor in 2006 were $12.9 billion, up 6 percent. but in the fourth quarter sales fell 1 percent to $3.34 billion, hurt by the introduction of generic competition to zocor, a competing cholesterol-lowering pill from merck. pfizer said it expected a modest gain for lipitor this year.  