after struggle, patterson finds touch for storm   the clock was winding down, and the game was on track to be a case of more of the same for st. john's and the junior guard avery patterson. the red storm, which led by 8 points midway through the second half yesterday, had frittered away its lead, and patterson was struggling. a fifth consecutive loss seemed to be a foregone conclusion.  that is, until patterson picked an opportune time to rediscover his shot.  with st. john's trailing by a point, he made a 3-pointer with 1 minute 28 seconds left and turned it into a 4-point play because of a foul by syracuse's eric devendorf. twenty-five seconds later, patterson struck again, hitting a 3-pointer from the right baseline that helped st. john's defeat syracuse, 64-60, at madison square garden.  ''my teammates kept encouraging me to shoot,'' said patterson, who was 1 for 7 from the field before hitting the shot that put the red storm (11-8, 2-4 big east) ahead. ''they kept telling me it was going to fall. it just happened at the end of the game.''  syracuse (15-5, 4-2), which had won four in a row , had its streak of 47 consecutive victories against teams from new york state ended.  but it was not a perfect afternoon for st. john's. in the second half of the garden doubleheader, the women's team fell to no. 6 connecticut, 74-56.  after his team's 71-63 loss at depaul last tuesday, st. john's coach norm roberts started to lose his patience with a team that had underachieved for most of the season. roberts said yesterday that he made the team practice twice friday and that he questioned the effort of some players.  ''we were not playing to our ability and not playing with the passion and intensity we needed,'' he said. ''if we had been playing our butts off, i could have lived with that. but when we don't give ourselves a chance to win or to be as good as we can be, that's what frustrates me.''  early on yesterday, roberts's message seemed to be getting through. the red storm jumped to a 13-2 lead while taking advantage of some sloppy play by the orange. syracuse regrouped and had the st. john's lead down to 29-28 at halftime, but the red storm again took control and increased its lead to 47-39 when anthony mason jr. made a 3-pointer with 9:10 to go.  to that point, patterson had been a nonfactor, something that had often been the case this season. one of the more erratic players in the big east, he recently endured a four-game stretch in which he averaged 4.3 points and shot 23 percent from the field. yet, he said, he never stopped believing in his shot.  ''i'm a shooter, and i knew my shots would start falling,'' he said. ''all shooters go through slumps. i never lost any confidence in my shot.''  but patterson remained cold, and devendorf took control. scoring 10 points during a stretch of 2:39, he helped cut syracuse's deficit to a point, and the orange went ahead on a 3-pointer by demetris nichols with 1:48 to go.  with the thousands of syracuse fans in the building ready to celebrate another win, patterson did his damage.  ''st. john's made two really good plays at the end of the game, and that was the difference,'' syracuse coach jim boeheim said.  after devendorf scored with 54 seconds left to cut the st. john's lead to 4, the red storm held the ball without being fouled. eugene lawrence missed a 3-pointer with 18 seconds left, but qa'rraan calhoun grabbed an offensive rebound to seal the victory.  mason led st. john's with 16 points. the red storm was playing without the oft-injured guard daryll hill, who is sidelined with a sore left knee and is also expected to miss tomorrow's game against notre dame. st. john's had lost six in a row to syracuse.  ''we were supposed to be a really good team this season, and we are a good team,'' mason said. ''but you can't lose four straight and not play hard. we weren't playing up to our potential, and we felt really bad about that. i think we came in more pepped up for this game.''  devendorf led syracuse with 23 points. the orange was only 4 for 14 from the free-throw line, in large part because terrence roberts missed 8 of 9 attempts.  in the women's game, mel thomas had 19 points for connecticut, which has beaten st. john's 23 consecutive times. she made five 3-pointers in the first half for the huskies (16-2, 6-0), who were making their first appearance at the garden.  kia wright, who transferred to st. john's from uconn, led the red storm (5-12, 0-5) with 19 points.  college basketball  