ogunleye keeps heat on the saints   as chicago bears defensive end adewale ogunleye walked out of soldier field on sunday and into the snowy, cold night, he said in his baritone: ''suntan lotion. get your suntan lotion.''  and then he laughed. for ogunleye, the bears' trip to miami as the national football conference representative in super bowl xli is a homecoming of sorts. he began his n.f.l. career in south florida in 2000, signing with the dolphins as an undrafted free agent out of indiana.  he might have been overlooked in the beginning of his career, but in the biggest game of his professional life he surely made his presence felt. in the bears' 39-14 victory against the new orleans saints, ogunleye was like a hot sun beating down on saints quarterback drew brees.  ogunleye was in brees's face and at his feet all day. on the saints' first possession in the fourth quarter, he sacked brees and caused a fumble that he recovered to set up running back's cedric benson's 12-yard scoring run. that touchdown effectively put the game out of the saints' reach at 32-14.  before the series, the bears' defensive coordinator, ron rivera, reminded his players that the final 15 minutes were their claim to fame, so they needed to be ready. ''coach rivera said, 'big-time players make big plays at a big time' and i was happy to do that,'' ogunleye said.  to play in his first super bowl in dolphin stadium, where he broke into the league and spent his first three seasons, is special. ''for me, it brings it full circle,'' ogunleye said. ''going back to miami is going to be a little surreal.''  even though the bears, on the strength of their defense, compiled the best regular-season record in the n.f.c., 13-3, not one person in a tv panel of experts picked them to defeat the saints. that made ogunleye mad. as he did at the beginning of his career, he used the perceived slight as motivation.  ''like 12 out of 12 picked the saints to come in here and beat us,'' said ogunleye, who had taped the piece of paper with the predictions in his locker. ''i'm really happy that we proved a lot of people wrong, but, more importantly, we proved ourselves right.''  pro football  