once given up for dead, comcast defies its obits   three years ago, with the cable television industry in the doldrums, the comcast corporation's chairman, brian l. roberts, approached mel karmazin, then the president of viacom, with a modest proposal: give comcast the right to show programming from such viacom properties as cbs and mtv on the cable company's channels so it could have a leg up on its rivals.  mr. roberts was accompanied by one of his senior managers and he vividly recalls mr. karmazin's reaction. ''he scrunched up his eyes, looked at us and said, 'so you want us to give you all this stuff for free and people will use it on video?' '' mr. roberts recalled with a laugh. ''and we said, 'yes, that's what we want.'  ''no, no, no. let me tell you want i would like to do,'' mr. karmazin responded. ''i would like to put my head down on the desk, close my eyes, and when i count to 10 and look up, i want you both out of my office.''  mr. karmazin, who now runs sirius satellite radio, confirmed the story. ''we were a content company with valuable content, and every opportunity we had to charge for my content, i would do it,'' he said. ''it was not in my dna to give away valuable content for free.''  even today, mr. roberts recalls mr. karmazin's reaction as typical of those misguided souls who fail to realize that consumers increasingly have the ability to record and watch programs where and when they want. ''a person who wants to watch 'csi' or 'desperate housewives' when the programs are not on, they are going to do it anyway,'' he observed. ''as a content owner, you should want them to watch your show.''  brian roberts has always conducted himself thus -- with a straightforward, plain-spoken, that's-the-way-the-world-works approach to his company, his customers and his competitors. those qualities have stood comcast in good stead as it emerges from a gloomy period in which (even though it was making scads of money, thank you) some analysts had written it off as a moribund, wire-bound behemoth doomed to be eclipsed by more nimble telecommunications concerns.  today, the entire cable business, and comcast, the country's largest cable company, are sitting pretty. amid the scramble that will decide which companies provide consumers with the flood of new media, entertainment and communications services, cable suddenly looks to be the winner. analysts now say cable operators are better positioned than their rivals. until quite recently, however, that wasn't a foregone conclusion because wall street -- even discounting the myopia that often distorts its vision -- had good cause to be pessimistic.  on one side, satellite broadcasters like directv and echostar communications were stealing video customers by offering lower rates and other benefits. on the other, telephone companies, led by at&t and verizon communications, were eager to use cash harvested from their shrinking land-line services to push into growth businesses like high-speed internet access and video. cable companies had to fend off these interlopers by investing heavily and continuously in expensive system upgrades to remain competitive. critics worried that these costs would devour cash and profits, without any certainty of a return on the investments.  ''the telephone companies were out there all the time talking about how they were going to kill cable,'' recalled mr. roberts, whose unsolicited bid for the walt disney company in 2004 led many investors to conclude that even the strongest cable companies were worried about the future. fortunately for mr. roberts and his shareholders, the disney bid fell apart. comcast continued to focus on its cable business: expanding revenue and increasing cash flow by offering digital cable, high-speed internet access and, starting in 2005, digital telephone service.  money rolled in. comcast's cash flow per subscriber, a common industry measurement, has risen at least 10 percent a quarter for 25 consecutive quarters, mr. roberts said, and wall street has noticed. after falling 22 percent in 2005, comcast's stock rose more than 60 percent last year, and it has climbed an additional 5.4 percent so far this year. from an intraday low of $25.35 a little more than a year ago, the shares now trade at $44.61.  comcast is by far the industry leader, with 24 million cable subscribers, of whom 11 million also pay for high-speed internet and 2.1 million also have telephone service. smaller rivals are also getting a new measure of respect from investors. the board of cablevision systems, based in bethpage, n.y., rejected an $8.9 billion buyout offer from its founding family, the dolans, just last week, saying the bid undervalued the company.  institutional investors, meanwhile, have been scooping up comcast stock: marsico capital management has acquired about 60 million shares, or 5.2 percent of the company, for example. dodge & cox  funds of san francisco has accumulated 109.5 million shares, and geico, a subsidiary of warren e. buffett's berkshire hathaway, owns 11 million.  satellite services and telephone companies are still vigorously competing for cable's subscribers, but cable companies, led by comcast, have taken charge by using competitors' new technology against them. they took advantage of the fact that it is easier to add phone service to cable systems than it is to deliver video over phone lines, and easier and cheaper to add video-on-demand to a cable system than for satellite services to make their signals interactive.  lo and behold, phone, pay-per-view and high-speed internet revenue at comcast have all been rising smartly. to maintain that pace, comcast has aggressively expanded its video menu and now offers roughly 8,000 movies and television programs on demand. most of that programming is (don't read any further, mr. karmazin) free.  free, says mr. roberts, works. it persuades subscribers to try new things and encourages them to graduate to paid services. ''if the consumer loves what we do, they will use it a lot and eventually they will pay for it,'' he said. ''we have seen a big increase in our pay-per-view business because people got in the habit of being able to watch programming on demand.''  in recent months, comcast's leaders have gone out of their way to reassure shareholders that they will remain focused on expanding and improving the cable business, and that their dreams of disneyesque diversification are behind them.  that approach was tested last november, when comcast agreed to buy disney's 39.5 percent share of e entertainment television, a cable network, for $1.23 billion. comcast's stock fell on news of the deal, which gave the company full control of the network, although it did not rattle big investors like tom marsico, of marsico capital management.  ''there had been an issue among shareholders about what comcast would do with its cash flow,'' he said in a telephone interview. ''i don't think they will make a significant acquisition. that is our impression.''  aryeh bourkoff, a cable analyst at ubs securities, said that comcast faces some competitive factors, but that they are not meaningful enough to stop its growth this year.  not long ago, such confidence was in short supply. from 2002 through 2005, james chanos, the short-seller who had presciently bet that enron was in trouble long before wall street saw a problem, was quoted as being negative on comcast's stock. mr. chanos did not return phone calls seeking comment.  comcast shares did indeed slide, to as low as $18.64 in october 2002. but several big investors -- including chieftain capital management, dodge & cox and geico -- believed that the market was wrong. they did not see comcast as seriously threatened by rivals or by its debt levels, and some urged it to buy back as much as 15 percent of its stock.  comcast has bought back 10 percent of its stock since the end of 2003, but it didn't buy more because ''they were scared,'' said one investor, who still has a relationship with the company and spoke only on the condition he not be named. ''they were too worried about the press and the stock price,'' the investor added.  after the failed $54 billion bid for disney, some investors also believed that mr. roberts wanted ''to keep his powder dry because he wanted to make another acquisition,'' as the investor put it.  mr. roberts shrugged off such backseat driving. ''i am happy to be accused of being too conservative,'' he said. ''i would disagree with the argument that i wasn't bullish. we bought at&t cable and spent $10 billion to buy back our stock.''  mr. roberts also helped engineer a deal that gave comcast access to mgm's library, and teamed up with time warner cable to buy adelphia. the companies split up adelphia's customers and swapped some of their own systems to give them greater control in certain markets like south florida and los angeles.  mr. roberts's confidence may seem unsurprising from a son of the company's founder and scion of the family that still owns a controlling stake in it. as the only one of ralph j. roberts's four children with an interest in cable, brian was a natural successor to his father, who at 86 remains on the board and runs its executive and finance committees.  as he has settled into the roles of chairman and chief executive, brian roberts has earned investors' confidence. compared with james l. dolan of cablevision systems -- whose public squabbles with his father, charles f. dolan, the company's founder, have been extensively chronicled in the tabloids -- brian roberts and his family appear singularly united.  ralph roberts founded comcast in tupelo, miss., in 1963. the elder mr. roberts, who began his career as a belt salesman, still comes to work four days a week and has his office next to his son's. brian roberts says he often consults with his father. when the elder mr. roberts has advice to give, the son said, he is always discreet. ''my father will say, 'have you thought about doing it this way?' '' he said.  that is not to say that comcast is completely conflict-free. while its overall performance has been good for investors, there are caveats. glass lewis & company, a research firm that advises institutional shareholders on governance issues, argues that brian roberts, his father and three other top managers were grossly overpaid in 2005.  altogether, the group reaped $84.9 million in salary, bonuses, other compensation and the value of restricted stock and stock-option grants, glass lewis said. it named brian roberts as the sixth-most-overpaid executive among companies in the standard & poor's 500-stock index, with a compensation package valued at $24.9 million.  several investors said privately that they were particularly annoyed that ralph roberts continues to receive a lucrative pay package when he is no longer chairman. glass lewis valued his compensation at $18 million.  in rebuttal, a comcast executive vice president, david l. cohen, said that more than half of ralph roberts's compensation -- $11.7 million -- was in the form of a pension, life insurance and tax relief that the board agreed to pay him when he was still chief executive. nearly $19 million of brian roberts's compensation, he added, was performance-related pay based on growth in operating cash flow.  while some shareholders grumble about executive pay, brian roberts has won praise for assembling a respected management team, led by stephen b. burke, whom he hired away from disney in 1998.  mr. burke's skills as the operations chief complement mr. roberts's talent for strategy, and mr. burke has shown no signs of chafing as comcast's no. 2. he might be following the example of his father, daniel b. burke, who served deftly as second-in-command at capital cities/abc under thomas s. murphy.  ''i watched my dad for 30 years work with tom,'' mr. burke said. ''i know they had a wonderful time and a wonderful relationship, and brian is the same way with me.''  the way mr. burke sees it, the cable business is like a layer cake: the bottom layer is tv, the next is high-speed data, and then come digital tv, telephone and, finally, commercials. ''the bottom layer is growing maybe 4 or 5 percent a year,'' he said. ''if you want to be a company that grows 13 percent to 15 percent a year, you have to keep adding layers.''  to keep the video layer competitive, comcast has aggressively pursued video-on-demand, seeking to use free videos to entice customers to pay for more expensive digital video packages. it offers hbo's older shows on-demand free, for example. time warner, which owns hbo, until recently charged $5 a month for hbo on-demand service on its cable systems and now offers it free.  other media companies are also skeptical of giving away premium programming, whatever the presumed payoff down the road.  of course, his company does not make its money by producing programs or movies; it earns a living by delivering them. but since that meeting, even some ''content'' companies have agreed to make their programs more widely available, often without charge. just last month, cbs, which was spun off by viacom in 2006, said it would no longer charge 99 cents every time a viewer wanted to watch an old program; now they are free.  competition has still taken its toll at comcast. ''we had our satellite assault years ago and they took 10 percent of the business,'' mr. burke said. ''now that has stabilized.''  today, there are more than 28 million satellite subscribers: 15.6 million for directv and 13 million for echostar. comcast, with its 24 million cable subscribers, is fighting for more. two months ago, for example, it said it would offer some movies to its cable subscribers on the same day the dvd version arrives in stores, rather than 60 days later, as had been the custom.  ''this is the first time the studios have done this,'' mr. roberts said, ''and it is partly because they are worried about the death of dvds. our theory has always been that simultaneous release won't hurt dvds. you could go to blockbuster and rent the film the same day.''  still, comcast and other cable providers are in for a long fight with phone companies and satellite services. as the cable companies have branched into telephone service and other products, the phone companies and satellite services have cooperated to offer comparable ''bundles.'' the phone companies offer wireless service in their bundles, too. to counter, comcast has struck a deal with sprint to offer cellular service as part of a bigger package.  however the race plays out, comcast executives say, they think video delivered over high-speed cable will remain central to their business.  ''technologies don't just disappear,'' mr. burke said. ''ten years from now, when you watch tv you will have a big screen and you will be watching through a big pipe in your house.'' that pipe, or delivery system, ''hopefully will be ours,'' he added.  