mr. chips goes to congress   we're in bipartisan nirvana. bills are passing through the house 356 to 71 and through the senate 96 to 2. nancy pelosi is aglow, and this week president bush will trot out a state of the union speech so conciliatory in tone it'll sound like gandhi on quaaludes.  the question is, what is all this good cheer accomplishing? it's time to render judgments on the substance of all this legislation coursing through the democratic congress:  ethics reform: a-. this is the best thing the democrats have done. the bans on lobbyist-financed gifts, meals and travel are unimportant. few legislators are corrupted by a steak or even a ride in a gulfstream.  but there are measures in the tough senate bill that will change behavior. legislators will have to wait two years before becoming lobbyists. lobbyists will have to disclose donations they collect and bundle. there will be more transparency on earmarks. if this bill becomes law, the democrats will have done something significant to clean up washington.  minimum wage: b-. the traditional argument against raising the minimum wage is that higher labor costs mean that employers hire fewer workers. it's hard to believe this burden will cost many jobs, given how low the minimum wage is now.  on the other hand, raising the minimum wage won't be of much benefit to the working poor. only 0.6 percent of all wage workers make the minimum, and many of those are middle-class teenagers or recent grads.  the economists richard burkhauser of cornell and joseph sabia of the university of georgia estimate that a mere 12.7 percent of the benefits of a federal minimum wage hike would go to poor families, while 63 percent would go to families earning more than twice the poverty line. in sum, a poorly targeted publicity measure that will nonetheless help some people in need. raising the earned-income tax credit would have been better.  prescription drugs: d. while they were the opposition, democrats fulminated that the republicans were so deep in the pockets of big pharma that they wouldn't even let the government negotiate lower drug prices. but governing is harder than kvetching, and the congressional budget office has concluded that the democratic plan would have a negligible effect on prices for the elderly.  the plan allows the government to negotiate, but doesn't take the politically difficult step of giving it any leverage to actually lower prices. a symbolic gesture.  student loans: c-. house democrats (and 124 republicans) voted to cut the interest rates on student loans. this is a nice subsidy for middle-class grads, but will do almost nothing to help working-class kids complete college. over the past three decades, the federal government has spent more than $750 billion on financial aid, with spending levels exploding over the past 10 years. this money has done little to improve graduation rates. that's because relatively few students can't complete college for financial reasons.  study after study has failed to find any link between recent federal subsidy programs and college attendance. democrats would have been better off streamlining existing aid or focusing their efforts on pell grants.  energy policies: a-. democrats have voted to reduce some of the government's oil and gas subsidies and shift them toward renewable energy. as jerry taylor wrote in the national review recently, the case for the existing oil subsidies is ''laughably thin.'' in fact, it's too bad congress didn't take an even bigger slice out of corporate pork.  sept. 11 commission recommendations: c-. this is another case of governing being a lot harder than complaining. democrats vowed to enact all the recommendations, but immediately backtracked on the one the commission said was ''among the most difficult and important'': strengthening congressional oversight. no guts, no glory.  stem cell research. b. the house voted 253 to 174 to reverse the bush restrictions on embryonic stem cell research funding (not enough to overturn a veto). a good move, for most of us. but it's hard to judge the practical consequences, given how distant the benefits of this research are, and the fact that recent innovations like amniotic stem cells might alter the whole debate.  in conclusion, if a wonky mr. chips were to step back and render a judgment on the new congress so far, he'd note that it's not a terribly ambitious student. it hasn't tried anything big. it has a weakness for showy symbolism and middle-class subsidies. still, at least it hasn't humiliated the nation the way the last congress did, and it looks set to do some modest good.  op-ed columnist  