in the region/new jersey; the town that would be hot   it's january, and not a bit too soon to think about property on the jersey shore. for those seeking beachfront bargains, after all, opportunity can be fleeting.  in long branch two years ago, prices seemed to rise almost instantly amid a wave of redevelopment. asbury park is still a work in progress, but housing prices haven't waited for the makeover of a derelict boardwalk neighborhood to be completed. typical condominiums in the redevelopment area there are already priced well over $500,000; the choicest units go for $1 million and up.  even with an overall housing market gone soft, prices in waterfront communities where prices have risen sharply are unlikely to sink back down, according to real estate agents who specialize in such properties.  the trick, of course, is to find the spot where prices will rise next. now comes a bid from the little borough of keansburg to be seen as that about-to-be-discovered place.  keansburg, home to 11,000 year-round residents, a small amusement park and a boardwalk beach on raritan bay, has tumbled into a fairly sorry state, even its partisans acknowledge.  it was established as a shoreline getaway even before the garden state parkway was built in 1957, and some jerseyans, and even new yorkers, still visit keansburg and nearby sandy hook out of longstanding tradition.  but with its beachfront area now populated mainly by fish-fry places, arcades, billiard parlors and a group of run-down apartment buildings, the median house value in keansburg was put below $100,000 in the most recent census. the median household income was $36,383 in 2000 -- and probably has not risen substantially since then, according to local officials.  a large majority of the housing stock -- primarily small wood-frame homes -- is more than 50 years old.  several years ago, borough officials took stock and decided all that had to change, according to terence wall, who was appointed borough manager in 2005.  ''the borough has embarked on a campaign to bulldoze blight,'' said mr. wall, who is beginning a speaking tour at area chambers of commerce to publicize keansburg's intention to metamorphose and attract new businesses.  ''we are a borough pulling itself up by its bootstraps,'' mr. wall added, with gusto. ''if horatio alger was the name of a town, it would be keansburg.''  mr. wall suggested that keansburg offers ''a place near new york city, with bus, train and ferry service nearby, a major revitalization program under way, and the ability to buy beside the water for those who may have been priced out elsewhere.''  he said he had already started to get calls from large developers expressing interest in the idea of a long branch/asbury park-style total makeover. but he also said borough officials were determined not to use the eminent domain power to condemn and clear a large swath of land along the shore for redevelopment.  ''we are committed to the scalpel approach,'' mr. wall explained, ''in which we carve out specific parcels for redevelopment, but pursue overall revitalization by including the existing property owners, and providing them the opportunity to propose their own ideas for rehab and upgrade.''  this is true for both commercial and residential property, according to the manager. so far, several very small condominium buildings have been built along the beachfront road; a block of storefront space is being rehabbed; and groundbreaking is planned within the next several weeks for a 48-unit condo project.  a sales trailer is already set up on the beach for the project, to be called harbor lights on the bayshore, a three-building complex to be built by the kalian companies of red bank. the project is designed to introduce a new elegance to keansburg, according to alton evans, kalian's vice president for sales and marketing, with sophisticated architecture and an array of upscale amenities, including an outdoor pool with cabana.  prices for 1,773-square-foot two-bedroom units at harbor lights will start in the low to mid-$400,000s. twelve penthouses, occupying the fourth floors of the buildings, and offering 1,940 square feet with an upper loft and roof terrace, are priced in the high $500,000s.  all units above the first floor will have views of raritan bay across to staten island and the verrazano-narrows bridge, mr. evans noted.  promotional material for the project notes the attractions of nearby shore towns like red bank and holmdel: chic clubs, shopping, seafood and specialty restaurants, live music at count basie theater in red bank, well-known entertainers at the pnc arts center in holmdel. it also proclaims nearby ferry service to manhattan, which is only 20 miles away; quick access to the garden state parkway; and train, light rail and bus service.  the borough is also formulating plans for a new marina, which would give residents the added amenity of pleasure boating.  meanwhile, it is continuing with a beefed-up housing code enforcement program to rid the borough of ''deadbeat and absentee'' landlords, he said.  it has also been awarded state financing for a pilot program aimed at desalination. saltwater intrusion into freshwater systems is a common problem in shoreline towns, he said, and only keansburg and cape may are currently part of a program aimed at addressing it.  ''whatever avenue to revitalization makes sense,'' the manager said, ''we will pursue.''  in the region | new jersey  