arizona is latest pac-10 team to regret trip to los angeles   the arizona wildcats gave themselves less than two hours saturday to board a bus at pauley pavilion, negotiate interstate 405 southbound, check in at los angeles international airport and hop a flight to tucson.  the transportation security administration may not approve of such a hurried itinerary, but the pacific-10 conference would probably sign off on it. any pac-10 team that comes to los angeles these days cannot wait to leave.  arizona was the latest disgruntled visitor. when the wildcats arrived in los angeles last week, they were ranked 11th and had lost only three games this season. in 48 hours, they lost twice more, beaten by southern california and u.c.l.a.  ''this would be hard for anyone,'' arizona coach lute olson said.  after no. 3 u.c.l.a. dismissed the wildcats on saturday, 73-69, most arizona players walked straight to their bus. u.c.l.a. guard arron afflalo made a more leisurely exit. after scoring 22 points, afflalo was among the last to leave pauley pavilion.  ''i think it's become very clear that we're a really tough road trip,'' afflalo said.  in the past, los angeles swings were mini-vacations. u.c.l.a. was often a challenge, but u.s.c. was usually not. a team like arizona (13-5, 4-4) could expect at least a split.  the balance of power in the pac-10 has officially shifted -- west and south. u.c.l.a. has proved that last year's run to the national championship game in basketball was no fluke. u.s.c. has proved that it is not simply about football.  los angeles has become a hoops hotbed. heading into saturday night, u.c.l.a. and u.s.c. had a combined record of 31-6. u.c.l.a. (17-1, 6-1) was ranked as high as second in some polls. u.s.c. could be ranked this week for the first time in five years.  this may not be a culmination, but a beginning instead. the trojans have signed one of the best high school guards in the country, o. j. mayo. the bruins have signed one of the best high school big men in the country, kevin love.  u.s.c. has opened a gleaming new arena, the galen center. u.c.l.a. has announced that it will renovate pauley pavilion. the renovation is expected to be completed in 2010, when the former coach john wooden, whose u.c.l.a. teams won 10 n.c.a.a. titles, would turn 100.  not since wooden was on the bench have the bruins appeared so fundamentally sound. several teams in college basketball may be more athletic, but few are better at moving the ball, playing disciplined defense and executing in the half court.  everyone on the roster seems to have a distinct role. there are the quick drivers (darren collison and russell westbrook), the dynamic wings (afflalo and josh shipp) and the brawny rebounders (lorenzo mata and luc richard mbah a moute).  mbah a moute sat out saturday because of a sprained right knee, so his countryman alfred aboya filled in and had 11 rebounds. mbah a moute and aboya, from cameroon, left the court side by side.  the bruins are striding toward a second consecutive pac-10 championship and a no. 1 seeding in the n.c.a.a. tournament. that could allow them to reach the final four in atlanta without leaving california, playing the first two rounds in sacramento and their regional games in san jose.  but nothing is guaranteed in the pac-10. six teams from the conference are expected to make the tournament; u.s.c. is one of them. the trojans have defeated four ranked opponents in their past seven games, transforming from giant killers to giants.  because pac-10 teams play each other on thursdays and saturdays, with trips organized by region, u.s.c.'s growth has probably helped u.c.l.a.  if a team is worn down by the trojans on thursday, that team is less equipped to handle the bruins across town saturday.  ''s.c. is taking the pressure off us,'' collison said. ''when we're in a close game and it's down the stretch, you can see the other team starting to wear down.''  the airport has never looked so close.  college basketball  