chinese new year is bargain time in hong kong   even though you might think that hong kong would be crowded during the chinese new year -- the two weeks after the start of the lunar calendar -- it is quite empty because many residents desert the island for vacation. (the one exception: disneyland, now 16 months old, which was so packed last year it had to shut its doors to day-trippers from the mainland.)  and so, much like paris in august, it is possible during the last two weeks of february to secure reservations at hong kong's hottest new restaurants and hotels, and there are many. what's more, as of jan. 1, smoking in all hotels, restaurants and bars has been banned.  in the heart of tsim sha tsui, where the celebrations begin on feb. 18 with the cathay pacific international chinese new year night parade, is the newly opened luxe manor (www.theluxemanor.com), a hotel that is being called kowloon's first designer boutique hotel.  it has 153 deluxe and garden suites -- decorated with a mix of asian, european and postmodern furnishings that look as if they had been chosen by salvador dalí. it will also have six themed suites, which will be completed by late spring.  one suite will be nordic with an icy theme, and another is described as a serengeti-style safari suite (the interior made up to resemble a bedouin tent). the only thing missing -- given that the lobby is about to acquire a crystal tree and that all the rooms have televisions set into mirrors -- are dalí's melting clocks.  until march 5, a premier room (normally 1,800 hong kong dollars, about $225, at 7.95 hong kong dollars to the u.s. dollar) is available for 1,188 hong kong dollars, including a buffet breakfast at no extra charge.  for a spectacular view over victoria harbor -- the setting for the fireworks, above, on feb. 19 -- reserve a table at the newest restaurant of the michelin three-star chef pierre gagnaire. called pierre, it is on the 25th floor of the mandarin oriental, www.mandarinorienta.com, which reopened in september after a nine-month renovation. double rooms over the new year, with breakfast, start at 2,699 hong kong dollars.  fans of nobuyuki matsuhisa will be pleased to learn that he has just opened his first asian nobu outside of japan at the intercontinental, while l'atelier de joël robuchon also recently opened at the landmark shopping center.  luckily, there is no need to feel guilty about overindulging since this is the chinese year of the pig.  in transit  