death knell may be near for public election funds   the public financing system for presidential campaigns, a post-watergate initiative hailed for decades as the best way to rid politics of the corrupting influence of money, may have quietly died over the weekend.  senator hillary rodham clinton of new york became the first candidate since the program began in 1976 to forgo public financing for both the primary and the general election because of the spending limits that come with the federal money. by declaring her confidence that she could raise far more than the roughly $150 million the system would provide for the 2008 presidential primaries and general election, mrs. clinton makes it difficult for other serious candidates to participate in the system without putting themselves at a significant disadvantage.  officials of the federal election commission and advisers to several campaigns say they expect the two candidates who reach election day 2008 will raise more than $500 million apiece. including money raised by other primary candidates, the total spent on the presidential election could easily exceed $1 billion.  people involved in the republican primary campaign of senator john mccain of arizona say he, too, is beginning to seek private donations for the primary and general elections, albeit with the option of returning them. a longtime proponent of campaign finance change, mr. mccain has recently removed his name as a co-sponsor of a bill to expand the presidential public financing program.  former gov. mitt romney of massachusetts, another republican primary contender, has already decided to forgo public financing for the primaries. senator barack obama of illinois, a rival to mrs. clinton for the democratic nomination, declined to comment, as did spokesmen for several other candidates.  in a sense, mrs. clinton was merely confirming what many in washington already knew: that the public financing system has failed to keep pace with the torrents of money flowing toward the presidential elections. in 2004, president bush and senator john kerry, the democratic candidate, each opted out of the system for the primaries but not the general election. by accepting the public financing, they had to agree not to raise or spend any private money for the period after their nominating conventions.  but when mr. bush raised some $270 million, and mr. kerry about $235 million, it became clear that major-party candidates could raise far more from private donors than from the public system.  ''the 2008 race will be the longest and most expensive presidential election in american history,'' said michael e. toner, chairman of the federal election commission. ''top-tier candidates are going to have to raise $100 million by the end of 2007 to be a serious candidate.'' he added: ''we are looking at a $100 million entry fee.''  the turn away from public financing is the twilight of a system once welcomed as a new era of clean government.  in 1986, a decade after the first publicly financed presidential election, a bipartisan commission headed by robert strauss, the former democratic party chief, and melvin r. laird, the secretary of defense under president richard m. nixon, concluded: ''public financing of presidential elections has clearly proved its worth in opening up the process, reducing the influence of individuals and groups, and virtually ending corruption in presidential election finance.''  formed to curb candidates' dependence on big donors without running afoul of supreme court rulings protecting political spending as a form of free speech, the system provides taxpayer money for candidates who voluntarily agree to abide by spending limits.  any primary candidate who raises an initial $100,000 in small donations receives federal money to match the first $250 of each donation. for 2008, candidates could receive matching grants of as much as $25 million for the primary season, grants of about $15 million for a nominating convention and grants of about $83 million for the general election.  the system is financed by taxpayers who check a box on their returns to allocate $3 to an election fund, with about 33 million people a year in recent years directing a total of about $400 million to each quadrennial presidential election.  but the fund has faced chronic shortfalls as the percentage of taxpayers contributing has declined to less than 10 percent last year from over 30 percent in the 1970s. those who could tap wealthy supporters began looking for ways to outmaneuver it almost from the beginning.  in the 1980 republican primary, for example, john b. connally, the former texas governor, became the first candidate to reject public money and outraise his rivals, but his candidacy failed to catch on.  by the mid-1980s, candidates and donors were circumventing the spending limits by raising unlimited ''soft money'' donations to party committees from corporations, unions and wealthy individuals. the party committees used the money to help support a candidate's presidential campaign or to attack his opponent.  in 2002, congress changed the campaign finance laws to ban soft money contributions to party committees, and donors turned instead to so-called 527 groups, which could still spend unlimited contributions.  by 2000, two republican candidates, the billionaire steve forbes and mr. bush, had turned down public money for the primary campaign. mr. bush became the first major-party nominee to do so. and in 2004, for the first time, both the democratic and the republican nominees turned down public financing for the primaries.  for mrs. clinton and other 2008 candidates, deciding this early to turn down public financing means that she can immediately begin building two war chests, one for the primary and one for the general election. candidates can raise twice as much from each individual donor: $2,100 for the primary and $2,100 for the general, for a total of $4,200.  it also means that the presidential candidates will be more beholden than ever to the so-called bundlers, often lobbyists, who solicit donations to present to campaigns in a lump sum. in 2004, president bush honored his biggest bundlers by calling them pioneers and rangers who raised $100,000 or $200,000, respectively.  beginning with the first quarterly disclosure of presidential campaign finances, due at the end of april, candidates can show off their cash on hand as a deterrent to competitors. mrs. clinton, who faces doubts among some democratic primary voters about whether she can win the general election, may be able to point to her general election fund-raising as evidence of her strength.  candidates who wait until 2008 to start raising contributions for the general election may be starting too late to catch up. in 2004, for example, mr. kerry demonstrated during the primaries that he could raise far more money than public financing provided. but by the time he had won the nomination it was too late to raise private money to compete in the general election, and he relied instead on public financing.  on monday, a spokesman for mr. kerry, who is weighing another presidential bid, said, ''it's smart for democrats to keep their options open.''  mr. toner, chairman of the federal election commission, said he expected that even if the major candidates bypassed the election fund, the money would still be used by dark horses. any hypothetical surplus would remain in the fund, he said.  lawmakers in both chambers of congress have proposed legislation to revamp and expand the presidential primary financing system, but the ideas have not gained much traction in recent years. phil singer, a spokesman for mrs. clinton, said she would support ''modernizing'' the system.  spokesmen for the democratic leaders of both chambers say they like the idea. but republicans are wary. ''the most massive poll ever taken on any subject is taken on the subject of using tax dollars for political campaigns,'' senator mitch mcconnell of kentucky, the senate republican leader, said in a statement.  ''that poll is taken every april 15 on our tax return,'' he said, referring to the voluntary check-off. ''about 10 percent of americans choose to participate; 90 percent choose not to.''  charles e. m. kolb, president of the committee for economic development, a business group that advocates for election laws, said, ''it may take a collapse of the system in order to build it back up.''  for now, mr. kolb added, ''obituary may be the right word.''  correction:  january 24, 2007, wednesday  a front-page article yesterday about the waning reliance of presidential candidates on public financing for campaigns included an outdated reference to michael e. toner, who said the 2008 election will be the most expensive in american history. as of jan. 1, mr. toner is a commissioner of the federal election commission. he is no longer its chairman, his position in 2006.  