rusty bridge, great views and soon, a walkway?   some see the long-closed poughkeepsie-highland railroad bridge as a 6,767-foot-long rusting relic. others envision a gleaming pedestrian walkway, offering spectacular views of the hudson valley.  it is that vision that inspires members of walkway over the hudson, a nonprofit group dedicated to building the walkway and reopening the bridge so that strollers and cyclists can experience firsthand what has captivated railroad enthusiasts and history buffs, not to mention politicians and writers, for decades.  fixing up the bridge -- the first to span the hudson south of albany -- is something of an obsession for david rocco, a retired carpenter from yorktown and a member of walkway. mr. rocco said the bridge combines three of his favorite things: train tracks that can be converted to public pathways, railroad history and ''the beautiful hudson river.''  ''it's the trifecta for me,'' he said.  walkway, which has owned the bridge since 1998, would love to reopen it in the spring of 2009 to coincide with the 400th anniversary of henry hudson's first trip up the river. the challenges are considerable; most glaring is the more than $10 million -- some estimates run as high as $30 million -- needed to build a walkway from the charred remains of a fire that closed the bridge in 1974, as well as pay for other additions, like an elevator.  the bridge, which is parallel to the mid-hudson bridge, was completed in 1888, five years after the brooklyn bridge opened. it initially served passengers and freight and was the primary rail route for goods traveling from new england to points west of the hudson. after the completion of the hell gate bridge in new york city in 1917, its role diminished. it was being used strictly for freight when the 1974 fire torched the railroad ties on the poughkeepsie side, warping the rails. the bridge never carried another train.  fred schaeffer, a poughkeepsie lawyer who is walkway's president, said the bridge -- an erector set-like structure that climbs out of the hudson like a black skeleton -- deserves better. ''the bridge helped this country grow,'' mr. schaeffer said. ''it tied this country together.''  now, mr. schaeffer simply hopes the bridge will tie the hudson valley together. walkway members see it as the centerpiece connecting bike paths and green space, with shops and restaurants dotting the surrounding areas.  whether it is all a pipe dream should become clearer in coming months, when an engineering firm hired by walkway completes a feasibility study. in november, as part of the study, inspectors in wetsuits found the bridge's underwater piers to be sound, but the structure is in dire need of a paint job, and building a walkway some 212 feet above the hudson will not be done by weekend volunteers.  the group also hopes to build an elevator to the walkway in poughkeepsie's waryas park, near the city's metro-north station, a children's museum and a cluster of restaurants.  an $874,000 grant from the federal government in 2005 was a big step, as was $155,000 from the governor's office. the city of poughkeepsie also ripped up a $550,000 tax lien that walkway had inherited from the bridge's previous owner. mayor nancy cozean said she saw the project as a metaphor for older cities looking to reinvent themselves.  still, mr. rocco concedes that the group is far from its financial goal. he hopes to make up the difference with a mix of city, county and state funds, along with private donations. the local congressman, maurice hinchey, said he was doing everything he could to make sure the project was financed. ''i'm absolutely certain this is going to go,'' he said.  something about the bridge and the views of the hudson it provides seem to inspire optimism. ''standing atop that deserted railbed was among the most humbling experiences i've ever had,'' said robert klara, a writer and railroad historian who walked over the bridge in the early '90s. ''views notwithstanding, there's a kind of industrial lyricism to the bridge's trusses, rivets and crossbars. even as a ruin, it's a thing of great beauty.''  local residents say anything meant to spur tourism has their support. enjoying an unseasonably warm january day in waryas park, in the shadow of the bridge, william durling said he was intrigued by the project.  ''it'd be excellent for the city to rejuvenate the bridge,'' he said.  landmarks  