fish, into quarterfinals, will face ex-housemate   the first man into the quarterfinals of this year's australian open on sunday was unseeded mardy fish, which was quite an achievement considering the former state of his forehand and his left wrist.  but fish, long considered a talented yet unreliable player, has managed to recover from both those handicaps in the last two years with the help of two operations on his wrist and of his coaches scott humphries and todd martin, each a former tour player.  now fish, 25, is in the final eight at a grand slam event for the first time, and, as the luck of the draw would have it, the man he will face is his childhood housemate andy roddick.  ''we were more like brothers than best friends,'' fish said of the years he spent living with the roddick family in florida when he and roddick were aspiring juniors.  fish advanced sunday with a 6-1, 7-6 (4), 2-6, 7-5 victory over 16th-seeded david ferrer of spain, who had beaten fish in their two previous matches. roddick advanced with another impressive performance under heavy pressure, winning by 6-3, 3-6, 6-1, 5-7, 6-4 against the net-rushing mario ancic of croatia.  ''i knew in the fifth set, win or lose, i had to try to turn the tables on the aggression,'' said roddick, who broke the ninth-seeded ancic in the fifth game of the final set, then held that advantage, serving out the match in style and winning it with a backhand winner down the line.  that shot was a symbol of roddick's revival in the last six months with the help of his new coach, jimmy connors, whose two-handed backhand was his signature shot. connors was in the front row of rod laver arena on sunday, pounding on the wall as the sixth-seeded roddick again came up with the clutch shots he required, just as he had in his third-round bout with the former australian open champion marat safin.  a year ago, in the fourth round on this same court, roddick, erratic and confused, was upset by marcos baghdatis of cyprus in four sets. this year, despite ancic's constant pressure, roddick passed the test and is now a heavy favorite to reach the semifinals in light of his current form and a 4-1 record against fish.  ''it's always a little weird when we play each other because of our history,'' roddick said.  in the fourth round, the scottish teenager andy murray will have his dream matchup at the australian open, but it is not so certain that james blake has his. murray had been eagerly awaiting his first chance to match his fluid and fast-maturing all-court game against the slashing forehand and athleticism of rafael nadal, the leader of murray's generation.  murray granted his own wish by winning in straight sets, 6-3, 6-2, 6-4, against juan ignacio chela of argentina on saturday. chela overwhelmed murray in the first round here last year.  but there will be no novelty for blake when he faces fernando gonzález of chile in the fourth round. they have played six times, and gonzález has won the past three matches, all on quick surfaces.  ''he's given me problems the last few times, but i've had some success against him earlier in his career,'' blake said. ''hopefully, i can draw on that and get back to the winning ways against him. he's playing pretty confident right now as well.''  on saturday, against his close friend robby ginepri, blake had to save a set point in the first set, then saved four more set points in the second with ginepri serving at 5-4. what will look like a straightforward 7-6 (7), 7-5, 6-2 victory on the draw sheet was hardly that.  ginepri spent time around more than your average weekend hacker in the off-season, playing the latest of a series of exhibition matches against the retired pete sampras. ''he taught me a thing or two,'' said ginepri, who added that sampras had been thinking about playing one more wimbledon.  ''there's been some talk about it, but you never know with that,'' ginepri said. ''he left the sport in a magical way, so he wouldn't want to ruin that.''  tennis  