racial subplot on british 'big brother' grabs nation and ratings   so, finally, it was over and it ended, of course, in tears. by an overwhelming majority, the viewers voted to expel jade and keep shilpa.  in what has possibly been one of the most bizarre weeks in british television, increasing numbers of people switched to channel 4 to watch ''celebrity big brother'' as it became embroiled in torrid charges of promoting racism and set off a soul-searching debate about britain's broader social failings.  the two gladiators in this contest were jade goody, who secured b-list status after participating in an earlier, noncelebrity ''big brother,'' and shilpa shetty, a bollywood star who was the target of slurs and gratuitous epithets. ms. goody, for example, called her ''shilpa puppadum.''  such has been the furor generated among politicians, viewers, columnists and reporters that gordon brown, the chancellor of the exchequer and prime minister-in-waiting, felt moved during a visit to india to swing his weight behind ms. shetty in almost churchillian terms.  ''it is up to the people to cast their votes, but a vote for britain is a vote for tolerance,'' he said in mumbai on friday.  in theory, the contestants on ''celebrity big brother'' knew nothing of all this as, hermetically sealed in a purpose-built house on a movie lot, they went through the stations of their anguish: the rows, the four-letter words, the scatological insults, the confessions.  mostly demure, ms. shetty said she felt abused by racism, then withdrew the charge. mostly loud, ms. goody said she was not a racist then apologized and hugged ms. shetty.  somewhat like germans after the second world war saying they knew no one who voted for hitler, many britons in casual conversation said they never watched this low-brow, artificial spectacle, or, as critics called it, this freak show.  but by friday night, when the vote was announced, the show's viewership had risen from 3.5 million to 5.7 million.  a tally by the bbc said ''celebrity big brother'' had generated 300 newspaper articles in britain, 1,200 in english-language newspapers around the globe, 3,900 foreign-language news articles and 22,000 blog postings. six cabinet ministers, including prime minister tony blair, commented publicly on it, and for many of higher intellectual pretensions, there was a further agonizing question.  ''should we even be talking about it?'' asked the high-brow today program on bbc's radio 4.  of the viewers who voted in the showdown by phone or text message, 82 percent cast ballots for ms. shetty to stay and ms. goody to go. when the result was announced, ms. goody seemed in turn stunned, tearful and remorseful, contemplating a hiatus in her lucrative career as, among other things, a tv personality and fitness and beauty adviser.  she told viewers she was embarrassed and disgusted after seeing her behavior and remarks played back to her during a post-eviction interview with the show's presenter, davina mccall.  ''i'm not racist, but looking at that film i can see why it has had the impact it's had,'' she said. ''i look like one of those people i don't like.  ''i'm disgusted in myself for saying what i have just seen myself saying.''  but, for some, it was too late for forgiveness.  ''goody-riddance,'' proclaimed the page 1 headline in saturday's mass circulation tabloid, the sun. and on channel 4, the show went on, with one less contestant, and ms. shetty still competing to be the last one in the house against a dwindling band of british and american hopefuls.  