after some pushback, easing a hard line on hats   tucked into a corner of restoration plaza on gritty fulton street, the 10-month-old applebee's restaurant resembles its 17 cousins throughout the city. there are the same roomy booths; neighborhood memorabilia on the walls, like photos of local sports heroes; and a menu of burgers, steaks and other comfort food. ''america's favorite neighborhood restaurant, right here in bed-stuy,'' reads a large outdoor placard.  at the entrance, there's another sign not found at any other franchise -- one asking patrons to please remove their hats and head coverings. but it isn't meant only to prompt a return to old-fashioned hat etiquette.  at a meeting of community board 3 this month, zane tankel, who owns all the applebee's in the city, said that the no-hat rule was instituted to discourage baseball caps, because their colors can signal gang affiliations. originally, the policy required rather than requested hat removal, but that mandatory rule received ''a lot of pushback,'' mr. tankel said, including accusations of discrimination against bedford-stuyvesant. and so, he said, although the policy had been recommended by local residents, he relaxed it late last year, keeping the sign but no longer turning away noncompliant guests.  now, he announced at the meeting, he was thinking of abandoning the policy entirely.  ''no!'' cried dozens of people at the meeting, most of them middle-aged.  but others criticized the policy, including eddie hampton, a board member who said he'd walked out of the restaurant shortly after it opened when he was told to remove his fedora. ''i think that's awfully paternalistic,'' mr. hampton said. ''would it make the food taste better if we took our hats off?''  nelson stoute, another board member, had a different suggestion. ''you need to have this policy in all your stores,'' he said. ''otherwise it looks like you've set upon the african-american community.''  mr. tankel will retain the relaxed policy for now, he said. he added that when young men agreed to take off their caps and fashionable tie-back skullcaps, called do-rags, they often dropped their threatening attitudes as well.  colvin grannum, who heads the nonprofit group that oversees restoration plaza, said he agrees. ''i think it's a happy medium,'' he said of the relaxed policy. ''well, i don't know how happy it is, but it's reasonable.''  outside the restaurant on a recent sunday afternoon, a passer-by named david jones, 30, who wore a do-rag under a gray yankees baseball cap, said he wouldn't consider taking off his headgear. ''they won't get my service'' because of the policy, he said.  but several people entering the restaurant, many coming from church, said they were fine with it. said rod rosemond, 50, as he prepared to doff his plaid cap, ''i wouldn't eat with any hat on, anyway.''  tim murphy  neighborhood report: bedford-stuyvesant  