a taste of portugal, fresh, simple and flavorful   sitting in docas in downtown ossining on a late december evening, we luxuriated in the restaurant's atmosphere. warm, soft portuguese rolls had just hit the table. the menu and most of the conversation around us was in portuguese. our glasses were filled with a wonderful house-made sangria and a carbonated pineapple juice from portugal that is a terrific, less sugary alternative to soda.  suddenly a stir came up from the crowd and we looked outside the window. a long procession of elaborately costumed revelers passed by, dressed as angels, princes, ladies-in-waiting. some sort of christmas parade? we weren't certain. but one thing was clear: this was not a typical saturday dinner in the suburbs.  the food, too, was a welcome change from the overly fussy fare at many restaurants today. docas excels at fresh, simple, flavorful stews and grilled seafood, made with ingredients that are either locally grown or shipped in from portugal.  the octopus salad -- large chunks of meat imported from portugal mixed with delicious extra-virgin portuguese olive oil, onion, tomato and seasonings -- was a great beginning to the meal. clams in garlic sauce were spicy and tasty, though a few of the clams were tough. of the two standard soups (there are also specials), the vegetable, which won over the bread and garlic soup, was nicely rendered, with a flavorful broth that did not overwhelm the individual tastes of the cabbage, chickpeas, carrots and other vegetables.  the flip side of docas's simple approach is that occasionally the offerings taste bland. shrimp cakes and codfish cakes were overly breaded, and the garden salad, though fresh, was pedestrian.  when it comes to the entrees, however, basic boiled potatoes and steamed vegetables are perfect pairings for the main dishes. for a special of rabbit stew, the rabbit was provided by a nearby connecticut farm (as is the occasional baby goat or suckling pig). the stew offered tender pieces of meat cooked in a rich brown sauce that mixed well with the simple sides.  braised pork with clams, also in a brown sauce, contrasted similarly tender pieces of meat with pickled carrots and cauliflower, spicy sausage and chili peppers. diced potatoes were sprinkled on top, so they were crunchy but still sopped up the flavors underneath.  straightforward grilled fish and steaks were also delicious, seasoned with just the right amount of olive oil, salt and pepper.  part of docas's appeal is its quirky, casual setting, with lots of extended families and some people eating while standing up when the crowds get thick on a weekend night. the restaurant could use more waitresses, however. one busy evening there were long waits for water refills, to order dessert and to get the check. whenever the waitress did make her way over to us, she was helpful. (we found the house wine unappealing, and she quickly brought us a nice dry chaminé vinho regional alentejano that complemented both the seafood and the meat dishes.) but she was overwhelmed.  the restaurant's owners, carla and abel pinto (he is the chef and she makes the desserts), hope to expand to a building next door, and that should ease the crowding. ideally they will increase the size of the staff as well.  once our desserts arrived, our frustrations eased. the pear tart was especially good, with ripe slices of pear pushing into its yielding crust. sponge cake dissolved in sweetness in our mouths. and if you like eggy, european-style flan, docas will make you happy. all were presented beautifully, paired with lots of fresh fruit.  and do not forget to order a cup of the restaurant's creamy cappuccino (so rich it did not even need the mound of whipped cream on top). then sit back, focus on the mural of lisbon's docas neighborhood painted over the bar, and you are practically in portugal.  docas restaurant  125 main street  ossining  (914) 944-9205  good  the space -- warm, quirky, often crowded. a mural of the port area of lisbon's docas neighborhood, painted over the long bar, dominates. bald eagle imagery is everywhere, a nod to the american symbol but also to a portuguese soccer team. wheelchair accessible.  the crowd -- mostly portuguese natives nostalgic for the tastes of home. lots of extended families. boisterous, friendly.  the bar -- informal, with patrons sipping cappuccino as well as housemade sangria or portuguese brandy . the wine list is entirely portuguese, from $18 to $65.  the bill -- lunch entrees, $12.75 to $15; dinner entrees, $12.75 to $21. all major credit cards.  what we like -- octopus salad, clams in garlic sauce, vegetable soup; braised pork with clams, grilled red snapper, grilled sea bass, rabbit stew, grilled t-bone; pear tart, sponge cake.  if you go -- tuesday to thursday and sunday, 11:30 a.m. to 10 p.m.; friday and saturday, 11:30 a.m. to 10:30 p.m. closed monday. reservations recommended for friday and saturday.  reviewed on jan. 21, 2007  dining/ossining  