arts, briefly   there's money in global warming  everyone talks about box office, but which movies are really the most profitable? in a report released on thursday, kagan research, a california media research company, ranked ''ice age: the meltdown,'' above, the most profitable widely released movie of 2006, the hollywood reporter said. kagan estimated the movie's total cost at $256.4 million and total revenue at $1.1 billion. when the revenue is divided by the cost, the result is 4.11, which kagan calls its kagan profitability index (k.p.i.). the runner-up, the report said, was ''pirates of the caribbean: dead man's chest,'' with a 3.93 k.p.i. ''pirates'' earned more than ''ice age'' ($1.7 billion), but also cost more ($423.8 million). rounding out the top five were ''the da vinci code'' (3.81), ''borat'' (3.75) and ''saw iii'' (3.48). four of the 10 top films on the list were computer-animated; in addition to ''ice age,'' they were ''cars'' (no. 8), ''over the hedge'' (no. 9) and ''happy feet'' (no. 10).  rodin thinker recovered  a rodin thinker, one of seven bronze statues stolen from the garden of the singer laren museum near amsterdam earlier in the week, was found badly damaged on friday, the dutch police said, according to agence france-presse. none of the other statues have been found. the police arrested two men on thursday in connection with the theft. the thieves had ignored the iron statues in the museum's garden, which suggests they might have been after the bronzes for their value as metal. the museum is in the former home of the american artist and steel heir william singer, who died in 1943.  poe, evermore  a mystery man arrived at edgar allan poe's grave at the westminster burial grounds in baltimore on friday morning, as he has on poe's birthday (jan. 19) every year since 1949, watched by the largest group of onlookers ever, the associated press reported. jeff jerome, curator of the poe house and museum, said 55 people were there to watch the anonymous visitor, known as the poe toaster, leave a half-empty bottle of cognac and three red roses at poe's grave. the toaster then slipped out a side gate, mr. jerome said. the original toaster is thought to have left a cryptic note in 1993 saying, ''the torch will be passed.'' a later note said that this toaster, who apparently died in 1998, had handed the tradition to his sons. poe died in baltimore on oct. 7, 1849, at the age of 40, after collapsing in a tavern.  the eternal feminine  an italian art historian says he has found the burial place of the woman known as mona lisa, agence france-presse reported friday. it is widely believed that the woman painted by leonardo da vinci was lisa gherardini, the wife of a wealthy florentine merchant. giuseppe pallanti, the author of ''mona lisa revealed: the true identity of leonardo's model,'' says records from the time show that she died on july 15, 1542, at 63, and was buried in the now-abandoned sant'orsola convent in florence. mr. pallanti found a death notice in the archives of a church in florence that referred to ''the wife of francesco del giocondo, deceased july 15, 1542, and buried at sant'orsola.'' lisa gherardini, born in may 1479, was thought to have been the second wife of del giocondo, a silk merchant, with whom she had five children. another da vinci expert, carlo pedretti, urged a search for lisa gherardini's remains to establish her identity.  