earth cover   bare escentuals  for a glimpse of what cosmetics marketing used to look like, flip through the recent book ''hello gorgeous!'' a collection of beauty-product advertising images from the 1940s, 50s, and 60s. ''glamour for you!'' squeals one such ad for something called stadium girl cake makeup, featuring an apple-cheeked young woman and a promise to make the user's complexion ''more romantic than ever.'' elsewhere, a presumably satisfied cosmetics customer in a bridal gown is literally hauled off by a handsome man.  whether you see such images as being shot through with optimism or just naïvete, it seems a long way from the sort of pitch used by bare escentuals, a cosmetics brand whose revenues for 2006 topped $300 million -- more than double the figure from 2004. the most overt selling point for its foundations, eye shadows and other products is not the imagined future you but the nitty gritty of the stuff itself. its bareminerals line of foundations -- $25 for 0.3 ounce at sephora -- are made with ''crushed minerals from the earth,'' with no oils or preservatives; it's ''so pure you can sleep in it.'' the company's ''patent-pending rare minerals skin revival treatment'' is actually meant to be worn while sleeping, making your skin ''more luminous'' all the while, thanks to a formula that includes ''all 72 organic macro- and microminerals that exist in nature.'' that one is $60 for .15 ounce.  an ingredients-based pitch seems a little crunchy for the mainstream, but then perhaps the mainstream has changed since the san francisco company was founded some 30 years ago. (back then it was basically a bath-and-body boutique.) leslie blodgett, the president and c.e.o., joined in 1994, starting bareminerals the next year. she had been in the foundation division of max factor, where, she says, the focus was entirely on creating products that ''would look great for three hours.'' what happened after that, how uncomfortable it felt in the meantime or how much ended up ''on your boyfriend's shirt'' wasn't really important.  she figured there was an audience for products that did address those issues -- but didn't expect that it would become one of the top-selling foundations. back then ''i couldn't give this stuff away,'' blodgett says. what the company had to do, she continues, was ''educate'' people on the benefits, both practical and health-oriented, of the no-preservative approach. it probably helped that in the subsequent years, ideas about organic food started to catch on, but blodgett says plenty of women who weren't all-natural-lifestyle types started trying the brand. thus its growth has been ''all word of mouth,'' she says.  oh, and one other thing: ''we went on tv,'' she adds. specifically, blodgett herself started showing up on qvc in 1997. in six minutes, she sold as much product as the company had been selling in a week. ''it was shocking.'' a few years later, the company made the next move -- to infomercials.  neither of those settings immediately calls to mind education, healthful living or the faint air of prestige that goes along with the brand's price points. but blodgett had a personal reason for suspecting that the television tactics would work without undercutting the brand's hoped-for image. ''i felt that i was pretty savvy and sophisticated,'' she says, ''and the way i knew of qvc is that i was a customer.'' the qvc and infomercial pitches are each built largely around enthusiastic bare escentuals users sharing -- televised word of mouth? -- testimonials, and blodgett herself. (a focus group found her ''fake'' -- and that was the last time the company used a focus group, she adds with a laugh.)  ultimately, of course, the bare escentuals education still culminates with a luminous promise or two. rachel c. weingarten, president of gtk marketing group and the author of ''hello gorgeous!'' figures that bare escentuals has indirectly benefited from the rise of science-y ''cosmeceuticals,'' which can be wildly expensive but which tend to have a compellingly rational back story -- like the popular crème de la mer, created by an aerospace physicist. it's not that glamour has gone out of style or that contemporary consumers are any less susceptible to it. ''but now we really have to justify our spending,'' she says. ''to be able to say, 'i bought it because. ...'' and these days, an answer that includes crushed minerals, pending patents and 72 organic ingredients just seems a little easier to swallow -- optimistic but not naïve -- than one involving a guy in a tuxedo.  the way we live now: 1-21-07: consumed  correction:  february 4, 2007, sunday  the consumed column on jan. 21, about bare escentuals, a cosmetics firm, misstated the position held by one of its executives, leslie blodgett. although she is the c.e.o., she is no longer the president. that position is held by diane miles.  