the neediest cases; once at risk of dropping out, but now making plans to go to college   you can hear the pride in estefania esquilin's voice: ''my teacher, she said that i'm her inspiration. i did what i had to do in such a short amount of time. my teacher used me as an example to the other classes.''  three years ago, estefania, now 17 and a junior in high school, skipped so many classes that she failed the ninth grade. this year, despite being out sick for a month with mononucleosis, she has made the honor roll.  fernando jennings, 17, a senior, is doing something that he never thought possible: making plans to go to college. ''there's only like three or four people out of my family who actually made it out of high school,'' he said.  in separate interviews, both students spoke about the after-school jobs that helped them change their lives. both participate in the city connection program, which extends summer employment into year-round work for 28 youths who are at risk of dropping out of school.  city connection is a pilot project of the new york times neediest cases fund's summer jobs program. the program is administered by the after-school corporation, which provides assistance to organizations in new york to run after-school programs.  jobs for the students come from one of the seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund.  for two and half years, estefania has worked at an after-school program for elementary school children in lower manhattan operated by the university settlement society of new york, a member agency of the federation of protestant welfare agencies.  among other duties, she helps youngsters with their homework.  at one recent session, a fifth-grade girl was ready to give up on a multiplication problem because, she said, ''i'm not that smart.''  estefania responded at once. ''yes you are, and stop saying that!'' then the two of them went back to figuring out how to solve the problem.  estefania could relate to the girl's frustrations. as a freshman in a school in the bronx, she said: ''i wanted to drop out of school. i wanted to give up on everything.''  in february 2005, she was repeating the ninth grade. she got into a fight with another girl over a stolen cellphone, and her brother, christian esquilin, 28, decided it was time for a change.  estefania's parents speak only spanish, so the help of her brother, who works as an administrative assistant at the after-school program, was necessary to help them navigate the school system.  he helped estefania to transfer to eastside community high school, which houses the after-school program. that summer, she started working at the day camp.  estefania's supervisor works closely with her teachers at eastside. if estefania does not attend school or if her grades falter, she cannot come to work.  ''i got suspended from this program for like a week because my attendance was horrible,'' estefania said. the suspension came at the beginning of her sophomore year, and she decided it would not happen again: she needed the paycheck, and she wanted to keep helping the children.  estefania has decided to pursue studies in child psychology. she was inspired, in part, by the biggest lesson she learned at work. ''kids know how you feel,'' she said. ''you might think that kids are naïve and they don't understand, but they actually do.''  she would be the first in her family to earn a college degree.  the children she works with changed her outlook. ''i want the best for them. i want these kids to go to college, the same thing i always wanted,'' she said. ''i shouldn't give up on myself. i know i can do it if i try.''  for a year and a half, fernando jennings has been working at the children's aid society as an office assistant. he works in an office that certifies foster and adoptive parents.  ''the job alone has taught me, there are responsibilities and there are morals to life,'' he said.  fernando has also forged a bond with his co-workers. ''over here we're a family,'' he said.  at 15, fernando was skipping school regularly and had joined a gang. his mother went to family court for help in dealing with him, and they were given counseling by the children's aid society.  with the society's help, fernando enrolled in a career development course and started working at the society through a youth employment program. he said that he was intimidated at first, but soon began to enjoy the work.  ''i'm grateful because now that i'm bringing money in, i can help my mother paying bills,'' he said.  gradually, fernando stopped skipping classes.  ''it was hard. cutting is party central,'' he said. fernando tackled the problem by switching his schedule. he stacked his favorite classes, earth science and gym, at day's end so that he would not be tempted to leave early.  but there were still problems. a rival gang had made attending classes unsafe, he said, and in september, he transferred to franklin k. lane high school in brooklyn.  his average rose to 73 in the fall. he is shooting for a 90 on his next report card. ''i can't wait for that. that'll be like a trophy right there,'' he said.  janice jones, who supervises the city connection students, or fellows, at the society, holds fernando accountable for keeping up at school. she gets a copy of his report card and speaks regularly with his teachers and his guidance counselor.  ms. jones said: ''i'm kind of like the bad cop. that's o.k. as long as you're educated.''  how he fares in high school will determine how far he can go in life, fernando said. ''everything goes together line by line like a domino set, and if you tip one over, then you lose everything,'' he said.  he said he learned this from his mentors at work. ''it took a while,'' he said.  previously recorded: $7,032,350.29  recorded thursday: 64,824.54  total: $7,097,174.83  last year to date: $6,434,748.71  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  