news summary   international a3-10  clans remain a barrier to governing somalia  american forces have ventured onto somali soil for the first time in more than a decade to hunt down the last of the islamist leaders who held a firm grip on much of the country until just a few weeks ago. whether somalia pulls itself together now or explodes into bloodshed again depends not on american troops, foreign peacekeepers, investment or aid. it depends on stemming clan-based violence. a1  china silent on satellite test  american officials said they had been unable to get even the most basic diplomatic response from china to protests following their detection of a successful test to destroy a satellite, and bush administration officials said they were uncertain whether china's top leaders, including president hu jintao, were fully aware of the test or the reaction it would engender.  a3  27 americans killed in iraq  the united states military said that two marines died in western iraq and an additional seven service members died on saturday, bringing the weekend toll to 27. seven of the deaths announced were caused by ''enemy action'' in the sunni anbar province, while another soldier was killed in baghdad by a roadside bomb.  a6  children in korean boot camp  each year, during summer and winter vacations, thousands of schoolchildren pass through a boot camp operated by the first marine division of south korea in an industrial town on the southeast coast. the five-day program was introduced in 1997 during the asian financial crisis. a10  ship spills cargo off england  a damaged and listing cargo ship was spilling fuel and cargo containers into stormy seas off the southwest coast of england, near devon, british officials said. some of the containers held hazardous materials.  a10  turk said to confess in killing  a teenage turkish gunman arrested in connection with the murder of an ethnic armenian journalist has given prosecutors an extensive confession, turkish news agencies reported, including details on why he plotted the killing and how he stalked the victim and shot him directly from behind three times in the neck and head on a crowded istanbul street. a8  science/health  coughs lead to health scare  a possible whooping cough epidemic at a new hampshire medical center was exposed as a false alarm six months later. infectious disease experts say the kind of tests that produced that false positive are coming into increasing use and may be the only way to get a quick answer in diagnosing diseases like whooping cough, and deciding whether an epidemic is under way.  a1  national a12-17  candidates jump start 2008 presidential race  there are now a dozen serious contenders from both parties competing in a nomination race that for the first time in more than half a century will not include an incumbent president or current or former vice president, or even a definitive front-runner in either major party.  a1  senator hillary rodham clinton began her newborn presidential campaign by announcing legislation that would significantly expand federal health insurance for americans who are under 18.  a14  gov. bill richardson of new mexico announced that he intended to seek the democratic nomination for president.  a14  advertisement splits county  in atlanta, city politicians have warned that a racially charged radio advertisement for a county race has poisoned relations with the republican-dominated state legislature.  a12  writings of the unabomber  nine years after he began serving a life sentence for the unabomber crimes, theodore j. kaczynski is locked in a legal battle with the federal government and a group of his victims over the future of his handwritten papers.  a1  challenge for speech writers  as president bush prepares for his state of the union address, he has told his writers that he wanted a more thematic speech, one that would focus on a few core issues, like energy, immigration and health care, where mr. bush hopes to achieve compromise with the democrats.a14  on reporters and sources  once leak investigations typically ended in failure, as reporters were able to fend off efforts to delve into what they learned from sources. but the investigation into the disclosure of the identity of a c.i.a. operative has made clear that any promise of confidentiality from a reporter may now come with an asterisk.  a16  new passport requirements  united states citizens returning by air from any country in the western hemisphere used to be able to present a driver's license or birth certificates to custom officials. starting tomorrow, american citizens will be required to present a passport.  a16  a call to improve fuel economy  the white house has posed questions about various options for a improved fuel economy. one idea under consideration, government officials and car company executives say, would be to do away with the existing system of fleet averages and set a standard for each vehicle.  a16  live microbe food products  in the year since the dannon company introduced activia, a line of yogurt with special live bacteria, sales in united states stores have soared well past the $100 million mark. now other food makers are scrambling to offer similar products .  a1  new york/region b1-7  educators rethink role of middle schools  school systems in new york city and nationwide are rethinking middle school, driven by increasingly well-documented slumps in learning among early adolescents as well as middle school crime rates and stubborn high school dropout rates. some educators are pushing for eliminating middle schools and absorbing the grades into either elementary or high schools.  a1  at 71, jockey chases goal  frank amonte sr. has a goal: to become the only jockey over 70 to win a race. the wiry 71-year-old probably won't make it to the hall of fame, and has never ridden in the kentucky derby, but he is a survivor of a dangerous, grueling sport where broken backs, limbs and necks are common, and some of its athletes have suffered permanent disability or even death on the track.  b1  the case of the paralegal  brian t. valery, who billed clients roughly $300 an hour as he deposed insurance executives at anderson kill & olick, a manhattan law firm, had never actually been admitted to the bar and is scheduled to be arraigned on criminal charges.  b1  neediest cases  b6  sportsmonday d1-7  bears and colts in super bowl  in miami, the indianapolis colts will play the chicago bears in super bowl xli, and it will create a significant matchup: coaches tony dungy and lovie smith will become the first black coaches to lead teams to the super bowl.  d1  arts e1-10  abc mulls actor's future  executives at abc and its parent, disney, are mulling the future of the actor isaiah washington, a star of the hit series ''grey's anatomy,'' after he publicly used an anti-gay slur for the second time in roughly three months, a disney executive said.  e1  'idol' judge denies inebriation  paula abdul, the ''american idol'' judge whose behavior in recent televised interviews has been the subject of widespread speculation, said she was sober and had not been under the influence of drugs while working to promote the show.  e1  obituaries b8  james hillier  a physicist who helped develop an early and commercially succesfulelectron microscope for rca and then found ways to use it in medical research, he was 91. b8  antonina tumkovsky  an influential teacher at the school of american ballet who trained future stars of the new york city ballet and other dancers for 54 years, she was 101.  b8  business day c1-12  drug ads under scrutiny  drug advertising aimed at consumers, a fast-growing category that reached $4.5 billion last year, is likely to face hard scrutiny in the new congress as pharmaceutical companies seek to have the ads evaluated by the food and drug administration.  c1  wall street gambling inquiry  the justice department issued subpoenas to at least four wall street investment banks as part of an investigation into the multibillion-dollar online gambling industry.  c1  business digest c2  editorial a18-19  editorials: congress's challenge on iraq; the clinic is open; hedge funds and insider trading; when john meets al.  columns: bob herbert, paul krugman.  bridge e4  crossword e4  metro diary b2  tv listings e9  weather d8  