chairs with airs: on arty streets, a cluster of hip furniture stores   the abc carpet and home store, yards from the brooklyn waterfront, has been closed for about a year now, but people moving into the new 33-story j condominiums up jay street need not fret about finding that perfect new sofa.  boconcept, an outlet of a danish furniture chain that opened on front street in december, is just the latest in a cluster of furniture stores that have set up shop in the narrow dumbo neighborhood. it is also the third specializing in european designs alone, joining baxter & liebchen on jay street, which sells vintage danish pieces, and prague kolektiv on front street, which sells czech furniture.  shaokao cheng, who owns the boconcept franchise in new york, said the area's reputation as a center for design enthusiasts had attracted him. ''one of the reasons we went out to dumbo is so we could showcase some of our design-conscious pieces,'' he said last week. ''by being there, we're hoping to say, hey, we're not just about selling to the masses a couch that you can get anywhere.''  one afternoon last week at the store's crisp white showroom, a local artist named stephanie brody-lederman, who was browsing, said the market for boconcept's wares was simple. ''i think there's a lot of new construction, a lot of condos opening up -- and they have walls and floors,'' she deadpanned. besides the j condominiums, the new structures include the 23-story beacon tower just past the manhattan bridge, and the recently opened 70 washington street, which has 259 units.  the european stores are just part of the menu: hide harashima, who writes about the neighborhood on dumbonyc.com, his blog, can rattle off a long list of local furniture merchants, including the independents wonk, city joinery and journey home on jay street; the outlet of the williams-sonoma-owned chain west elm on front street; and even modern tots, which sells sleek children's furniture on pearl street.  besides the new residences, the neighborhood's appeal to these businesses includes large converted warehouse spaces and an active creative community, mr. harashima said.  andrew kevelson, who owns baxter & liebchen, said that despite the local building boom, space was a relative bargain for a business like his. in manhattan, he explained, ''to get into a neighborhood where people tend to look for an interesting aesthetic in furniture, that would have to be soho, tribeca or noho, and it could cost six times as much.''  the manager at wonk, robert siewert, said his customers are the kind of people who know what an eames chair is. dumbo, he thinks, has at least something to do with that.  ''this building, before they started getting kicked out, was mostly artist studios,'' he said about the j condominiums, around the corner. ''maybe people buy into that idea, even though they're spending a million dollars on an apartment.''  jake mooney  neighborhood report: dumbo  correction:  january 28, 2007, sunday  because of an editing error, an article last sunday about furniture stores in dumbo, brooklyn, misstated the context of a quotation by robert siewert, the manager at wonk, one of the stores. when mr. siewert said, ''this building, before they started getting kicked out, was mostly artist studios,'' he was referring to a building at 68 jay street, where his store is located -- not to the nearby j condominiums.  