dueling banjos, gospel harmonies, arabesques and electric eels   exploding star orchestra  the cornetist rob mazurek originally convened his exploding star orchestra for a commissioned concert a year and a half ago at millennium park in chicago. ''we are all from somewhere else'' (thrill jockey), the group's phantasmagorical first album, was recorded in a studio some time later with many of the same musicians. mr. mazurek, a chicago native who now lives in brazil, divides the album neatly into two suites, each with its own whimsically oblique story line. (sting rays, phoenixes and the violent energies of the universe are involved.) writing for 14 pieces, he employs strategies somehow evocative of both lalo schifrin and andrew hill. swirling action is his strong suit, even when the working conceit is a group improvisation against the recorded hum of electric eels. the flutist nicole mitchell and the guitarist jeff parker make the strongest individual impressions, along with mr. mazurek, who augments his cornet with electronics. but the orchestra itself demands a wide-angle focus. at times its multilayered sonic atmosphere suggests an expanded edition of the instrumental rock group tortoise, with which it shares several members, including mr. parker. as engineered by john mcentire, another tortoise transplant, this album comes across as a work of ambition, imagination and panache.  holmes brothers  sherman and wendell holmes, who play bass and guitar respectively, and popsy dixon, who plays drums, have been making music as the holmes brothers for more than 25 years. their sweetly raspy vocal harmonies, deeply rooted in gospel, bring an irrepressible uplift to their new release, ''state of grace'' (alligator). it's not all warmth and sunlight though: the opener, a song by wendell holmes called ''smiling face hiding a weeping heart,'' sets the tone. nick lowe's ''(what's so funny 'bout) peace, love and understanding'' ideally suits this dynamic, and a pair of songs by lyle lovett work too. the producer craig street captures the group's rustic style without much fuss, adding only seasoned studio hands like the guitarist larry campbell and the keyboardist glenn patscha. he also brings in a few respectful guest singers: joan osborne, who tackles a song made famous by bill monroe; rosanne cash, who finesses a classic by hank williams; and levon helm, whose reedy vocal on ''i've just seen the rock of ages'' is the right thing at the right time. (the holmes brothers perform with allen toussaint on monday night at joe's pub.)  bill evans  bill evans led a handful of trios throughout his career, each one a vehicle for his precisely fluttering pianism. a new dvd, ''the oslo concerts,'' available from shanachie on jan. 30, documents a pair of performances nearly 15 years apart, and the contrast is striking. the first, with the bassist eddie gomez and the drummer alex riel, takes place at the munch museum in october 1966. it's a chiming, almost somber performance, right down to the poker faces in the norwegian audience. (four of the seven songs from the concert can be found on youtube.) the second concert dates from august 1980, when mr. evans performed a set at the molde jazz festival with an even better trio, featuring marc johnson on bass and joe la barbera on drums. but mr. evans's style had changed by then, with a rhythmic feel more suggestive of a surge than a swell. he prefaces ''nardis,'' which in 1966 was a floating mystery, with some startlingly emphatic arabesques. it's tempting to view the performance as a last gasp -- a month later, mr. evans would be gone -- but as a postconcert interview illuminates, it was just one stop along the road.  tony trischka  the title of ''double banjo bluegrass spectacular'' (rounder), the latest effort by tony trischka, is almost comically self-descriptive. it's a bluegrass album, no question, and on it mr. trischka matches wits and fingertips with a bushel of fellow banjoists, from the venerable earl scruggs to alison brown of union station to steve martin (yes, that steve martin). there are also solid contributions by members of the johnson mountain boys and other kindred spirits, like nickel creek's chris thile on mandolin. virtuosity is the standard, so much so that the rush of 16th notes can level off into a blur. but mr. trischka presents his guests with tunes that swerve from harmonic complacency or fretboard cliché. the longest and most incandescent track is ''twilight kingdom,'' which includes stuart duncan on fiddle, jerry douglas on dobro and david grier on guitar. at its center is an exchange between mr. trischka and his former student béla fleck; that's where the spectacular comes into play. (mr. trischka appears with soulgrass, led by the saxophonist bill evans, at the blue note tuesday through jan. 28.)  mira calix  ''eyes set against the sun'' (warp) is the latest electro-acoustic odyssey by mira calix, also known as chantal passamonte, the composer and producer from suffolk, england. though a shade precious at times, it's an engaging trip, thanks largely to a broad expanse of timbres. twittering birds, jangling keys and rustling foliage all play roles here; so do violins, a children's choir and the airy, distracted voice of ms. calix herself. the album occasionally drones, but more often it catches the attention one intricate detail at a time.  music: playlist  correction:  january 28, 2007, sunday  a review last sunday of tony trischka's album ''double banjo bluegrass spectacular'' in the playlist column misidentified a guest banjoist, alison brown. she is formerly of the group union station; she is no longer a member.  