keeping the livestock comfortable   the pigs, cows and fowl being raised on footsteps farm in old mystic are treated well -- very well. the owner, craig floyd, names every one and allows them all to live in a way he insists they deserve: plenty of fresh air, sunshine and interaction with members of their breeds.  after all, he says, animals raised for consumption deserve such high-quality treatment because they will be making the ultimate sacrifice for humans.  this philosophy, along with his refusal to use herbicides, antibiotics or other chemicals in raising the animals, helped footsteps farm become the first farm in connecticut to receive a ''certified humane raised and handled'' designation from humane farm animal care, a nonprofit organization based in virginia that seeks to improve the lives of farm animals.  farmers say the designation is important because it demonstrates to consumers that a third party has agreed that their animals are being raised in a natural manner. mr. floyd said he sought the certification because it was in keeping with his outlook.  ''an organic chicken generally means it was fed organic grain,'' he said. ''it can still mean it was never outside and never had a chicken life.''  he said that while pigs are social animals that have round noses so they can root in the ground, most of those raised for consumption spend their lives alone and confined in windowless, concrete-floored pens.  fowls are meant to scratch in the earth, but many chickens and turkeys that end up on our plates have had their beaks clipped, he said.  footsteps farm is one of 55 food producers nationwide to receive the certified humane designation. holly bridges, director of outreach for humane farm animal care, said the program began in may 2003.  producers with the designation include family farms like footsteps, packers like mosner veal in the bronx and food marketers. applegate farms in bridgewater, n.j., is the only other suburban new york city food producer with the certification.  christopher ely, co-founder of applegate, said his company concentrates on the sale and distribution of food like cheese, bacon and delicatessen meat.  ''we still micromanage our production,'' he said while on his way to inspect a pennsylvania farm from which applegate buys turkeys.  footsteps received certification in november for its chickens and turkeys, one of which was bought by martha stewart for thanksgiving. mr. floyd said he expected that his pigs would also soon be certified.  besides being free to roam in their paddocks and mingle with one another, his small herd of red-colored tamworth pigs are the same breed that his ancestors might have raised when they began working the land in 1712, he said.  he specializes in heritage breeds that are becoming endangered as food producers genetically engineer animals to grow bigger and faster, he said. many big food producers have genetically altered pigs that grow to market weight in six months, while his pigs take 10 to 12 months to reach optimal size, he said.  not only does he want to help preserve endangered breeds like the tamworth pigs, bourbon red turkeys and highland cattle, but he also wants animals that are more genetically natural, he said.  in the end, mr. floyd said, everyone benefits.  ''if a pig is happy, it affects the taste of the meat,'' he said.  farming  