partial bailout offered in book bankruptcy   small publishers left reeling by the major book wholesaler advanced marketing services' bankruptcy filing last month received a rare bit of good news yesterday.  the perseus books group announced that it was offering to acquire the distribution contracts of roughly 150 book publishers who employ publishers group west, a subsidiary of advanced marketing services, as their book distributor. perseus promised to pay 70 cents for every dollar owed to the publishers, an amount that could total $20 million if all the publishers accepted the deal.  two of the biggest publishers group west clients, grove/atlantic and the avalon publishing group, have already agreed to sign over their distribution contracts to perseus, and on jan. 10, avalon agreed to be acquired by perseus.  the announcement by perseus signaled to many small publishers that there could be a swift resolution to the advanced marketing services bankruptcy, a matter that has been the source of much anxiety for them.  advanced marketing services, which distributes books to discount clubs including costco and sam's club, filed for bankruptcy protection on dec. 29, reporting more than $200 million in debt to dozens of publishing companies. the largest creditor, random house, is owed more than $43 million, and simon & schuster is owed more than $26 million.  but it was the smaller independents, especially the clients of publishers group west, who appeared most vulnerable. david steinberger, the president and chief executive of perseus, said now that avalon and grove/atlantic had signed on, his company intended to reach out to each client of publishers group west this week.  ''given the situation that these independent publishers find themselves, in, we're hopeful that the substantial majority of them see this as the best option,'' mr. steinberger said. ''we're committed to independent publishing. we really see this as the preferred platform to support independent publishers.''  at emmis books in cincinnati, for instance, a publishers group west client that employs four and issues 50 titles a year, monday's offer was greeted with relief.  ''i think it's certainly as good an offer as many publishers are going to get,'' said howard cohen, the publicity director. ''seventy percent of something is better than zero percent of nothing. now we at least see a way for us to continue, to keep business going, to bring some resolution to this. we're finding our way out of an ugly situation.''  in addition to the $20 million it could cost perseus to pay off the debt that the publishers are owed, it will take millions to finance the shipment of those publishers' books to the perseus distribution installation in jackson, tenn., from that of publishers group west in indianapolis, mr. steinberger said.  the money owed to publishers is largely from book sales in the fourth quarter of 2006. publishers typically ship their books to a distributor, then receive payment within 90 days. the bankruptcy was filed at a particularly painful time for the publishers because october, november and december tend to be the busiest book-buying period of the year.  also yesterday, a federal bankruptcy court in delaware rejected a bid by simon & schuster to reclaim books in advanced marketing services' inventory that could be valued at $5 million, a simon & schuster spokesman, adam rothberg, said. ''we made an aggressive move to reclaim the books that were in their possession during the 45-day period before they filed chapter 11,'' mr. rothberg said.  