critics' choice: new cds; an album of riddles arrives on tiptoes   the shins  ''wincing the night away''  (sub pop)  there are singers who can evoke entire worlds with just a few well-chosen words. and then there is james mercer, leader of the indie-rock band the shins; he writes lines that run on and on. ''oh, inverted world,'' the shins' beautiful 2001 debut album, was full of unwieldy lyrics and lightheaded melodies. one song began, '' 'howdy, lem,' my grandpa said, with his eyes closed, wiping the eastbound dust from his sunburned brow/a life before doubt.'' somehow he made that heavy couplet float.  then came the louder and faster 2003 follow-up, ''chutes too narrow,'' and a film, ''garden state,'' that built the band into the soundtrack and the plot. soon the unassuming shins had become million-sellers, in a sense. (to reach that figure, you have to add up worldwide sales of both albums.) the new cd, ''wincing the night away,'' arrives on tiptoes.  ''sleeping lessons'' begins with mr. mercer and a keyboard; it's more than two minutes before the full band hits. and the lyrics might (or might not) be a dreamlike chronicle of insomnia: ''go without 'til the need seeps in.''  like the other shins albums, this one is sneaky; it takes hold slowly but insistently. mr. mercer told billboard that the glorious first single, ''phantom limb,'' was ''a hypothetical, fictional account of a young lesbian couple'' in a small town, but the lyrics are pleasingly indirect, like the melody.  he starts by running halfway up a major scale. (instead of do-re-mi-fa-sol, it's ''foals in winter coats''; mr. mercer is a hard-core anthropomorphist.) and every new handful of words brings with it a winsome new snatch of melody, until you're not sure where the chorus is, or if there is one.  this album is a bit more warmblooded than the first two, full of characters trying to decide between trying anew or giving up. ''sea legs,'' which has a drum-machine beat and a hint of morrissey, builds to a half-asked question: ''the choice is yours: to be loved, come away from it empty of '' mr. mercer doesn't finish the thought. and ''australia'' slowly comes into focus as the portrait of a mope: ''been alone since you were 21/you haven't laughed since january.''  buoyed by an incongruously cheerful bass line, mr. mercer glides toward a conclusion: ''you don't know how long i have been watching the lantern dim, starved of oxygen, so give me your hand and let's jump out the window.'' a cruel joke or a fantastic promise? in this low-gravity world, it's hard to tell.  kelefa sanneh  