as his character pursues fugitives, an actor breaks out too   ''prison break'' prides itself on over-the-top plot twists and belief-beggaring coincidences.  start with the very conceit of this addictively entertaining show: an upstanding structural engineer robs a bank so he can be incarcerated in the same prison as his death-row-bound brother so that they can escape together, guided by the prison blueprints tattooed all over the engineer's upper body. and the comic-book craziness has continued since the breakout, with touches like the show's creepy rapist-murderer forcing a veterinarian to reattach the hand that was chopped off during the escape, only to hack it off himself to escape imminent capture.  but with the twist that ended the fall finale, the ''prison break'' creative team may have vaulted the high bar it has set for itself. paul kellerman, the dogged secret service agent who has spent the past season and a half killing and torturing to ensure the brothers' deaths, saved their lives by shooting their f.b.i. nemesis.  tonight ''prison break'' returns on fox, with kellerman seemingly on the side of the angels. and as kellerman, paul adelstein is getting an acting challenge rivaling those of his chicago theater days, when he played roles like a mental-asylum patient cast as a rabble-rousing ex-priest in ''marat/sade.''  mr. adelstein, 37, originally auditioned for one of the two lead roles, that of lincoln burrows, whose framing for the murder of the vice president's brother sets off the show's roller-coaster gyrations. paul t. scheuring, the creator of ''prison break,'' said the burrows character needed to possess both a heart and the physically imposing menace to administer a prison beating.  mr. adelstein's audition tacked too far in the woe-is-me direction, mr. scheuring said. ''he had such a mournful read to it.'' but the show's casting director liked that vulnerable quality in mr. adelstein and urged mr. scheuring to bring him back to read for the role of kellerman. mr. scheuring and his colleagues, however, had been searching for a more stereotypical can-do type, like the cyborg pursuer robert patrick played in the film ''terminator 2: judgment day.''  but hiring mr. adelstein promised to add complexity to what could easily be a two-dimensional role as the cold-blooded killer. it is not an easy task to deepen a character and connect him with an audience when he has killed his partner, put a bullet in the ex-wife of one of the hero brothers and tried to drown the other brother's love interest. the layers mr. adelstein has added to kellerman have spurred the writers to make the character more of a regular and a fulcrum of this season's second half, mr. scheuring said.  mr. adelstein, suspecting that he would not be cast as burrows, had told his agent that he wanted to read for the kellerman role as a backup. ''i'm more of a character guy,'' he said in a telephone interview from dallas, where ''prison break'' is shooting this season.  that description captures his earlier roles in film (''intolerable cruelty,'' ''be cool'') and television (''without a trace,'' ''hack''), where the face might have been recognizable but the name was not. before his move to hollywood and after graduating from bowdoin college in brunswick, me., mr. adelstein worked in theater in his hometown, chicago, beginning his professional acting career when he joined a commedia dell'arte troupe started by the actor john cusack.  ''it was theater boot camp,'' he said. the heavily improvised theatrical form taught him to build characters, and he used that experience to flesh out kellerman.  after getting the ''prison break'' role, mr. adelstein immersed himself in literature about the secret service and the special forces, both aspects of the character's back story. he even read an interrogation handbook, which has come in handy when kellerman tortures recalcitrant innocents in his way. mr. adelstein also talked to several secret service agents and a special forces operative.  what stood out from his research was the secret service agents' attention to detail and the rule book, and the special forces operatives' willingness to improvise. ''within kellerman those two ideas reside,'' mr. adelstein said.  kellerman's loyalty to caroline reynolds, the vice president (now president) whose detail he was attached to and who had stirred some personal feelings inside him, has driven him in the first season and a half to do all sorts of dastardly deeds. his moral compass told him that reynolds (patricia wettig) was the best leader for the country, and that anything or anyone who jeopardizes her position must be eliminated. ''he is a patriot, if a misguided one,'' mr. adelstein said. if a few people have to die to ensure her status, he added, ''so be it.''  but kellerman has become disillusioned as he has learned that the president's motives may be suspect and that she has become a pawn of a shadowy cabal of multinational corporations known as the company. cast out of the inner circle by reynolds, kellerman feels betrayed, professionally and personally, and decides to do something rash: taking down reynolds and her presidency by helping the escaped brothers.  but since this is ''prison break,'' kellerman's alliance with the two brothers promises to be an uneasy one. after all, kellerman did try to smother burrows to death earlier this season.  mr. scheuring promises that kellerman will become a ''real loose cannon'' in forthcoming episodes and that the depth of his commitment to the escaped brothers will remain murky. ''is that a certainty, or can he still be persuaded by the other side?'' mr. scheuring asked. ''can he become a double agent? that's what drives the second part of the season.''  mr. adelstein has avoided the temptation to amp up the acting to match the plot. playing it straight does the job. ''the twists and turns are so juicy, you don't have to do much to get people to continue salivating,'' he said. and he hasn't had to tweak his character too much despite the hairpin plot turns; kellerman, in his mind, is still fighting for god and country. ''the guy totally believes he's doing the right thing,'' mr. adelstein said.  as he gets more public recognition while having a blast playing with guns -- ''it's like playing cops and robbers'' -- he may also soon get a chance to become even more of a television fixture. two years ago mr. adelstein played a major role in the pilot of ''nobody's watching,'' a comedy about two characters setting off for california to make their own sitcom. the pilot was rejected, only to find new life as a youtube sensation. now nbc has ordered scripts from the show's creator, bill lawrence (''scrubs,'' ''spin city'').  mr. adelstein may end up with less time for his rock band, doris (for which he sings lead and plays piano and guitar), if he is allowed to juggle two network shows. but he might no longer be pigeonholed as just a ''character guy.''  