the week ahead: jan. 21 - 27   correction appended  theater  steven mcelroy  the ancient greeks were arguably the first to use theater to create dialogue about war and other weighty matters. so sophocles' "antigone," written in 441 b.c., seems particularly timely yet again as it confronts the futility of war and the price a ruler pays for excessive pride -- or, as the greeks termed it, hubris. "the burial at thebes" is a modern adaptation of "antigone" by seamus heaney, the nobel prize-winning irish poet. the version of the text published in 2004 includes a note from the author drawing parallels between creon and the bush administration. a few years later we are still at war, and the play is still timely. alexander harrington directs. thursday through feb. 12, la mama, first floor theater, 74a east fourth street, east village, (212) 475-7710, lamama.org; $18.  uptown on the night that work opens, another irish writer takes center stage when brian friel's "translations," now in previews, has its official opening. mr. friel's 1980 play about native irish culture being wiped away by the steady and unapologetic march of imperialism seems appropriate today as well. in the fictional town of ballybeg in 1833, the british are remapping and renaming every hill and dale with english words, thus declaring ownership of the land while simultaneously treading on national pride. garry hynes ("the beauty queen of leenane") directs. biltmore theater, 261 west 47th street, (212) 239-6200, telecharge.com; $39.25 to $86.25.  war still on your mind? head back downtown to catch the incumbo theater company's revival of james mclure's dark 1979 comedy, "pvt. wars," about three vietnam war veterans struggling with physical and emotional injuries. after the feb. 3 performance audience members can participate in a discussion about military operations in iraq and afghanistan with veterans of each conflict. thursday through feb. 18, gene frankel theater, 24 bond street, between lafayette street and the bowery, east village, (212) 868-4444, smartix.com; $18.  film  manohla dargis  this time of the movie year often feels as empty as a gymnasium after the prom. the studios have released all their holiday blowouts and award hopefuls, some of which are actually worth seeing. (and if you haven't seen ''children of men'' yet, what are you waiting for?) for the most part the industry is just holding its collective breath until the end of february, when the academy awards roll around, which is why disposable flicks like ''night at the museum'' are topping the box office charts. new yorkers, however, don't need to watch ben stiller run around a computer-generated fantasy if they don't want to, because this week the art-house cup runneth over with a trove of new and old alternatives.  the museum of modern art has the restored print of david lynch's primal dream, ''eraserhead'' (1977), a film that needs revisiting particularly in the wake of his ''inland empire.'' mr. lynch's latest freakout is still drawing audiences to the ifc center, which, starting wednesday, will be playing two of the most critically beloved and underseen films released last year, hou hsiao-hsien's ''three times'' and cristi puiu's ''death of mr. lazarescu.''museum of modern art, (212) 708-9400, moma.org; ifc center, 323 avenue of the americas at west third street, greenwich village, (212) 924-7771, ifccenter.com.  television  mike hale  on the calendar of network television we're entering return-from-hiatus season. this week brings the resumption of the serials ''prison break'' on fox (monday, 8 p.m.) and ''heroes'' on nbc (monday, 9 p.m.). ''heroes'' has not been the best of last fall's new shows -- acting, apparently, is not an ability subject to enhancement through genetic mutation -- but it has been the most entertaining. monday's episode is light on action, as story lines are recapped and characters are shuffled around to set up future derring-do, but there is an amusing scene set at the american museum of natural history involving hiro, ando and a samurai sword.  another show that returns this week, after an even longer hiatus, is the guilty-pleasure sitcom ''george lopez'' (wednesday, 8 p.m.). it ended last april with the police arriving to arrest george's mother; it picks up with george leading them to her and delivering the show's first joke in nine months: ''in case she tries to run, don't bother with the pepper spray. we're mexican. ''  ''oprah's roots: an african american lives special'' (wednesday night on most pbs stations; check local listings) is an expanded version of a segment from the pbs series ''african american lives,'' which virginia heffernan of the new york times called ''the most exciting and stirring documentary on any subject to appear on television in a long time'' when it was shown last february. the scholar henry louis gates jr. enlists genealogists, historians and biochemists (and presumably several underpaid production assistants) to research ms. winfrey's ancestry.  dance  jennifer dunning  studio performances presented this week by the mark morris dance group will make it possible to see the work up close and personal. but mr. morris's dances and dancers have almost always looked that way, from the early days at the tiny dance theater workshop to later shows at the brooklyn academy of music. the gleaming mark morris dance center is just across lafayette avenue from the academy, and it is there that the company will present a new piece set to bach's italian concerto, as well as ''the argument,'' ''sang-froid'' and ''love song waltzes,'' tuesday through saturday. the program and assorted other events are mr. morris's way of welcoming in the new year. 3 lafayette avenue, fort greene, (212) 352-3101, mmdg.org; $40.  christopher d'amboise's ''tribute,'' which will be danced by the new york city balletfor the first time on saturday night, pays homage to the city ballet co-founder lincoln kirstein in the centenary year of his birth. the ballet will be danced by some of the company's most vivid young performers, dancers of the sort kirstein would have watched and championed as they progressed through the city ballet-affiliated school of american ballet, one of his pet projects. it is part of a program called ''tribute to kirstein,'' which also includes george balanchine's ''episodes'' and ''vienna waltzes.'' saturday at 8 p.m., also jan. 31 at 7:30 p.m., new york state theater, lincoln center, (212) 721-6500, nycballet.com; $30 to $82.  classical  anne midgette  classical music often focuses on unearthing the old: on resurrection rather than decline. but ''decasia'' focuses on decline itself. this film symphony (its name a gloss on ''fantasia,'' corrupted by ''decay'') consists of a score by michael gordon and a film by bill morrison edited from a trove of decaying silver-nitrate film from the early 20th century. the result is a tapestry of images that keep dissolving before the viewer's eyes as mr. gordon's music probes at tonality with deliberately mistuned chords. the work, something of a cult classic, is available on dvd but is by all accounts far more powerful in a theater, with live music provided (as it was for the piece's new york concert premiere in 2004) by tactus, the manhattan school of music's contemporary-music ensemble. thursday through saturday at 7 and 9:30 p.m., angel orensanz center for the arts, 172 norfolk street, lower east side, (212) 352-3101; $25; advance tickets are available through ticketmania.com.  another blend of old and new takes place on saturday, mozart's birthday, when the masters reimagined series at merkin concert hall ushers him past his overhyped 250th birthday into the wonderful world of 251. matt haimovitz, the acclaimed cellist, and uri caine, the jazz pianist, join in a two-part program that first presents mozart ''straight'' (in a performance of the k. 563 divertimento, with mr. haimovitz) and then ''modern,'' in the premiere of mr. caine's ''mozart project,'' with his own ensemble performing his updated versions of mozart excerpts. at 8 p.m., 129 west 67th street, manhattan, (212) 501-3330; $30 in advance, $35 at the door.  back to resurrection: the gotham chamber opera, which has put itself on the opera lovers' map by exploring less-known works from all over the repertory, is turning to outright comedy this year with rossini's ''signor bruschino,'' in which he honed the comic style that catapulted subsequent opera buffas like ''l'italiana in algeri'' or ''il barbiere di siviglia'' to such success. it has not been performed in new york since its american premiere at the metropolitan opera in 1932-33 (on a double bill with ''elektra''). opens thursday at 7:30 p.m. (performances continue next week), harry de jur playhouse, abrons arts center, 466 grand street, lower east side, (212) 279-4200.  another highlight this week is the song continues, the annual series of recitals and master classes that the marilyn horne foundation puts on at carnegie hall. this year the master classes have the spotlight: they will be taught by barbara cook, evelyn lear and ms. horne herself. tuesday at 7:30 p.m., wednesday and thursday at 5:30 and 7:30 p.m., friday at 7:30 p.m., weill recital hall and zankel hall, (212) 247-7800; $5 to $45.  pop/jazz  jon pareles  audition night goes international, eclectic and often danceable at globalfest. the event started in 2004 as a world-music showcase for concert bookers gathered at the annual conference of the association of performing arts promoters, and it has outgrown its initial home at the public theater. this year it moves to webster hall, so there's room for a general audience. a dozen acts are in the lineup, each offering a different perspective on how the traditional meets the present. lenine, one of brazil's most beloved songwriters, will play an acoustic set that's likely to merge the maracatu rhythms of recife with his own gift for melody. sara tavares draws on the afro-portuguese rhythms of the cape verde islands, while andy palacio and the garifuna collective play african-rooted music from central america. lila downs carries the husky drama of mexican tradition into songs addressed to both sides of the border. and lucia pulido, a colombian singer based in new york, leads palenque, which weaves jazzy accompaniments around traditional songs.  dengue fever is a los angeles band with a cambodian lead singer and a taste for 1960s psychedelic rock from both california and asia. boom pan, an israeli trio of guitar, tuba and percussion, delivers modal melodies with the twangy reverb of surf guitar. julia sarr, a singer from senegal, and patrice larose, a guitarist from france, mingle african vamps, french pop and a touch of flamenco.  a french contingent also includes the peppy babylon circus, which connects the horns and oompah of ska to accordion-driven cabaret, big-band swing and some political thoughts; les primitifs du futur, playing jazzy songs that echo the 1920s and 1930s; and le trio joubran, palestinian brothers who adapt middle eastern classical pieces for the oud. american tradition is also on the bill with the carolina chocolate drops, a string band revitalizing the african-american roots of old-timey music from the piedmont. sunday night at 6, 125 east 11th street, east village, (212) 353-1600; $40.  art  nicolai ouroussoff  in an age when the mantle of outsider can seem like just another fashionable pose, the outsider art fair in the puck building has a quaint ring to it. but this 15-year-old fair can still provide the unexpected. it includes a daunting sample of paintings by self-taught hobbyists, eccentrics and the clinically insane. and although the work is notoriously uneven, it remains a welcome counterpoint to the increasingly predictable slickness of the contemporary art scene. friday through jan. 28, 295 lafayette street, soho, (212) 777-5218.  those searching for a more ethereal experience should take a trip to ''lace and subversive knitting'' at the museum of arts and design, an exhibition that bridges the divide between high art and low craft. the show, which groups together 27 artists from seven countries, offers a range of works with different sensibilities, from a tiny pair of red mittens by the artist althea merback to janet echelman's enormous diaphanous webs, whose soft, billowing forms shift delicately in the wind. through june 17, 40 west 53rd street, manhattan, (212) 956-3535.  by comparison ''private treasures: four centuries of european master drawings,'' at the morgan library & museum, should be a comfort to those who prefer a more comfortingly classical art experience. on display are weighty 16th-century masterpieces like agnolo bronzino's ''study of the dead christ.'' but pay particular attention to watteau's delicious sketch of a man playing a guitar, as well as françois-andré vincent's ''drawing lesson,'' with its undertones of sexual tension. through april 8, 225 madison avenue, at 36th street,(212) 685-0008.  correction: january 19, 2007  a classical music entry on sunday in the week ahead report in arts & leisure incorrectly described ''decasia,'' being performed thursday through saturday at angel orensanz center for the arts. the concert consists of a score by michael gordon and a film by bill morrison, not a video. the entry also omitted information about advance tickets. they are available only through ticketmania.com, not at the center.  