a stylish ride to hydraulic hell   what was it? the citroën sm of 1970-75, the front-wheel-drive offspring of a french-italian marriage. fewer than 13,000 were made before the fuel crisis killed the market for fast coupes.  what's in a name? sm stood for systeme maserati, not sado-masochist, although that is an apt description of anyone who buys a less-than-perfect sm.  and the point was? the sm was the first fruit of a short-lived citroën-maserati merger. the car had an expediently designed v-6 -- the maserati bora's v-8 with two cylinders lopped off.  what made it memorable? unique-to-citroën hydraulics controlled the brakes, steering and suspension; a hydaulic breakdown could result in the loss of these crucial subsystems. the sm had no fewer than 14 warnings clustered around a large red light frighteningly labeled ''stop.'' while the ride was remarkably smooth, the steering and brakes could be terrifying. the brakes, actuated by a pressure-sensitive ''magic mushroom'' button on the floor, were incredibly touchy; the steering was so direct that a sneeze could send you into the next lane.  why be cautious? when an sm breaks -- and it will -- good luck finding a mechanic willing to tackle the job. opening the hood is like performing an alien autopsy in area 51: there are things in there that you cannot identify.  the ads said: like the infiniti campaign two decades later, the sm came with poetry. but in this case, the words were unintentionally hysterical (and bordered on soft-core pornography). consider this example:  ''trust the sm.  you'd be surprised  what a machine can do  when it knows  you believe in it.  easy on the steering wheel  handle it gently  don't overwhelm the sm  it will do what you want it to.  the citroën maserati is happiest,  will do its best for you  when it's trusted.  a love affair with the sm  is something that happens in the open  with everyone watching  and talking  such pleasure;  it feels almost sinful  relaxed by a suspension of air and oil  caressed by the sleek interior  seduced by the safe swiftness of the ride  you never want to go home.''  the critics said: with radical styling and unusual engineering, the sm was initially a hit with the press, and was motor trend's 1972 car of the year. but over time, the car's secret demons emerged. a former owner, joe molina, president of the jmpr public relations firm in woodland hills, calif., summed up the sm this way: ''powered by the italians, produced by the french and engineered by stephen king.''  what's it worth? free is too much for a bad one. in october, an sm described by norm mort in sports car market magazine as ''the worst car i've ever seen at any auction,'' went unsold in toronto with a high bid of $4,900. a much nicer sm brought $24,800 in raleigh, n.c., in december.  rob sass  rust in peace  