the visitors are from home   most concerts presented by the chamber music society of lincoln center rely on players from the organization's standing roster. the society's international string quartet series, on the other hand, usually offers a steady supply of visiting groups. but at a recital by the daedalus quartet on wednesday night at alice tully hall, the society had it both ways: daedalus, founded in 2000, is part of the organization's cms ii program for young musicians. but it also enjoys a busy career independent from its work at lincoln center.  debussy's string quartet in g minor (1893), which opened the concert, was intended to demonstrate the nascent (at the time) impressionist's ability to handle classical forms, or so the story goes. ravishing swells in the third movement presaged the voluptuous sound world of his ''prélude à l'après-midi d'un faune,'' a benchmark work well under way when debussy wrote his sole quartet.  the daedalus players -- the sibling violinists kyu-young kim and min-young kim, the violist jessica thompson and the cellist raman ramakrishnan -- underscored the work's formal elegance with impeccable balance and articulation, while also emphasizing its elusive passion and wit through imaginative management of phrasing and dynamics.  henri dutilleux's ''ainsi la nuit'' (1976), heard in its chamber music society premiere, evoked nocturnal mysteries with a moon-drunk vocabulary of twitters, rustles and glassy slithers that drew upon the innovations of webern and bartok. now and again, four independent flurries suddenly coalesced into striking ensemble statements. even in the most hushed passages, the players maintained a riveting focus.  beethoven's string quartet in a minor (op. 132) got off to a promising start; the musicians embraced the episodic strangeness of the opening movement and frolicked in the rustic bagpipe impressions of the second. the famous ''heiliger dankgesang'' hymn of the central movement initially seemed too chaste, but grew to an impressive intensity by the end. ebullient renditions of the two final movements were occasionally blemished by shaky intonation; still, over all this was a respectable account.  an encore was certainly warranted. but the work chosen, wynton marsalis's clever ''rampart st. row house rag,'' was an anticlimactic trifle in the wake of beethoven's towering edifice.  music review  