an art scene pushes beyond the old frontier   the town of jackson has long been known for cowboys, moose and mountains -- a shorthand for the american frontier that has been immortalized in countless wildlife and landscape paintings. and in jackson's town square, you can find showrooms like the trailside galleries and the legacy gallery, whose large spaces exhibit mounted bronzes of bears and oil paintings of snowy owls taking off in flight.  all sell briskly, at prices that can often exceed $50,000, and during the jackson hole fall arts festival every september, bit and spur makers display their work, locals lead tours of historic ranches and top western landscape artists hold individual shows and book signings that draw enthusiastic crowds.  but newer galleries in jackson, ones with a broader focus, have also been gaining an audience. the year-and-a-half-old oswald gallery specializes in photography, from the vintage (yousuf karsh's moody midcentury portraits of georgia o'keeffe and pablo casals, henri cartier-bresson's black-and-white seaside images) to the contemporary (works by hiroshi watanabe and annie leibovitz).  ''there are about 30 to 40 galleries in jackson, which is a lot for a town this small, but we get a lot of people coming through,'' said cary tijerina, director of the oswald gallery. ''this place has filled a bit of a void in the arts scene here -- people say that it doesn't feel like jackson. trailside and legacy have done a great job building their market, and we're trying to do the same for what we do.''  it's not just the gallery scene that is bringing a new artistic sensibility to this rugged resort town. the definition of art in the town and the surrounding valley of jackson hole has expanded with the arrival of the multidisciplinary center for the arts, a budding international film festival and a 500-seat performing arts theater that will open its doors in march.  there are now about 20 local and regional nonprofit organizations in the center for the arts, which serves as a new focal point for jackson's art scene. many groups have their own dedicated state-of-the-art studios and classrooms, including dancers' workshop -- which has been host to performances and master classes by companies like elisa monte dance of new york -- and the art association, whose new artspace gallery exhibits important contemporary artists like the sculptor deborah butterfield and the printmaker bud shark. six of ms. butterfield's large crushed-metal and wood horse sculptures were shown in the fall, and mr. shark's show of collaborative woodblock, lithograph and other prints will open in february.  ''this place is really going to change the look of the arts community in jackson hole because of the centralization of it all,'' said karen stewart, executive director of the art association. ''living in this building, the partnerships are wonderful -- it's working with the film festival, or the national museum of wildlife art, to enrich this community as a whole.''  the opening of the jackson hole film festival, which moves into its fourth season in june and is expected to draw 7,000 people and 1,000 film submissions from around the world, has also helped signal a broadening of the artistic landscape.  ''when we started the event, everything pointed toward its being a good cultural fit with the changes that were happening here,'' said eben dorros, founder of the jackson hole film festival and the nonprofit jackson hole film institute. movie industry heavyweights like ang lee and harrison ford have attended earlier festivals. ''we already know people want to go to jackson -- that's on our side -- but we want to offer something different with our festival,'' mr. dorros said. ''that includes a focus on global issues and a real commitment to independent filmmaking.''  this year's competitive program includes films that deal with humanitarian issues and a category that spotlights films from the far east. but mr. dorros also describes the festival's sports action category as a draw that is specific to jackson's outdoor pedigree.  focusing on the arts as an attraction alongside the snow and the wildlife is something that local hotels are doing as well. the four seasons jackson hole offers four-day digital photography workshops taught by rich clarkson, the former director of photography for national geographic, and a faculty of award-winning photographers. held in the fall, the workshops take participants on sunrise photography sessions in neighboring grand teton national park, home to elk, bear and bison. guests can use top-of-the-line digital cameras and computers for classes on technique and image editing.  because artistic tastes are evolving in the valley, there are more offerings that appeal to the new sensibility, said samantha denny, spokeswoman for the four seasons jackson hole. the three-year-old hotel's eclectic art collection -- including works by romare bearden, joan miró and alberto giacometti -- has been popular with locals and visitors alike.  ''the arc has moved away from the insular and the regional to a more cosmopolitan, diverse appreciation,'' said ms. denny. ''but the classic western and wildlife art aesthetic is still quite strong, and it's a significant part of what this place is. ''  at the oswald, a recent photography event brought out treasures like a portfolio of antique tissue prints by ansel adams, and greg epstein, a local photographer, was in attendance. ''i was interested in hearing what these guys had to say,'' said mr. epstein, who grew up in jackson and often shoots outdoor and adventure sports. ''there really aren't many photography galleries in jackson and certainly not any that are concentrating on contemporary and vintage work. this is a really nice change.''  one of the most important things to happen to jackson is that contemporary art has finally gained a serious foothold, said ms. stewart of the art association. ''it took a long time for that to happen, but we've finally achieved critical mass. there are now four to five galleries in town that are dedicated to contemporary work, which adds a new, exciting element to the scene here.''  doug henderson, associate director of the center for the arts, agreed. ''it's not just a bunch of cowboys and buffalo anymore,'' he said. ''my goal is that in five years, people think of jackson as a national arts destination, as well as whatever else they think of it now, for the extraordinary outdoors, skiing and wildlife.''  in the valley  the center for the arts (240 south glenwood street; 307-734-8956; www.jhcenterforthearts.org) has a full schedule of classes, programs and events from 20 arts organizations. the new performing arts pavilion will open in march.  the oswald gallery (165 north center street; 307-734-8100; www.oswaldgallery.com) holds regular artist receptions and photography exhibitions.  the fourth annual jackson hole film festival (307-733-8144; www.jacksonholefilmfestival.org) will take place from june 7 to 11 this year; festival passes will be available starting in february.  the four seasons jackson hole (800-295-5281; www.fourseasons.com/jacksonhole) plans to offer its ''capture the season'' four-day photo workshops this fall. prices and other details have not been announced.  the jackson hole fall arts festival will be held sept. 7 to 16. for information contact the jackson hole chamber of commerce (307-733-3316; www.jacksonholechamber.com).  heads up: jackson, wyo.  