amsterdam: mÖvenpick hotel amsterdam city centre   the basics  it is easy to be put off by a hotel chain that is owned by a former ice cream company. but mövenpick's latest hotel, a 408-room high-rise that opened in september on amsterdam's busy harbor, is a cool surprise. designed by the dutch firm claus en kaan, the hotel has a 20-story exterior striped in alternating bands of glass, white concrete and green granite -- not unlike an enormous popsicle.  the location  despite its name, the hotel is not quite in the amsterdam city center. situated on the water's edge, between the new muziekgebouw concert hall and the passenger terminal buildings, it is about a 10-minute walk from rail service at central station. (it offers an hourly shuttle to the station during the day.)  the crowd  business travelers and tourists in jeans and t-shirts. during a recent check in, one could overhear american, british and african accents. it's also a smoke-free hotel (a new concept for this city), so expect a small crowd to huddle outdoors, in front of the lobby bar.  the rooms  insist on a room on the 10th floor or higher for the most striking views of the active harbor, dotted with ferries, cruise ships, small boats and cranes. the windows in my standard double took up nearly half the wall, which not only made the average-size room feel spacious, but compensated for the lack of a flat-screen tv. when your eyes finally focus on the contemporary interior, you'll notice a comfortable bed, a navy blue couch under the window and an electric kettle for coffee or tea. the décor picks up on the facade's striped motif: gray wall-to-wall carpeting, lined beige curtains and thinly striped ivory-and-brown nightstands.  the bathrooms  small but efficient, with spotless white-tile surfaces and bright halogen lighting. the shower stall was tiny, but offered good pressure and instant hot water. the towels were small, but fluffy and bleach white. the bogner bath products included shower gel and shampoo.  amenities  free wi-fi is available throughout the hotel, and two computers are available in the lobby. a small but well-equipped gym and spa are on the mezzanine level. a stylish asian-themed restaurant, silk road, has funky bamboo wallpaper, communal wooden tables and an eclectic menu of indian, indonesian and thai dishes, along with other international cuisine. at 21 euros a person ($27 at $1.33 to the euro), breakfast is not cheap, but it offers a generous buffet of pastries, fruits, cereals, cheeses, meats and an omelet bar.  room service  fast and professional. a cappuccino was delivered piping hot less than 10 minutes after the order was placed. it was served in a large mug and cost less than a latte at starbucks, even after the tip. the 24-hour menu includes a good selection of comfort foods like burgers, pasta and, of course, mövenpick ice cream.  bottom line  this hotel offers good value a short trek from amsterdam's center. those who want old european charm along the city's historic canals should look elsewhere (and be prepared to spend at least 200 euros). otherwise the dramatic harbor views, moderate rates and modern amenities make up for the extra walking and cab fares.  standard rooms start at 145 euros a night on weekends and 175 euros on weekdays, or $188.60 and $227.60; for junior suites add a 120-euro supplement, or $156; and for the enormous ambassador suite, add 220 euros, or $286, to the rate. mövenpick hotel amsterdam city centre, piet heinkade 11; (31-20) 519-1200; www.moevenpick-hotels.com.  gisela williams  check in/check out  