with loss, rangers limp into break   a gloom descended on the rangers late in a 3-1 loss to atlanta yesterday afternoon at madison square garden, where the crowd melted away and the team limped into the all-star game break with the momentum of a stalled car.  this seemed worse than just another loss. the rangers have lost four of their past five games, but they were tied, 1-1, going into the third period yesterday. and they remain in a full-scale search for answers.  although they seem to have stanched the worst of their defensive problems lately, the rangers are now having difficulty scoring. on the power play, they pass the puck excessively and routinely scamper back to retrieve it. if opponents slow jaromir jagr, then the rest of the rangers offer few options.  ''it just seems right now the team's off balance, the power play's off balance, the lines seem disjointed,'' forward brendan shanahan said. ''sometimes it's a good time to step back, have a bit of a break and come back recharged.''  last season, the rangers were a hot team going into the olympic break and cooled off when they returned. going into the all-star game this season, the rangers would need freon to lower their temperature any further. at 23-21-4, they are fighting to hang on to a playoff position.  meanwhile, atlanta cruises into the break in first place in the southeast division at 27-15-8, a young, entertaining team with few of the rangers' worries.  shanahan will be the rangers' only representative at the all-star game on wednesday in dallas. it is a fitting honor for a 19-year veteran with 24 goals, tied for the team lead, but it comes with its own contradictions. shanahan remains one of the rangers' great projects because they have failed to put an effective line around him. of shanahan's goals, 12 have come on power plays. he has not scored at even strength since dec. 9.  the rangers signed shanahan, who has 622 career goals, in the off-season as a free agent. but they cannot find the right person to pass him the puck.  coach tom renney has tried several players on the line with shanahan, including petr prucha, jarkko immonen, martin straka, marcel hossa and jason ward. center matt cullen has been moved off the line, back on the line and shoved over to the left wing. against atlanta, jason krog, claimed off waivers from the thrashers on jan. 12, was thrown between cullen and shanahan at center.  that line had a few scoring chances.  ''it's our first game together and who knows if we'll have a second game together,'' shanahan said. ''it's just about developing some chemistry and getting results.''  shanahan is the star, but one without a proper setup man.  ''you'd like to think it's in your lineup, but it's possible that it's not,'' renney said. ''you can guess your way through that only so long. bottom line is, we have to have results from that position.''  renney will spend at least part of the break in hartford, searching for answers among the rangers' minor leaguers, but the rangers are also looking around the league as the feb. 27 trade deadline approaches. they are reported to be in line to acquire the often-injured center peter forsberg from philadelphia if the flyers decide to trade him.  ''obviously there has to be something missing,'' jagr said. ''if there wasn't anything missing, we would have a better record.''  jagr, with 17 goals and a team-leading 59 points, has tried to do the heavy lifting. against atlanta, he scored the rangers' goal on a spectacular move, putting an unstoppable shot on kari lehtonen 8 minutes 7 seconds into the first period.  the thrashers had a pretty goal in the first period, on a shot by ilya kovalchuk, and an ugly one in the third, when defenseman niclas havelid bounced a puck off the back of goaltender henrik lundqvist. in the second, lundqvist had kept the rangers alive by stopping a penalty shot by marian hossa, but hossa added an empty-net goal in the final minute.  all the rangers got was an emptier feeling for their week off.  hockey  