looking ahead   davos, anyone? -- the annual world economic forum will take place wednesday through sunday in davos, switzerland, drawing political and business leaders -- plus a celebrity or two -- to brainstorm solutions to world problems. among the top issues on the agenda are climate change and the role of emerging markets. klaus schwab, right, the founder and executive chairman of the forum, said he hoped that this year's conference would address a ''schizophrenic world'' in which there are both broad prosperity and tremendous risks from many directions.  news from pfizer -- jeffrey b. kindler, who was named chief executive of pfizer in july, will lead a presentation for analysts and investors on monday. the drug maker says it will discuss its ''strategic direction,'' which wall street analysts widely expect will include a goodly number of job cuts. pfizer and other pharmaceutical companies are under pressure to reduce costs, and pfizer said in november that it was laying off a fifth of its united states sales force. mr. kindler has called for pfizer to become more entrepreneurial.  the president's message -- president bush will give the state of the union address on tuesday. he is expected to announce a tax plan aimed at making health insurance more affordable for low-income people and to discuss energy initiatives to help reduce reliance on fossil fuels.  measuring the economy -- the main economic news of the week will be about housing, with existing-home sales for december (thursday) and new-home sales for december (friday). other reports include leading economic indicators (monday) and durable goods for december (friday).  many earnings reports -- this week falls in the heart of earnings season. among the many large companies reporting will be american express, pfizer and texas instruments (monday); advanced micro devices, bank of america, dupont, emc, johnson & johnson, sun microsystems, ual, wachovia, xerox and yahoo (tuesday); abbott laboratories, conocophillips, corning, ebay, general dynamics and mcdonald's (wednesday); at&t, bristol-myers squibb, ford, kimberly-clark, lockheed martin, microsoft, nokia and northrop grumman (thursday); and caterpillar and honeywell international (friday).  