knicks escape as last shot brings relief for a change   there were nine-tenths of a second left on the game clock when danny granger's 3-point attempt sailed past, and not through, the rim closest to the knicks' bench saturday night. the clock ticks that preceded that moment might have been the most anxious the knicks had endured all week, which is saying a lot.  last wednesday, the knicks lost to washington on a dunk with 2.2 seconds left. on friday, they lost to the nets on a tip-in with 2.8 seconds left. so a 2-point lead late saturday night against the indiana pacers was of no comfort when granger pulled up from 29 feet.  ''i was holding my breath, saying all the hail marys and everything i possibly could,'' coach isiah thomas said afterward. ''i know i couldn't take another heartbreaking loss like that at the end.''  the knicks were spared a spirit-crushing conclusion this time. granger, who had made three of six attempts from 3-point range, shot an air ball. quentin richardson gathered it, then heaved it into the air as the final buzzer sounded, and the knicks escaped with a 108-106 victory at conseco fieldhouse.  the final score was about the only thing that felt good for the knicks (18-24) at the end of another chaotic night. eddy curry was dominant, with 26 points, but fouled out with 2 minutes 31 seconds to play. stephon marbury had to pull himself from the game with 1:26 left because he could no longer run on an injured left knee.  the knicks blew leads of 15 points in the third quarter and 10 points in the fourth, and they nearly lost the game with marbury on the bench. they led by 6 points when marbury left for good, but committed three consecutive turnovers against the pacers' press. indiana cut the deficit to a point twice in the final 11.2 seconds, both on jermaine o'neal layups. the knicks held on, with nate robinson hitting three of four free throws in the final z10.1 seconds.  after that, the concern turned to marbury's health.  ''i'm fine,'' he said.  marbury said the injury was merely tendinitis and would not prevent him from playing monday in miami. thomas seemed less certain.  ''we'll see where he's at,'' thomas said. ''he's a pretty tough guy and he's been banged up all season long with that knee, and he's managed to get through.''  marbury first injured the knee in a game here dec. 15 but has not missed a game since then. he aggravated it in friday's loss against the nets, and twice more in the fourth quarter saturday. marbury hurt himself on a driving layup with 5:52 left, and grimaced as he jogged back up the court. but he did not take himself out until after he landed awkwardly when he was fouled with 1:42 left. in between, jamaal tinsley scored 6 points against marbury, and the pacers knocked an 8-point lead down to 2.  marbury said the knee was not a factor in tinsley's burst, but said he finally had to bench himself.  ''i would have been hurting the team if i had been out there,'' he said.  marbury's absence was felt immediately. with the pacers applying a press, jamal crawford threw away a pass. on the next possession, malik rose traveled as he crossed midcourt. then robinson committed a backcourt violation.  ''it was a hectic time,'' rose said. ''we didn't do what we normally practice, and it almost cost us.''  an incensed rose kicked a chair and bellowed for several minutes when he went back to the bench after his turnover. rose said his anger was directed at himself and at the referees.  but the knicks' worst stretch came in the third quarter, when the pacers cut a 15-point deficit to 2. o'neal, who had been quiet until then, got rolling and finished with 25 points and 10 rebounds. granger had 19 points.  it was a disappointing finish for the pacers (20-20) in the debut of their reconfigured roster after an eight-player trade with golden state on wednesday.  mike dunleavy, acquired in the deal, started at shooting guard and, after missing all four of his shots in the first half, scored 14 points in the second half. troy murphy, the other major player in the deal, came off the bench and had 10 points and 11 rebounds in 23 minutes.  before the game, pacers coach rick carlisle defended the team's decision to trade the starters al harrington and stephen jackson. o'neal criticized the trade after a game in miami on thursday night.  ''i felt like we had a crew of guys who could make it work,'' o'neal said. ''with al and those guys, i felt like we had the best five in the league.''  carlisle said he was unaware of o'neal's remarks, but he said that donnie walsh and larry bird, the team's top two officials, had talked to o'neal about the trade.  ''this is part of the business,'' carlisle said. ''if you want to get good players, you got to trade good players. my understanding is larry and don sat down with jermaine and talked about the reasons for the trade. a lot of it was to enhance his ability as a franchise player. that was a real positive for him. on the other hand, it's tough when your best friends leave the team -- a guy like al. we went through a lot to get him. none of us wanted to trade him.''  pro basketball  