australian open: roddick will try to make semis interesting for federer   melbourne -- roger federer was sitting comfortably, legs crossed, after vanquishing tommy robredo in less style than usual in the quarter final round of the australian open tuesday. he was talking just a little wistfully about how great it had been to watch a five-set match the night before when rafael nadal's staying power had gotten the better of andy murray's brain power.  "very interesting, i thought," said federer, who had stayed up late on monday night to see the finish on television in his hotel room. "raf is incredibly tough. i like to watch him just battle it out. i love seeing that. i mean he was so strong in the end. he deserved to win."  for the moment in melbourne, the small screen is as close as federer is getting to five-set fever. despite fluctuations in form and weather conditions, the world's number one player has not come close to going the distance at this australian open.  in five matches, he has not lost a set, and even losing his serve four times, as he did against the seventh-seeded robredo on a cool, gusty tuesday night that played tricks with timing, was not enough to keep federer from closing out the smooth-moving spanish baseliner 6-3, 7-6 (2), 7-5.  "i think he has a level of confidence that is way up there," said robredo, who has lost all seven of his matches against federer. "he comes up with what he needs."  federer has set the bar so high that even straight-set victories can seem deflating if they contain a few too many errant shots or a few too many groans of frustration.  but the ongoing test of a great champion is how his game responds to true pressure, and though federer has played and won two tiebreakers in melbourne, it appears that roddick's form and the american's state of mind could make things more interesting for federer when the two face off for the 14th time on thursday night.  "i look forward to it," roddick said. "we've done it before. i'm sure we'll do it again. i feel like i'm in good form. i'd love to see where i match up."  after having to fight his way past former australian open champion marat safin in the third round in four sets and mario ancic in the next round in five sets, roddick got to conserve some energy on tuesday as he put close friendship aside for an hour and 27 minutes and overwhelmed his former housemate mardy fish 6-2, 6-2, 6-2 and then kept the celebration to a minimum  "you know, it's always difficult; it's a weird, weird situation," said roddick, who made a minuscule four unforced errors in the match. "being that we're close, i think it takes away maybe a little of the elation because you're not really solely focused on your side of the court. maybe you're a little more conscious of both sides. it wasn't a planned reaction not to do anything. it was just kind of what i felt."  a victory over federer would leave him with no reason to hold back. theirs, for now, is much more a relationship than a rivalry. federer has won 12 of their 13 matches, his only loss coming in 2003 in the semifinals of the masters series event in canada when federer was one victory away from claiming the number one ranking for the first time.  "it was so important for me this experience, this kind of pressure, because never in my life had i handled pressure like this," said federer, who lost in a third-set tiebreaker. "so i was so disappointed but so happy to have gone through it later on."  by the end of the 2003 season, roddick had the number one ranking but federer had begun taking control of the sport, and he has maintained that control for three full seasons, clamping down hard on roddick in a series of matches in late 2004 and 2005.  but after successfully recruiting all-time great jimmy connors to help coach him, roddick has made changes to his backhand and tactics and, above all, recovered his sense of the possible.  "i'll be the first to say it was a welcomed change, almost a new life," roddick said. "just the way he put things, it just clicked. i don't know if you can minimize the effect that he's had on me."  with connors in his corner, roddick took a set off federer in last year's united states open final before losing his edge in the fourth. more encouragingly, he held three match points against the swiss in a round-robin match at the masters cup in shanghai in november before losing, and then beat him in the final of an exhibition tournament in melbourne before the australian open.  federer looked anything but devastated, which was understandable. an exhibition is just that, but it could not have hurt roddick's confidence to get another taste of what it felt like to beat the swiss.  "anytime you can get over the hump at all i think it helps you," said john roddick, who remains his brother's co-coach. "you're definitely not going to blow it out of proportion, but definitely, you kind of tuck it away in the back of your head and know you can do it."  