fragile hopes for bipartisan rescue of social security   president bush is renewing his call for a bipartisan effort on social security, but few other issues so clearly highlight the limits of bipartisanship these days, the mistrust and ideological division just barely below the surface.  many democrats and republicans agree that this period of divided government should, theoretically, be an opportune moment to find a solution to the long-term fiscal problems in social security, the 72-year-old government pension system. it is almost universally acknowledged that any fix -- which would be likely to involve a politically risky mix of benefit reductions, tax hikes or other painful changes -- would require broad and deep bipartisan support.  ''the american people have to sense on these types of issues that it's absolutely bipartisan and that the agreement was reached in an absolutely fair way,'' said senator judd gregg, republican of new hampshire, the senior republican on the budget committee. ''and that's one of the strengths of divided government.''  but even the earliest efforts at a rapprochement have been vexed, in large part because of the memories of the social security battle of 2005, when mr. bush campaigned hard to create private investment accounts in the program but failed.  efforts have been made: treasury secretary henry m. paulson jr. has talked to crucial lawmakers, including representative charles b. rangel of new york, the chairman of the ways and means committee, ''encouraging everyone to bring all their ideas to the table, and hoping that some kind of consensus can emerge,'' as michele davis, the assistant treasury secretary, puts it.  mr. rangel said he had also been talking about the possibility of action on social security with the ranking republican on his committee, representative jim mccrery of louisiana. and in the senate, mr. gregg and senator kent conrad of north dakota, the chairman of the budget committee, have proposed a bipartisan working group to explore broad entitlement and fiscal issues.  but the old fault lines have quickly re-emerged. vice president dick cheney, in an interview with fox news last week, said mr. paulson's openness to all ideas did not indicate that the administration was open to any increase in the payroll tax that supports social security. raising the cap on income subject to payroll taxes -- now at $97,500 -- is one of the most commonly cited ways to shore up social security. ''i think this president has been very, very clear on his position on taxes, and nothing's changed,'' mr. cheney said.  mr. conrad said that after those comments, his effort to move forward with his working group ''is on life support.'' he added, ''people have interpreted that to mean that the administration is not willing to alter their position one iota, and it's their way or the highway. well, that's not going to work.''  democrats already mistrustful of negotiating with the administration were buttressed in their views, mr. conrad added. ''they say, look, they're playing us for suckers.''  many democrats say they still want the president to take private investment accounts explicitly off the table before serious negotiations can begin. mr. bush is expected to include those accounts in his budget again this year, although with their hypothetical creation pushed back a year.  representative rahm emanuel, chairman of the democratic caucus, said that in a climate of such uncertainty for many americans' private pension programs, it was all the more important ''not to take away the one solid cornerstone of their retirement.'' he added, ''it's not good politics and it's not good economics.''  senator max baucus of montana, the chairman of the finance committee, a critical venue for any social security plan, said he too believed the president must give up his private accounts before serious talks could occur. if so, he added, ''i'm more than open, if the president is truly willing to look at all options.''  it is, in short, a polarized debate, and likely to become all the more so as the parties head into the 2008 election. on left and right, advocacy groups are watching for any signs of a flinch. grover norquist, the antitax conservative, said he was vocally making a pre-emptive case against any payroll tax increase, although he had been assured by the president in december that he would hold the line.  still, mr. norquist added, it is simply too dangerous to walk into negotiations with the democrats without explicitly ruling out tax increases. ''mom didn't want you to have girls at the house after 10, not because she didn't trust you, but because she thought it was unwise,'' he said.  there is similar vigilance on the left. ''there is no reason for us, as a campaign working on this issue, and there's no reason for the democrats to compromise with this president on the most sacrosanct program to progressives after he lost the privatization debate and lost the election,'' said brad woodhouse of americans united for change, a liberal labor-backed organization.  washington memo  