the overlook: the conclusion: a perfect crime   instead of going to the hospital to get checked out, bosch, along with walling, has gone back to the kent house, where bosch has convinced her that the terrorist angle was meant to distract, the crime being a classic one of sex and murder: alice kent had conspired with walling's partner to kill stanley kent. except the partner wasn't brenner, as bosch had been thinking.  harry bosch almost laughed but was too shocked to do anything except shake his head. rachel walling was telling him that cliff maxwell, the agent bosch had tangled with twice in the last few hours, was alice kent's partner in murder.  ''i can't believe this,'' he finally said. ''three hours ago i had the killer handcuffed on the floor right here!''  walling looked mortified by the realization that the murder of stanley kent was an inside job and that the theft of the cesium was nothing more than a well-played misdirection.  ''you see the rest now?'' bosch asked. ''you see how he would work it? her husband's dead and he starts coming around out of sympathy and because he's on the case. they start dating, fall in love and nobody ever raises an eyebrow about it. they're still out there looking for moby and elfayed.''  ''and what if we ever catch those guys?'' walling said, taking up the story. ''they could deny being a part of this thing until osama bin laden dies in a cave of old age, but who would believe them or care? there's nothing more ingenious than framing terrorists with a crime they didn't commit.''  ''a perfect crime. the only reason it blew up was because digiberto gonzalves checked that dumpster. without him we'd still be chasing moby and elfayed.''  ''so what do we do now, bosch?''  bosch shrugged but then answered anyway.  ''i say we set up a classic rat pit. put them both in rooms, ring the bell and say the first one who talks gets the deal. i'd bet on alice. she'll break and give him up, probably blame him for everything.''  ''something tells me you're right. and the truth is, i don't think maxwell was smart enough to pull this off. i worked with --''  walling's cellphone started buzzing. she took it out of her pocket and looked at the screen.  ''it's jack.''  ''find out where maxwell is.''  she answered the call and first answered a few questions about bosch's status, telling brenner that he was o.k. but was losing his voice because his throat hurt. bosch got up for another bottle of water but listened from the kitchen. walling casually steered the call toward maxwell.  ''hey, where's cliff, by the way? i wanted to talk to him about that thing with bosch in the hallway. i didn't like what he --''  she stopped and listened to the answer and bosch saw her eyes immediately become alert. something was wrong.  ''when was that?'' she asked.  she listened again and stood up.  ''listen, jack, i've got to go. i think bosch is about to be discharged. i'll check in as soon as i'm clear here.''  she closed the phone and looked at bosch.  ''what?''  ''jack said there were too many agents at the recovery scene -- just about everybody came out from downtown and they were standing around waiting on the radiation team. so maxwell volunteered to go pick up the witness at the mark twain. nobody had gotten around to it because i'd pulled off the original pickup team.''  ''he went alone?''  ''that's what jack said.''  ''how long ago?''  ''a half-hour.''  ''he's going to kill him.''  bosch stood up and moved toward the door.  he drove this time. on the way to hollywood he told walling that jesse mitford had no phone in his room. the mark twain wasn't much when it came to full service. instead, bosch called the watch commander at hollywood division and asked him to send a patrol car to the hotel to check on the witness. he then called information and was connected to the front desk at the mark twain.  ''alvin, this is detective bosch. from this morning?''  ''yeah, yeah. what's up with you, detective?''  ''has anyone come in asking for charles dickens?''  ''mmm, nope.''  ''in the last 20 minutes have you buzzed in anybody who looked like a cop or who wasn't a tenant there?''  ''no, detective. what's going on?''  ''listen, i need you to go up to that room and tell charles dickens to get out of there and to then call me on my cell.''  ''i got nobody to watch the desk, detective.''  ''it's an emergency, alvin. i need to get him out of there. it will take you less than five minutes. here, write this down. my number is 323-244-5631. you got it?''  ''i got it.''  ''o.k., go. and if anybody but me comes in there looking for him, say he checked out, took a refund and left. go, alvin, and thanks.''  bosch closed the phone and looked over at rachel. his face showed his lack of confidence in the deskman.  ''i think the guy's a meth-head.''  bosch increased his speed and tried to concentrate on driving. they had just turned south on cahuenga off barham. depending on traffic in hollywood, he was thinking that they could get to the mark twain in another five minutes. this conclusion made him shake his head. with a half-hour lead, maxwell should have reached the mark twain by now. he wondered if he had slipped in the back way and already gotten to mitford.  ''maxwell may have gone in through the back,'' he told walling. ''i'm going to come in from the alley.''  ''you know,'' walling said, ''maybe he's not going to hurt him. he'll pick him up and talk to him, judge for himself if he saw enough at the overlook that he'd be a threat.''  bosch shook his head.  ''no way. maxwell's got to know that once the cesium was found in the dumpster that his plan was going down the toilet. he's got to take action against all threats. first the witness, then alice kent.''  ''alice kent? you think he'd make a move against her? this whole thing is because of her.''  ''doesn't matter. survival instincts take over now, and she's a threat. it goes with the territory. you cross the big line to be with her. you cross it again to save your --''  bosch stopped as a sudden realization thudded in his chest. he cursed out loud and pinned the accelerator as they came out of the cahuenga pass. he cut across three lanes of highland avenue in front of the hollywood bowl and made a screeching u-turn in front of oncoming traffic. he punched it, and the car fishtailed wildly as he headed toward the southbound entrance to the hollywood freeway. rachel grabbed the dashboard and a door handle to hold on.  ''harry, what are you doing? this is the wrong way!''  he flicked on the siren and the blue lights that flashed in the front grill and back window of the car. he yelled his response to walling.  ''mitford is a misdirection. this is the right way. who is the greater threat to maxwell?''  ''alice?''  ''you bet, and now's the best shot he has of getting her out of tactical. everybody's up in that alley with the cesium.''  the freeway was moving pretty well, and the siren helped open it up further. depending on what kind of traffic maxwell encountered, bosch figured he could have already gotten to downtown.  walling opened her phone and started calling numbers. she tried number after number, but no one was answering.  ''i can't get anybody,'' she said.  ''where's t.i.u.?''  she didn't hesitate.  ''on broadway. you know where the million dollar theater is? same building. entrance on third.''  bosch opened his phone once more and called his partner. ferras answered right away.  ''ignacio, drop what you're doing and meet me at the third street entrance to the million dollar theater building. you know where that is?''  ''what's going on? i hear the siren.''  ''do you know where the million dollar theater is?''  ''yeah, i know where it is.''  ''meet me there at the third street entrance. i'll explain when i get there.''  he closed the phone.  the next 10 minutes took 10 hours. bosch moved in and out of traffic and finally reached the broadway exit in downtown. he killed the siren as he made the turn and headed down the hill toward their destination. they were three blocks away.  the million dollar theater was built in a time when the movie business showed itself off in magnificent theater palaces that lined broadway in downtown. but it had been decades since a first-run film was projected on a screen there. its ornate facade had been covered by a lighted marquee that for a time announced religious revivals instead of movies. now it waited, unused, for renovation and redemption, while above it a once-grand office building was 12 stories of midgrade office space and residential lofts.  ''good place for a secret unit to have a secret office,'' bosch said as the building came into sight. ''nobody would've guessed.''  walling didn't respond. she was trying to make another call. she then slapped the phone closed in frustration.  ''i can't even get our secretary. she always takes early lunch so there will be somebody in the office when the agents take lunch.''  ''where exactly is the squad and where would alice kent be in there?''  ''we have the whole seventh floor. there's a lounge with a couch and a tv. they probably put her in there.''  ''how many in the squad?''  ''eight agents, an a-sac, the secretary and an office manager. the office manager just went out on maternity leave, and the secretary must be at lunch. i hope. but they wouldn't have left alice kent alone. it's against policy. somebody had to have stayed there with her.''  bosch turned right on third and immediately pulled to the curb. ferras was already there, leaning casually against his volvo station wagon. in front of it was another parked car. a federal cruiser. bosch and walling got out. bosch approached ferras, and walling went to look into the fed car.  ''have you seen maxwell?'' bosch asked.  ''who?''  ''agent maxwell. the guy we put on the floor at the kent house this morning.''  ''no, i haven't seen anybody. what --''  ''it's his car,'' walling said as she joined them.  ''ignacio, this is agent walling.''  ''call me iggy.''  ''rachel.''  they shook hands.  ''o.k., then he's gotta be up there,'' bosch said. ''how many stairwells?''  ''three,'' walling said. ''but he'll use the one that comes out by his car.''  she pointed to double steel doors with an exit sign above them. bosch headed over that way to see if they were locked. ferras and walling followed.  ''what is going on?'' ferras asked.  ''maxwell is our shooter,'' bosch said. ''he is up --''  ''what?''  bosch checked the exit doors. there was no outside handle or knob. he turned to ferras.  ''look, there's not a lot of time. trust me, maxwell is our guy, and he's in this building to take out alice kent. we're --''  ''what is she doing here?''  ''the f.b.i. has a location here. she's here. no more questions, o.k.? just listen. agent walling and i are going up the elevator. i want you out here by this door. if maxwell comes out, you take him down. you understand?''  ''got it.''  ''good. call for backup. we're going up.''  bosch reached over and tapped ferras on the cheek.  ''and stay frosty.''  they left ferras there and headed through the entrance door. there was no lobby to speak of, just an elevator. it opened at the push of the button, and walling used a key card to engage the ''7'' button. they started going up.  ''something tells me you're never going to call him iggy,'' walling said.  bosch ignored the comment but thought of something to ask.  ''does this thing have a bell or a tone that sounds when it reaches the floor?''  ''i can't remem -- i think it does ... yes, definitely.''  ''great. we'll be sitting ducks.''  bosch pulled his gun out of its holster and walling did the same. bosch pushed walling to one side of the elevator while he took the other. he raised his gun. the elevator finally reached seven and there was a soft bell tone from outside. the door began to slide open, exposing bosch first.  no one was there.  walling signaled that the offices were to the left after exiting the elevator. bosch lowered himself into a combat crouch and stepped out, his gun up and ready.  again, no one was there.  he started moving to his left. rachel came out and moved with him on his right flank. they came to a loft-style office with two rows of cubicles -- the squad room -- and three private rooms that had been built free-standing in the open floor plan. there were large racks of electronic equipment between the cubicles, and every desk had two computer screens on it. it looked as if the whole place could be packed up and moved on a moment's notice.  bosch stepped farther in, and through a window in one of the private offices he saw a man sitting in a chair, his head back and eyes open. it looked as if he were wearing a red bib. but bosch knew it was blood. the man had been shot in the chest.  he pointed, and walling saw the dead man. she reacted with a quick intake of breath and a low-volume sigh.  the door to the office was ajar. they moved toward it and bosch pushed it open while walling covered them from behind. bosch stepped in and saw alice kent sitting on the floor, her back to the wall.  he crouched beside her. her eyes were open but dead. a gun was on the floor between her feet, and the wall behind her was spattered with blood and brain matter.  bosch turned and surveyed the room. he understood the play. it was set up so it would look as if alice kent had grabbed the agent's gun from his holster, shot him and then sat down on the floor and taken her own life. no note or explanation, but it was the best maxwell could come up with in the short amount of time and opportunity he had.  bosch turned to walling. she had let her guard down and was just standing there looking at the dead agent.  ''rachel --''  there were sudden shots from outside the room and the window shattered, spraying glass across the room. maxwell had sprung from behind one of the electronics racks. bosch rolled to his right and came up firing, putting six shots in a spread through the window into the squad room. he caught a glimpse of maxwell at the last moment as he jumped from cover and hit a door with an exit sign hanging from the ceiling over it.  ''rachel?''  ''i'm fine. go!''  ''which exit is that door?''  he pointed at the black door maxwell had gone through. walling stood up and looked. bosch saw glass all over her clothes and that she had been cut on the cheek.  ''those stairs go down to his car.''  bosch ran from the room toward the exit door. he opened his phone as he went and pushed the speed dial for his partner. the call was answered on half a ring. bosch had already hit the door and was in the stairwell.  ''he's coming down!''  bosch dropped the phone and started down the stairs. he could hear maxwell running on the steel steps below and instinctively knew that he was too far ahead.  bosch covered three more landings, taking three steps at a time. he could hear walling coming down behind him. he then heard the booming sound from below as maxwell hit the exit door at the bottom. there were immediate shouts, and then there were shots. they came so close together that it was impossible to determine how many had been fired.  ten seconds later bosch hit the exit door. he ran out onto the sidewalk and saw ferras leaning against the back bumper of maxwell's fed car. he was holding his weapon with one hand and his elbow with the other. a red rose of blood was blooming on his shoulder. traffic had stopped in both directions on third, and pedestrians were running down the sidewalks to safety.  ''i hit him twice,'' ferras yelled. ''he went that way.''  he nodded in the direction of the third street tunnel under bunker hill. bosch stepped closer to his partner and saw the wound in the ball of his shoulder. it didn't look too bad.  ''did you call for backup?'' bosch asked.  ''on the way.''  ferras grimaced as he adjusted his hold on his injured arm.  ''you did real good, iggy. hang in there while i go get this guy.''  ferras nodded. bosch turned and saw walling come through the door, a smear of blood on her face.  ''this way,'' he said.  they started down third in a spread formation. after a few steps bosch picked up the trail. maxwell was obviously hurt bad and was losing a lot of blood. it would make him easy to track.  but in another 20 feet it didn't matter. maxwell stopped them with his voice. he called out from an alleyway running perpendicular to third.  ''i just want to say ... that it was her. she wanted him dead. i just ... i just wanted her. that's all. but she wouldn't have it any other way ... and i did what she wanted. for that ... i am damned. ...''  bosch quietly approached the corner on a wide turn. he had his gun up and ready. then maxwell spoke again.  ''i'm sorry,'' he said.  then there was another shot. bosch made the turn and saw maxwell on the ground leaning against the wall, his gun on the pavement between his outstretched legs. in his suicide he adopted the same position as his lover, the woman he had just killed.  walling stood next to bosch and looked down at the dead agent. she said nothing. bosch checked his watch. it was almost noon. he had ridden the case from beginning to end in 12 hours. the tally was four dead, one wounded and one dying of radiation exposure.  and then there was bosch. he wondered if he was going to be part of the tally by the time all was said and done. his throat was now blazing, and there was a heaviness in his chest.  he looked over at walling and saw blood running down her cheek again. she would need stitches to close the wound.  ''you know what?'' he said. ''i'll take you to the hospital if you take me.''  she looked at him and smiled sort of sadly.  ''throw in iggy and you've got yourself a deal.''  bosch left her there with maxwell and walked out of the alley and back toward his partner. backup units had just turned off broadway onto third. there were sirens blaring and crowds forming. bosch decided he would leave it to the patrol officers to take charge of the crime scene. he leaned against the fender next to ferras and told him that maxwell had just killed himself.  ''hell of a way to go, i guess,'' ferras said.  bosch nodded but kept silent. his thoughts moved down the streets and up the hills to the overlook, where the last thing stanley kent ever saw was the city spread before him in beautiful shimmering light. bosch thought that maybe it wasn't so bad, for a last view. maybe to stanley it even looked like heaven.  next week: the debut of ''gentlemen of the road,'' by michael chabon.  the funny pages: iii  