big game? an enron survivor hunts for riches   the south pacific islands of papua new guinea, where canned mackerel occasionally serves as currency and cannibalism was once on the menu, are a long way from the corporate jungles where enron was born.  yet amid the wreckage of enron, the energy giant that went bankrupt in 2001, is a leftover sliver of the company that is still doing business in papua new guinea: an oil refinery near the country's capital, port moresby, that was shipped there from alaska and in which enron continues to hold a small stake.  in november, the relatively obscure houston company that owns most of that refinery, the interoil corporation, made the kind of announcement investors crave: explorations near the refinery had uncorked a vast pool of natural gas potentially larger than the united states' total residential consumption of the fossil fuel in 2005. the size of the discovery was so large, phil e. mulacek, interoil's chairman and chief executive, informed an analyst, that simply controlling its output ''was sort of like trying to stop the mississippi.''  just a few years ago, such proclamations -- and the executives who made them -- might have been viewed as curiosities, if they were noticed at all. energy prices were so low that many natural-gas discoveries were burnt off so that drilling rigs could extract precious oil deposits further below. and rattled investors might have been wary of any company linked to enron, especially one like interoil that was boasting of possible treasures unearthed in remote jungles.  but that was then. this is now.  after a lengthy dormant spell, the global search for gas and oil has reignited with a fervor that is transforming companies like interoil into wall street darlings. ''the gold rush is back on,'' said andrew v. boland, an energy analyst at peters & company, a canadian investment firm. ''it's like the wild, wild west, all over again.''  interoil's gas find -- which is unconfirmed and may be impossible to transport -- caused the company's stock price to soar and its market capitalization to swell to $891 million from $572 million within three weeks of the announcement. many of interoil's financial backers, including merrill lynch, morgan stanley, goldman sachs, wells fargo, and boone pickens's investment firm, increased their bets after the discovery was revealed. stanley druckenmiller, a former lieutenant of george soros, disclosed three days after the announcement that his hedge fund had poured more than $30 million into interoil stock.  the passion for unearthing energy riches goes well beyond interoil, of course. yet, as the tangled history and relationships behind interoil demonstrate, fortune and merit do not always march in lockstep in today's energy scramble. in addition to enfranchising bold explorers, energy fever has empowered scrappy promoters and would-be kingmakers who are rushing to remake nations and economies in a flash, analysts say.  in a controversial move, the monarchy of qatar, for instance, earned a shot at becoming a regional power broker after a collection of local magnates helped to persuade the government and exxonmobil to pour more than $25 billion into the nation's gas fields. in bolivia, president evo morales is trying to use his country's gas reservoirs to force neighboring chile to give his landlocked country a corridor to the sea.  for small companies like interoil, the possibilities for riches and influence are even more intoxicating. ''i knew from the start this company would be great,'' said wayne andrews, an analyst at raymond james who has long encouraged investors to buy interoil. ''these guys have moved mountains. they're working in an area with huge documented reservoirs of crude oil and natural gas. this is how fortunes are made.''  critics disagree. the company's history of disappointing results cause some to worry that not everything at interoil is as it seems.  ''this is a very questionable company,'' said peter j. hodson, a senior portfolio manager at sprott asset management who has both owned and bet against interoil's stock, but is not currently invested in the company. ''these are not the types of people who are supposed to win the energy race.''  interoil was born in 1994, when mr. mulacek, a texas oilman, bought a small alaskan oil refinery and decided to relocate it halfway around the world.  mr. mulacek, who declined repeated interview requests, founded his first energy company in 1981 while he was still an undergraduate at texas tech university. in 1990, according to an interview with the australian, the newspaper, he was processing oil waste in war-torn kuwait when he met a group of chevron executives. four years later, they invited him to alaska on a fishing trip that also included a tour of a small refinery that chevron was trying to sell.  at the time, oil refineries were not in high demand. global petroleum development had slowed to a relative standstill as energy companies faced record low oil prices. but mr. mulacek saw in the alaskan refinery a unique opportunity: although the rugged terrain of papua new guinea, 6,000 miles away, was known to house oil and gas reserves -- in some places, visitors could squeeze rocks until their hands were coated with an oily residue -- the country had no domestic refining capacity. mr. mulacek, who is described by acquaintances as a uniquely intense and driven businessman, bought the refinery and started the move.  to find investors to finance the purchase, he enlisted the aid of gaylen j. byker, an oil executive who he had met through mutual acquaintances. mr. byker was about to become president of calvin college, an educational affiliate of the christian reformed church that is based in grand rapids, mich. (mr. byker still holds that position.) but before taking the reins at calvin college, mr. byker incorporated a small company to invest in mr. mulacek's refinery. a few months later, in mid-1995, mr. byker sold a portion of that company to his previous employer, the offshore energy development corporation.  when offshore energy went public a few months after that, mr. byker sold his shares for $1.6 million, according to securities filings. five months later, offshore energy's stock had declined by more than 73 percent, and offshore energy announced that it was for sale. in 1997, titan exploration, controlled by the deal maker richard rainwater, and an enron subsidiary named jedi (an entity later implicated in enron's bankruptcy) bought the company and its stake in mr. mulacek's refinery.  by the time titan entered the scene, mr. mulacek and mr. byker were scrambling to find cash to finance the refinery's relocation, according to mr. byker. foremost among potential financiers was the overseas private investment corporation, a federal agency also known as opic that offers american companies loans and insurance for foreign projects with strategic value to the united states.  by 1999, when interoil's talks with opic were announced, papua new guinea was struggling to maintain a fragile peace achieved only a year earlier when a treaty ended a popular revolt that had claimed 20,000 lives. the united states had promised more than $1 million in direct aid to help quell unrest. in 2001, opic agreed to lend interoil $85 million to finance the refinery's rebuilding.  by then, the project was almost 10 years old and reconstruction was almost complete. but the refinery failed to meet expectations: although it began in 2004 to process crude bought from other oil companies, and has produced millions of barrels of gasoline and other products, it has never sold any of it at a profit. interoil has booked about $893 million in revenue over the last three years, largely by selling the refinery's output. but the company reported increasing losses, posting a net loss of $37 million in 2005 alone, the last full year for which data are available.  ''when crude was $30 a barrel, this refinery made a lot of sense,'' said mr. byker, who still serves as an interoil director. but the market for nontransportation fuels produced in the refining process, like naphtha, became less profitable as the price of crude rose, said mr. byker, causing interoil's earnings to suffer. the company has spent millions of dollars making the refinery more efficient, but thus far ''it hasn't worked out as we hoped,'' he said.  a dearth of profits, however, did not stop interoil from raising wads of money from investors. interoil raised more than $125 million from shareholders and $318 million from debt holders between 2003 and 2005, according to securities filings. it did so based on assets that consist primarily of the refinery, which mr. byker said interoil bought for less than $10 million, about 60 papua new guinean gas stations and a handful of oil and gas exploration projects.  the company's executives and analysts say investors are willing to overlook interoil's losses because they believe that its oil and gas exploration activities will eventually pay off.  ''while there hasn't been any real success in the company's history, i think they're on the brink of something huge,'' said mr. andrews at raymond james, one of the few wall street analysts who has consistently followed the company. ''i know it's controversial, and when people bash the company, i can't really say they're wrong, but i think it's going to be a great investment. it's happened with other energy explorers before.''  in the last seven years, interoil has drilled major wells in at least eight locations in papua new guinea. at the beginning of many of those projects, interoil executives announced impressive preliminary results. with wells bearing such robust and bullish names as ''rhino,'' ''sterling mustang'' and ''triceratops,'' interoil has announced tentative oil finds that topped 1.3 billion barrels.  and, as has always been the case on wall street, rosy announcements often provide more than enough fuel to ignite a stock surge.  a dollar invested in the company's stock in january 2002, when interoil first said it discovered a major new oil system in papua new guinea, would be worth nearly $11.50 today. (by comparison, $1 invested in exxonmobil would be worth $2.10.) during that time interoil insiders, including mr. mulacek and mr. byker, have exercised stock options worth millions of dollars, and hedge funds have sold large blocks of shares to smaller, retail buyers, according to interviews with some of these large investors.  but none of interoil's wells have ever produced any significant amounts of oil, according to securities filings. almost all of its petroleum wells are now capped or dormant. interoil remains dependent on buying crude from other papua new guinea oil explorers and foreign companies that it then refines. mr. byker said the company has always been forthright about its exploration activities, and has always been explicit in public statements that its business projections may be wrong. ''those press releases were very carefully couched,'' mr. byker said.  interoil's vice president for investor and public relations, anesti dermedgoglou, agreed. ''there is often a difference between expectations and results in life,'' he said. ''i can't help if investors get too excited. i don't control the stock price.''  mr. byker added that throughout the company's history, interoil insiders have held onto most of their stock, showing that they are as dedicated as the investors they approached.  the company has also always urged inside shareholders to be forthright about their purchases and sales of the company's stock, he said.  ''we're all pretty well committed,'' said mr. byker, who personally owns shares worth more than $8 million. mr. mulacek holds shares worth more than $25 million, according to securities filings.  but mr. byker acknowledges that the company's convoluted, labyrinthine ownership structure makes it difficult to know exactly who owns what at interoil. for instance, a portion of interoil's shares are owned by a series of different entities that mr. mulacek and his family partially own. there are also a number of other entities partially owned or affiliated with mr. mulacek or mr. byker that own interoil stock.  ''the company grew up over a long period of time, and so there were a lot of different groups involved,'' mr. byker said. although identified in filings as one of interoil's largest shareholders, mr. byker said that ''there are lots of other people involved with this company who own more than i do.''  ''but it's hard to tell who they are or who owns what,'' he added, ''because they work through limited partnerships and offshore companies.''  such explanations have not satisfied some short-sellers and analysts, such as ira zadikow at great eastern securities in new york and mr. hodson of sprott asset management, who say the company's complicated ownership structure is worrisome.  interoil has obtained millions of dollars in loans from clarion finanz ag, the investment firm of carlo civelli, a swiss businessman who has worked with mr. mulacek since 1996 as an investor or adviser. last year, interoil announced that clarion and merrill lynch had agreed to lend the company $130 million. mr. civelli has a long history as an investor in canadian energy, mining and technology companies, where he often takes director posts.  in 1994, according to news reports, two inspectors working for the british government reviewing insider-trading allegations accused mr. civelli of improperly working with a broker to disguise stock sales of companies involved in takeover talks. the inspectors also examined financial transactions that they believed were ''akin to a money-laundering operation,'' according to the reports, for possible links to mr. civelli. mr. civelli was never charged with any crimes by the british government, and vancouver stock exchange officials who reviewed the report decided not to pursue their own investigation.  in an interview, mr. civelli said that he would have been criminally charged if there had been any real evidence of wrongdoing. ''they were interested in destroying my reputation,'' he said. ''they were not interested in the truth.''  in a second, unrelated case earlier this year, canadian securities regulators said mr. civelli had covertly helped another executive gain control of a publicly traded energy company after regulators had banned the executive from running any public companies. mr. civelli said the regulators' claims were false, and that he was simply helping to broker a stock deal. canadian regulators have not charged mr. civelli with any wrongdoing in the matter.  merrill lynch, which had a banking relationship with enron and is now one of interoil's major lenders, declined to discuss its relationship with mr. civelli or interoil. for his part, mr. byker asserted that mr. civelli's problems had nothing to do with interoil. ''he's been a very reliable and straightforward person in everything involving interoil,'' he said.  interoil has had other entanglements with controversial figures. in 2004, mr. mulacek hired an investor relations executive named carl caserta, whom the securities and exchange commission had barred from the securities industry almost two decades earlier, after he was accused of buying hundreds of thousands of stock shares for clients without their authorization. mr. caserta, who declined to speak on the record, stopped working for interoil in 2005, according to his former employer, lighthouse capital ltd.  mr. byker said the interoil board was not aware of mr. caserta's history when he was retained. mr. dermedgoglou of interoil said he was not aware that the firmhad hired mr. caserta.  the tangled corporate structure at interoil, and the skein of financial and business relationships propping it up, might not have generated much attention if the company had not unfurled its november announcement about the mississippi-sized natural-gas fields it had found in papua new guinea. the timing of the announcement was impeccable, arriving amid a global transformation in energy exploration.  for years, foreign development of natural gas lagged behind the search for other resources like petroleum, because low natural-gas prices did not generate much interest. but earlier in this decade, energy prices began rising and natural-gas exploration became much more attractive. previously discovered but undeveloped gas fields in qatar, nigeria, indonesia, algeria, australia, iran, egypt and trinidad and tobago began drawing interest. analysts at cambridge energy research associates forecast that production of liquefied natural gas, or l.n.g., will more than double by 2012.  interoil's blue-chip backers, all of whom declined to speak about the company, are betting that some of that enthusiasm will spill into papua new guinea. but if interoil's gas find is to become a gold mine, someone needs to build a plant nearby that can convert natural gas into a liquid, so it can be easily transported.  while interoil bought its refinery for just $10 million, l.n.g. plants are a tad more pricey: the cost of such facilities starts at about $4 billion.  ''the name of the game is creating the infrastructure to bring reserves to market,'' said michael zenker at cambridge energy research associates. ''there's a tremendous appetite for l.n.g. projects, and companies and development banks are lining up. where that money goes may have as much to do with hype and politics as economic logic.''  almost every country with untapped gas fields is racing to convince major energy companies, international lenders and third-world development organizations that its gas finds justify extraction. in november, when interoil tentatively reported its discovery of 4 trillion to 11 trillion cubic feet of natural gas, the company also said it had lined up $130 million for pre-engineering work on a liquefied natural gas plant. but to win the energy race, it obviously will need to raise much more.  to that end, interoil executives have enlisted papua new guinea's prime minister, sir michael somare, and its energy minister, sir moi avei, to convince investors and foreign governments that the nation deserves their help. at interoil's urging, the country has changed its tax laws to make natural-gas investments more profitable. interoil executives are circling the globe to pitch investors on the company's stock and a major new refinery project.  some independent engineers and analysts say interoil's efforts may pay off.  ''they've been very open with their data, and at first glance you can't help but be amazed,'' said robb moss, a geologist at acumen capital finance partners in calgary, alberta, who has reviewed interoil's published findings. acumen is not an investor in the company.  ''but until you drill a lot of wells, you can't really measure anything,'' mr. moss added. ''it's almost impossible to accurately forecast anything at this stage.''  furthermore, analysts say, given the enormous amount of natural gas development occurring elsewhere, it is unclear if developing even a large discovery makes sense. interoil critics note that australia, a neighbor of papua new guinea, is already the fifth-largest producer of liquefied natural gas in the world, and is expected to more than double its production by 2015, according to the united states department of energy. such concerns helped persuade a consortium of investors to pull out of plans to build a pipeline from papua new guinea to australia in august.  ''high gas prices have seduced investors into overlooking concerns,'' said mr. boland at peters & company. ''energy is always cyclical, and the natural-gas market is particularly fickle.''  if interoil can convince investors to back an l.n.g. plant, the company is almost certain to profit from the gas fields, analysts say, because it will make the deposits cheaper to develop than fields in other countries.  to that end, mr. mulacek is working hard. a few years ago, he flew with a handful of papua new guinea ministers to trinidad, a nation that won the natural-gas lottery when a plant was constructed there in the late 1990s. today, the energy industry is one of trinidad's largest employers.  ''we're making our case to organizations like opic, who want to help impoverished countries, and to groups like merrill lynch and foreign investors, who are very interested,'' mr. byker said.  if interoil succeeds, the company's shares, which closed on friday at $26.20, may climb. if executives fail, or the discovered gas reserves turn out to be too small to justify a pipeline or plant, the company may, like enron, simply disappear.  interoil's executives are undaunted, and enthusiastic, about the challenges of striking it rich in papua new guinea.  ''this is a beautiful island, filled with amazing jungles and rainforest, spectacular animals and birds that are like something out of storybooks,'' mr. byker said. ''it's like an unknown frontier. these areas need visionaries. that's how dreams become real.''  