toy-size sculptures that play with adult-size emotions   in classic examples of william king's sculptures, the figures have arms like i-beams, legs like stilts and heads that are barely there. sometimes they stride or sit with a kind of stiff american nonchalance, like giacomettis conceived by john cheever. just as often they gesticulate emphatically. they're frustrated, furious, ecstatic, having some kind of fit. children probably think these figures in particular, with their long, goofy clodhopper shoes, are fun. adults may be less easily charmed, sensing what it's like, emotionally, to be in those shoes.  mr. king's comical-tragical-maniacal sculpture has always evoked those feelings, but it turns out that it once looked quite different. that's the revelation of an absorbing show of very early work, most never before exhibited, assembled by the art critic sanford schwartz at alexandre gallery. although mr. king has worked on a large scale, much of his early material is hand-size, toy-size, and comes in a variety of forms and mediums.  at first glance the exhibition looks like a survey of two or three artists, maybe four. one is a sculptor with an intense push-pull attraction to the art of elie nadelman. in two carved wood pieces -- a standing figure titled ''shirley'' (1952), and a seated figure, ''miss bowman'' (1953) -- he emulates mr. nadelman's sandpapered-smooth abstraction, but adds textural faceting, formal and psychological.  a second artist detected here is a portraitist with a wicked satirical eye. in a 1959 painted ceramic bust of the art dealer edith halpert, she looks at once blowsy and regal, a perle mesta with nefertiti eyes. a ceramic portrait of the artist sally hazelet drummond is even more stylized: she's a purple people eater with a pixie haircut.  in the tiny cut-metal ''sonny greer and jimmy archie'' (1953), a third artist is fooling around, late in the modernist day, with the 3-d, planar-dimensional aspects of cubism, to see what, if anything, new and useful they will yield. and finally, elements of all three artists come together in a fourth, represented by a carved wood sculpture titled ''daphne and charlie'' (1954). this largish piece is both smooth and rough, flat and in-the-round, caricatural but -- as the man looks sideways at the woman and she looks away, wide-eyed -- loving.  basically it's a work about affection: between the couple -- the painters daphne mumford and charles duback -- and between the artist and his subjects, who were his friends. but clearly mr. king has always had a funny way with tenderness. you see it in the half-naturalistic, half-cartoonish couple here; in a sculpture of wailing infant who looks like a wizened aztec death-god; and in one of a pet cat that suggests a moldy squashed pumpkin with ears.  to be honest i have never paid close, considered attention to mr. king's career until now. as can too often be true in the case of artists who develop a highly distinctive signature style, at some point you assume you've taken in its fundamentals and can stop looking, forward or backward.  wrong. it is precisely when you realize that you've made that assumption that you should start looking again. the alexandre show, for which mr. schwartz has written a lucid catalog essay, is just such an eye-opener. i will now filter not only mr. king's half-century career, but also many other under-examined aspects of late 20th-century american art through it.  ''the early work of william king'' continues through saturday at the alexandre gallery, 41 east 57th street, manhattan; alexandregallery.com, (212) 755-2828.  art review  