clock ticking, speechwriters for bush seek perfect pitch   most americans think of president bush as the commander in chief. his speechwriters have another name for him: the editor in chief.  ''he always wants it to be logical and straightforward,'' william mcgurn, the chief white house speechwriter, said in a hurried telephone interview on friday, just four days before the state of the union address. ''that's his big obsession. i always say i've been edited by bill buckley at the national review, bob bartley at the wall street journal. and the president is the strictest editor, the most line by line.''  mr. mcgurn, a former journal editorial writer, and his team of about a half-dozen writers and researchers have had more than their usual exposure to presidential editing this winter. the address on tuesday comes 13 days after mr. bush's prime-time speech on his new strategy in iraq, one that even some republicans have criticized as uninspiring, a rhetorical dud.  for the people who get paid to put words in the president's mouth, the pressure is on.  ''my job is to explain the president's policy and put it forward, to state his priorities in his voice,'' mr. mcgurn said. ''so we do what he wants, not what someone may say on the cable news.''  but this is washington, where punditry is practically an official sport, and the pundits disagree. ''a mediocre speech that was flat,'' said david gergen, a former nixon speechwriter, echoing the sentiments of many. ''it was solid, but they miss gerson.''  mr. gergen was referring to michael j. gerson, mr. mcgurn's predecessor, who left the administration last summer. he is credited with what many say was mr. bush's best speech, to a joint session of congress nine days after the sept. 11 attacks.  of course, writing a speech is only half the equation; the other half is in the delivery. veteran bush-watchers say the president is never as good standing solo before a television camera, as he did in the white house library for the speech on iraq, as he is before a live audience.  mr. mcgurn and his crew, which includes a onetime spokesman for former senator jesse helms and a staff member who four years ago was editing the student newspaper at yale, are described by clark judge, a former speechwriter for mr. reagan and for the first president bush, as ''a first-rate team.''  they also have the task of writing for the president in very different times than mr. gerson did. the bipartisan support for mr. bush that swept over congress and the nation after sept. 11 is long gone, the war in iraq is going badly, and the president is about to deliver his first state of the union address to a congress controlled entirely by democrats.  mr. bush was determined to be prepared. mr. mcgurn said he and christopher g. michel, the yale graduate, were in the oval office going over the iraq speech in december when the president announced: ''i need to get started on the state of the union. we can't wait.''  that called for reinforcements. mr. mcgurn's deputy, marc a. thiessen, the former helms spokesman, was already working on the state of the union. with mr. mcgurn and mr. michel still busy on iraq, john mcconnell, the lead speechwriter for vice president dick cheney, was brought in. so, too, was matthew scully, a speechwriter who left in 2004. mr. scully now lives in los angeles; he has been camping out in a washington hotel since jan. 6.  every white house speechwriter, current and former, knows the traditional state of the union formula: a laundry list of ideas, many of them destined to die in the bowels of some congressional committee room. (in 2004, mr. bush proposed sending humans to mars, a plan that even republican strategists mock today.)  this year, the president told his speechwriters that he wanted a more thematic speech, one that would focus on a few core issues, like energy, immigration and health care, where mr. bush hopes to achieve compromise with the democrats.  mr. mcgurn would not disclose details, and as for soaring rhetoric, he would not say. but he did say the president was not much interested in ''flowery language.''  at this point, mr. bush is well into rehearsing. by friday, he had already had several run-throughs in the family theater of the white house, with officials including stephen j. hadley, the national security adviser, and condoleezza rice, the secretary of state, listening in.  for his part, mr. mcgurn is a bit tired after a month of 12-hour days and 6:45 a.m. phone calls, and in need of a decent meal. in one eight-day stretch after christmas, he and fellow writers ate breakfast, lunch and dinner every day in the white house mess, except when it was closed, as it was for dinner on new year's day.  ''we went to fuddruckers,'' said the man who puts words in the president's mouth. ''it was, like, 8 o'clock. nothing else was open.''  correction:  january 23, 2007, tuesday  an article on monday about the drafting of president bush's state of the union address misidentified a speech three years ago in which he called for human exploration of mars. mr. bush proposed that idea in a speech at the headquarters of the space agency, delivered on jan. 14, 2004. he did not mention it in his 2004 state of the union address, which was delivered on jan. 20.  