congress's challenge on iraq   president bush's refusal to come up with a serious policy on iraq means that the democrats will have to goad him toward one. congress needs to do more than just oppose the latest ill-conceived military escalation. it needs to insist that american troops are not captive to the destructive policies of an iraqi government for which sectarian revenge counts for more than national unity and civil peace.  to do that, it needs to demand that mr. bush impose firm, enforceable benchmarks on prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki -- if any american troops are going to remain in iraq.  in the senate a nonbinding, bipartisan resolution seems headed toward early passage. sponsored by joseph biden, chuck hagel and carl levin, it expresses strong opposition to sending more troops, citing the failure of the iraqi government to keep its past promises on national reconciliation.  passing this resolution by the widest possible bipartisan margin would be a good first step. it would make clear to the american people (who called for a change last november), to president bush (who didn't listen) and to mr. maliki (who didn't seem to notice) that the days of uncritical american support for shiite misrule are over.  already, the newly questioning tone in congress has pushed mr. maliki to distance himself -- at least publicly -- from his ally moktada al-sadr, whose mahdi army has been responsible for some of the worst outrages against baghdad's sunni population. it is too early to say whether this is a public relations ploy, or whether mr. maliki will now allow the americans and his own army to move against mahdi army strongholds. the senate resolution should make clear that that is the first prerequisite for continued american support.  hortatory statements are unlikely to change mr. bush's mind or mr. maliki's behavior, so the congress will likely have to go further. both houses will need to find ways to use their power -- including the power of the purse -- to do what mr. bush refuses to do: set and enforce deadlines for the iraqi government to disarm militias, share oil revenues and reintegrate the sunni middle class into iraqi life.  funding limits that simply freeze the number of troops, like the one senator edward kennedy now proposes, are inadequate. the much more difficult challenge is to figure out ways to compel mr. bush to come up with a policy that has at least some chance of letting american troops come home without leaving total chaos behind.  even if the congress could stop mr. bush from sending an additional 20,000 troops, there will still be 130,000 caught in iraq's maelstrom.  editorial  