you, too, can be an energy trader right in your heated home   it is not enough that in contrast to our parents we have to shop for our phone service, our cable service, our retirement plans and our health provider. now many of us can become energy traders in our spare time.  those who use oil to heat their homes have always had the opportunity to compare prices and services and choose the best company. but now, if you live in new york and some other parts of the country, you can also select your natural gas provider.  and no matter if it is gas or oil, you can also gamble on whether to lock in a price against the possibility that costs might skyrocket.  but as with so many options in this increasingly choice-filled and bewildering world, the question is, where to start?  consolidated edison supplies our natural gas; my husband did try another company a few years ago, but was not pleased with its service. and so con ed it is; quite possibly there is a cheaper option, but we just have not pursued it yet. who has the time?  ''i think a lot of folks are most comfortable with the company they've dealt with for a gazillion years,'' said barbara mariner-volpe, senior technical adviser for the energy information administration, the analytical and data arm of the department of energy.  in the past, utility companies like con ed, keyspan and pacific gas and electric were one-stop shops. they owned the pipes that transported the gas, sold it, and delivered it to your door.  now, with what is known as unbundling, or separating the various services, private energy service companies buy the gas from somewhere, texas or louisiana, for example, then pipe it interstate to the utilities' pipeline system.  in our area, that means con ed then delivers the natural gas through its pipes to our house.  all consumers in new york, new jersey, pennsylvania and washington, d.c., can choose their natural gas providers; other states, including california, massachusetts, new mexico and west virginia, have limited programs. the energy information administration provides the status of states that offer a choice for natural gas at http://www.eia.doe.gov/oil--gas/natural--gas/restructure/restructure.html.  consumers can still stick with buying directly from the utility. the advantage, however, to paying one company to supply the gas (the energy supplier) and one to deliver (the utility) is that it might be cheaper.  david rosenberg, senior vice president of hudson energy services, which supplies gas and electricity in new york, new jersey and texas, said his company could offer cheaper prices than utilities because of lower overhead and other factors.  he also noted that under new york state law, if you use an energy supplier, you pay sales tax only on the product -- the gas -- but not on the delivery. if you use a utility company, you pay sales tax on the entire bill.  sounds good. the trouble, as usual, is figuring out how to choose a reputable company that doesn't hide all the bad stuff in the fine print. is the low rate good only for the initial five minutes after i sign up? does the contract lock me in for the rest of my natural life? do i have to give up my first-born to get service?  first step (and this is true in deciding on an electricity supplier as well): check your bill or call your local utility company and get all the relevant information you need: prices, monthly payments and your use history so you can have a base to compare.  find out if you're paying significantly above the regional average, or if you're in the ballpark, said greg mihailovich, director for the new york public interest research group's fuel buyers group. ''if you're in the ballpark, then you're o.k.; if you're 30 or 40 percent higher, you may want to look around.''  then, if you decide it is worth it to check further, find a list of reputable energy suppliers in your area. one way is to contact your state's department of energy or similar body. for example, in new york, the public service commission oversees such companies, and provides a web site (www.powertochooseny.com) that allows customers to type in a zip code to get access to a list of businesses in the area.  the site, which was reconfigured last month, not only lists companies in good standing, but their prices by month and per therm, as well as other variables that consumers need to take into consideration before picking a company.  for example, our december con ed bill showed that we paid $1.02 per therm, the unit for measuring natural gas, up from 94.3 cents in november. on the commission's web site, some companies came in as high as $1.29 per therm, and one as low as 75 cents a therm. but of course, price is not the only criteria. customers also need to consider other questions like:  will i be locked into a contract? for how long?  is the price fixed or variable?  does the price quote include taxes?  what are the late fees?  are there discounts or bonuses?  is a deposit required?  what kind of notice, if any, is required to terminate?  are there cancellation costs?  office locations and hours?  can you pay with a credit card or automatic draft from your bank account?  in addition, some companies supply single bills, meaning you won't get one bill from your utility and one from your energy supplier, while some do not offer that option.  in new york, consumers can find out how many complaints have been filed against a business by going to www.dps.state.ny.us and clicking on ''consumer assistance.''  in an emergency, like a gas leak, it is the utility, not the energy supplier that will respond to calls.  once you have settled on your natural gas or oil delivery, there is still another question to answer: do you want to lock in a price? you look good, of course, if the cost per therm or gallon takes off, but a little less so if they plummet.  ''hedging is a fairly sophisticated art,'' said mark cooper, research director with the consumer federation of america. ''a lot of consumers locked in at high prices and then they tumbled.''  because even experts have difficulty predicting where gas and oil prices are going, the trick is not knowing the answer, but being able to live with the results.  ''you have to know 'is this a price i'm going to be o.k. with if the market bottoms out?' '' mr. mihailovich said. ''if you lock in at $2.80 and it's over $3 a gallon, $2.80 looks great. but now the new york statewide regional price is $2.53.''  as with everything else, mr. mihailovich suggests, do your homework. check out the current regional gas or oil price, which your state's department of energy or similar agency should have.  ''don't just take someone's word for it,'' mr. mihailovich said. ''and read the fine print. is it locked in as long as the sky is blue?''  some companies also offer capped prices, although this is much rarer than fixed prices. a price cap sets the highest price you will have to pay, but if retail prices go down, you will pay less.  another option is joining a fuel-buying group, an organization, which can be for-profit or nonprofit, that uses strength in numbers to make deals with retailers to obtain a discounted price.  one of the better known, the massachusetts energy consumer alliance, provides discount heating oil for 10,000 members. the membership cost is $15 a year, less for senior citizens and those on fixed incomes.  the public interest research groups in both new york and philadelphia also offer fuel buyers' cooperatives; in new york, which offers gas, oil and wind power, consumers can join for $30 annually or $20 for senior citizens.  mr. mihailovich estimates that members receive oil at 15 cents to 40 cents a gallon below retail and natural gas at 10 percent less than retail.  in some cases, membership in the fuel-buying group includes a service contract and emergency repairs.  so now with all this information at our fingertips, we have some decisions to make: should we find a new energy supplier? lock in a gas price?  and while i'm contemplating what to do, i think i'll put a log on the fire, pull on a warm sweater and turn down the heat.  personal business: shortcuts  