curry's biggest test must wait until heat's o'neal is healthy   eddy curry now knows he can score 20 points nearly at will, that he can carry the knicks for weeks at a time, that he can dictate an opponent's game plan. but the learning curve for a newly dominant young big man is long and jagged. and his evolution cannot be complete until he has faced the ultimate big-man test.  shaquille o'neal, even at 34, provides the only relevant barometer. if circumstances are right, curry will have a chance to test his newfound prowess against o'neal on monday, when the knicks play the miami heat.  ''it's hard to be equipped to play shaq, honestly,'' said curry, the top-scoring center in the eastern conference with 19.1 points a game. ''i'm definitely playing a lot better now on offense. but on defense, i still got to guard him. so we'll see what happens.''  for this particular subplot, the game may prove to be a disappointment. o'neal has missed several target dates for returning from knee surgery, including sunday's loss to the dallas mavericks. the knee is healed, but o'neal has had little practice time and does not intend to play until he regains his stamina.  so curry's final exam may have to wait -- until friday, when the heat visits madison square garden, or until feb. 26, when the teams meet for the final time this season, also in new york.  there are only a handful of legitimate back-to-the-basket, physically imposing centers in the n.b.a. curry has long been projected as the next great one, having been tagged as baby shaq when he was an eighth grader in chicago.  curry showed flashes of greatness -- a game at a time, a week at a time -- during his first five n.b.a. seasons, but he never sustained it. now it appears he has arrived. among full-time centers, curry trails only houston's yao ming (25.9 points a game) in scoring.  yao dominated curry in november, holding him to a total of 15 points over two games. but curry's emergence began soon after that. he has averaged 22 points and 7.7 rebounds over the past 29 games. curry will not face yao again until next season and has yet to play o'neal this season. so the true test still awaits.  ''that's kind of like an unfair test,'' the knicks veteran malik rose said. ''shaq is so good, shaq is so big, shaq has been there before, he's won championships, he's a great player.''  and, as rose noted, o'neal had the benefit of playing two years in college, at louisiana state, whereas curry was drafted by the bulls out of high school in 2001. the comparisons have not stopped, however. and curry has struggled to live up to the expectations.  there is no doubting curry's abilities now. coach isiah thomas designated curry the knicks' no. 1 scoring option this season, and curry has mostly thrived in the role.  based on recent balloting results, curry will not be voted into the all-star game by the fans. but he is sure to receive strong consideration as a reserve when coaches make those selections this week. after all, those same coaches are devising defenses every night designed to thwart curry's inside game.  after curry scored 26 points in saturday's 108-106 victory against indiana, the pacers star forward jermaine o'neal complained about a lack of defensive help. ''you let them go one-on-one, and it's going to be tough,'' o'neal said.  still, it is the other o'neal who matters most in any big-man discussion. curry has faced shaquille o'neal several times, but in games in which both played significant minutes, curry has bested him only once. on march 11, 2003, curry -- then 20 -- scored 20 points and helped hold o'neal, then with the lakers, to 3-of-11 shooting and 13 points. afterward, o'neal claimed he had gone easy on curry because he had met his mother before the game and did not want to embarrass him.  ''the mom was sitting there all nice and everything,'' o'neal said then. ''i couldn't do it. for real. i couldn't do it.''  curry still laughs at the memory. o'neal, ever the creative storyteller, did not actually meet curry's mother until after the game.  ''that was funny,'' curry said. beating o'neal that night ''didn't mean anything to me, because people have off-nights.''  the window on o'neal's hall of fame career is closing, so curry will not have many more chances to prove himself against the best center of this era.  ''if he plays, it's going to be great for me, a great measuring stick to see where i am now,'' curry said. ''i'm not going to base my whole season and my whole career on that game, but it'd be great to go out there and have a great game against him.''  rebounds  the heat could be missing its two biggest stars for monday's game against the knicks. shaquille o'neal, recovering from knee surgery, is questionable. dwyane wade badly sprained his left ankle in sunday's loss to dallas. wade played the rest of the game, but his status is uncertain. ... stephon marbury is expected to play monday despite hurting his left knee saturday.  pro basketball  