damaged ship off britain spills fuel and cargo   a damaged and listing cargo ship was spilling fuel and cargo containers into stormy seas off the southwest coast of england, near devon, british officials said sunday night. some of the containers held hazardous materials.  an estimated 150 to 200 containers have slipped off the deck of the heavily damaged ship, the napoli, which was listing severely, paul coley, of the maritime and coastguard agency, said at a news conference.  some of the containers have already washed up at local beaches, officials said. the police closed some beaches and warned residents not to approach any of the containers, although the coast guard agency said that it believed that only two of those washed overboard contained hazardous substances, like nitric acid.  in addition, the boat's hull developed a crack at some point while it was being towed to shore and since sunday night has been spilling heavy diesel fuel oil into the sea, presumably from its engines.  it was not clear how much fuel oil had spilled into local waters, although there were reports of a few sea birds covered in oil.  the leaks are extremely threatening because the vessel is near a sensitive ecological area, the estuary of the axe river, an area known for wildlife and salmon breeding, mike dunning, a spokesman for the environment agency in southwest england, said in a phone interview.  the british authorities have deployed a boom over the mouth of the river as a precaution to prevent any oil from washing in to it.  the napoli was damaged and its crew of 26 was evacuated about 40 miles off the british coast on thursday after a severe storm, with seas of 40 feet and winds of 70 miles an hour. british officials decided to tow the vessel nearer to land and to ground it to prevent it from sinking.  recurrent gale force winds and high seas near the coast on sunday caused the boat to list, allowing containers piled four-high on its deck to fall into the sea perilously close to land, mr. dunning said.  ''the salvage plan concerns the oils that we deem at this present moment to be the greater threat,'' robin middleton, a salvage adviser to the coast guard agency, said at a news conference sunday.  the ship's tanks hold 3,000 tons of diesel and fuel oil but british officials said sunday that only one tank, holding 200 tons, appeared to be damaged.  salvage teams were working to stabilize the ship, which was listing at a 30-degree angle. a tanker was expected to arrive monday to begin pumping the remaining oil off the napoli, officials said, and remaining containers would be unloaded.  the vessel was carrying 2,323 containers, 158 of which were classed as hazardous, according to the international maritime dangerous goods code. dangerous materials in containers on board included nitric oxide and potassium hydroxide, battery acid and chemicals used to make perfume.  