playing across the river, jefferson appears right at home   by the time the nets make their scheduled arrival in brooklyn for the 2009-10 season, richard jefferson could be the team's marquee player. only 26, he already has a mixture of panache and intellect that is worthy of the sheen the nets hope to have in their new arena in atlantic yards.  last night, a little more than 24 hours after the nets officially planted a foot in new york by announcing a naming rights deal for their planned brooklyn arena, jefferson gave his standing in the big city a test run of sorts. he scored 21 points and showed a tenacity that has been lacking at times this season to help lead the nets to an exhilarating 101-100 victory against the knicks, their cross-river rivals.  ''richard jefferson was tremendous,'' nets coach lawrence frank said. ''what he did in the second half was really effective, coming off screens, getting into the paint, not only creating for himself but creating for his teammates.''  jefferson did it with help from the man who could help him bridge the gap between now and 2009: jason kidd, the nets' captain and the face of the franchise. kidd continued his recent excellent play by scoring 23 points to go with 9 assists and 7 rebounds.  on thursday, jefferson, kidd and vince carter represented the team at a news conference to announce a 20-year, $400 million agreement with barclays bank, which will put its name on the nets' new arena in brooklyn.  the nets had a smattering of fans in the madison square garden crowd last night, enough to be heard when the knicks fans fell silent. when kidd hit a layup and drew a foul to give the nets a 95-83 lead with 3 minutes 43 seconds remaining, the cheers were loud and clear.  ''it was nice to hear the support out there,'' said nets forward cliff robinson, who had the winning tip-in with 2.8 seconds to play. ''most of the time we come over here, it's predominantly a knicks crowd and you would expect that. but tonight, for my first time since being on the team, there were a lot of nets fans out there.''  many of them saw jefferson, who also had 6 assists, in one of his best performances of the season. jefferson has been bothered this season by ankle problems that may require surgery. but his play has improved lately, and the nets are 8-2 in their past 10 games.  although jefferson has been vocal in saying there is no rivalry between the nets and the knicks, he may have extra motivation to shine on the stage the garden provides. he is young, hip and enjoys the city life. he lives in manhattan, while most of his teammates have chosen new jersey. after the game, he spoke briefly with the rapper jay-z, who is also an investor in the nets.  ''this is a fun place to play, and you just want to come out and play aggressive,'' jefferson said. ''i got a couple of opportunities. we were running a play that was opening up the basket for me, and i just tried to be aggressive.''  even kidd, at 33, cannot help but get excited in the lights of the garden.  ''well, we're talking about an arena that's the greatest stage on earth,'' he said. ''so no matter how long you've played in the league, you enjoy coming here.''  in a couple of years, the nets hope others will be saying the same about their new home.  rebounds  jason kidd has accepted an invitation to play for the united states national team, which will participate in a qualifying tournament this summer for the 2008 beijing olympics. nets officials were supportive of his decision. ''he's always kept himself in good shape and he wants to do it and he's encouraged,'' general manager ed stefanski said. ''he's a special player.''  pro basketball  