an internet video partnership from 2 lions of old media (eisner and jann wenner)   michael d. eisner and jann wenner, who once successfully joined in saving a celebrity magazine, are about to reunite in the world of internet video.  wenner media and veoh networks will announce a partnership today between usmagazine.com, the web site for mr. wenner's us weekly, and veoh.com, a video-sharing web site and a competitor of youtube.com, to create a celebrity entertainment channel on veoh.  once the channel is formally introduced in february, users will be able to watch and even upload celebrity-related clips on either veoh or usmagazine.com. representatives of the companies declined to disclose the specific terms of the deal, an advertising and revenue-sharing partnership.  mr. wenner leads the privately owned wenner media while michael d. eisner, the former chief executive of the walt disney company, is a major investor in veoh and brokered the deal.  the partnership revisits familiar territory for mr. wenner and mr. eisner. in 2001, when us weekly faltered in its transition from a monthly to a weekly publication, mr. eisner and disney bailed out the celebrity-focused magazine by purchasing a 50 percent stake for $40 million. in august, after us weekly had firmly established itself in an otherwise grim market, disney sold its share back to wenner media for $300 million -- making a tidy profit in the process. (mr. eisner left disney in september 2005.)  mr. eisner, whose tornante company invested in veoh last april, approached mr. wenner about the partnership in august.  ''i know jann and i know his assets,'' mr. eisner said in a telephone interview, adding that the ease of dealing with a private company like wenner media also attracted him. ''i just felt that there was a place for celebrity news both generated by the established media company in this area and the possibility of some user-generated video.''  mr. wenner said his long friendship and earlier business experience with mr. eisner made him eager to revisit their partnership. ''i have an enormous respect for him as a businessman and his intuitive instincts about popular culture,'' he said in a telephone interview, adding that their previous collaboration ''worked out brilliantly for both of us.''  the partnership follows the success of celebrity-focused web sites like tmz.com, as well as the youtube phenomenon and the popularity of user-generated content. veoh remains a very small participant in the market, with 500,000 unique visitors in august, according to nielsen/netratings (although the company says the figure should actually be four million).  us weekly, which had circulation of 1.8 million in august, already has a built-in audience. (usmagazine.com had almost a million unique users in december, according to nielsen/netratings, and 1.8 million, according to wenner.)  according to janice min, the editor in chief of us weekly, usmagazine.com and its veoh channel will aim at a specific demographic group, rather than trying to directly challenge powerful online establishments like youtube and tmz.  ''we're the only celebrity web site that really speaks to a very specific audience of women in their 20s and 30s,'' she said. ''as more competitors and the internet cover celebrity, it's only furthered the interest in celebrity. the appetite seems boundless.''  us weekly, which intends to provide the bulk of the video content, will also retain editorial control over the user-uploaded clips, filtering out material that editors reject.  mr. eisner's departure from disney does not appear to be affecting his interest in connecting hollywood with new media. in addition to reviving his partnership with mr. wenner, mr. eisner also recently put together a deal between veoh and the united talent agency, enabling veoh users to upload video clips for possible representation by the agency.  ''if i was the c.e.o. of disney, i would do the exact same thing,'' he said. ''it's a big piece of the media future.''  media  