campaign spotlight: trying not to be roadkill on the schuylkill   remember the jingle "baseball, hot dogs, apple pie and chevrolet"? a musical campaign for a new web site offers a version that could be called "phillies, cheese steaks, scrapple and all kinds of cars."  the campaign is for phillycars.com, a web site introduced on new year's eve by philadelphia media holdings. that's the company led by the local entrepreneur brian p. tierney, which in june bought the philadelphia properties that were formerly part of the knight ridder newspaper chain from their new owner, the mcclatchy company.  the web site (phillycars.com) is intended to offer a philadelphia-focused alternative to auto-shopping sites like cars.com and vehix.com. the campaign promotes the web site as "brought to you by" its older siblings: the philadelphia inquirer, the philadelphia daily news and philly.com.  to underscore the connection, the automotive sections of the two newspapers have been renamed phillycars and the 250 dealerships taking part in phillycars.com also get free ads in those sections.  the campaign, with a budget estimated at more than $1 million, is wide-ranging, including television and radio commercials, the internet, outdoor ads and of course, space in the inquirer and the daily news.  the campaign is being created by gyro worldwide, a philadelphia agency known for its offbeat, energetic campaigns for advertisers like chupa chups, william grant & sons, mtv and r.j. reynolds. gyro also sells its own line of merchandise, under the sailor jerry brand name, sometimes in partnership with marketers like converse.  the campaign for phillycars.com is indicative of attempts to play up the ability of online media to be targeted more narrowly than their mainstream, traditional counterparts. that benefits marketers seeking to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of their pitches by placing them only before consumers who find the ads relevant.  research shows that although the public frustration with advertising deemed intrusive is increasing, people say they actually welcome ads selling what they really want.  so the goal of the campaign is to establish phillycars.com "as the local car-buying site with thousands of cars, a broad array of choices throughout the delaware valley," says ed mahlman, chief marketing officer at philadelphia media holdings.  "we're saying: 'this is the perfect site for you. don't search for the perfect car only to find it's in butte, montana,'" mr. mahlman says.  that's a reference to the national nature of web sites like cars.com, part of classified ventures, which is owned by media companies like belo, gannett and tribune.  the philadelphia newspapers worked with cars.com when they were owned by knight ridder. mr. tierney, who is chief executive at philadelphia media holdings, says he ended the arrangement because "we wanted to create our own proprietary brand" in conjunction with the local car dealers.  the creation of phillycars.com came not long after mr. tierney withdrew from careerbuilder, the job-search web site owned by gannett, mcclatchy and tribune, and formed an alliance with monster worldwide, the operator of the rival monster.com service. the new allies started a co-branded web site (philly.com/monster) in the first such agreement between monster.com and the owner of big-city newspapers.  the elements of the campaign meant to remind computer users of the local aspects of phillycars.com are laid on as thick as the icing on the tastykake butterscotch krimpets sold by philadelphia's own tasty baking company.  for instance, the tv and radio commercials feature a song, "philadelphia," by a local singer, kevin michael, signed to a local label, downtown records. the tv spots are styled like music videos clips, intercutting scenes of mr. michael performing with local sights like the schuylkill expressway and the streets of center city, as philadelphians call their downtown.  the commercials also show signs for roadways like the pennsylvania turnpike and neighborhoods like chestnut hill as well as mock vanity license plates.  the radio commercials are humorous, with actors playing residents of local neighborhoods and suburbs. they offer fanciful testimonials about how phillycars.com helped them find the dream cars you might not expect they wanted.  for example, in one radio spot, a "soccer mom" from the main line philadelphia suburbs describes her dream car as a hummer h2. "out of my way, sucka," she exclaims.  in another radio commercial, a man declares: "i'm from king of prussia, and they call me big ed, and that's not ironic. i just found a mini on phillycars.com, and that's ironic."  humor is also a big part of the print and outdoor versions of the campaign, which present dozens of imaginative web addresses. (most are fakes, but some will actually link the extremely curious to phillycars.com.)  for instance, ads appearing in the movie pages of the inquirer and the daily news direct computer users to "http://www.phillycars.com/twothumbswayup" and "http://www.phillycars.com/perfectforchasescenes."  there are ads in the sports section with the words "tailgate in style" after the slash and ads in the music section with the words "cars with great stereos" after the slash.  the outdoor ads, in the same mock-u.r.l. style, are more direct. ads on the backs of buses describe phillycars.com as "easier than the bus" and "the express to finding a new car locally." billboards on highways use drivers to "give up that clunker" and "commute better."  gyro worldwide was familiar to mr. tierney because for many years he competed against the agency: he ran philadelphia shops like tierney communications before leaving the industry and subsequently forming philadelphia media holdings.  "when he got the papers, we were hoping we'd get a phone call from him," says steven grasse, chief executive at gyro.  when the call came, "we discussed a project about trying to get new readers, young people not reading the papers," he adds, "then he had a more immediate need, phillycars.com."  even so, the phillycars.com campaign has a youthful feel because "people who buy cars online tend to be younger," mr. grasse says. "i think we're talking to a new generation of car buyers," he adds, so the ads are infused with "personality and vitality."  mr. michael's song is perfect for the campaign, mr. grasse says, because "it's vibrant" and all about "'hometown hip, hip hooray' and philly pride."  he found the song, he adds, when executives he knew from downtown records "came to us and said: 'we have an artist who has this song, "philadelphia." what can you do with it?'"  in a neat bit of synergy, the cover art that gyro designed for downtown records for the cd single release of "philadelphia" depicts the word in the same typeface as it appears in the logo of the inquirer.  mr. grasse says he would like to "use the song as the theme song for the entire philly.com web site, not just for phillycars."  there are also plans, he adds, for mr. michael to perform on behalf of phillycars.com, the inquirer and the daily news at the philadelphia international auto show, scheduled for feb. 3 to 11 at the philadelphia convention center.  mr. tierney says he is pleased with the results of the campaign so far. for instance, in the first week, he says, 1,400 leads from visitors to phillycars.com have been sent to car dealers that are participating in the web site.  phillycars.com has been averaging 28,500 page views a day, mr. tierney says, compared with 15,000 a day last january when the deal with cars.com was still in effect.  "and it's spilling over to philly.com," he adds, citing figures showing almost 9.5 million page views from jan. 1 through 9 this year compared with 6.4 million in that period last year.  since mr. tierney took over, he has outlined ambitious plans to increase circulation and advertising revenue, in part by significantly stepping up marketing efforts. recent layoffs at the inquirer and the daily news were attributed to a need to offset a steep decline in ad revenue, which mr. tierney said had not been expected.  for example, mr. tierney says, ads that ran before christmas promoted buying subscriptions to the sunday edition of the inquirer as holiday gifts.  and the company spent about $1.2 million in the fall on a campaign promoting the new deal with monster.com, he adds, which included "putting the monster logo on the sides of our 450 trucks."  -----  if you like in advertising, be sure to read the advertising column that appears monday through friday in the business day section of the new york times newspaper.  