judging the state of the oil market   it was barely six months ago that wall street was keeping a nervous eye on the rising prices of oil and other commodities and investors in those sectors were enjoying an i-told-you-so satisfaction.  the stock market has since moved to new highs and commodities have been slumping, especially in the last few weeks; the main grade of american crude oil has fallen more than $10 a barrel this month. but john b. brynjolfsson, who manages a multibillion-dollar commodity portfolio for the pimco fund family, expects a recovery that may follow president bush's state of the union address on tuesday.  signs of slowing economic growth are responsible for much of the drop in industrial commodity prices generally. when it comes to energy, mr. brynjolfsson said, political factors also come into play, accounting for changes in traders' expectations of both supply and demand.  the market has concluded that mr. bush's plan to send additional troops to iraq is leading middle east allies to open the taps, ''to keep the world economy lubricated and show good faith to the bush administration,'' he said.  the anticipation of greater supply is accompanied by an expectation that demand will fall, and mr. bush is likely to call in his speech for measures to conserve energy and to produce more of it from renewable sources, mr. brynjolfsson said.  ''the state of the union address, i suspect, will have large doses of energy policy in it,'' he said. but the impact of any programs arising from the speech is unlikely to be felt for months or years, he said, even if energy initiatives are backed by democrats in congress. ''the rubber wouldn't hit the road for months,'' he said.  once the speech has been digested by the markets, he said, prices could rebound.  the best way to benefit from any recovery in energy or other commodity markets is through easily tradable proxies for the actual materials, he said, such as futures contracts or exchange-traded funds, but not shares of production companies, which he finds comparatively expensive.  ''valuations fluctuate,'' mr. brynjolfsson said, ''but direct exposure to commodities turns out to be a more cost-effective way to get exposure than through equities.''  data watch -- the week's economic reports are expected to convey mixed messages. on thursday, orders for durable goods are forecast to show a 3.5 percent increase for december after a 1.9 percent gain in november, according to a bloomberg news poll of economists.  the poll predicts that another report that day, for december sales of existing homes, will show a decline of 0.2 percent. but on friday, a gain of 0.7 percent is expected for december new-home sales.  market week  