public parks and private schools   in a city of gaping economic disparities, public parks have long been the great equalizer. new yorkers take pride in their egalitarian green spaces, which are open to everyone. but acreage has always been at a premium, and public money cannot keep pace with the costs of upkeep and improvements. over the years, the city has thus come to depend on private donations to fill the gaps.  public-private partnerships can reap great benefits, as long as private interests don't overtake the public's right of access. the city will have to work hard not to tip that balance the wrong way on randall's island, a 480-acre public park that sits in the waters separating east harlem, the south bronx and astoria, queens.  mayor michael bloomberg and parks commissioner adrian benepe want to enter into a contract that would allow students at 20 of manhattan's wealthiest private schools exclusive use of most of the island's playing fields during prime after-school hours for the next 20 years. in return, the city would get a real prize: upgraded and repaired fields which those schools have already been using for soccer, softball and other sports for 15 years, along with dozens of new fields, all financed by the private schools. their total investment could be more than $80 million.  the schools had originally wanted a 30-year contract and exclusive rights to 80 percent of the fields during prime time. they've scaled that back to 20 years and two-thirds of the fields, leaving public schools and community groups with access to one-third of the space after school hours. the city should claim a larger share of prime time for public schools -- perhaps 40 percent to start, with a possible increase to 50 percent if demand materializes.  there are also objections in principle. new yorkers for parks, an independent monitor, warns the deal could set a dangerous precedent, in effect selling off public parkland to the wealthy and giving a new twist to the words ''pay to play.''  there's another very important point here, lost in the back-and-forth over contractual details. for people without private transportation -- and that means public school children -- randall's island is reachable only by a footbridge or the triborough bridge, with ferry service added for special events, like concerts. the randall's island sports foundation transports children from disadvantaged neighborhoods on the weekend. but public bus service is virtually nonexistent.  this explains why private schools have so far had the place mostly to themselves on weekdays. city comptroller bill thompson and manhattan borough president scott stringer insist that as part of any new contract the city should guarantee better public transportation. it's an excellent idea.  the contract is to be voted on soon by the franchise and concession review committee, a little-known panel with six votes -- four controlled by the mayor. this is the committee that approved the contract for snapple soft drinks in public schools as well as the contract with a private company to build a 26-acre water park on randall's island, drawing an objection from mr. stringer over a projected $40 ticket price.  mayor bloomberg, who has often shown impatience with government process, wants to change the committee rules to expedite its work. but in making decisions about the use of randall's island and other public spaces, the city needs more deliberation and transparency, not less.  the city  