the fornicator   killing johnny fry  a sexistential novel.  by walter mosley.  280 pp. bloomsbury. $23.95.  t times in walter mosley's ''sexistential'' new novel, ''killing johnny fry,'' it's unclear whether his hero, cordell carmel, is meant to be a lover or a big-game hunter. one of his conquests is described as bellowing ''like some large woodlands creature in ecstasy over the wild'' and flopping ''like a mackerel on the deck of a fishing boat.'' manly and active to a fault, the descriptions mosley favors for both cordell's physical equipment and his talent with it might have been plucked from ''the boys' big book of phallic metaphors.'' cordell compares himself to ''a bullet'' entering ''the well-oiled chamber of a gun'' and ''a giant cruise ship coming into a port that was way too small.'' all that's missing is for cordell to drop his drawers and have one of his partners inquire, ''is that the chattanooga choo-choo?''  ''killing johnny fry'' is a frankly pornographic novel, and i mean that as a compliment. it would be unfair to what mosley is attempting here -- to put sex at the center of cordell's existence and to turn the reader on in the process -- to describe the sex scenes with that wan word ''erotica,'' a word almost always used to demonstrate that the user is above those coarse enough to be aroused by mere pornography. and judged solely by its intentions to appeal to what prosecutors in obscenity cases used to call the prurient interest, the novel is a success. good porn is tough to write and when talented writers decide it shouldn't be left to the hacks, the result can be something as joyous as nicholson baker's ''vox'' and ''the fermata.'' or even something as voluptuously smutty as the porn-for-cash alexander trocchi turned out for maurice girodias's olympia press.  the story mosley is telling here begins when cordell, a translator, walks into his girlfriend joelle's apartment and -- without her being aware of his presence -- finds her blissfully submitting to anal sex with an acquaintance of his named johnny fry. fry is, to use a phrase susan faludi once quoted to describe a porn star, a life-support system for a penis. he is also the tormentor who sets cordell on his sexual adventure. cordell is hounded by the sight of fry having sex with joelle; by fry's being better endowed than he is; and, just as generations of white men have been obsessed with white women having sex with black men, by the sight of joelle with a white man. deciding that everything about his life has been too safe, cordell sets out not just to sleep with the women who cross his path, but to treat sex with them and with joelle as a chance to strut his power and prowess. impulsively, he also quits his job and decides to act as an agent for one of his new conquests, a young photographer whose specialty is genocide and starvation in sudan. he also decides to murder johnny fry.  any artist who tries to deal with sex graphically is almost inevitably accused of narrowing his or her outlook. and i can't imagine that ''killing johnny fry'' won't provoke some of the disgust that has greeted far better novels that strip sex of its niceties (philip roth's ''dying animal'' comes to mind) and make the link between lust and feelings of power. those are not attractive qualities, they are often male and mosley shouldn't be condemned for trying to stay true to them. it should also be said that in ''killing johnny fry,'' more than in many books that tackle this subject, the male protagonist here often submits to his partners, overwhelmed by sex as much as empowered by it.  the problem with this novel isn't that it's graphic or that mosley uses the standard set-ups of pornography -- the horny neighbor, the girl picked up on the street. the problem is that it's silly. that there is an embarrassed (and embarrassing) quality to ''killing johnny fry'' is no surprise. the violence that erupts in mosley's easy rawlins detective novels often feels worked up, as if overblown descriptions of physical punishment were what the genre called for. (that white women are often the she-devils luring black men to their doom suggests mosley takes some pulp fantasies too seriously.) there is something in mosley that pulls back from the carnal madness cordell gives himself over to, that presents it as the beginning of a journey toward redemption. which makes mosley something like a guy who's decided to hand out copies of ''the watchtower'' at an orgy. the novel that ''killing johnny fry'' most recalls is norman mailer's great and appalling ''american dream,'' in which mailer's protagonist, rojack, confronts existential dread by indulging in murder and sex and the most insane macho daredevilry. but mailer was inside that subject, feverishly so -- and because he so freely risked ridiculousness the book never felt ridiculous. mailer wrote to make us feel that the fires of hell were a whisker away. mosley stands by with the extinguisher.  charles taylor is a columnist for the star-ledger of newark.  