under fire, gap chief steps down   for the last two weeks, the son of gap's founders and the board's chairman, robert j. fisher, conducted a series of secret conference calls with fellow directors.  the topic was whether to fire gap's embattled chief executive, paul s. pressler.  on friday, mr. fisher delivered the board's decision to mr. pressler: he was out. the 50-year-old former disney executive did not put up much of a fight, according to a person briefed on the matter.  yesterday mr. pressler stepped down after gap's third dismal holiday shopping season, in what the company described as a ''mutual'' decision. the move was widely expected on wall street, where investors began calling for his ouster more than a year ago. he is eligible for a severance package worth $14.5 million, the company said.  with gap's board weighing the sale of the troubled company, mr. pressler's departure clears the way for potential buyers to install their own chief executive.  several private equity groups have approached millard s. drexler, the former gap chief executive who was ousted to make way for mr. pressler, about running the company after a sale, according to a person briefed on the matter.  but mr. drexler, whose runaway success at j. crew has haunted gap's board, has told the investment firms that he has no interest in returning to gap, this person said.  gap said it was searching for a new chief with ''deep'' retail experience -- an apparent jab at mr. pressler, who had little -- and speculation immediately fell upon industry heavyweights like roger n. farah, the president of polo ralph lauren, and paul r. charron, the former head of liz claiborne. for now mr. fisher will fill the post.  mr. pressler, who once ran the walt disney company's theme parks, arrived at gap in 2002 with bold plans to cut costs and restore the chain's place in the retail firmament after years of sluggish sales.  he slashed gap's heavy debt, but it quickly became clear that he could not turn around the ailing retail business. he inherited an ambitious expansion program that left gap with too many stores and a strategy of appealing to younger shoppers that moved the chain away from its casual clothes.  with his emphasis on testing products, through focus groups and computer models, mr. pressler immediately clashed with the chain's clothing designers, who managed by instinct under mr. drexler, whose fashion acumen earned him the nickname ''the merchant prince.''  in one meeting that employees said epitomized his tenure, mr. pressler told designers to ''put together a focus group on graphic t-shirts,'' according to people who attended it, who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorized to talk publicly.  ''designers see the future, they do not respond to focus groups,'' one attendee said later.  but under mr. pressler, these people said, such data motivated a dizzying number of changes to fashions and store layouts, leaving consumers more confused than ever.  there were puffy jackets one season too late and five shades of green hoodies on the same rack. sales fell every month for the last year and the chain resorted to discounts like $100 off a fur-lined parka this fall.  during the holiday season, in what was widely regarded as mr. pressler's last chance to save his job, gap returned to the simple fashions, like t-shirts and hooded sweaters, that fueled the chain's meteoric rise in the 1990s. but sales at stores open at least a year fell 8 percent.  soon after, according to people briefed on the matter, the board hired the investment bank goldman sachs to investigate the potential sale of the company, which would be one of the largest buyouts ever in the retail industry. gap's market value is more than $16 billion, and analysts expect that the company would bring more than $18 billion.  several groups have expressed interest in buying gap, but the board, which is filled with several members of the fisher family, favors keeping control of the company, according to a person briefed on the matter.  rumors of mr. pressler's impending ouster became so persistent in the last year that gap's founder, donald g. fisher, issued a statement last year confirming his support for the chief executive.  still, analysts began to refer to him as a ''dead man walking'' over the last year and openly predicted that he would not last through the end of 2007.  they were right.  ''they finally did it,'' said jennifer black, a retail analyst who runs a firm by the same name. ''four years was enough.''  in a statement, mr. pressler said that he ''enjoyed the opportunity to lead this iconic company over the past four years,'' adding that gap ''is a company with tremendous potential.''  