election ad aggravates a racial divide in atlanta   the nastiness of the 2006 campaign season has largely died away, forgotten amid the swearing-in ceremonies and gavel transfers of a new political landscape. but in this normally resilient city, one 30-second radio advertisement for a relatively obscure county race has lingered uncomfortably in people's minds.  in the advertisement, atlanta's three most prominent black leaders, mayor shirley franklin, representative john lewis and andrew young, the politician and civil rights leader, evoked the police dogs and water hoses of the civil rights movement to urge voters not to support a republican candidate for the fulton county commission. though the candidate was not named in the advertisement, the three leaders, who are all democrats, warned that right-wing republicans would ''turn back the clock'' on equality and undo the efforts of the rev. dr. martin luther king jr. and others.  ''your very life,'' mr. lewis said in the advertisement's conclusion, ''may depend on it.''  even now, weeks later, the resentment fueled by the advertisement is being harnessed in a campaign to change the boundaries of fulton county, and split off its predominantly white northern section, and city politicians have warned that the advertisement has poisoned relations with the republican-dominated state legislature.  while democrats argued that the advertisement was just the sort of politicking that their opponents long ago perfected, republicans called it a race-baiting low blow. many took the advertisement's suggestion of violence -- and the involvement of ms. franklin, who is generally admired for her ability to unite ideological opponents -- very personally.  ''people were killed back then,'' state representative barry fleming, the house majority whip and a republican from eastern georgia, said in an interview last week. ''and she's saying that voting for a republican for a local office is as bad as turning water hoses on people?''  many people did not learn of the advertisement until after election day, when it was replayed on the fox news network program ''hannity & colmes'' and right-wing talk radio, provoking a debate so pitched that mr. lewis, who was beaten during the 1965 voting rights march from selma, ala., felt compelled to declare on the op-ed page of the atlanta journal-constitution that he was not a racist.  ms. franklin has apologized for causing offense, but has not backed down from the advertisement's message. she explained that she was speaking out not against all republicans but the right-wing views that in georgia led to a state constitutional ban on same-sex marriage, a bill requiring voters to show photo identification, and what she believes is a dangerous underfinancing of health care and other social services. her own mother, she said, could not obtain an identification because she had no birth certificate -- a circumstance that is not unusual among blacks born decades ago in the south. (the voter id law was blocked in court.)  the advertisement appeared in an election cycle in which one republican mailer distributed in the atlanta area said, ''democrats win elections by lying and stealing,'' further inflaming tensions.  ''you want to talk to me about being outraged?'' ms. franklin said in a recent interview. ''i am really outraged.''  mr. lewis has also offered an apology and defense of the advertisement, as has john eaves, a democrat and the newly elected fulton county commission chairman, whose campaign it supported.  mr. young did not return a phone call requesting comment.  some viewed the advertisement as a violation of atlanta's central ethos: that of racial harmony. although georgia was no stranger to racial violence, they pointed out that hoses and police dogs were not used to quell atlanta's civil rights demonstrations.  ''there are so many painful ironies here,'' said howard shook, a white atlanta city councilman who has questioned ms. franklin about the advertisement. ''it would be an incredible irony if the mayor who did more than anyone else to bring people together had as one of her legacies a real fracturing of relations.''  but if the advertisement wedged itself into the racial fault lines that lace fulton county, it did not create them. resentments in the mostly black county run so deep that in the northern third, which has a white majority, there is an active movement to split off and form a new county.  supporters of the split quickly seized on the radio spot, which supported mr. eaves, a black democrat, over lee morris, a white republican, for chairman of the county commission.  ''on nov. 7 we face the most dangerous situation we ever have,'' mr. lewis said in the advertisement. ''if you think fighting off dogs and water hoses in the '60s was bad, imagine if we sit idly by and let the right-wing republicans take control of the fulton county commission.''  in the advertisement, ms. franklin referred to popular black leaders of the city's past. ''the efforts of martin and coretta king, hosea williams, maynard jackson and many others will be lost,'' ms. franklin said. ''that's why we must stand up and we must turn out the vote for the democrats on election day.''  then andrew young said: ''and especially for john eaves for fulton county commission chairman. unless you want them to turn back the clock on equal rights and human rights and economic opportunity for all of us, vote for john eaves as fulton county chairman.''  the advertisement's defenders have insisted that its critique was intentionally broad, invoking as evidence examples like the botched rescue effort following hurricane katrina and the high cost of prescription drugs. but its forum was narrow: mr. eaves's republican opponent, mr. morris, is a moderate who describes himself as a pro-choice environmentalist who favors gay rights. to further complicate matters, he lives in buckhead, the posh atlanta neighborhood that for years felt ill-used by the city.  ms. franklin had done much to repair that relationship, but the advertisement has fueled talk that buckhead should withdraw from the city, taking its tax dollars to the theoretical new county.  ''we have loved atlanta,'' wrote a wounded bob irvin, a former republican state representative. ''but it has been revealed that atlanta -- or at least its top political leadership -- doesn't love us.''  mr. morris said he received more than 70 percent of the vote from buckhead and the north, although he lost the november election by more than 10 percentage points. ''the real point here is how divided this county is,'' mr. morris said.  earlier this month glenn delk, a lawyer who is white, used the words of dr. king in an op-ed article published by the atlanta journal-constitution, supporting an independent buckhead: ''when the day comes that the city of buckhead opens its doors, i will gladly tell franklin, lewis and young, and all others who've used race to obtain and keep political power for 30 years -- in the words of the rev. martin luther king -- 'free at last, free at last, thank god almighty, i'm free at last.' ''  