new favor for a name that straddles cultures   for the first time in a generation, the most popular name for newborn hispanic boys in new york city is an ethnic one: angel.  there are more angels in america than ever before: the name ranked 32nd nationwide, a record high, among all baby boys in 2005 and in arizona it is now the most popular name among all male newborns.  but in new york, the nation's proverbial melting pot, a traditional spanish name has not been no. 1, even among hispanic boys, since the mid-1980s, when josé ranked first. (josé is still ahead of angel nationally, in 30th place.) instead, hispanic parents generally choose decidedly anglo names, like kevin and justin.  the latest list, based on birth certificates for 122,725 infants born in 2005 and released late last year by the city's health department, does not necessarily suggest any blow to assimilation. in fact, angel (up from fourth place a year earlier) is the only distinctly ethnic name among the 10 most popular for hispanic boys in new york.  the others in the top 10 for hispanic boys were anthony, christopher, justin, joshua, david, daniel, kevin, michael and jonathan. (josé was 13th, luis 15th, juan 22nd and sebastián 25th).  among hispanic girls, the most popular names were ashley, emily, isabella, jennifer and mia.  (other most popular baby names in new york city were emily and ryan for asians, kayla and joshua for blacks and sarah and michael for non-hispanic whites).  angel solano was born last august at newyork-presbyterian hospital/allen pavilion. the boy's father, angel miguel solano, wanted to name him christopher, said joseline liriano, the baby's mother. but when her 16-year-old niece suggested the name angel, ms. liriano liked it because she thought it worked well in english and spanish.  what's more, when the baby was born, she felt the name fit.  ''he is so fair, with the bluest blue eyes,'' said ms. liriano, who lives in washington heights and works in a perfume factory in new jersey.  dominicans have accounted for the most births in the city in recent years but are expected to be overtaken by mexicans in the count of 2006 birth certificates.  the baby name list is not broken down by the parents' ancestry, and cultural anthropologists were generally at a loss to suggest a single reason for the popularity of angel, which can take either the standard english pronunciation or the spanish one of ahn-hel.  ''there were 9,362 boys named angel in 2004 and 10,788 in 2005'' across the country, said cleveland kent evans, the president of the american name society. ''that's a 15 percent increase in one year, a fairly rapid upward rise, and shows that angel was increasing in use in the hispanic community nationally before it showed up on top in new york city.  ''it is today's perfect compromise name,'' he said, ''for those who want to emphasize their hispanic heritage and yet assimilate into the larger society at the same time.''  héctor r. cordero-guzmán, chairman of the department of black and hispanic studies at baruch college, said angel was suggestive of ''qualities mothers would like their children to have or is somewhat eponymous. the levels of religiosity in the latino community, i think, also add to the popularity of the name.''  guillermina jasso, a sociology professor at new york university, said, ''if the surge in angel is indeed linked to new yorkers born in mexico, then it has an added meaning, a kind of hope and protection for persons, many of whom are illegal immigrants.  ''like wearing an amulet, having an 'angel' under the roof may provide a measure of tranquillity,'' professor jasso said.  analyzing the top 20 names among hispanic boys in new york city, laura wattenberg, author of ''the baby name wizard: a magical method for finding the perfect name for your baby,'' found that in 2000, 71 percent received anglo names, 19 percent spanish and 10 percent crossover names. in 2005, she said, the comparable shares were 73 percent anglo, 16 percent spanish and 11 percent crossover.  ''angel has been a hot rising name across the country for more than a decade,'' she said. ''it rose to the top among latino new yorkers by taking a bigger slice of the spanish-naming pie, not by growing that pie. the rise in angel is more than offset by the decline in josé and luis. and it's still not as popular as justin was in 2000.''  