a career in letters, 50 years and counting   robert loomis has never been fired. he's never been lured away from his job as an editor at random house by a higher salary. his name doesn't pop up in gossip columns. he has never been caught up in a plagiarism scandal.  at a time when publishing has become yet another media spectacle, with advances rising into the stratosphere and key players engaging in public dramas like judith regan's firing from harpercollins, mr. loomis has remained rooted in the classic mold of the editor, which is to say, in the background. it's not about him, he says, but about the genius of his writers, a long list that includes william styron, calvin trillin, edmund morris, maya angelou, shelby foote, jonathan harr and pete dexter.  ''about 25 years ago, i began to think, 'i'm a stick in the mud,' '' mr. loomis, now 80, told an audience of close to a hundred in the trustees room of the new york public library last week, at a tribute celebrating his 50 years at random house. '' 'why wasn't i moving on?' '' mr. loomis asked, in that soft, tricky voice that compels you to lean forward and listen. why wasn't he like so many other editors jumping from house to house in search of bigger, better opportunities?  well, the answer is, he would have to leave his beloved authors. mr. loomis has been at random house since the days of donald klopfer and bennett cerf, its founders, and the essence of that great publishing era still lingers in the halls -- at least for him, though the company has moved several times.  then there were no auctions driving authors' advances so high that they could never be recouped, no multiple submissions, no editorial meetings -- and when an editor waited patiently for 14 years for a book, as mr. loomis did for neil sheehan's vietnam war epic, ''a bright shining lie,'' the reward was a book that won both the pulitzer prize and the national book award.  many of mr. loomis's authors were at the library for last week's tribute. ms. angelou, who sometimes uses a wheelchair now, sat next to him as the candles flickered on the wood-paneled walls of the room, with its carved pilasters and its marble fireplace. rose styron was there, in place of her late husband, william.  mr. trillin was master of ceremonies, giving a little glimpse of mr. loomis's editing style, which could, at a maximum, be described as subtle -- ''mysterious little check marks next to things in the manuscript,'' as mr. trillin put it. ''he says, 'it's almost there,' '' mr. trillin said. '' 'everything is great but the beginning and the end.' '' which, of course, leaves the middle to be completely rewritten.  there is a koanlike suggestiveness to it all. when mr. trillin and mr. loomis would go over the manuscript and come to those mysterious little check marks, mr. trillin recalled, ''bob would say: 'i wonder what i was thinking here. i can't imagine. well, take a look at that anyway.' ''  the anchorman jim lehrer, also a prolific novelist, was another author who mentioned mr. loomis's ''wonderful 'almost' technique'' of editing at the dinner. when mr. lehrer handed in the manuscript of his novel ''the phony marine,'' mr. lehrer said, ''he yelled: 'eureka! you did it, jim. it's a wonderful novel.' bob paused so i could savor it,'' mr. lehrer continued. ''then he said, 'almost. that is, 'except for.  ' ''  ''i said, 'what do you mean?' '' mr. lehrer recalled. ''he said, 'the space between the beginning and the ending.' ''  yet behind mr. loomis's soft voice, those gentle suggestions show the instincts of a cobra. william styron once said of his editor, ''with bob you can't get by with those moments of laziness or failure of clarity or self-flattering turgidity: he pounces like a cobra, shakes the wretched phrase or sentence into good sense or meaning.''  mr. loomis first spotted styron's work when they were both students at duke university, in the student magazine ''the archive,'' of which mr. loomis later became editor. mr. loomis went on to edit every one of styron's books except his first novel, ''lie down in darkness.''  at the reception ms. angelou too couldn't help commenting on the loomis ''almost'' editing style. ''he would say, 'it's really good -- almost,' '' she told the audience. she described how mr. loomis tricked her into writing her first book. it was 1968, she said, and she was in a deep depression over the murder of martin luther king jr. her friend james baldwin took her to the home of jules feiffer and his wife at the time, judy. the group began telling stories of their childhoods. the next day judy feiffer phoned mr. loomis and told him that he ought to get this woman to write a book. mr. loomis tried, but ms. angelou recalled, ''i said, 'absolutely not.' ''  mr. loomis tried another ploy, phoning ms. angelou and saying, '''it's just as well, because to write an autobiography as literature is just about impossible,' '' she recounted.  that did it. ''i said, 'i will try,' '' ms. angelou remembered, in her majestically deep voice. out of their phone conversation came ''i know why the caged bird sings,'' and about 20 other books written by ms. angelou for random house.  ms. angelou said she sends mr. loomis literally every word she writes. yes, there have been hard times. ''i have found him to be absolutely intractable,'' she said. ''i tell him, 'i will never speak to you again.' '' but that doesn't stop them from being one of the happiest couples in the room, mr. loomis said, patting ms. angelou gently on the head.  mr. loomis is married to hilary mills, a biographer of norman mailer. they have a a son, miles, and mr. loomis has a daughter, diana, from his marriage to the agent gloria loomis. he still flies his cessna 172 every weekend out in sag harbor, where he has a home, passing the mandatory f.a.a. physical for pilots every year, he says.  the inevitable question arises: will mr. loomis retire now? there are some big books coming up, the second volume of sheldon novick's biography of henry james, the third volume of edmund morris's biography of theodore roosevelt, neil sheehan's book on the cold war.  but mr. loomis doesn't like to talk about retiring: ''it makes people nervous.'' he will always be attached to random house, he said.  