for better food, look to congress   to the editor:  re ''amber fields of bland'' (op-ed, jan. 14):  dan barber is correct: farmers don't determine what or how they farm. washington does through policies that favor commodities over a diverse, edible agriculture.  but i disagree on one point: it's not food that lawmakers are focused on in the new farm bill; it's energy.  agriculture and energy policy are merging, and the interests of corn-producing states and multinational agribusinesses are in growing corn for ethanol, oceans of it.  as demand for ethanol uses up more of the crop, corn prices are at a 10-year high, while global supply is at a 29-year low. the result: higher food costs, more corn for fuel and less for food.  with this kind of incentive, it's unlikely that farmers are going to choose tasty broccoli over bland corn.  jan weber  brooklyn, jan. 15, 2007  to the editor:  sure, we can buy ''cheap'' hamburgers ground from animals raised in inhumane conditions in government-subsidized factories, fed on subsidized grain, grown with subsidized irrigation.  as dan barber points out, we are paying for it with our tax dollars while sacrificing flavor, local business, healthy soils and diversity.  he did not mention the alarming and growing health costs of obesity, directly traceable to ''cheap'' calories produced by bloated factory farms.  how much foreign oil would we save by eating locally grown foods? how much would we influence global climate change by not trucking carrots cross-country?  this is not only tasteless food that government policies offer us; it is also very expensive.  martine donofrio  short hills, n.j., jan. 14, 2007  to the editor:  kudos to dan barber for caring about what americans eat rather than about the bottom line of corporations, which have undue political influence.  one item he doesn't mention is the introduction of cheap high-fructose corn syrup into the american diet and its consequent contribution toward obesity.  let's keep taste on the table and maintain the health of our diet and irreplaceable farmland with a more sensible farm bill.  elizabeth r. cardman  urbana, ill., jan. 16, 2007  