an old movie house gets a broadway glow   for someone who says he is not a theater buff, kevin j. o'neill is going to a lot of trouble -- and expense -- to bring year-round plays to an old movie house here.  mr. o'neill, 43, one of the owners of theatermania.com, an online theater magazine and ticket agency, is spending $2 million to restore the former northport theater for the performing arts. he and his partner, richard t. dolce, 38, plan a professional theater there starting in late june.  a former government bond trader who lives in huntington, mr. o'neill bought the property in june from dennis tannenbaum, a local real estate investor; mr. tannenbaum had bought it for $1.4 million in 2005. (neither mr. o'neill nor mr. tannenbaum would reveal the selling price.)  mr. dolce, who lives in hauppauge, is a lawyer who knows his way around backstage, working as an administrator and producer at the broadhollow theater company's trio of regional theaters, bayway arts center in east islip, studio theater in lindenhurst and its flagship theater in elmont. (it was founded by his mother, pat zaback, and her husband, jerry zaback.) mr. o'neill and mr. dolce formed an in-house production company, harborside productions, and plan to stage full-scale broadway-caliber actors equity shows at the theater in northport.  meanwhile, the theater is undergoing a renovation, including excavating a larger basement to accommodate additional dressing rooms with showers, and an orchestra pit. the 10-foot stage will be extended to 30 feet.  originally built in 1912, the northport theater was rebuilt after a fire in 1932. unable to compete with multiplexes, it was shuttered in 2001. the curtain will come up on a stage with a new name, the john w. engeman theater at northport, in honor of mr. o'neill's brother-in-law, who was killed in iraq in may 2006. the engeman theater will be the only year-round equity house on the island; gateway playhouse in bellport and bay street theater in sag harbor stage seasonal productions.  sloped stadium seating, reusing the theater's burgundy velvet seats, which are now in storage, is being installed. with an emphasis on quality over quantity, the number of seats will be reduced to 399 from 600.  ''we reduced it down to where every seat in the house has a perfect view of the stage,'' mr. o'neill said. with side rather than center aisles, the stadium seats will override the existing balcony, but the playhouse's coffered ceiling will remain, along with four rosette light fixtures.  damask-upholstered walls and six arched murals have been covered with plastic during the renovation. in the lobby, a bar and a grand piano will replace the concession area, but the marble-faced box office will remain.  in the void created by the stadium tiers, additional bathroom stalls and a coat checkroom will be built.  ''we are trying to go and check off the problems you typically experience at a broadway house,'' mr. o'neill said. plans also include new lighting and sound system.  the lineup of shows for the opening season will be announced in mid-february, said mr. dolce, who expects to hold auditions and rehearsals in manhattan.  ''it is the largest talent pool in the world, so i figure i might as well take advantage of that,'' mr. dolce said. actors will be transported by bus to northport for each production.  there are also plans for a children's theater on saturdays and classes for children, teenagers and adults. performances by name entertainers between full-scale productions are on the drawing board.  mr. o'neill said he invested in the northport project to ''fill the gap'' in quality entertainment in the area.  ''my wife and i have been going out for many, many years in huntington,'' he said. while they have ''done the restaurant tour many times over and enjoy it very much,'' he added, after dinner they find themselves saying, '' 'well, what else is there to do right now?' ''  if having a broadway-quality theater nearby appeals to him, mr. o'neill said, it should attract others who are reluctant to spend the time and the money to frequent the great white way.  tickets will be $55 for musicals and $45 for nonmusicals; about half the cost of a broadway production, he said. no on-site parking is available, but mr. o'neill says he is considering valet parking and expects most patrons to walk to the theater from the harbor area, where there is parking, a few blocks downhill.  ''this provides a viable alternative for something else to do,'' mr. o'neill said. ''there is a region of the island that is really starved for this kind of entertainment.''  