hard-hitting look at autism is being shown at sundance   as he worked on a documentary about children with autism, eric solomon wanted its opening sequence to have an impact similar to the start of ''saving private ryan,'' he said: ''the soldiers are storming the beach and you feel like you're in battle with them.''  the film, ''autism every day,'' is being shown starting jan. 21 at the 2007 sundance film festival in park city, utah. its first 90 seconds are an uncomfortable, compelling sequence of children crying, shouting and rocking as their parents struggle to restrain, comfort and connect with them.  children with autism, a puzzling disorder, typically have delays in language development, trouble relating to others and rigid, often obsessive behaviors. the intensity of symptoms varies; the children in the film are among the more severely affected, for whom the activities of daily life are a challenge and meaningful communication is frustratingly limited.  for mr. solomon, who with his wife, carol, runs milestone video of huntington, sundance was an unexpected destination. milestone is a video production boutique founded in 2000, whose past works have tended more to customer testimonials, promotional videos and broadcast commercials for clients including the u.s. trust corporation, 1-800-flowers.com and the nonprofit organization henry street settlement.  ''we're still pinching ourselves a little bit,'' mr. solomon said.  as for the unscripted documentary style of the film, mr. solomon said, ''what we did in 'autism every day' is what we have been doing for years for our corporate clients as well as for our not-for-profit clients.'' hired by autism speaks, a national, nonprofit organization based in new york, and the nonprofit new york center for autism, the solomons teamed with lauren thierry, a former cnn anchor and executive producer of the october group, a film production company, who was co-producer and director. ms. thierry, who lives in new york, has a 9-year-old son with autism.  the filmmakers first made a 13-minute version for an autism fund-raiser in may in manhattan, which was attended by larry aidem, president of the sundance channel. though the television operation has no formal relationship with the festival, mr. aidem urged autism speaks to submit it to the film event, said alison singer, a spokeswoman for the organization. ms. singer appears in the film with jodie, her 9-year-old daughter, who has autism.  for sundance, the piece was expanded to 44 minutes, still focusing on more impaired children. they are the ones, as ms. singer characterizes them, ''who don't make enough progress to be mainstreamed, who continue to struggle, who still have such challenging behaviors.''  ''that's why we made this film, to tell their stories,'' she said.  that focus has angered some families. kristina chew, a mother of an autistic child who writes two blogs about the disorder, said the initial version of the documentary ''portrayed a tone of hopelessness.''  while the filmmakers capture hope, love and determination, the documentary also reveals the unrelenting stress and occasional despair in rearing children with autism. in one scene, michele iallonardi of hauppauge, a mother of three boys with autism, says: ''you're stressed that your kid's not eating broccoli. my kid is eating baby food for the past three years. we have had feeding therapy for three years.'' mrs. iallonardi also describes the debt the family has incurred for her sons' therapies.  in a telephone interview, mrs. iallonardi said she didn't hesitate to be filmed. ''nothing is going to change if people don't know what's going on,'' she said.  