with victory against magic, the nets finally find the middle ground   two months ago, the nets lost their second consecutive game to fall to 5-5, the first inkling of an unexpectedly rocky and inconsistent start to the season.  the .500 mark now comes with a much different connotation.  the nets won for the ninth time in 11 games saturday night, defeating the orlando magic, 101-94, at continental arena to improve to 20-20. they will head out west for a five-game trip that starts in sacramento on monday with an opportunity to have a winning record by the season's midpoint.  the nets entered this season with much higher expectations for the halfway mark, but considering what they have been through, falling as many as seven games below .500 and facing a number of off-court issues, it would be a noteworthy achievement.  ''as a mini-goal it's good, but we're not going to celebrate the fact,'' nets coach lawrence frank said after saturday night's game.  what frank was willing to tout was a perception that his team was getting better. the nets put away the magic with a pair of runs in the third and fourth quarters.  vince carter led the nets with 27 points, 2 of which were particularly impressive. midway through the third quarter, carter drove to the basket from the left wing and elevated from just inside the left edge of the lane. magic center darko milicic tried to block his shot, but carter ducked in midair, soared beneath the rim and flicked in a reverse layup off the glass before coming down on the opposite edge of the paint.  the acrobatic shot was part of a 28-12 surge by the nets that turned a 15-point deficit into a 1-point lead entering the fourth quarter.  ''our energy level was pretty low until vince made that normal shot,'' said nets point guard jason kidd, who had 16 points, 8 rebounds and 7 assists. ''for some of us that just doesn't happen, but for him that is just a normal layup.''  carter said, ''i don't know how it went in.''  perhaps the most amazing thing the nets did against the magic (22-19) was hold its star center dwight howard to a season-low 1 point.  howard, who fouled out in the fourth quarter, entered the game playing like an all-star with averages of 17.5 points, 12.6 rebounds and 1.9 blocked shots. he got nothing going against the nets.  ''i don't know what happened,'' howard said. ''i couldn't get to the free-throw line. i couldn't get any shots going.''  every other member of the magic who played scored more than howard, led by forward hedo turkoglu's 24 points. the nets also got contributions from throughout their lineup for the second consecutive night.  on friday, the nets' reserves combined for 31 points in a victory against the knicks. they had 37 against the magic, led by eddie house's 17 points. house missed the first 15 games because he was recovering from off-season knee surgery. he has been effective of late, having scored in double digits on consecutive nights.  ''i'm finally getting a rhythm,'' he said. ''i'm starting to see stuff that i wasn't seeing before, getting my confidence.''  house missed his first six shots saturday night, but he hit 6 of 9 the rest of the way, with 15 of his points coming in the fourth quarter.  house played a large role in an 18-3 run the nets used in the fourth quarter to put the game away. when carter blew past turkoglu along the baseline and threw down a reverse dunk, the nets went ahead by 14 points with 3 minutes 51 seconds remaining. the magic pulled to within 5 points in the final 30 seconds but never seriously threatened.  the nets have not been at .500 since nov. 20. they were 11-18 just three weeks ago, but thanks to a revamped defense and the strong play of their captain, kidd, they have looked as though they expect to win.  ''you set a goal of, 'hey, let's get moving, let's get back to .500,' and then, 'let's start catching up on some of these other teams in the eastern conference,' '' said small forward richard jefferson, who scored 17 points against the magic.  if the nets are to continue their success, they will need consistency from jefferson, who has been bothered by ankle problems. he will probably need surgery to fix the problem. the timing of the surgery, if it occurs, will be up to jefferson.  ''he's far from 100 percent,'' frank said before the game. ''at any time it could be where there's a decision that it's best for him to look at a different remedy as opposed to just getting cortisone shots.''  asked after the game if he might miss the trip out west to have surgery, jefferson said: ''you're not asking me any questions about this. come on, guys.''  pro basketball  