new haven arena to fall, taking grand-scale vision with it   there are rooftop soirees and a city-sponsored official watching spot. one art gallery has scheduled an open-microphone night to encourage people to share their memories. people from near and far are making plans to witness the implosion, though the whole spectacle is expected to last less than 20 seconds.  saturday morning at 7:30 a.m., the new haven veterans memorial coliseum -- host to van halen, bob hope, monster truck shows, wrestling matches and countless minor-league hockey games -- is scheduled to be put to rest.  from the time it was built in 1972, the coliseum towered over the city with high hopes of downtown renewal. but for the last 10 years, it has run a deficit as big-name acts skipped over new haven to play in connecticut's casinos or other, newer venues.  now, after decades of debate over its potential as a tool for urban renewal, the crumbling giant will come tumbling down, even as other midsize cities nearby, such as yonkers and bridgeport, are banking on similar stadiums to revive their own downtowns.  the decision to destroy the coliseum reflects a shift in philosophy on urban planning, with mayor john destefano jr. choosing to focus on arts, education and small retail buildings rather than on large-scale public spaces.  ''i think we are taking an approach that is smarter about what works in building a city,'' mr. destefano said. some people still like the idea of big projects, he said, ''but successful urban life gets woven from lots of small things, not one grand gesture.''  talking about the coliseum, he added, ''this was a particularly grand gesture for its time.''  when city officials first made plans for a downtown arena in the 1960s, they believed it would draw a huge number of people, who would in turn bring thousands of dollars with them. at the time, the city had grand plans to remake itself and thought the hulking building would be the ideal ''front gate'' to grab the attention of drivers along the highway.  but as early as 1987, officials and residents began debating the possibility of tearing down the 10,000-seat stadium and putting a shopping mall in its place. by then, the coliseum was already losing money -- about $54,000 that year. it stopped operating in 2002.  ''there was no chance to make the kind of money that made it worth it,'' mr. destefano said.  while new haven is scrapping its stadium, yonkers is taking the opposite approach, planning to be the host of a minor league baseball team at a 6,500-seat stadium that city officials envision as the centerpiece of a $150 million development that will likely include several big-box stores. the mayor of yonkers, philip a. amicone, said he hoped the plan, designed for a vacant parking lot in the center of downtown, would bring much needed revenue to his struggling city.  bridgeport built its 10,000-seat stadium in 2001. while performers like james taylor and andrea bocelli have drawn large crowds, there is little evidence that the stadium has boosted other downtown business.  new haven's plans for the coliseum's space are less grandiose this time around. after the rubble is cleared this summer, the area will be used for parking near union station, where metro-north and amtrak trains stop. by 2011, city officials said they expected to move the long wharf theater from its current spot on the harbor to the site on orange street and also to open a new community college, called gateway, there. city officials also hope to build several stores and housing units adjacent to the existing retail area across the street.  new haven's new $230 million plans to redevelop the coliseum site have not attracted much attention -- the real fanfare is about the implosion, which has been delayed for the last two years. it might lack the significance of other famous demolitions -- say the berlin wall or the london bridge -- but residents here were preparing for the saturday morning destruction of the building with a similar kind of nostalgic excitement.  traffic along interstates 95 and 91 is to be stopped saturday morning from 7:15 to 7:45. some 15,000 tires will be placed around the coliseum to absorb the impact of more than 2,200 pounds of explosives. city planners said that the rubble could be about 50 feet high, though it is impossible to predict exactly what the destroyed building will look like.  and that, of course, is part of the draw.  city officials are expecting hundreds of people to show up for a view from the top of the temple street parking garage, the city's official observation spot. tower one, a senior citizen housing complex that, at 20 stories, is one of the largest buildings downtown, is expecting dozens of visitors. other event-watching plans include more than a few illicit rooftop parties.  at artspace art gallery, a few miles from the coliseum, plans were to stay open all night friday and offer an open microphone and free hot chocolate to anyone who comes by. ''we'll be a refuge for a lot of onlookers, i think, but i have no idea how many,'' said helen kauder, the executive director. ''we just thought why not be a part of history?''  onlookers were encouraged to gather early and be ready at precisely 7:30 a.m. and to try not to blink.  ''whatever will happen, it will take place very quickly,'' said stephen goldblum, the owner of stamford wrecking company, which is overseeing the demolition. ''gravity doesn't take very long.''  