the tricky task of spotting a new market darling   five years after the stock market hit bottom, investors are feeling perky again. they have even returned to i.p.o. wunderkinds and high-tech highfliers.  michael moe's new investment manual is, therefore, all too timely. ''finding the next starbucks'' (penguin, $26.95) is an unashamed guide to picking growth stocks. as the subtitle, ''how to identify and invest in the hot stocks of tomorrow,'' makes clear, shooting for the moon is back.  mr. moe, formerly a well-known securities analyst and, today, c.e.o. of a boutique san francisco firm, thinkequity partners, pitches a trendy approach that will delight his friends on wall street. he advises readers to invest in companies in hot industries that are run by the right people and that boast sustainable growth opportunities.  he is undaunted by the fact that such stocks typically trade at a sky-high multiple of earnings. though mr. moe includes a chapter on price-to-earnings ratios and such, his focus clearly is not on valuation (that is, the price of a stock relative to its earnings) but rather on ''finding the companies that can have rapid earnings growth for a long period of time.''  he also urges investors to ignore the doubters, among whom he presumably includes the financial journalist pack, many being distinguished for their wit, their skepticism and their high turns of phrase -- but not their bank accounts. indeed, it irritates mr. moe that investing in plain old (or rather, plain new) winners is not held in higher regard. as he says, ''for some reason, on wall street cynics are thought to be brilliant.'' point taken.  indeed, if you can find the next starbucks, there is no reason to invest in bonds, gold coins, certificates of deposit or utility shares. mr. moe's claim to fame is that he found the first one. as he tells it, he was about to return from a long trip to seattle when he reluctantly paid a call on one last company, some coffeehouse named after a character from melville's ''moby-dick.''  no sooner did he enter the reception area than he sensed the buzz (or was it the caffeine?) and became ''one of the first research analysts'' to recognize sbux.  he makes a similar boast with respect to the apollo group and, more recently, google. mr. moe also acknowledges that he has had his share of losers, but he does not trouble himself to identify any, except perhaps obliquely. (he says he ''used to follow'' boston chicken, whose stock market valuation went from $3 billion to zero.)  such reticence is a pity because, it seems to me, identifying the potential losers is just as important as identifying the winners. this is especially true in the growth-stock arena, where a flameout can be devastating. it would have been interesting to hear mr. moe talk about amazon, a company with all the attributes -- growth potential, shrewd management, a valued brand -- that he admires. after its early sky-high valuation, the stock has yet to regain its internet-bubble peak set seven years ago.  but mr. moe takes a backward-looking approach, focusing on stocks he knows to have been winners. this rather colors his conclusions. he asks where the winners came from and, not surprisingly, discovers that the best performers in any period started out as very small businesses. they were ''acorns'' that grew into oaks.  there is a problem with such an approach. my front lawn, for instance, is chock full of acorns. one or two might make it to the oak-tree stage, but most are destined to sit until discovered by some enterprising squirrel.  what we would like to know is what, in advance, distinguishes the very few acorns that grow into trees? mr. moe recommends looking for companies in the cross hairs of what he refers to as ''megatrends,'' like the information revolution, the internet and the aging of society, to name only a few. and he lists (though doesn't evaluate) a good many stocks.  but his discussion of how to identify particular winners strikes me as a tad superficial. he acknowledges that ''luck'' was on his side when he discovered starbucks, and i don't think he is entirely kidding. perhaps a more trenchant criticism is that predicting megagrowth stocks defies hard analysis or, as the author says, is largely a matter of intuition. this is hard to teach.  nonetheless, when mr. moe refers to ebay and apple as ''one-of-a-kind companies,'' he has missed an opportunity to compare and contrast. though both are success stories, from an investor's standpoint they could scarcely be more different. in the case of ebay, the more customers it attracts, the more it has to offer -- thus its growth tends to be self-propelling. it is close to a natural monopoly. on the other hand, apple's growth depends on its ability to continually invent new and attractive products -- a far dicier proposition.  mr. moe is aware of the need to distinguish the attributes of winners from those of losers, and in a final chapter he contrasts pairs of stocks in like industries, like the rocket dell and the more pedestrian gateway. but these are brief, retrospective sketches. the reader is left to wonder what mr. moe might have said of them in advance.  though mr. moe is dead right to emphasize long-term earnings growth, he repeatedly undermines this by urging readers to pay attention to short-term factors (what he elsewhere describes as ''wiggles'').  take the case of discovery zone, which briefly wowed wall street as a potential second coming of disneyland.  mr. moe says the first sign of trouble was when discovery zone reported quarterly earnings that, while nearly doubling, fell a penny short of analyst expectations. he approvingly quotes a seasoned investor who told him at the time, ''mike, if these guys can't find a penny, they are too dumb for me to invest with or their business has other issues.'' the company was bankrupt within 12 months.  this is a cute story, but sends exactly the wrong message, as do his other reminders on the supposed import of quarterly earnings. it risks turning long-term growth investors into hot-money traders.  off the shelf  