the reappearance of an old thai friend   welcome back, chaophaya. the thai restaurant reopened in its new quarters in kings park in mid-november. it had a near-cult following during its eight years in lindenhurst before closing abruptly two years ago. (there was a problem with the lease, the owners said.)  the kings park restaurant is on main street, a big improvement over its previous, hard-to-find location. the building had been home to the american bistro, then to a series of italian restaurants. with chaophaya, its revolving-door days may be over.  the restaurant is owned by two talented sisters: molrude (neena) kittiratanaporn, the chef, and noi bartolomeo, who rules the front of the house. various family members are on hand on busy nights, greeting patrons, running the bar, waiting on tables and helping out in the kitchen. their talents are not limited to the culinary arts. our waitress told us that everything in the dining room had been made by the family: the wooden tables, the metal wall sconces and other decorations. one wall depicts thai temples highlighted in metallic paint; another features wooden boxes with water running over pebbles.  noi bartolomeo, elegantly dressed in thai style, is a dynamo. she does a fine job of explaining the menu, determining how spicy patrons want their food to be and noting any other dining preferences. the rest of the staff is amiable but quite casual. the runner delivering dishes does not know who ordered them, and it may take more than one request to get a soft drink refill.  still, it is the exceptionally good food that is the big story here. chaophaya's pad thai was the best i have ever eaten. the stir-fried rice noodles were moist, crunchy with bean sprouts and slightly sweet; they were enhanced by a crown of four jumbo shrimp. a squeeze from an accompanying wedge of lime made the dish perfect. a rival for top honors was called spicy noodle, which we ordered with beef. these wide, flat noodles were full of flavor from basil and chilies.  soups were standouts. all carried a red star on the menu, indicating spiciness. even though we requested them mild, they still delivered a kick. the tom yum koong, a clear shrimp soup, provided a tangy hit from lime juice and lemongrass. the tom ka kai, a vibrant chicken soup, had its heat tempered by coconut milk.  both the beef and shrimp salads were outstanding starters for those who like their food spicy. they sparkled with crunchy fresh ingredients. we did have to ask for knives for the beef salad; the slices of meat were far larger than bite-size.  other appetizers that scored were thai dumplings, both the delicate, nearly transparent vegetable variety and the sturdier ones filled with meat. shrimp blanket was another good pick. it consisted of four whole shrimp enclosed in egg roll wrappers and served with plum sauce.  don't miss the whole baked fish (boned) in a sweet-tangy tamarind sauce. it was perched atop baby bok choy and slices of eggplant. the sautéed asian eggplant with basil in garlic sauce was also splendid.  the two best curries sampled were the pad pik khing with chicken, string beans and lime leaves, and the sea scallops with coconut milk and chilies in a red curry sauce. we tried two versions of pad kaprow. one starred a crunchy mix of vegetables, chili peppers, garlic, onions and basil with shrimp; the other featured tofu. both delivered.  my favorite desserts were the fried ice cream with raspberry sauce, served aflame, and the fried bananas. the latter were small, crisp logs wrapped in spring roll skins and drizzled with honey and sesame seeds. the tapioca was hot and flecked with black beans, not the cold western pudding. tapioca fans loved it anyway. slices of fresh mango surrounding a mound of not-too-sweet sticky rice was another pleaser. skip the three thai fruits listed on the menu, longans, rambutans and litchis, all canned in syrup; they all tasted the same.  chaophaya's loyal following continues to grow. as i left the restaurant, i heard the people at the next table tell the waitress they were visiting for the third time that week.  chaophaya  25 main street (route 25a)  kings park  (631) 269-2818  very good  the space -- simply decorated, with thai touches. there are a few steps at the entrance to the restaurant, but restrooms are wheelchair accessible.  the crowd -- mainly families and couples.  the bar -- a separate room, at the entrance, is dominated by a long wooden bar. the restaurant is still awaiting a license to serve wine and beer. diners may bring their own.  the bill -- complete lunch with thai salad and spring roll, $7.95 to $8.95. dinner entrees, $8.95 to $16.95.  what we like -- thai dumplings, shrimp blanket, tom yum koong, tom ka kai, beef salad, shrimp salad; pad pik khing, sea scallop curry, pad kaprow with tofu, pad kaprow with shrimp, baked whole fish in tamarind sauce, pad thai with shrimp, spicy noodle with beef, eggplant with basil; fried ice cream, fried bananas.  if you go -- open noon till 10 p.m. sunday and tuesday through thursday, till 11 p.m. friday and saturday. closed monday. reservations are recommended.  dining/kings park  