tapping the stuff dreams are made of   as another oscar season gets under way, the academy of motion picture arts and sciences faces a conundrum: is what we have here a failure to communicate, or is this the beginning of a beautiful friendship?  the academy and its television partner, abc, are scheduled to start today their annual campaigns to encourage viewers to watch the academy awards show. abc is scheduled to broadcast the coming oscars, the 79th annual ceremony, on feb. 25; the campaigns dovetail with the announcement this morning of the nominees.  in recent years, the general public's interest in watching the academy awards, as reflected in the ratings, has become much more dependent on how familiar they are with the films and actors being nominated. by contrast, the super bowl usually draws large audiences year after year, in the neighborhood of 90 million, regardless of which teams are playing.  for instance, in 2003, when ''chicago'' was named best picture, only 33 million viewers watched the oscar ceremony, nielsen media research reported, compared with 55 million in 1998, when ''titanic'' won.  the academy awards audience last year totaled 38.9 million, when ''crash'' won, compared with 42.1 million in 2005, when ''million dollar baby'' was the big winner. the academy awards show is typically the no. 2 most-watched tv program each year, behind the super bowl.  for the academy, the size of the audiences can affect the luster of its image, not to mention how much it can charge for the television rights to the ceremonies. for abc, the ratings influence how much it can charge for commercial time during the broadcasts and, to some extent, the pedigree of the sponsors the shows attract.  for those reasons, there are significant changes in the tune-in campaigns this year. for instance, the academy and abc are trying to coordinate and integrate the campaigns more closely than in previous years.  also, the creative content of the campaigns is being broadened in an effort to appeal to the american ardor for movies in general, rather than for specific films or performers.  the campaign from the academy, created by tbwa/chiat/day, is an upbeat celebration of lines of movie dialogue famous enough to have become catchphrases (like the two in the first paragraph of this article, from, respectively, ''cool hand luke'' and ''casablanca'').  the campaign from abc, created internally, features the comedian ellen degeneres, who will serve as the host of the show for the first time, joining the ranks of previous m.c.'s like johnny carson, billy crystal, whoopi goldberg and bob hope.  the ads are infused with the broad-based, good-natured humor for which ms. degeneres is popular. they include depictions of her as a ticket taker in a movie theater, the leader of a children's band in a school and a living oscar statue.  in the past, ''we were relying on the glory of the oscars,'' said sidney ganis, president of the academy. ''we've come to learn nothing totally promotes itself.''  ''yes, we are the oscars; yes, we are the academy awards,'' mr. ganis said. ''but we're in the marketplace, and everyone around us promotes.''  michael benson, senior vice president of marketing at the abc entertainment unit of abc, echoed that assessment.  ''we still have 'event television' on the air,'' mr. benson said, referring to shows that viewers still make an effort to watch, ''but it gets increasingly difficult to tell people what's on.''  ''we want to get the audience excited for this show,'' he added, by demonstrating ''the entertainment value ellen will bring to the show.''  the centerpiece of the campaign from the academy is a series of commercials, directed by the filmmaker spike lee, presenting film fans uttering lines like ''frankly, my dear, i don't give a damn'' (''gone with the wind''), ''it was beauty killed the beast'' (''king kong'') and ''adrian!'' (''rocky'').  the commercials can be watched not only on tv and in movie theaters but also on the academy web site (oscar.com).  the print and outdoor ads from the academy campaign are being tailored for the locations in which they will appear.  for example, billboards with a well-known line from ''sunset boulevard'' -- ''all right, mr. demille, i'm ready for my close-up'' -- will go up on the actual sunset boulevard. and posters declaring: ''fasten your seat belts. it's going to be a bumpy night'' (''all about eve'') will appear on the sides of buses.  phone kiosks on wall street will bear signs reading, ''greed is good'' (''wall street''). phone kiosks in a certain neighborhood in san francisco will carry signs reading: ''forget it, jake. it's chinatown'' (''chinatown'').  and phone kiosks in various big-city neighborhoods will bear signs reading, ''e. t. phone home'' (''e. t. the extra-terrestrial'') and ''you had me at 'hello' '' (''jerry maguire'').  ''this is an issue you have to address, that if you look at the data it's the particular movies and the particular stars driving viewership'' of the show, said rob schwartz, executive creative director at the playa del rey, calif., office of tbwa/chiat/day, part of the tbwa worldwide unit of the omnicom group.  ''our approach is that this is like the super bowl,'' he added. ''irrespective of the stars, the films, the scripts, it's not just the movies; it's the oscars.''  the idea behind the campaign is that ''if the oscars is a brand, its best product is the movies,'' mr. schwartz said. ''the great writing, the great quotes -- when you hear and see them, the scenes come to life.''  abc, part of the walt disney company, charged about $1.7 million for each 30-second commercial during the oscar show last year, compared with $1.6 million for the 2005 program. the network has not disclosed the price for a spot during the coming show.  by comparison, cbs is charging an estimated average of $2.6 million for each 30-second spot during super bowl xli on feb. 4.  among the advertisers for the coming academy awards are diet coke, sold by the coca-cola company, and the dove brand sold by unilever, which is sponsoring a contest that invites consumers to create a commercial for a new product, dove cream oil body wash (dovecreamoil.com).  only time will tell if television viewers will, to borrow a familiar line from ''moonstruck,'' snap out of it and resume their fervent annual interest in the oscars, or if they will, to paraphrase another line from ''sunset boulevard,'' decide that the pictures are still big -- it's the oscars that got small.  advertising  