gun making as an art as well as a business   an engrossing exhibition at the wadsworth atheneum museum of art is the first show to document the colorful life and business career of samuel colt, the firearms manufacturer and shameless self-promoter.  as expected, the extensive colt firearms collections, donated to the museum by his widow, elizabeth hart jarvis colt, in 1905, draws the eye, but there is much else of interest here.  colt (1814-1862) was a canny promoter of his products. in the 1850s he commissioned the frontier artist george catlin to paint a series of pictures that showed people hunting with colt guns -- several of these paintings are on view. there is also information about colt's achievements as a technological innovator and industrial entrepreneur, including gun-design schematics.  arranged loosely into nine themes, the exhibition opens with a display on the development of the revolving firearm by colt in the early 1830s. like many scientific and technological breakthroughs, it happened by accident: after colt dropped out of school, he was packed off by his parents, at age 16, to work as a crew member on a boston brig, where, the story goes, he observed that the locking mechanism of the ship's wheel might also be used to house multiple, revolving barrels of a pistol. colt quickly whittled a wooden model. this was the germ of the revolutionary idea for the famous colt revolver.  when colt returned to hartford the following year, he hired anson chase, a gunmaker, to create a prototype. the result was, as an exhibition label says, ''the first multishot weapon to automatically rotate its cylinder with the action of its hammer -- the spring mechanism that strikes off the powder charge.'' to finance his early prototypes, colt worked as a traveling salesmen demonstrating the uses and applications of nitrous oxide, or laughing gas.  the exhibition charts colt's efforts to perfect his new revolver design and cost-efficient manufacturing techniques. he took several years to get it right, initially going bankrupt. but once perfected, colt's guns became a market leader.  to keep up with demand, he built an arms factory in hartford, with state-of-the-art machines and dedicated production lines; back then it was one of the most technologically advanced factories in the world. he even built an area called coltsville, which had housing for employees, a library and a community center.  colt's pistols are beautiful pieces of machinery and, for their time, the world's most efficient weapons, combining a functional simplicity with a formal elegance. colt liked to juxtapose materials, colors and finishes to heighten visual appeal. some of the revolvers have expertly carved or inlaid handles and gun barrels with a seductive black-blue tinge.  colt was apparently indifferent to the uses of his products; he sold arms to whoever would pay. buyers included czar alexander ii of russia, the japanese shogun tokugawa yoshinobu and sultan abd al-majid of turkey.  colt even sold guns to opposing forces -- during the crimean war (1853-56), he supplied guns to both the british and the russians. to him, it was just business.  in gratitude, his customers often gave him lavish gifts, several of which are on view, including enormous diamond rings, medals, vases, swords and other trinkets.  one of the most astonishing gifts on display here is a gold and diamond snuffbox given to colt by the czar and fitted at its center with a blue enamel plaque bearing the czar's monogram in diamonds beneath a diamond-studded crown. not bad for a school dropout.  ''samuel colt: arms, art and invention,'' wadsworth atheneum museum of art, 600 main street, hartford, through march 4. information can be found at (860) 278-2670 or www.wadsworthatheneum.org.  art review  