warm days and hard times in snowmobile land   for 24 winters, bev and butch jelley, owners of the b&b mobil station here, have provided legions of snowmobilers with fuel and chili. but this year the kitchen is quiet, and the snowmobiles are nowhere to be found.  snowmobile clubs and the businesses that cater to them are having their second bad year in a row in many parts of new england, as warm weather has turned flakes to wet blobs and left trails a grassy, rocky mess.  conditions are improving for clubs in northern maine, which received a foot of snow this week, and are getting better in parts of the northeast kingdom in vermont and the north country of new hampshire, both of which received snow this week.  but elsewhere, snowmobile clubs are seeing memberships decline, meaning a drop in the dues used for trail maintenance. the lack of riders is severely affecting restaurants and gas stations like the jelleys', which laid off much of its winter staff and is closing on sundays to save money.  ''it's horrible. we've been here 24 years and have never closed on a sunday,'' mr. jelley said. ''we need snow for snowmobilers. that's what we depend on in the winter; it's 99 percent of our business.''  pat budnick, owner of the motel in the meadow, has a sign saying ''think snow'' in the reception area.  ''i'm down $3,000 from last year in january, and so far that's just 18 days,'' ms. budnick said. ''we haven't had one snowmobiler, because the trails aren't open.''  ann shangraw, president of the vermont association of snow travelers, which oversees local clubs and distributes money for grooming trails, said fewer than 5,000 memberships had been sold so far this season. the association, known as vast, normally sells about 30,000 memberships annually, ms. shangraw said.  ''our budget is membership-driven,'' she said, adding that the association distributes about $800,000 annually to clubs. ''we are a wealthy association until the end of this year. we are by no means folding, but at the end of this season we will be thinking about programs and services to cut.''  ms. shangraw said snowmobiling brought $553 million annually to vermont, according to the association's last economic impact study.  local associations are also trimming their budgets. dick jewett, president of the chester snowmobile club, said that all of the club's trails had closed and that he had not had occasion to use its snow-grooming machine, which sits in his garage. the club, he said, gets $10 from vast for every mile of trail it grooms.  mr. jewett said that the club had 489 members last year, and that as of sunday, only 110 riders had joined so far this year. because of budget concerns, the club will probably do away with two scholarships it gives out, he said, and look for other ways to trim its budget.  ''it's the second year with light snowfall,'' mr. jewett said. ''in order to survive, we'll have to make cuts.''  in maine, registrations were down by a quarter, said bob myers, executive director of the maine snowmobile association, but the state just received snow, and people plan to snowmobile this weekend, mr. myers said.  bill cost, owner of inn by the river in the forks, me., said he and other business owners were trying to salvage the season. mr. cost, who helps maintain trails, said the region recently got about a foot of snow, roughly one-third of what it takes for good snowmobiling conditions. he expects heavy use this weekend.  ''it's been devastating, absolutely devastating. it has a huge trickledown effect,'' said mr. cost, who had to lay off four employees because business was slow this year and last. ''we're holding our breath, hoping the cold and snow continue.''  here in chester, benny's power, which services cars and sells snowmobiles, has three years of unsold stock out back.  chris gansz of full throttle motor sports in warren, n.h., and a member of the asquamchumauke snowmobile club, said he could not get rid of his inventory of used snowmobiles.  ''no one is buying sleds. i couldn't sell a used sled to save my life right now,'' mr. gansz said. the club, he said, is worrying about money.  ''we're all scratching our heads wondering how we're going to pay for the groomer this year,'' he said. ''our checkbook is taking a pretty good hit right now.''  john plante, president of the sno-bees snowmobile club in barre, vt., has not given up hope.  ''we're waiting, praying, for snow,'' he said.  vermont journal  