trade deficit stubbornly defies the dollar's slide   jessica heyman's breakfast in paris last month was nothing out of the ordinary: a modest repast of eggs, coffee and a side salad with her husband, jonathan podwil, at the popular café de flore. but the bill was memorable -- 46 euros, or about $60, at the current exchange rate. five years ago, when the dollar was strong, the same bill would have amounted to $42.  the sticker shock provided a powerful incentive to remain frugal the rest of the vacation. ''we ate a lot of bread,'' ms. heyman said.  shocking tourists into counting every penny, and getting americans back home to spend less on costly imports, is part of what a weaker dollar is supposed to do to help pare america's outsize trade deficit, according to economic textbooks.  but, so far, the dollar's slide has not helped enough. although the dollar has lost a lot of ground against many of the world's major currencies -- including the euro, the british pound and the canadian dollar -- the nation's trade imbalance with the world has continued to rise, reaching $702 billion in the first 11 months of 2006, on track to easily outstrip the $717 billion of 2005 and set another record.  officially, the united states government does not welcome the dollar's weakness. ''a strong dollar is clearly in our interest,'' the treasury secretary, henry m. paulson jr., said last month.  but many economists say that the bush administration is satisfied with the dollar's fall against the euro and some other currencies, counting on the decline to help improve the competitiveness of american manufacturers in global markets.  for several reasons, however, that may not happen anytime soon -- even if the dollar continues to weaken against european currencies. for one thing, the dollar has not fallen much against the currencies of some crucial trading partners, including china and japan. critically, the value of china's yuan against the dollar has been carefully managed by beijing so that it does not increase much more than 5 percent annually against the dollar. that is a reason china alone ran up a $214 billion surplus in its trade of goods with the united states from january to november last year.  many foreign suppliers, moreover, are willing to absorb the impact of a declining dollar on their profit margins rather than pass it on to consumers as higher prices. that gives americans less of an incentive to shift away from imports.  in the end, for the united states to begin to balance its trade, american consumers must spend less, while foreign consumers would have to buy a lot more.  ''my u.s. colleagues tend to believe that exchange rates can carry out this adjustment painlessly which i, looking from the outside, find hard to believe,'' said thomas mayer, chief european economist at deutsche bank in london. ''you would need to have unrealistically large changes in exchange rates to overcome that gap.''  free market economists argue that the deficit does not really matter -- it is mostly a benign side effect of america's faster economic growth and its appeal as a destination for foreign investment. trade imbalances are nothing to worry about, these economists say, reflecting private transactions that just happen to occur across borders.  still, with the deficit now in excess of 5 percent of the nation's gross domestic product, many other economists worry that the foreign debt needed to finance the growing imbalance is accumulating at an unsustainable pace.  to some extent, a weaker dollar has bolstered american exports to strong-currency nations. america's inflation-adjusted deficit in trading goods and services with the european union declined by about 1 percent in the first three quarters of last year compared with the 2005 period, to about $84 billion.  and american producers are seeing some benefits. california wineries, for example, have shown double-digit sales growth in canada every year since 2002, when the dollar started its fall against the canadian dollar.  ''there's a real price threshold of 10 canadian dollars a bottle,'' said joseph rollo, director of the international department at the wine institute, the lobby group for california wineries. ''a few years ago it was very difficult for california wineries to make that level. now it's a lot easier.''  the cheap dollar is also allowing some american companies to enter foreign markets for the first time. phoenix closures, a manufacturer of bottle caps in naperville, ill., exports very few of its caps to europe. but a few months ago, it unexpectedly picked up a german client. ''i assume these guys are getting a fairly large price reduction coming to us,'' said bert miller, president of the company.  the opposite side of ms. heyman's expensive breakfast in paris is that america is now a bargain destination for europeans.  ''it was always too expensive for me to go to the states, but now it's a good time,'' said sotirios polytimis, 29, an architecture student in berlin. ''with the same money, i can do more in new york: buy drinks, see the night life, go shopping.''  some american companies that compete with foreign suppliers domestically have also benefited. ''we are gobbling up market share,'' said marty staff, chief executive of ja apparel, which makes joseph abboud suits and sports jackets at a plant in new bedford, mass. ''our products are as good as the european products, but for a lot less money.''  still, the shifting currency has moved far too little to alter entrenched habits.  ''the intractability of consumer behavior is the key to the mystery,'' said cliff waldman, economist at the manufacturers alliance/mapi, a research group for american producers. ''about half of the united states' deficit problem with europe is the difference between the behavior of the european consumer, which is moribund, and the behavior of the american consumer, who never stops.''  these days, a lot of foreign things do look ridiculously expensive to american eyes: the $4.15 big mac in paris; the $16.50 ticket to see a movie at the multiplex in leicester square in london; $5.89 for a heavily taxed gallon of gas in frankfurt.  but europe remains irresistible. american purchases of travel services from european union countries totaled $17.7 billion in the first three quarters of last year, almost 1 percent more than in the period in 2005, after inflation, and about 20 percent more than in the period in 2003.  the number of german tourists visiting the united states this winter is down approximately 20 percent compared with last year, according to tui, the largest european tour operator. robin zimmermann, a spokesman for tui, said germans were favoring destinations in southeast asia, where currencies had also fallen against the euro.  martin n. baily, former chief economic adviser to president bill clinton, remains optimistic that the decline in the dollar will ultimately turn the united states' current-account deficit around. ''i think we are poised for a gradual reduction,'' mr. baily said. ''we are at a point where exports are starting to grow faster than imports.''  currency adjustments can take time to feed through into trade patterns. in fact, a slide in the dollar could initially worsen the nation's trade balance, as the price in dollars of imports would increase immediately while it could take time for american consumers to switch to domestic products.  but new factors arising from the increased globalization of production seem to be making the trade adjustment particularly slow. for instance, by moving more production out of europe, into dollar-pegged regions like china and elsewhere in asia, european companies have created natural hedges against a strong euro.  ''with globalization, we now have a large network of plants all over the world,'' said anton börner, president of bfa, an association of german wholesalers and exporters based in berlin. ''so we are not as affected by changes in a single currency.''  hugo boss, one of joseph abboud's main competitors, is based in the southern german town of metzingen. but it also stitches garments at a factory in cleveland and buys raw materials from asia, where most of its transactions are in dollars or dollar-linked currencies.  sales of boss suits and accessories rose 14 percent in europe in the third quarter of 2006, but 17 percent in the united states, in volume terms. the company said it had not felt much of an impact from the strong euro.  ''if the dollar stays in a reasonable range, say between $1.10 and $1.50, it will not affect us that much,'' said bruno e. sälzer, the chairman of boss. ''if it were to go to $1.60 or $1.70, that would mean there are bigger economic problems than just the exchange rate.''  with asian production now a big part of the equation for manufacturers all over the world, even big increases in the yuan and other asian currencies would probably do little to shift output without causing major economic disruptions.  the people's bank of china is holding about $1.01 trillion in reserves, the vast majority in dollars, which it has amassed as part of its strategy to keep the yuan from appreciating against the american currency to ensure chinese products remain competitive in the united states market.  but even though asian central banks are diversifying their holdings slightly, any big withdrawal from the treasury market that slowed the flood of credit that has helped keep american interest rates low could harm the chinese as well as americans.  ''with china,'' said mr. waldman, the manufacturing economist, ''the capacity for trade imbalances to adjust is minimal.''  