a hudson valley artist rediscovers a forgotten past   betsy braun lane's ''racing on a broken road'' at the castle gallery is a thoughtful, complex and often moving exhibition that does not fully come off. it begins with a map of peekskill in 1800, listing the names of families that lived there. this establishes a broader context for the show, which traces several generations of african-americans who have lived in the hudson valley for the past 230 years.  the exhibition is divided into two sections, each with distinct bodies of work. ''looking past the blindspot,'' the first section, consists of 12 collages made from reproductions of historical family photographs of african-americans from the hudson valley. they provide a tribute to what ms. braun lane, an ossining resident, describes as the unrecorded, largely elided past of african-americans in these communities.  ms. braun lane's research revealed that new york and new jersey had the largest slave populations outside the south and that many african-american families with roots in the communities are the descendants of those slaves. given the subject matter, it is surprising that the collages do not make more impact. the problem seems to be conceptual. the original photographs, some of which are here in a display case, are fascinating as historical documents, but when combined as reproductions in a patchwork collage they don't really amount to much. this is just bad art.  ''following the spirit of the underground railroad,'' the second part of the exhibition, has more to offer. it traces the role of peekskill and other hudson valley towns in the underground railroad, a network of people who helped fugitive slaves escape from the south. the art draws on the oral history and family memories of the descendants of free and enslaved african-americans who lived in the region, as well as on town archives, historical records and photographs.  the centerpiece is a group of photographs of historical re-enactments using local people dressed in period costumes. they show ordinary african-americans of the 18th and 19th centuries going about their lives -- a slave and her child walking to work as maids in a manorial home; a woman in a frilly apron, perhaps a washerwoman, standing on the shoreline looking at a ship anchored in the hudson.  these images, the artist writes in the catalog, provide ''overdue recognition of these previously lost lives and their individual contributions to the struggle for freedom.''  while it is true that these images may help provide ''a richer, more nuanced'' appreciation of local history, they also work well as art. ms. braun lane has worked creatively to imitate the form and appearance of genuine historical photographs, while the inclusion of biographical text about the individuals depicted in the re-enacted images enables us to identify with them sufficiently to care about the ordeals they suffered.  also on display in this part of the exhibition are reproductions of historical documents relating to the underground railroad, and contemporary photographs of caves and other sites where escaped slaves hid on their way north to canada. an admirably intelligent and sensitive documentary film about the process of researching the exhibition is clearly sympathetic to the artist, but it explains a great deal about the exhibits and is well worth watching.  the final gallery is a tribute to benny andrews (1930-2006), a well-known figural expressionistic painter and teacher whose narrative-based paintings, prints, drawings and collages drew on his african-american roots in georgia to address human suffering and injustice -- in particular, the history of slavery and the american civil rights struggle in the 20th century.  this small companion exhibition of paintings provides an apt coda to ''racing on a broken road,'' for mr. andrews's life embodied the struggles many african-americans experienced to achieve full social and political rights. the son of sharecroppers and one of 10 children, he was the first member of his family to finish high school; he later graduated from the art institute of chicago, moved to new york and became a successful artist.  today, his work is exhibited in major galleries and museums throughout the world, and his story is an inspiration to us all.  ''racing on a broken road'' is at castle gallery, college of new rochelle, 29 castle place, new rochelle, through march 4; (914) 654-423 or www.cnr.edu/cg.htm  art review  