a daughter proves she's of the same stripe   in the early hours of a quiet morning in may 1986, mickey crowley jumped out of bed to answer the doorbell at his home in centereach on long island.  ''there was a police sergeant standing there,'' crowley recalled. ''he told me that my daughter was hurt.''  crowley, then a college basketball referee, and his wife, patricia, were taken to a queens hospital to visit their daughter, theresa, a 26-year-old new york city police officer.  during the ride to the hospital, the crowleys were told that their daughter had been injured in a scuffle during a drug raid in far rockaway, queens. as crowley wrestled a suspect to the ground, her right hand crashed onto a curb. she sustained a compound fracture and tore several tendons in her right index finger.  ''i damaged my trigger finger,'' she said in a recent interview. ''that's not a good thing to have happen to a new york city police officer.'' in october 1986, theresa crowley retired as a result of her injuries.  ''suddenly i'm wondering, what am i going to do with the rest of my life?'' she said.  one answer came from her father, who had been a men's college basketball referee since 1958, and was working games in powerful conferences like the big east and the atlantic coast conference.  ''why not become a ref, like me?'' mickey crowley said to his daughter. ''you know basketball. you'd be a natural.''  theresa crowley had grown up with basketball, traveling with her mother and four siblings to games that her father was officiating.  ''madison square garden, the palestra in philly, you name it, we were there,'' she said. ''when we weren't at a game, we were watching dad on television just about every other night.''  theresa crowley attended centereach high school and become a star in basketball and field hockey. by 1978, she was off to indiana university, which offered her a scholarship in both sports.  ''field hockey at indiana was so intense and took up so much of my time, i couldn't play basketball,'' crowley said.  uncomfortable with that arrangement, she went home, transferring to c. w. post, where she played both sports.  at 23, she joined the police force.  ''i loved being a cop,'' crowley said. ''i never thought it would end so soon.''  though she did not immediately jump at her father's suggestion, crowley began heading down his career path, taking assistant coaching jobs with the women's basketball teams at c. w. post and hofstra.  in 1991 -- the year mickey crowley blew his whistle for the last time, working the n.c.a.a. tournament championship game between duke and kansas in indianapolis -- theresa crowley took her father's advice.  ''i began enrolling in referee schools and referee camps,'' she said. ''i worked a lot of high school games and a lot of junior college games.''  she slowly moved up the ranks. by 1995, she was officiating at the college level, working n.c.a.a. division i women's games for the metro atlantic athletic conference as well as in division ii and iii.  ''my father always told me that the best part of this job is all the people you meet, all the camaraderie; it's like you're a part of one big family, and he was right,'' crowley said.  mickey crowley, who was elected to the new york city basketball hall of fame last year, is now the men's coordinator of officials for the ivy and patriot leagues. he sits courtside, critiquing veteran referees. he also evaluates young men in referee camps trying to earn their stripes.  he was at it again last saturday at columbia, but the day's pay came with an unusual twist. for the first time, the careers of father and daughter crossed paths. he was there to monitor officials working the columbia-cornell game, and his daughter officiated the women's game between the universities later in the day.  ''i'm a little nervous because my father is here,'' theresa crowley said at halftime, between sips of bottled water. ''i may have missed a traveling call out there.''  later in the game, mickey crowley was asked to evaluate his daughter as she raced up and down the floor, seemingly propelled by her blonde ponytail.  ''she's got a very, very good feel for the game, handles coaches very well, and she needs a haircut,'' crowley said, smiling. ''the one piece of advice i've always given her was to try her best to not get involved in the outcome of a game, and, if possible, to let the players decide who wins and who loses.''  crowley said that his daughter was ''a good referee because she's a people person, like me.''  ''if you're going to handle the likes of bobby knight, p. j. carlesimo, john chaney, mike krzyzewski, jim boeheim and lou carnesecca, you had better be a people person,'' crowley said. ''i got along with all of them just fine.''  crowley recalled a game at madison square garden in the mid-1980s when carnesecca, the longtime st. john's coach, leaped off the bench after he thought crowley made a bad call.  ''hey, mickey, that was the worst call i've ever seen,'' he recalled carnesecca shouting at him.  crowley said he replied: ''if you thought that was bad, stick around. there's still a long way to go in this game.''  chaney, who retired last march after coaching at temple for 24 seasons, called mickey crowley ''the absolute best referee i have ever seen.''  ''mickey didn't just know the rules, he understood human nature, how to talk to and handle athletes and coaches in heated situations,'' said chaney, who has never seen theresa crowley work a game. ''i'm sure his daughter shares that dna, but it will take years for her to develop the kind of wisdom her dad displayed on the basketball court.''  theresa crowley likes to think she is on her way. she said that watching her father whistle as he worked all of those years has helped her deal with the criticisms and tirades from coaches, players and fans.  ''when i was young, i couldn't understand why all these people were yelling at my dad, but my mom used to say, 'just sit there and watch the game; it's all a part of daddy's job,' '' she said.  ''now that i'm doing this for a living, i understand what my dad always told me about officiating, that no matter what call you make, at least half the crowd thinks you got it wrong.''  basketball  