archdiocese list says 21 parishes must be closed   the roman catholic archdiocese of new york yesterday issued a final list of 21 parishes that will close, ending a wrenching period of uncertainty for thousands of parishioners, some of whom had waited for several years to learn the fate of their church.  the tally was considerably fewer than the 31 parishes that were on an initial list, released last march, of those recommended for closings.  ten parishes in the archdiocese will close completely -- the parishioners will be forced to go elsewhere. some among the other 11 will get a smaller chapel built for them, perhaps within another building, that is under the jurisdiction of another parish, or they will be able to keep their building and become missions attached to other parishes. but they will lose their pastor and many of the services that come with being a full-fledged parish, a bitter outcome for many.  the announcement brings to a close a tumultuous stretch of dramatic announcements, extended over two years, of scores of parish or school closings for roman catholics in not just the new york archdiocese, which is made up of manhattan, the bronx, staten island, westchester and a swath of upstate, but also in the diocese of brooklyn, which includes queens.  the reshuffling was driven by new demographic realities and immigration patterns that have left some once-booming churches in mostly urban settings nearly empty; others, many in the suburbs, have overflowed. roman catholic officials said they were trying to reposition themselves to better serve their people for the 21st century.  ''we sought an in-depth understanding of what our people needed,'' cardinal edward m. egan said yesterday at a news conference at cathedral girls high school in manhattan. ''we listened, listened, listened. we learned much. i might add, we learned well.''  cardinal egan tried to be upbeat about the announcement, stressing the opening of new parishes to accommodate growth in the northern part of the archdiocese and in staten island: ''i'm delighted to be able to share with you a lot of good news,'' he said, opening his remarks.  bishop dennis j. sullivan, a vicar general of the archdiocese who has shepherded the reorganization process since early 2005, said there would be no timetable for closing each parish. he said officials would work with congregations to determine the ''proper pastoral moment.''  ''we're not saying, 'we're closing you down tomorrow,' '' he said. ''we would be very remiss to do that, and we won't do that.''  as for what will become of the church properties, officials said their goal was to convert them to other uses in the archdiocese. if that was not possible, they said their preference was to hold on to the grounds and lease them out.  ''if you sell property, you can never get it back,'' said msgr. douglas mathers, who played a key role in the reorganization.  four parishes recommended for closing last march were still awaiting a decision. church officials explained that they needed more time to evaluate them.  ''we needed more time to get it right,'' bishop sullivan said.  the 31 parishes that had originally been on the recommended list for closing have faced uncertainty for the past 10 months. that list had also included 14 schools, but after hearing appeals from school officials and parents, archdiocesan officials reduced the list of school closings in april to nine before turning their attention to the parishes.  but even though parish appeal meetings were concluded by midsummer, no decision was announced for months.  for those who did get news yesterday about the fate of their parishes, there were moments of laughter and tears, prayers of thanksgiving and heartfelt grief in sanctuaries and rectories from staten island to the catskills.  at mary help of christians in manhattan, parishioners gathered amid the statues of saints that have looked down upon them for generations. they hugged, wiped away tears and prayed after learning their more than century-old parish would be closing.  for many parishioners, there was a palpable anger toward cardinal egan and the archdiocese. their church, while small, with just 300 worshipers every sunday, is nevertheless full of life, with more than 30 active ministries, they said.  ''if it was a church that was not being used, then it would be perfectly understandable,'' said rafael jaquez, 52, who participated in the parish's appeal to the archdiocese. ''this church is very much alive. it's very vibrant.''  he and others vowed to fight the decision. archdiocese officials are hoping to avoid what unfolded in the boston archdiocese in recent years after a string of closings, when parishioners held sit-ins and in some cases managed to win stays for their churches.  ''there will be battles,'' said josephine gaglio, who has attended mary help of christians for more than two decades and said she would resist the archdiocese's decision. ''we will do whatever we have to do.''  most pastors interviewed yesterday were measured in their reactions.  ''you run the gamut, from deep sadness to anger,'' said the rev. mark hyde, pastor of mary help of christians, in the east village. ''it's almost like a death in the family: why this person, why this time. the questions are almost impossible to answer, but it's a fact of life.''  across town at st. vincent de paul, which features a french-language mass that draws french speakers from across the city, the rev. gerald murray said he understood the archdiocese's decision but expressed worries about reports that the chelsea church, with its vaulted ceiling and images of angels, will be torn down.  ''it's sad to be losing this beautiful building,'' he said. ''i understand the cardinal's reasons and i think it's a reasonable decision.''  meanwhile, several miles north, at st. rita of cascia in the bronx, in front of a display case that contains a relic of st. rita -- a piece of her bone -- parishioners went to offer prayers of thanksgiving after learning the church, which had been slated to close in march, had been spared.  st. rita, according to the rev. jose gutierrez, the church's pastor, is the ''patron saint of impossible cases.''  ''when we thought that the church would be closed, people came to pray to st. rita that it would stay open,'' he said. ''this week, people have come to pray for thanks.''  but at st. paul in staten island, there was confusion. should they celebrate or not? parishioners got word that their parish would close and that they would lose their pastor, but they would get to keep their building as they join another parish. the church had originally been slated to close completely.  by 10 a.m., when the announcement was expected, a small group had gathered in the church rectory. margaret moschetto, one of the parishioners there, said she was feeling queasy. ''i'm just trusting in the holy spirit that he'll do best for the people,'' she said.  later, michael mcvey, president of the parish council, burst into the room with the news that ''we won.'' the pair hugged, while ms. moschetto burst into tears.  only later did it dawn on her that the picture was not quite as rosy as she had first thought. msgr. vincent bartley, st. paul's pastor, arrived to explain that there would be a new administrator for the church and it was unclear whether the church's ministries to hispanics in the area and the poor would continue.  nevertheless, he said was delighted the elderly in the congregation would still have a place nearby toworship. mary tighe, 82, a member of st. paul's for 62 years, expressed a mixture of sadness and resignation about the prospect of joining another parish but said she would press on.  ''we have to go along,'' she said. ''we can't change it. they're doing the changes, not us.''  correction:  january 27, 2007, saturday  a map last saturday showing parishes affected by the reorganization plans of the roman catholic archdiocese of new york misidentified a bronx parish scheduled for closing. it is st. anthony's at 4505 richardson avenue, in the northern part of the borough -- not st. anthony's at 1496 commonwealth avenue, in the central bronx. a corrected version of the map can be found at www.nytimes.com/2007/01/20/nyregion/20churches.html.  