after loss, concerns about effort, and marbury's knee   disaster took on many forms for the knicks on monday night. had a 28-point first-quarter deficit been the worst of it, they might have left south florida feeling grateful.  they had greater concerns, however, after being routed, 101-83, by the star-depleted miami heat at american airlines arena. stephon marbury's left knee again became too painful to bear, and he played only 15 minutes 58 seconds before leaving the game for good. his status for wednesday's home game against the phoenix suns is uncertain.  marbury, who routinely plays hurt and nearly always vows to be back by the next game, could not make that declaration this time.  ''i don't know yet,'' he said. ''to really be honest, i don't know.''  had marbury been at full strength, the knicks (18-25) would have probably still been blown out by the energized heat (19-22). miami looked that determined. the knicks looked that disoriented, at least in the first quarter.  after quentin richardson made a 3-pointer for a 3-2 lead, the heat scored 27 consecutive points -- a miami franchise record. the knicks went 8:14 without scoring until eddy curry made a driving layup to cut the deficit to 29-5.  coach isiah thomas called timeouts, to no avail. he sent in jamal crawford for jared jeffries and david lee for curry, and later sent in nate robinson and malik rose for marbury and channing frye. the heat kept scoring, and the knicks kept missing.  ''it seems like the court's tilted, like they're running downhill, shooting layups and making 3's,'' lee said. ''and we're going uphill just to get the ball across halfcourt and try to get a shot up.''  it was the kind of display one might expect when the defending champion plays one of the league's weaker teams. except that the heat was missing its two biggest stars -- shaquille o'neal and dwyane wade -- and the knicks had lately appeared to be stronger than this.  thomas was forced to concede the obvious, that the knicks had perhaps been overconfident. ''probably,'' he said.  thomas had far worse things to say about his team.  ''this is the first time i've been with this group where we didn't show up to compete,'' he said. ''maybe respect had something to do with it.''  the disbelief in thomas's expression was matched by the exasperation in his players' voices. no one disputed the conclusions. they just could not fathom how it all happened.  ''we don't have the luxury of taking anybody lightly,'' richardson said. ''we're not that good.''  even without wade (who has a sprained ankle) and o'neal (who missed his 36th game after knee surgery), the heat had a stockpile of talented and accomplished veterans: alonzo mourning, gary payton, jason williams and udonis haslem among them.  ''they performed flawlessly,'' said ron rothstein, the heat's acting head coach while pat riley recovers from surgery.  with the ageless mourning setting the tone, the heat outrebounded the knicks, 45-33. mourning blocked four shots, including consecutive swats of lee in the first quarter, and finished with seven rebounds.  payton, who is also in his twilight, started for wade and collected 10 points and 13 assists. williams had 20 points and 7 assists. jason kapono scored 12 points in the first quarter -- matching the knicks' team output -- and finished with 22.  the knicks trailed by 40-12 at the end of the first quarter and were down by 15 points at halftime, when marbury said he was done for the night.  crawford (23 points) and curry (26 points) led a second-half rally, and the knicks cut their deficit to 6 points with 8:10 left in the game. they were down by just 8 points with 5:37 left, but williams hit two 3-pointers and antoine walker followed with another 3-pointer to kill the knicks' surge.  ''by the time we showed up, the game was over,'' thomas said.  when all the self-flogging was over, the attention turned to marbury's health. he has had trouble with the knee for more than a month, since banging the patellar tendon in a game dec. 15 at indiana. but marbury has not missed a game this season and has not flinched at playing 40 minutes on many nights.  the knee had not been an issue until saturday, when marbury landed awkwardly late in the fourth quarter at indiana. he spent the final 1:26 on the bench. on monday morning, marbury dismissed concerns about the knee, saying it had improved greatly after a therapeutic massage that broke up scar tissue.  but he passed up some early scoring opportunities and went to the bench for good with 4:51 left in the first half.  ''just running on it, it just got really sore,'' he said. ''it's just going to take some time for it to heal a little bit.''  asked if that meant he might have to take time off, marbury said, ''i don't know, i'm just going to see.'' but, he reiterated, ''it's not something that i'm worried about.''  with steve francis still in houston -- presumably rehabilitating his own sore knee -- the knicks can ill afford to lose marbury. there are no indications that francis will return anytime soon, if he does at all. last season, the knicks went 5-17 in games that marbury missed.  ''i don't even want to think that way, 5-17,'' thomas said. ''i mean, that wouldn't be good right now.''  rebounds  isiah thomas said he had no update on the status of steve francis, who left for houston three weeks ago to rehabilitate a sore knee. reminded that he had said he hoped francis would return soon, thomas said with a chuckle, ''i still hope that.'' ... the heat's previous franchise record for consecutive points scored was 26, against the golden state warriors on march 24, 1995.  basketball  