memo pad   not a bad year for airlines -- after $35 billion in net losses from 2001 to 2005, the domestic airline industry is expected to earn about $4 billion in 2007 and to report earnings of $2 billion to $3 billion for 2006, the air transport association said. but the champagne corks are not popping yet. john heimlich, the trade association's chief economist, noted that despite cost cutting, reduction in capacity and a decrease in the number of aircraft types flown, ''debt levels remain high, leaving airlines vulnerable to fuel spikes'' and other risks like a recession, natural disaster or another significant terrorist attack.  for passengers, fuller planes -- a reason for the brightening prospects for airlines' bottom lines is that passengers are flying in planes that are, on average, more full than at any time in decades and are paying more. according to the air transport association, yields for seven major airlines (that is a rough estimate of the revenue earned for each mile flown) rose an average of 8.9 percent on domestic routes in 2006. yields were up 5.9 percent on hotly competitive trans-atlantic routes, despite a sharp increase in overall seat capacity across the atlantic among both domestic and foreign carriers.  for employees, less bad news -- united states airlines employed 1.6 percent fewer workers in november compared with november 2005 -- though that was the smallest year-to-year drop since february 2005, according to the bureau of transportation statistics of the transportation department. the seven major so-called network carriers employed 263,000 full-time workers in november, which was about two-thirds of the total employees for the domestic industry. low-cost carriers employed about 18 percent and regional carriers accounted for the remainder. as an indication of how hard the airlines' work forces were hit in the last four years, the network carriers had 361,000 full time employees in november 2002.  ranking world hotels -- world travelers responding online to the annual travelers choice survey by the consumer travel web site tripadvisor.com have ranked hotels in a multitude of categories, including the 100 top luxury hotels. for example, the top five luxury hotels in the united states were: sofitel, n.y.; french quarter inn, charleston, s.c.; four seasons hotel, san francisco; omni san francisco; and reunion resort & club, celebration, fla., according to the readers of tripadvisor. the full lists of categories and rankings (including a list of what tripadvisor readers rank as the ''10 dirtiest hotels in the u.s.'') are available at tripadvisor.com/travelerschoice.  et cetera -- american airlines has relocated to terminal 2 at narita international airport in japan, partly to help passengers connecting to china and elsewhere in asia on four of its fellow oneworld alliance members in that terminal. american also plans to open a new 13,000-square-foot admirals club lounge in its new terminal. singapore airlines introduced a $360 million initiative to upgrade its cabin last week with the start of service on boeing 777-300er aircraft between san francisco and singapore. the new flat-bed first-class seat is 35 inches wide, which singapore said is the biggest in the industry. in business class, the lie-flat seats are 30 inches wide and the new coach seats 19 inches wide, which singapore says is two inches wider than the industry average. the in-flight entertainment system offers more than 1,000 on-demand options, including movies, television shows, interactive games and audio cds.  joe sharkey  