when is a building a rubik's cube?   sometimes, developers and architects say, the biggest design problem with a new manhattan residential building is figuring out how it will fit onto its lot. two luxury condominiums, one planned for east 51st street and the other for east 13th, are currently presenting a challenge.  the 21-story condo that will rise at 211 east 51st street, between second and third avenues, is set to contain 72 units, ranging from studios to three-bedrooms. pricing hasn't been set yet, because the building is under contract. uned associates, the current owner, based in manhattan, is selling to allied properties of bay ridge, brooklyn. the closing is scheduled for this week, said tim ziss, allied's principal.  at first, mr. ziss had planned to demolish the 15-story condo currently on the site, leaving only its metal beams, concrete floors and foundation, and use those elements as the groundwork for something larger, thereby creating the maximum number of apartments permitted at the site.  but this plan was hamstrung by the fact that the property straddles a commercial zone and a residential zone, each with different building height requirements.  a potentially lopsided roofline wasn't what worried mr. ziss. it was the fact that height caps on the residential eastern half of the building would severely curtail how many units he could create.  ''it was extremely complicated,'' he said. ''even the zoning experts had a hard time tweaking this one.''  the solution, proposed by the architect david mandl, was to add medical offices to the building's second and third floors. by law, if commercial tenants serve some kind of public benefit, as doctors do, the building can grow taller -- in this case, on the commercial side. thus, more square footage can be wrung from the project.  ''i've been practicing under my own shingle since 1980, and this is one of the more exotic zoning situations i've dealt with,'' mr. mandl said. ''but i think it will turn out to be an elegant project.''  for the a building, a luxury condo at 425 east 13th street, between first avenue and avenue a, the hitch came in the form of an unusual t-shaped lot that extends the width of a block -- so that the t's base fronts on 14th street.  the size may seem advantageous, leaving plenty of room for extra apartments. but according to john cetra, the architect, zoning dictates that any new structures be massed along the lot's edges, so that an unbroken line of buildings faces the sidewalk.  so the building is divided in two. the east 13th street portion, with 150 feet of frontage, will have 77 units, and the east 14th street side, with 25 feet of frontage, will have 7 units. prices range from $600,000 to $2.5 million, and 35 percent of the units have sold, said robert kaliner, president of the ascend group, a manhattan-based developer.  to avoid leaving a potentially unattractive doughnut hole of unused space in the lot's center, mr. cetra decided to pack it with trees and grasses, creating a courtyard that complements the 5,000-square-foot roof deck, which will have similar landscaping and a 50-foot pool.  another snag: east 13th street sits at a slightly lower elevation than east 14th, which means that the glass walkway traversing the courtyard to connect the building's two areas must slope down, mr. cetra said.  ''organizing the lower floors was sort of a puzzle,'' he added, explaining that he had never worked on a lot like this before, or on a block-through project. ''it added a lot of drama.''  postings  