on web, voters question clinton directly   senator hillary rodham clinton strived for an oprah moment yesterday night, the third of her presidential campaign, by sitting in a fake living-room set and fielding questions on a live video webcast about her vote for the iraq war (if she had known then), universal health care (still wants it) and her favorite movies (''the wizard of oz,'' ''casablanca'' and ''out of africa'').  but will she attain oprah winfrey's ratings? advisers could not say how many people watched and took mrs. clinton's measure during the appearance -- or whether any of them were anyone other than her diehard lovers and her diehard haters.  mrs. clinton's advisers say the webcast demonstrates her determination to speak directly to voters, in as many ways as new technology allows, instead of dealing only with news media that have sometimes been intensely skeptical of her actions and motives.  the questions e-mailed from linda in pensacola, fla., and other visitors to the web site were vetted by mrs. clinton's staff and offered or elicited few surprises. mrs. clinton sat on a sofa in front of a bookcase looking relaxed as a young aide read questions from a monitor. her answers suggested various personas that she wants to convey to voters: a hometown girl, a mother, a moviegoer, a churchgoer, a standard-bearer for women and a critic of the war.  she said she was rooting for the chicago bears in the super bowl, recalling that she grew up in illinois (a crucial electoral state and the home of senator barack obama, a rival). she spoke lovingly about her daughter, chelsea.  she described her three favorite movies, linking herself with other americans who can recite lines from ''casablanca.'' she told a 14-year-old girl that when she was young she found inspiration by volunteering through her church.  in response to the first question, about what mrs. clinton would say to people who wondered whether a woman could be president, she said it was ''important that we demonstrate that women are fully capable to serve in the highest levels of government.''  with the second question, about whether she regretted her vote on the iraq war in 2002, the senator repeated her latest explanation, which she also used yesterday night on the network news programs -- that, had she known in 2002 what she knows now, ''i certainly would not have voted'' to authorize military action in iraq.  