parents in school sex case sue mamaroneck district   the parents of two girls who were inappropriately touched by a music teacher say in documents that mamaroneck school district administrators did not act after becoming aware of other inappropriate behavior on his part months before his arrest.  the documents, filed as part of a civil lawsuit against the school district, three administrators and the teacher, also include statements and depositions from 15 students suggesting that the teacher, omar rodriguez jr., had been touching students for years.  the parents, in filing the lawsuit in federal district court in white plains on jan. 5, say they are seeking damages and changes in district procedures.  paul j. noto, a lawyer for one of the victims, provided the documents to the new york times.  ''the objective of this lawsuit is change,'' said the victim's father. ''someone should have to leave their position. procedures are only as good as the people implementing them. if the current procedures were implemented, we wouldn't have had this problem.''  mr. rodriguez, 27, who taught at hommocks middle school in larchmont, was arrested in april after several students told school officials that he had inappropriately touched them. after his arrest, a 16-year-old girl from outside the district told her parents that she had had sex with mr. rodriguez twice at his home. mr. rodriguez pleaded guilty in october to rape and endangering the welfare of a child.  he is scheduled to be sentenced on feb. 8 to 10 years' probation; any jail time is at the discretion of the judge. he will be a registered sex offender for 20 years, said janet difiore, the westchester county district attorney.  according to the documents, concerns about mr. rodriguez's physical behavior toward students, which included roughhousing, hugging and holding girls on his lap, appear to have been first noted by the administration in the fall of 2005 after he was granted tenure.  in a statement to the police provided by mr. noto, michael kollmer, a fellow music teacher and mr. rodriguez's mentor, said he was shocked that mr. rodriguez had been granted tenure ''because he did not maintain a professional distance physically and emotionally from his students.''  in an e-mail message, the schools superintendent in mamaroneck, paul r. fried -- one of the administrators named in the lawsuit -- said that the district takes ''swift and appropriate action'' whenever it receives allegations of inappropriate behavior by a teacher.  dr. fried said that after mr. rodriguez's arrest, the district trained all staff members on the reporting requirements of child abuse and sexual harassment.  abby gruen  the week  