naming rights and wrongs across time zones   what would walter o'malley have thought about the $400 million naming rights for a sports arena atop the railroad station near downtown brooklyn, where he once feinted at building a ballpark?  maybe that kind of money, even at lower 1957 levels, would have kept o'malley from stuffing the dodgers into his satchel and lamming it westward.  o'malley was irish enough to spend money on green uniforms in spring training every st. patrick's day, but i'm guessing he would not have turned down $400 million for 20 years of naming rights because barclays bank happened to have originated in england.  o'malley, the former owner of the dodgers, did not become rich by worrying about technicalities like foreign domination. likewise, the people in brooklyn trying to block the construction of an arena for the current nets should stick to land-use issues.  i heard protesters on talk radio saying it was time to kick out the english all over again, but it is way too late for that. globalization is here to stay.  don't get me wrong. i hate naming rights as much as the next crank. i don't bother to learn the geeky names of companies that underwrite some modern stadiums, on the quite rational theory that these sponsors are likely to be defunct by the time i sort it all out.  the reality is, fans can call these new joints anything they want. it's a free country. a certain financial institution that keeps fiddling with its name and its logo recently paid $400 million for 20 years to plop its name on the next ballpark in queens, and i passively went along with it, at the time.  but lately, as i risk my life on the frighteningly makeshift whitestone expressway, dangerously glancing at the early construction of the new stadium, i find myself calling it the new shea. i didn't plan to do this. my twitchy little brain did it. new shea. it's even punchier than the name they gave it, which is, aw, but i forget.  this same selective creativity could take place in brooklyn, down the street from where the brooklyn academy of music turned into bam. as richard sandomir pointed out friday in the new york times (great bald minds think alike; i had already come to the same conclusion), that the new arena's name could be shortened to the bark.  foreign domination is a red herring. the resisters in brooklyn have better issues: whether the new $4 billion atlantic yards project is good for the people and the land and the lifestyle of that dynamic borough. although the project has government approval, lawsuits are pending that could endanger the 2009-10 opening.  any way you look at it, we are all in a world market. barclays is in 60 countries. arenas in the united states are already named for multinationals like american airlines or hsbc, whose headquarters are in fort worth and london. besides, barclays has a whole lot better karma than, say, halliburton.  it's a little late for americans to fret about foreign influence, after we took to the beatles, hondas, kiri te kanawa, dos equis, hideki matsui, pedro almodóvar and dirk nowitzki. recently, major league soccer paid a fortune for the aging english free-kick specialist david beckham. we import when we want.  also, america is marketing its sports like crazy for an international audience, as the wall street journal pointed out friday, depicting the n.f.l. training place-kickers in china.  at least american sports ownership tends to be homegrown (although mark cuban, the owner of the dallas mavericks, is from the former planet of pluto.) england, the home of barclays, has had 6 of its 20 premier league soccer clubs bought by raffish adventurers from exotic places like russia, israel, iceland and the united states, with three more clubs likely to be sold.  talk about naming rights: one of the grand old soccer teams, arsenal, named for the munitions factory in north london, has moved into its new home -- emirates stadium. (arsenal plays manchester united, owned by the glazers from america, in the new place today.) presumably, most fans of the gunners know the stadium is named after an airline, not the country, but, still, it's not the same as the quaint old place, which was known as highbury.  for my generation, o'malley remains the devil incarnate for ignoring his brooklyn roots and whisking the dodgers across the continent. the weird thing was, after conning the locals out of a valuable ravine north of downtown, o'malley and his son, peter, maintained one of the most successful and tasteful sports franchises in the nation.  they avoided most advertisements in immaculate, pastel dodger stadium until the family sold the club in 1998, and much of the sedate ambiance survived the brief stewardship of the murdochites and remains relatively intact under the mccourts.  in an age of naming rights, we still have dodger stadium and fenway park and yankee stadium, with yankees management claiming it will retain that hallowed name when the new ballpark on former bronx parkland is completed in a few years. walter o'malley is now associated with an era of taste and restraint. who would have believed it?  sports of the times e-mail: geovec@nytimes.com  