libby jury seated; arguments may start today   the judge in the perjury trial of i. lewis libby jr. seated a jury of nine women and three men on monday who are expected to spend a month or longer hearing the case against vice president dick cheney's former top aide.  mr. libby, widely known by his nickname scooter, is charged with lying to a grand jury and to federal bureau of investigation agents who were trying to find out who leaked to journalists the identity of a c.i.a. operative and why. neither mr. libby nor anyone else was charged with disclosing the name of the operative, valerie wilson.  instead, he is charged with lying about the fact that he discussed ms. wilson with journalists and thus impeded the investigation.  in addition to the 12 jurors, judge reggie m. walton seated four alternates to replace any of the 12 who may fall ill or have other problems.  all 16 jurors will hear the case, unaware who are alternates, to ensure that they pay attention. the lawyers on both sides and reporters covering the case do know which jurors are which.  the jurors include a woman who said she had worked for decades as a curator of prints and drawings at the metropolitan museum of art and a retired postal worker who said in jury selection that judge walton sentenced her son to jail on drug charges years ago.  the jury includes a former reporter for the washington post who said his editor was bob woodward, a post journalist who is expected to be a witness in the trial. the former post reporter also said that until recently he was a neighbor of tim russert of nbc news, who is also expected to be a witness.  all the jurors had said they would be able to put aside any feelings about the bush administration and assess the case fairly.  the jury selection spanned four days, an unusually long time, because so many prospective candidates said they might be biased because they were so strongly critical of the administration, especially mr. cheney. the vice president is expected to be a major witness for mr. libby.  explaining that he wanted to shield the jurors from the news media and others at the courthouse who might inadvertently influence them, judge walton said jurors would be collected at an undisclosed location and brought in to hear the case.  at each day's end, they will be returned to that location to be dismissed to go home.  each side is expected to make its opening statements on tuesday, with patrick j. fitzgerald, the prosecutor, first.  he will be followed by mr. libby's lawyer, theodore v. wells jr.  the first witnesses against mr. libby may begin testifying on wednesday.  