f. y. i.   riders on the storm  q. as i rode an m train over the williamsburg bridge during a thunderstorm, with lightning and thunder rattling the windows and nerves of my fellow straphangers, i wondered if new york subway cars running on elevated lines are in danger of being struck by lightning. and if so, are the riders simply sitting ducks?  a. you can relax. the problems, if any, would be outside the cars, while the passengers inside are well protected.  ''usually subway cars are safe,'' said deirdre parker, a spokeswoman for new york city transit. ''if struck, they direct the lightning through the car body to the rails.''  lightning, ms. parker added in an e-mail message, can cause train signal problems if the electronic controls monitoring the flow of power are damaged, or if fuses blow. but perhaps the most common reason for delays from lightning is that it sometimes fells trees and branches, which can block the tracks.  animal art  q. at 72nd street and amsterdam avenue, at the foot of verdi square, stands a tall post. it's square and heavily ornamented, and supports five lighted globes. it has lions' heads about eye level, and what may be goats' or some mythical creatures' heads below the globes. is this unique in the city? does it commemorate something?  a. the parks department's arts and antiquities director, john kuhn, is quite familiar with this light post, or luminaire.  it is one of two bronze luminaires, he wrote in an e-mail message, that once stood at riverside drive and 100th street, flanking the staircase that leads to the firemen's memorial, which was erected in 1913. the luminaires, he wrote, were probably the second incarnations of decorative light poles at that site, since drawings on file with the art commission and early photographs show a different version. this pole was probably made between 1913 and 1935.  around 30 years ago, mr. kuhn said, the poles were vandalized. one pole disappeared, while a portion of the other was recovered and placed in storage.  in the late 1990s, when verdi square was renovated, the parks commissioner, henry stern, asked that the light pole in storage be installed there as a decorative feature. he said he had an affection for ''animal art.'' the light pole is supported by cloven hooves and has rams' heads at the top. this plan was approved by the art commission, and the metropolitan transportation authority paid for it.  in 2003-4 the missing components were modeled and recast, and the bronze surface was cleaned and recoated. the lamp was installed in autumn 2004, about 10 days before the square reopened officially.  there is no commemorative meaning to the pole, mr. kuhn said; it is purely decorative.  street cred  q. i'm a huge ''ghostbusters'' fan, and i know that a lot of scenes were shot on location, like the ladder no. 8 firehouse in tribeca and 55 central park west, which stood in as the art deco monster headquarters. but every time i watch, there's one scene i can't figure out. how was a street filmed erupting into slabs by supernatural forces? surely that was a studio shot.  a. nope; it was shot in front of 55 central park west, at 66th street. giant slabs of simulated pavement were placed over the real street bed to allow a simulation of fire, brimstone and the coming of the sumerian deity gozer in the 1984 film.  michael pollak  f. y. i.  correction:  january 28, 2007, sunday  a report in the f.y.i. column last week about a luminaire at verdi square misstated the given name of the director of art and antiquities for the department of parks and recreation, who commented on the luminaire's history. he is jonathan kuhn, not john.  