numbers | jan. 14-20   34,000 deaths  the news -- more than 34,000 iraqi civilians were killed in violence last year, according to a united nations report released on tuesday.  behind the news -- the first comprehensive annual count of civilian deaths provided a vivid measure of the chaos there. the iraqi government called the figure exaggerated; the united nations says it relied on official sources. if anything, the figure of 34,452 deaths -- about 94 a day -- may be lower than the true number, since it did not include the december totals from all provinces. and some deaths go unreported.  830,000 births  the news -- france announced that 830,000 babies were born there last year, the most in a quarter century.  behind the news -- french officials said the rising birth rate was a victory for government policies promoting inexpensive day care and generous parental leave. the baby boom coincides with a continuing decline in the number of french marriages as couples opt to form civil unions. the increase also comes as other european countries, worried about economic growth, look to reverse a decades-long decline in fertility rates. a glass of red wine, perhaps?  $50 a barrel  the news -- oil prices dropped briefly below $50 a barrel for the first time since may 2005 after the united states reported larger-than-expected oil and gas reserves.  behind the news -- the drop in prices has been gaining speed since the beginning of the year. supplies are ample, warm weather in the northeast has kept down demand and producing countries can't agree on production cuts. the government's energy forecasters say the price of regular gasoline could drop to close to $2 a gallon. others expect oil prices to rise, pulling up gasoline prices. might want to fill 'er up now.  $1 million cap  the news -- democrats in the united states senate took aim at the multimillion-dollar pay packages awarded to corporate executives.  behind the news -- $213 million. $210 million. $95 million. those are some of the recent exit packages for departing executives. the deals often include millions paid out over time to limit the tax hit. now democrats want to limit deferred compensation to $1 million -- which could raise $800 million in taxes over 10 years. the senate finance committee approved the limit last week.  the new no.2  the news -- the yorkshire terrier has passed the german shepherd and golden retriever to become the second most popular purebred dog in the nation.  behind the news -- it was no surprise that the labrador retriever ranked no. 1 on the american kennel club list, having held that spot since 1991. but it was the first time in nearly 70 years that a small breed reached no. 2. and that says something about the way we live, said lisa peterson, a club spokeswoman: ''many modern dog owners prefer a portable, pint-size pet that fits their modern, fast-paced lifestyle.''  the week  