knicks win. no, wait.  nets win   by perception and by record, the knicks and the nets spent three months converging on each other -- the knicks rising to meet the nets' apparent decline. when they finally met last night, the gap proved narrow indeed.  the nets won, but by the slimmest of margins and with a most unlikely conclusion. clifford robinson, age 40, rose behind the 23-year-old eddy curry, reached over him and tapped in the winning basket with 2.8 seconds left. the nets finished a 101-100 victory, leaving a capacity crowd at madison square garden in disbelief.  with toronto losing to utah, the nets (19-20) climbed back into first place in the atlantic division. the knicks (17-24) fell three games back in third place. but in wiping out a 14-point fourth-quarter deficit, they appeared that much closer to catching their cross-hudson rivals.  ''but we still got a little ways to go,'' a downcast curry said.  if one player symbolized the knicks' deficiencies, it was curry, their newly anointed scoring leader. he was effectively neutralized by two savvier veterans, jason collins and robinson, and finished with 14 points. when curry did get going late in the game, he misfired at the foul line, going 3 for 8 in the fourth quarter.  curry had 11 rebounds, but he missed the most critical one. the knicks took their first lead of the second half, 100-99, when david lee put back the miss of jamal's crawford shot with 9.7 seconds left.  there was momentary jubilation in the stands, and chest bumps at the knicks' bench. the celebration was short-lived. with the final seconds ticking down, vince carter drove by jared jeffries for a layup attempt, which bounced off the far side of the rim. curry had stepped toward the paint to contest carter's shot and was too close to the basket. he might have gotten a bump from robinson as well.  ''as they went to jump, i was already up in the air and i was able to tip it in off the glass,'' said robinson, the league's second-oldest player. (dikembe mutombo is 6 months older.) ''i think they fell asleep on me in the corner and i was able to get a run at the basket and get my hand on it.''  it could have been considered a foul -- for reaching over the back -- but curry and coach isiah thomas conceded that the referees would not make that call in the final seconds. thomas instead chalked it up to another learning experience for his precocious team and its still-developing center, curry.  ''that guy who tapped it in, i played against him in the n.b.a. finals,'' thomas said with a chuckle.  he credited robinson with making ''a good play.'' without blaming curry specifically, he said: ''that is a rebound that we got to secure. one day down the road, we'll understand the significance -- i mean, we understand the significance, but we'll know how to get it. and right now, at the end of the game we play a little too fair.  thomas added: ''the veteran guys know how to grab, push, hold, push you out of the way, and they know when the official is going to blow the whistle, when he's not going to blow the whistle. and at the end of the game, that situation, you probably get away with a little bit more.''  thomas said that the knicks lost to a team that had ''veteran know-how.''  as for the nets' sturdy defense, curry said, ''they did a good job at flopping, and they did a good job at doubling me.''  jason kidd led the nets with 23 points, 9 assists and 7 rebounds, and the nets improved to 21-4 against the knicks -- counting playoffs -- since acquiring kidd before the 2001 season. richard jefferson added 21 points and carter finished with 16.  the nets took the lead early in the second quarter and had a 12-point advantage with 3 minutes 43 seconds left to play. the knicks used a 17-4 run to erase the deficit. stephon marbury led the charge, with a 3-point play, a 3-pointer, a layup and two free throws over the next three minutes. he finished with 23 points.  the nets opened the door for a comeback, with carter and collins combining to miss four consecutive free throws. jefferson and carter also missed long-range jumpers in the run. but the nets were the team with the better composure throughout. thomas blamed his team's youth and the magnitude of the game, which was billed as a chance for the knicks to show they could compete with the nets  ''this was a much bigger game for them tonight than it was for us,'' jefferson said. ''we have nothing to prove. they're trying to set the tone, but they are playing better and are definitely a much improved team from last season.''  the heartbreak for the knicks was even greater because of the circumstances. two nights earlier, they lost to the washington wizards when caron butler dunked with 2.2 seconds left. the knicks had begun the week with a last-second victory over sacramento, meaning they were five seconds away from going 3-0 over the week.  ''that's tough, but we're close, man,'' curry said. ''we're very close.''  rebounds  the knicks will be the first team to play the overhauled indiana pacers when the teams meet tonight at conseco fieldhouse. troy murphy, mike dunleavy jr. and ike diogu, acquired earlier this week from golden state, are making their debut for the pacers, who traded the starters al harrington and stephen jackson in the eight-player deal. ''you don't know what to expect,'' isiah thomas said. ''i do expect them to be a better team.'' thomas said he watched them play thursday night with harrington and jackson gone, but before the arrival of the new players. ''the chemistry is better,'' he said.  pro basketball  