metropolitan diary   dear diary:  this event occurred the friday before christmas in the late afternoon.  the setting was outside the local firehouse on east 85th street.  a cab was parked and four firefighters with large flashlights were poking about the inside of the cab at each door. the cabdriver looked on. the passenger, a woman, was pacing the sidewalk in front of the firehouse. from the open door came the laughter of other firefighters.  clearly annoyed, the woman stopped and turned to the firehouse, announcing in a loud voice: ''it's not funny! he's my hamster, and he's lost.''  it's nice to see that in the absence of trees and kittens, firefighters practice other urban pet rescues!  the rev. philip judge  dear diary:  a few weeks ago on broadway, not far from lincoln center, i was admiring some very pretty scarves a street vendor was selling. a tourist -- by his accent, scandinavian, i think -- approached me, seeking directions. ''how do i get to carnegie hall?'' he asked.  i could hardly believe it: the man had presented me with a classic straight line, a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity! what else could i do? helplessly, i gave the classic punch line: ''practice, practice, practice.''  the poor fellow stared uncomprehendingly at me, so i relented. i pointed downtown and told him to walk to 57th street and turn left to seventh avenue. i also gave him subway directions.  joan m. traub  feeding pigeons  if i give them far too many crumbs,  do they need a supplement of tums?  am i blameworthy and ripe for a beating,  encouraging them in their rampant overeating?  first, though, before you judge my charity,  tell me: did he who made the pigeon make thee?  leon freilich  dear diary:  i was waiting at a takeout counter at a third avenue deli when a woman came rushing in and said, ''i need three-quarters of a pound of turkey delivered to my vet for my dog.''  in my next life, i want to come back as a dog.  nancy pline  dear diary:  my 4-year-old daughter, alexa, has been learning patterns in preschool. as we wandered around chelsea one sunday afternoon with no specific plans, she turned to me and said: ''mommy, i have an idea. let's get a manicure and then go shopping and then get a pedicure and then go shopping again. it's a pattern.''  elise m. brett  dear diary:  upon entering the brice marden exhibition at the museum of modern art, i was taken aback by the rectangular canvases painted separately in hues of battleship gray, mud and olive green.  i walked over to the security guard and asked his impression of the art. he replied, ''i don't look at the art, i look at the expressions on the faces of the people. most of them look as though they have been dropped into a home depot.''  susan birnbryer madon  dear diary:  on a recent afternoon while riding the m42 bus, i spotted a sign in a food shop window: ''meditarian food.''  could they possibly be selling something we can add to our multitasking list and eat while meditating? and it was a nice, professionally made sign, too. i kind of feel they maybe meant ''mediterranean food.'' do you think?  joe baldwin  dear diary:  while walking through the metropolitan museum's exhibition ''cézanne to picasso,'' i stopped and looked at several very beautiful platters decorated by matisse. i turned to the man next to me and said, ''aren't they beautiful?''  he answered sadly, ''yes, but are they dishwasher-safe?''  michael parrella  dear diary:  on a wednesday night about 11:30, i was bringing a birthday cake in a huge plastic carrier to a friend's apartment, for a surprise party to be held there the following day.  i walked through the village and took the no. 6 train at astor place, getting a lot of curious stares from passers-by and riders, which i attributed to my unusual cargo and the late hour.  by my stop at 23rd street, i was feeling quite self-conscious -- that is, until i got off the train and saw a group of six or seven people sitting on a bench on the platform and hovering over an even larger cake, eating it ravenously with their bare hands.  moral of the story: in new york city, there is always someone doing something more bizarre than you.  jessica smith  metropolitan diary  