comings & goings   want to mingle with literati on your next vacation? rosewood hotels & resorts might be able to help. its hot type author series invites well-known writers to discuss their work with guests at selected resorts. next in the series is adam gopnik, a staff writer at the new yorker and author of ''through the children's gate: a home in new york'' (2006). mr. gopnik is scheduled to visit caneel bay, a rosewood resort in the united states virgin islands, from friday to jan. 31. rates there start at $450 (www.rosewoodhotels.com).  for those who prefer their intellectual stimulation while on a cruise, regent seven seas cruises is offering a cruise with pbs personalities and other guests from may 12 to 23. the 11-night alaskan voyage is scheduled to feature gwen ifill, moderator and managing editor of ''washington week,'' on pbs; scott simon, the host of ''weekend edition saturday,'' on national public radio; ric burns, the documentary filmmaker; charlie cook, editor and publisher of the cook political report; scott ellis, a theater director; and david lee, a television writer, director and producer. rates start at $3,998; (www.ptvatsea.com).  last month, the peninsula hong kong hotel introduced a fleet of 14 custom-designed rolls-royce phantoms, below, as one of its services. guests can make reservations to take one to and from the airport for about 850 hong kong dollars, $109, at $7.95 hong kong dollars to the united states dollar, one-way or 1,500 hong kong dollars round-trip. guests can also rent them for about 1,100 hong kong dollars an hour. there is a two-hour minimum (www.hongkong.peninsula.com). travelers who want to shop for designer luggage at competitive prices can visit www.luggagepoint.com, a new web site that also provides baggage requirements for airlines.  ruaha national park in tanzania is preparing to become the largest national park in africa as it absorbs the almost 5,800 square miles of the usangu game reserve (www.tanzaniaparks.com).  hilary howard  