the week ahead: jan. 21 - 27; classical   classical music often focuses on unearthing the old: on resurrection rather than decline. but ''decasia'' focuses on decline itself. this film symphony (its name a gloss on ''fantasia,'' corrupted by ''decay'') consists of a score by michael gordon and a video by bill morrison edited from a trove of decaying silver-nitrate film from the early 20th century. the result is a tapestry of images that keep dissolving before the viewer's eyes as mr. gordon's music probes at tonality with deliberately mistuned chords. the work, something of a cult classic, is available on dvd but is by all accounts far more powerful in a theater, with live music provided (as it was for the piece's new york concert premiere in 2004) by tactus, the manhattan school of music's contemporary-music ensemble. thursday through saturday at 7 and 9:30 p.m., angel orensanz center for the arts, 172 norfolk street, lower east side, (212) 352-3101; $25.  another blend of old and new takes place on saturday, mozart's birthday, when the masters reimagined series at merkin concert hall ushers him past his overhyped 250th birthday into the wonderful world of 251. matt haimovitz, the acclaimed cellist, and uri caine, the jazz pianist, join in a two-part program that first presents mozart ''straight'' (in a performance of the k. 563 divertimento, with mr. haimovitz) and then ''modern,'' in the premiere of mr. caine's ''mozart project,'' with his own ensemble performing his updated versions of mozart excerpts. at 8 p.m., 129 west 67th street, manhattan, (212) 501-3330; $30 in advance, $35 at the door.  back to resurrection: the gotham chamber opera, which has put itself on the opera lovers' map by exploring less-known works from all over the repertory, is turning to outright comedy this year with rossini's ''signor bruschino,'' in which he honed the comic style that catapulted subsequent opera buffas like ''l'italiana in algeri'' or ''il barbiere di siviglia'' to such success. it has not been performed in new york since its american premiere at the metropolitan opera in 1932-33 (on a double bill with ''elektra''). opens thursday at 7:30 p.m. (performances continue next week), harry de jur playhouse, abrons arts center, 466 grand street, lower east side, (212) 279-4200.  another highlight this week is the song continues, the annual series of recitals and master classes that the marilyn horne foundation puts on at carnegie hall. this year the master classes have the spotlight: they will be taught by barbara cook, evelyn lear and ms. horne herself. tuesday at 7:30 p.m., wednesday and thursday at 5:30 and 7:30 p.m., friday at 7:30 p.m., weill recital hall and zankel hall, (212) 247-7800; $5 to $45.  correction:  january 24, 2007, wednesday  a classical music entry on sunday in the week ahead report in arts & leisure incorrectly described ''decasia,'' being performed thursday through saturday at angel orensanz center for the arts. the concert consists of a score by michael gordon and a film by bill morrison, not a video. the entry also omitted information about advance tickets. they are available only through ticketmania.com, not at the center.  correction:  january 30, 2007, tuesday  a classical music entry in the listings pages of weekend on jan. 19 misstated the history of the performance in new york of ''il signor bruschino,'' by rossini, which the gotham chamber orchestra is performing through saturday. the gotham chamber orchestra's production is the first professional staging of the work in new york since 1933, not the first staging since then. (the error was repeated in a week ahead entry in arts & leisure on jan. 21, in the listings pages of weekend on friday and in a review of a performance on saturday.)  correction:  february 1, 2007, thursday  a classical music entry in the listings pages of weekend on jan. 19 misstated the history of the performance in new york of ''il signor bruschino,'' by rossini, which is being performed in new york through saturday. the current production is the first professional staging of the work in new york since 1933, not the first staging since then. (the error was repeated in a week ahead entry in arts & leisure on jan. 21, in the listings pages of weekend on friday and in a review of a performance on saturday.) a correction in this space on tuesday misstated the name of the group that is currently presenting the work, at the abrons arts center on the lower east side. it is the gotham chamber opera, not orchestra.  