paperback row   the judgment of paris: the revolutionary decade that gave the world impressionism, by ross king. (walker & company, $16.95.) this is a spirited account of the battle between france's officially sanctioned history painters and the upstarts contemptuously dismissed as impressionists -- embodied, for king, in the opposing fortunes of ernest meissonier and Édouard manet. king, author of ''brunelleschi's dome'' and ''michelangelo and the pope's ceiling,'' colorfully describes the controversy that raged around the annual paris salons (juried exhibitions) of the 1860s and '70s, and the impact of historic events on cultural politics. king ''tells a well-known story, but one seldom recounted in such vivid detail, or with such a novelistic sense of plot and character,'' diane johnson wrote here.  love and other impossible pursuits, by ayelet waldman. (anchor, $13.95.) motherhood is far from sacred in this darkly funny novel about a woman who falls desperately in love with a married man but can't muster much affection for his precocious 5-year-old son. in the book review, chelsea cain called ''love and other impossible pursuits'' a ''bravely contrary'' novel: ''it actually says something new and interesting about women, families and love.''  the place you love is gone: progress hits home, by melissa holbrook pierson. (norton, $14.95.) part memoir, part social history, this book mourns vanishing public and personal spaces as well as other environmental costs of rapid development and overpopulation. pierson catalogs the changes that growth has wrought on three places she has called home: akron, ohio; hoboken, n.j.; and kingston, n.y. our reviewer, anthony swofford, called this a ''strange and lovely book, quirky, smart and defiant.''  elia kazan: a biography, by richard schickel. (harper perennial, $16.95.) this life story of elia kazan (1909-2003) traces the distinguished stage and screen director's rise from a fledgling actor to his creative pinnacle presenting tennessee williams and arthur miller on broadway and directing films like ''on the waterfront.'' schickel -- a documentary filmmaker and movie critic who participated in the 1999 presentation of an honorary academy award to kazan -- also analyzes the significance of kazan's 1952 testimony before the house committee on un-american activities. ''no mere page turner, this is a page devourer,'' john simon wrote here, ''generating the kind of suspense that is usually the province of the playwright or novelist.''  passarola rising, by azhar abidi. (penguin, $13.) in abidi's colorful picaresque fantasy, two brothers in 18th-century portugal invent an airship -- four large copper spheres attached to a deck -- and visit voltaire, louis xv and the north pole. our reviewer, alexander mccall smith, called abidi's descriptions of their flight ''beautifully realized.''  world as laboratory: experiments with mice, mazes, and men, by rebecca lemov. (hill & wang, $16.) an absorbing history of human engineering, ''world as laboratory'' describes a long train of practical, absurd and dangerous 20th-century experiments -- financed and endorsed by the most prestigious institutions of the day -- and the scientists who organized them. in the man who knew too much: alan turing and the invention of the computer (atlas/norton, $13.95), david leavitt tells the story of the tragic genius who revolutionized mathematics, helped the british crack secret nazi codes and died after biting into a poisoned apple.  the last of her kind, by sigrid nunez. (picador, $14.) countercultural america in the 1960s and '70s, and its repercussions, are relived in this powerful novel about the divergent fates of two college roommates. georgette george, the oldest daughter in a large working-class family, and ann drayton, a connecticut heiress and future campus radical, meet at barnard in 1968. nunez, herself a 1972 barnard graduate, follows the two women beyond their college years -- through jobs, marriages and their faltering friendship -- as ann becomes the central figure in a murder case that draws national attention. ''nunez's keen powers of observation make her a natural chronicler,'' megan marshall wrote in the book review.  the wal-mart effect: how the world's most powerful company really works -- and how it's transforming the american economy, by charles fishman. (penguin, $15.) fishman places the world's leading retailer in the larger context of globalization, and reveals a company driven to deliver low prices but unable to comprehend what he calls the ''troubling elements of the wal-mart effect: low wages, unrelenting pressure on suppliers, products cheap in quality as well as price, offshoring of jobs.''  ihsan taylor  