turkish police arrest teenage suspect in editor's killing   the turkish police on saturday arrested a 17-year-old suspect in the killing of a newspaper editor who championed armenian rights, turkish authorities said.  the editor, hrant dink, 52, a turk of armenian descent, was shot friday afternoon outside the office of his newspaper, agos. a gunman was recorded by a surveillance camera nearby, and the police appealed to the public for help in identifying him.  on saturday night, ogun samast was captured in samsun, a black sea port, after his father recognized his images from the surveillance video and notified the police in trabzon, their hometown, said muammer guler, istanbul's governor, at a news conference just before midnight.  ''the suspect was captured in samsun on a passenger bus destined to trabzon, together with all the evidence, including his gun and the white beret'' seen in the video, mr. guler said.  mr. samast, an unemployed secondary school graduate who arrived in istanbul a week ago, admitted killing mr. dink, the samsun police said.  the police are also looking into possible links between mr. samast and the killing of a catholic priest, andrea santaro, last february. the assailant was a 16-year-old who, like the priest and mr. samast, was from trabzon.  prime minister recep tayyip erdogan praised the efforts of the security forces saturday and expressed satisfaction that an arrest had been made before mr. dink's funeral on tuesday. ''we're going to continue investigations with the same determination,'' mr. erdogan told the reporters, assuring that the arrest was only the start.  mr. guler said at a news conference earlier saturday that mr. samast had visited the agos office on friday. he apparently posed as a university student hoping to meet mr. dink, whose secretary told the young man he would need an appointment.  the secretary later saw him loitering outside the office before mr. dink was attacked, mr. guler said.  kazim kolcuoglu, head of the istanbul bar association, noting that mr. samast and the killer of mr. santaro were under 18, said that minors in turkey are used in slayings because they face lower penalties than an adult convicted of the same crime.  as a 17-year-old, mr. samast will be interrogated by a public prosecutor instead of the police, and will be tried at a minors' court, which will lead to certain reductions on his possible jail term, mr. kolcuoglu said.  mr. dink's murder has shocked turkey. mr. erdogan condemned the shooting as a direct attack on turkey's stability, and analysts from diverse political backgrounds appeared to agree.  ''if the trigger finger aimed at the air of stability and confidence in turkey, it hit the bull's eye,'' wrote mehmet barlas, a columnist for the center-right newspaper sabah.  although analysts like mr. barlas saw the assassination as a politically motivated attack on turkey's progress toward membership in the european union, others blamed a controversial law under which mr. dink had been convicted of insulting the turkish identity.  mr. dink, who angered many in turkey by challenging the official turkish version of the 1915 armenian genocide, was given a six-month, suspended sentence. but in the eyes of many radical nationalists, it made him a target.  meanwhile, people continued to flock to the agos office in istanbul. chants of ''we are all armenians, we are all hrants,'' filled the air.  ''we're here because we lost one of us,'' said a 33-year-old woman. as a teacher, she declined to give her name because it is illegal in turkey for public workers to make public comments. ''i want to see the perpetrators be brought to justice and the plot behind this assassination clarified immediately,'' she said.  agos, the only bilingual armenian-turkish newspaper in turkey, was founded and run by mr. dink since 1996.  ''we lost the voice that spoke for us, but turkey lost as much as we did,'' said nadya ismezoglu, an armenian woman standing outside the agos office. ''our pain is indescribable.''  