parcells tells the cowboys he's retiring as a coach   bill parcells dutifully kept regular office hours, even as he kept the dallas cowboys in the dark for the past 15 days.  on monday, though, in a statement released via e-mail, he ended the suspense and speculation with an added twist, resigning as coach of the cowboys and saying he was retiring from ''coaching football.''  parcells, 65, who was apparently preparing to attend the senior bowl on saturday in mobile, ala., to scout college talent, did not give any insight into why he had decided to retire. although parcells had stayed quiet about his plans even as three assistant coaches left for other jobs, the team owner jerry jones had said several times that he wanted parcells back for a fifth season.  ''i want to thank jerry jones and stephen jones for their tremendous support over the last four years,'' parcells said in his statement. stephen jones is the owner's son and the team's chief operating officer.  ''also, the players, my coaching staff and others in the support group who have done so much to help. dallas is a great city, and the cowboys are an integral part of it. i am hopeful that they are able to go forward from here.''  contractually, parcells's deadline to reach a decision on his future was feb. 1. last january, he signed a one-year contract extension for 2007 worth about $5 million.  parcells will not immediately relinquish his parking space and pack up his office. jerry jones was not available to comment monday, but he said in a statement released by the team: ''bill will continue to come to work here at valley ranch throughout at least the end of this week, and we will continue to meet and address the present status of our team while also discussing the future.  ''clearly, we wanted bill to return for next season, but i am completely understanding and respectful of his decision to retire from coaching.''  success for parcells proved as slippery as the snap that holder tony romo bobbled on a chip-shot field-goal attempt in the waning minutes of the cowboys' 21-20 first-round playoff loss to the seattle seahawks.  the cowboys were 34-30 in the regular season under parcells and made the playoffs twice in his four years, losing each time in the first round. parcells compiled an overall record of 183-138-1 -- the ninth most victories in n.f.l. history -- in 19 seasons with four teams, and is the only n.f.l. coach to lead four different teams to the playoffs.  he guided the giants to two super bowl victories, and the jets to the american football conference championship game in the 1998 season.  monday was the third time parcells had announced a retirement. citing heart problems, he left the giants in 1991, only to become coach of the new england patriots in 1993. he took the 1996 patriots to the super bowl and retired again, only to take the jets' coaching job eight days later.  by saying he is retired from coaching football, parcells leaves wiggle room to take a front-office job. reports surfaced after the cowboys' loss to the seahawks that he was a candidate to succeed the retiring giants general manager, ernie accorsi. the rumors were quickly and adamantly denied by parcells and the giants. (jerry reese was named the giants' g.m. last week.)  ''i am in good health and feel lucky to have been able to coach in the n.f.l. for an extended period of time,'' parcells said. ''i leave the game and the n.f.l. with nothing but good feelings and gratitude to all the players, coaches and other people that have assisted me in that regard.''  parcells took over a franchise that had suffered through three consecutive 5-11 seasons before he arrived in 2003. yet the cowboys never matched the 10-6 record of parcells's first season.  this season, the cowboys finished 9-7 for the second season in a row and limped into the playoffs as a wild card after losing three of their last four games and blowing a two-game lead in the national football conference east.  judging by parcells's body language on the sideline, he often appeared tired and listless while dealing with the cowboys' late-season breakdowns. he also seemed exasperated with the distractions caused by wide receiver terrell owens. a switch to a 3-4 defensive formation and a midseason quarterback switch from drew bledsoe to romo also proved challenging.  ''from an ownership and general manager's perspective, bill's coaching the cowboys represented a willingness to embrace a different philosophy and approach toward winning,'' jerry jones said. ''this experience will reinforce that willingness to be flexible.  ''his contributions to the game of football, and to the n.f.l., are immeasurable, and we will always be grateful for his dedicated effort and commitment to the dallas cowboys.''  pro football  