shuffle or sharpie? harrison takes the points   by the way, marvin harrison is going to the super bowl, too.  that needed to be said -- and celebrated -- after the television-savvy peyton manning finally canceled the brady bunch on sunday night, and even after another retirement from coaching yesterday by bill parcells.  we understand certain personalities make news more than others, even when it is primarily for coming or going -- as in the case of parcells, the now former giants, patriots, jets and cowboys coach; and receiver terrell owens, from whom parcells couldn't separate himself fast enough.  others stay in one place without attracting attention, to the extent that it's easy to forget they exist. so, after coverage of manning's first hug of a conference championship trophy that was tantamount to that of a royal wedding, it bears repeating, even shouting:  marvin harrison is going to the super bowl, too.  he has waited longer than manning, while just as dominant at his position. for 11 years, including the nine as manning's favorite and record-setting receiver, harrison has been the model of end zone comportment, the antithesis of those who have never quite grasped the potential payback for that crassly expressed touchdown high.  reggie bush, was it worth it?  harrison would never have looked back at defenders futilely chasing and pointed an index finger, as the rookie bush did sunday in chicago. he would never have body-flipped himself into the end zone, another act of idiocy by bush during the saints' 39-14 loss to the bears.  he would never so much as spike the ball, risk losing one for his touchdown collection or promoting himself ahead of his team.  ''he's never been a fan of being famous,'' brian conroy said sunday night in a telephone interview after the colts defeated the patriots, 38-34. conroy ought to know. he was a teammate and classmate of harrison's at roman catholic high school, where he is now an assistant principal, in center city, philadelphia, at the corner of broad street and vine.  ''people always said he was shy -- i would call it unassuming,'' conroy said. ''even when he was in high school, when he was so much better than everyone it was ridiculous, he knew he was the man, but he didn't have to let anybody know about it.''  chances are that harrison, the anti-owens, won't have too much to say next week in miami during the buildup to colts-bears. he will happily cede attention to manning, or to tony dungy and the bears' lovie smith, longtime friends who will be the first african-american head coaches in 41 super bowls to stand tall, proud and polite at that orgy of oratory known as media day.  the good news is that even a story as heartwarming and overdue as dungy versus smith cannot possibly meet the demand for two weeks worth of prebowl blather. eventually, the spotlight will find harrison, even if he would prefer to stand in the shadow of success, which he more or less did sunday in indianapolis.  at 34, still worth 95 receptions this season on a team blessed to have reggie wayne lining up on the opposite side of the field, harrison couldn't shake the patriots' assante samuel on a couple of deep balls early, then watched samuel run untouched to the end zone after he read manning on an out route, picked the ball off harrison's shoulder and gave the patriots a 21-3 lead.  with good reason, the colts wanted no part of samuel after that, targeting their tight end, dallas clark, for six catches and 137 yards in the belly of the new england defense. harrison caught four passes for 41 yards, along with a 2-point conversion that tied the score at 21-21. nothing to write about on his hall of fame plaque, but at least he didn't contribute to his team's undoing, as did bush.  bush's 88-yard catch and run was the most eye-opening individual play of the postseason, but guess what it will be most remembered for? for waking up the bears after the saints had cut a 16-point deficit to 2 and put the home team back on its heels. for infuriating the chicago defense, which soon forced quarterback drew brees into a safety and shut out the saints for the rest of the game.  a hefty fine for such ill-timed buffoonery would not be unjustified, but bush is young and he said he was sorry. maybe the saints should just put together a harrison highlight tape and order bush to watch it every day until next summer. maybe they can find old footage of a race harrison was challenged to while at roman catholic high by the city's reigning sprinter -- an event conroy called ''one of those urban legends that happens to be true.''  outside the school, on a busy thoroughfare, students used police barricades to create a lane. a crowd formed. bets were made.  ''the sprinter -- his name was marc cobbs -- got out of the blocks quicker and took the lead,'' conroy said. ''but at one point, marvin just smiled, kicked it into another gear and beat the kid by 5 or 10 yards. and when the race was over, he didn't celebrate, didn't gloat, probably never said a word about it again.''  all right, we admit, harrison is an extreme case on the field and off, where he guards his privacy as he would his wallet. we're not suggesting that everyone be him, just more like him, because too often these days, attempts to humiliate opponents are routinely confused or rationalized as expressions of joy.  does flamboyance have to be so foolish that nonsensical stereotypes about african-american athletes, who dominate the scoring positions in the n.f.l., are the result? is it in anyone's interests when people believe such athletes are culturally disposed to taunt and incite?  someone should ask marvin harrison that question next week. he's going to the super bowl, too, trying to get his ring without disturbing the bears.  sports of the times e-mail: hjaraton@nytimes.com  