feeling a child's pain, and reliving your own   many things you live through as a kid are unpleasant, but you survive them, grow up, think you're done with all that, then experience that very emotion again as you watch your children go through the same misery.  seeing your child picked on -- physically or emotionally -- is a hard one. you ache to spare them what you went through, though i, for one, could not. in one case, my oldest was in third grade and a kid was repeatedly jamming his head against the school bus window. i told ben i'd talk to the principal, but he begged me not to. i told him he ought to just smack the kid, but he would not; he feared getting in trouble. i told him i thought it was worth the punishment; he did not.  my daughter was a few years older when she was frozen out by a couple of girls. i counseled her to ignore them as aggressively as they were ignoring her -- but she didn't want my advice, and the more i talked to her, the angrier she got. i hated seeing her hang around waiting for those girls to instant-message back.  maybe if the situations had been more extreme i'd have intervened, but i felt that even at a young age the kids had the right to work these problems through themselves, and i kept my distance.  still, it hurt to watch. what i could do was remind them how much they were loved; explain that i'd gone through the same thing; and tell them my story of being ostracized, which, as it turns out, was recently resolved -- 40 years later.  when i was in junior high i was part of a group of four boys. we were all good students and very close. we'd spend as much time together as we could in and out of school. i'd often go over to their houses. we formed a club, were forever making grand plans.  then, during eighth grade, without a harsh word and with no warning, they froze me out. they stopped calling, ignored me at school. if i committed some gaffe -- like wearing white sports socks with dark shoes -- they'd find it hilarious. if i phoned, they weren't home. when i spoke to them at school, they'd shrug, saying nothing.  it was painful and humiliating, too; other kids knew.  i wished for it to stop, but it didn't. after being good buddies of mine since fifth grade, they didn't talk to me again.  in the months that followed, i spent lots of time alone. my mother noticed -- she'd watch me sulk around and ask why i never called my friends anymore. i said nothing. how could she understand? how do you make kids like you who don't want to? no one has that power, certainly not a parent.  while i was sure it wasn't my fault, can you ever be sure?  it changed me. i became more guarded, more of an outsider, more aware that people weren't what they seemed to be. now, as an adult, i know this was an important part of growing up. i was learning to view the world with a harder eye. in eighth grade, it just felt lonely.  this wasn't some epic tragedy. in time, i made new friends, the pain receded, and after a while i gave it little thought, until years later i told my own kids the story as a balm.  about five years ago, one of the three boys -- now a middle-aged academic -- sent an e-mail message to the new york times, saying he'd seen my byline and, if i was the same person, he'd like to get in touch to apologize for something bad he'd done when we were kids. the editor who forwarded the note said it sounded so juicy, i had to call him. but i didn't. by then it seemed like small potatoes, and i really didn't feel a need for an apology.  a few years later i learned from a mutual acquaintance that he had died from health problems and wondered: did he know he was dying? is that why he'd written? about the same time, a second ''boy'' in the group -- by then a 52-year-old physician -- died in a traffic accident. in my mind they were still in junior high, and now two were dead.  then, a few weeks ago, i got an e-mail message from the last ''boy.'' he'd tracked me down online. michael bernstein wrote that he was an educator in jewish studies in australia. he said that he'd read my recent column about my mother's death and wanted to extend his condolences.  ''more important, however, although it is belated, i want to apologize for my appalling behavior as a teenager in deliberately ostracizing you and, for no sensible reason, severing our childhood friendship,'' he wrote. ''although it is easy to expedite the excuse of youthful folly, i would be lying if i said that i didn't know my behavior was wrong. the tragic truth is i just didn't care. i remember in high school making a lame attempt at rectification by treating you with a bit more kindness, but i never had the courage to say that i was sorry. i hope you can accept that apology now, even if it is 40 years overdue.''  i wrote back telling him how stunned i had been to hear from him, and how pleased, too, and that our falling-out had long ago stopped mattering to me. i filled him in on what i knew about the other two -- he hadn't heard from them in years -- and wrote that i'd told my own children our story and might like to include it in a parenting column.  he responded graciously: ''i am happy for you to use our story instructively in one of your pieces, and i have no objection to you using my name.''  however, he went on to write that there was one piece of unfinished business. ''i noted that you did not really accept my apology,'' he wrote. ''when it comes to apologies, it is the perpetrator's wish to rectify things that needs to be respected rather than the sentiments of the victim. although you might feel it was a long time and you don't need to be apologized to, obviously i feel otherwise or i would not have contacted you. from a kabbalistic perspective, it is the formal acceptance of the apology that breaks any negativity in the cycle of development. so i hope you will indulge me by accepting my apology even though you think it is a long time ago and small potatoes.''  i wrote back that, of course, i did.  i told my children the new ending to the story. they seemed interested; at least i didn't catch them rolling their eyes the way they do at a lot of dad's classics. but the story has a fresh ending that i should have known from my own transgressions. it's not just something in the bible: over time, the pain may weigh more on the bully than the bullied.  parenting e-mail: parenting@nytimes.com  