quick bite/hillsdale; why wait until may?   the sign may say cinco de mayo, but at this hillsdale diner you can enjoy authentic mexican food all year long.  benito huerta worked as a waiter in a mexican restaurant in rockland county, n.y., for 19 years before he saw the need for an ethnic market in the pascack valley. he opened his cinco de mayo tienda mexicana selling latin american products in 1999. a year later he added a taqueria making fresh tacos. it was such a success that when kelly's diner went up for sale around the corner, he decided to expand his business.  five years ago mr. huerta opened a restaurant with a counter seating 10 people and a few tables. with the help of his wife, susana, his brother gabriel and other family members, he serves recipes borrowed from his mother and cooked with fresh ingredients he buys from the fruitimex market in passaic.  mr. huerta is proud of the authentic mexican flavor, even though some of the ingredients he needs are difficult to find here. all sauces are made on the premises, as are the mexican sausage and spicy meat. mr. huerta also ages the beef and bakes the various mexican breads sold in the store.  some of the most popular items sold are sopes, corn cakes layered with refried beans and topped with your choice of meats, cheese, onions and cilantro. they are $3 apiece, and many customers purchase several at a time. quesadillas are also $3, but the mexican-style tacos, stuffed with aged beef, steak, mexican sausage, tongue, chicken, beef head or pork, are a bargain at $2. dinners include rice and beans for $9.95 and range from flautas and chimichangas to tostadas and tamales. most special dinners, like camarones salsa verde (sautéed shrimp with green tomato sauce) or shrimp enchiladas, are $14.95.  local delivery is free with a minimum $15 order; delivery to a few other towns is free with a $30 order. call for details.  the walls are lined with bright contemporary paintings done by family and friends, while an icon of our lady of guadalupe watches over each meal. unless it's snowing outside, you might think you're really in mexico.  cinco de mayo mexican restaurant, 116 broadway, hillsdale; (201) 722-1172. open daily 10 a.m. to 10 p.m.  christine contillo  new jersey  