a wrenching aids tale spanning two continents   there's a simple moment in the off broadway hit ''in the continuum'' that speaks far more eloquently than any government statistics could about the aids crisis in africa. abigail murambe, an announcer on zimbabwe's state-run television channel, is trying to flag down a jitney after learning that she is hiv-positive. shooing away the street urchins pestering her for money, she says: ''go away, you kids! where are your parents?''  the words are no sooner out of her mouth than her expression changes. in a flash, a look of horror crumples the features of danai gurira, who plays abigail, a character she invented while studying acting at new york university. as abigail realizes that the begging children are among zimbabwe's more than one million aids orphans, she also registers the awareness that her own young son and the baby she is carrying could someday be on the street too -- like so many other african women, abigail has been infected by her husband.  ''in the continuum,'' which plays through feb. 10 at the yale repertory theater, cleverly mirrors abigail's story with that of nia, a troubled teenager from south central los angeles who finds herself in a similar predicament: pregnant and hiv-positive, but also jobless, husband-less and pretty much homeless. nia, the creation of another former n.y.u. acting student, nikkole salter, is, in ms. salter's winning performance, a headstrong mix of innocence and guile. she feels alternately thrilled and angry with the high school basketball star responsible for both her pregnancy and her infection, and she does not know if she is better off with his love or his money.  when, in 2003, ms. gurira and ms. salter combined their separate monologues at the suggestion of an n.y.u. professor, the whole clearly added up to more than the sum of its parts. the show opened commercially at primary stages in 2005 and then moved to the perry street theater. the stop at the yale rep is part of a larger tour that has taken ms. gurira and ms. salter across the country and around the world, and on a nearly bare set designed by peter r. feuchtwanger, with minimal costuming by sarah hilliard and a handful of props by jay duckworth, they demonstrate why ''in the continuum'' has been so successful.  under the direction of robert o'hara, ms. gurira and ms. salter people the stage with more than a dozen vivid characters -- men, women and children -- from different but intersecting worlds. a pair of glasses and a scarf turn ms. salter into nia's well-meaning but clueless social worker; the scarf becomes a crying baby when nia visits her preoccupied mother. ms. gurira puts on a posh accent to become one of abigail's expatriate high school friends; a feather headdress and a fly whisk transform her into a witch doctor. nia tosses aside a tissue in los angeles; abigail retrieves it in harare.  as the two women search for help, the play lays out -- with compassion and humor and sometimes more detail than is strictly necessary -- exactly how unsatisfactory their options are. the problem is the same for both the girl in the 'hood and the married woman in africa: if either tries to prevent her man from infecting others by revealing his hiv status, she risks destroying his willingness and his ability to see her through the illness.  you would think that at this point -- after ''the normal heart,'' ''angels in america'' and so many other plays about aids -- the theater would have little new to say about it. then along comes ''in the continuum'' to remind us that women get aids too, and that the world gives them very good reasons to do the wrong thing.  ''in the continuum,'' by danai gurira and nikkole salter, at yale repertory theater, 1120 chapel st., new haven. tuesdays through saturdays until feb. 10. information at 203-432-1234 or www.yalerep.org.  theater review  