insider named president of farmingdale college   farmingdale state college has not only undergone a recent name change (from the state university of new york at farmingdale), but it now has a new president as well.  the suny board of trustees voted unanimously on jan. 11 to name w. hubert keen the college's president. dr. keen, 62 and a resident of north woodmere, had been provost and vice president for academic affairs at farmingdale since 2005. he was special assistant to the suny system provost for the previous six years.  ''i'm a bit of an anomaly,'' he said, ''since most college presidents are selected from the outside, and often from out of state.''  but the board chairman, thomas f. egan, said, ''while the university has done great work attracting presidents to lead our campus from all over the country, we still recognize internal talent and are pleased to be promoting hubert from within the university.''  dr. keen, who has a doctorate in ecology from kent state university, succeeds jonathan gibralter, who was president from 2001 until leaving last august to assume the presidency of frostburg state university in maryland.  dr. keen said his first goals included developing new academic programs and expanding existing ones, particularly in applied social science.  ''we hope to have our first master's degree program in a year and a half; that will be an extension of one of our existing bachelor's programs,'' he said. ''this is a big step for a school that for most of its years was an associate degree college.''  dr. keen also said he wanted to increase enrollment, now 6,200, at a modest pace. ''we are an institution in transition,'' he said. ''unlike other schools, we're not settled into our academic programs and need to manage many complex issues as we move forward.''  three new trustees named to roosevelt board  in the five years since the roosevelt school district was taken over by the state, there have been a series of financial and academic problems. now the state board of regents has appointed three new members to the district's five-member interim board of education.  their appointment on jan. 9 coincided with the release of the state's annual list of schools that failed to meet one or more academic standards for at least two consecutive years -- which included roosevelt high school.  the new trustees replaced three board members who resigned last month after state officials reported that the district had an end-of-the-year deficit of $3.4 million. earlier this month, newsday reported that construction of a new middle school was $10 million over budget and a year behind schedule.  gale stevens haynes, the provost of long island university's brooklyn campus and the new board chairwoman, said that while she recognized the challenge of her new responsibility, ''i am encouraged by the recent successes at the elementary level, and now we need to identify the strengths and figure out how to build upon the positives to move the school district forward.''  superintendent ronald o. ross, who was appointed by the state two years ago, said there were many misconceptions about the district. he said, for example, that the middle school construction was costing more than was budgeted because of an unanticipated environmental cleanup that he said should be nassau county's responsibility.  ''the building is on land purchased from the county, and the severe problems of pesticides on the site were never foreseen by either the county or the school district when only $1 million was allocated for its cleanup,'' he said.  mr. ross said the district had many recent accomplishments. the roosevelt elementary schools were ''at or above academic levels compared with other schools on long island,'' he said, and the high school had nine new advance placement courses and more students than ever entering the intel science competition. roosevelt also begins chinese language study in first grade.  ''this is a school district that is no longer failing,'' mr. ross said, ''but you can't turn around decades of mismanagement in just two years.''  sometimes even death can't stop health premiums  a state audit of 20 local governments and school districts statewide has found that 9 had paid $786,000 in health insurance premiums for retirees or spouses of retirees who had died -- some as many as 12 years ago.  the brentwood school district and the town of oyster bay were among those identified as having overpaid: brentwood by $11,851 and oyster bay by $3,050. the towns of brookhaven and islip and the three village central school district were also audited.  jeffrey gordon, a spokesman for the state comptroller's office, which conducted the audit, said the municipalities and school districts had inadequate systems for identifying when retirees die. those that were audited said notification of deceased retirees was obtained by reading local obituaries, word of mouth, family notification or uncashed medicare reimbursement checks.  the audit report said that only one municipality it surveyed, islip, had appropriate monitors of payments to retirees, including an annual questionnaire and follow-up process to make contact with all enrollees and retirees.  after learning of the audit's findings, some of the municipalities and school districts, including oyster bay and brentwood, recouped the money from insurance providers. some repayments are pending.  phyllis barry, a spokeswoman for oyster bay, said the town's overpayment was for one deceased employee, whose daughter did not notify the state retirement system and the town of her mother's death for several months.  donna jones, the assistant superintendent for business in brentwood, said the district's overpayment was for one person, the spouse of a retired employee who had died. the money was recouped in november, she said.  the week  