cancún   beyond the seaside curtain of megahotels, theme restaurants and jam-packed beaches that have made cancún, mexico, a spring break mecca, there lies an idyllic, veiled city. it is a cancún apart, which offers tranquil sunsets and shaded parks for post-college beachgoers who have outgrown cavernous nightclubs and wet t-shirt contests. this is a cancún, where brass bands parade through the pubic square, waves crash against vacant shorelines and the friendly women at corner food stands will teach you how to make a perfect quesadilla.  friday  5 p.m.  1. bienvenidos, margarita  this is cancún, so grab a drink. for views of a caribbean sunset, tiny islands and kayakers skimming across glassy waters, go to la dolce vita (boulevard kukulcan, kilometer 14.6; 52-998 885-0161; www.cancunitalianrestaurant.com), an italian restaurant situated along laguna nichupté, the broad lagoon that separates mainland cancún from the thin peninsula of the hotel zone. sit outdoors on a wind-swept terrace and order a margarita (60 pesos, or about $5.40 at 11.17 pesos to the dollar) made with fresh lime juice as the sun dips below the blue waters.  7 p.m.  2. death wears a horseshoe  every corner store hawks cheesy t-shirts and fake mayan art, but when you need a love potion or baggie of frozen tears, there's only tienda la esfinge, a tiny boutique devoted to black magic and christian paraphernalia (avenida xel-ha no. 28, in market 28; 52-998 884-5724). inside this lime-green storefront, votives burn on a small altar and shelves brim with crystals, potions and religious statues. especially striking is santa muerte, a skeletal figure of death festooned with horseshoes and other charms. he comes in sizes small, medium, large and 7-foot nightmare. karen altamirano, one of the owners, does tarot readings, which cost up to 300 pesos.  8 p.m.  3. yucatán tapas, not tacos  it's not all onion rings and day-glo frozen drinks in this resort town. a string of classy restaurants has opened around the parque las palapas, cancún's charming downtown park, that serve everything from tapas and crepes, to upscale mexican cuisine. restaurante labná on the park's northwestern corner (calle margaritas 29; 52-998 892-3056; www.labna.com), serves dauntingly large portions of classic yucatán fare. start out with a tangy bowl of lime soup (48 pesos) and take a culinary tour of the yucatán peninsula with the paseo por el yucatán (125 pesos), a sampler of traditional dishes from the region, including roast pork with sour orange juice, fried pumpkin, tamales and tortillas filled with egg.  10 p.m.  4. music in the square  after dinner, stroll around parque las palapas and watch local artists hang paintings, kids play pickup soccer and women sell hot fried bananas from pushcarts. this is downtown cancún's softly beating heart. grab a concrete park bench and a cup of warm atol, a sweet corn beverage (about 10 pesos), while you people-watch or catch one of the free concerts, dances or festivals that occur most weekends. small brass bands are likely to march by as they circle the park on their way to the center stage. for more refined entertainment, check out the friendly clubs and cafes that line the plaza. try el rincón del vino (calle alcatraces 29) for mexican guitar; terraza chacmool (calle gladiolas 18; 52-998 892-1462) for latino funk,; and roots (calle tuilpanes 26; 52-998-884 2437) for top-notch cancún jazz.  saturday  8 a.m.  5. island, ho!  spend the day on isla mujeres, a skinny little island long on history and charm. it was on this island that mayans worshipped the fertility goddess ixchel, pirates sought refuge, and wayward travelers found paradise and opened coffee shops. to get to the island from downtown cancún, catch a taxi (about 25 pesos) or a bus marked puerto juárez to the gran puerto cancún ferry terminal (www.granpuerto.com.mx). from there, it's a 15-minute boat ride (70 pesos roundtrip) through jade-colored waters. ferries run from 6:30 a.m. to midnight, every hour or half hour.  10 a.m.  6. getting to know parrot fish  the three best things to do on isla mujeres, in no particular order, are: be near the water, on the water, or in the water. to explore the sky-clear waters, go snorkeling on a tour led by anglers from the local fisherman's cooperative, cooperativa isla mujeres (52-998 877-0283), just steps from the main ferry dock. for 250 pesos, you can spend five hours swimming among sneering barracudas and phosphorescent parrot fish. schools of sunfish glint and shimmer like ancient coins, and most fishermen will allow you to dive down to explore hurricane-felled ships, now moldering on the sea floor. another 50 pesos buys you a lunch of grilled fish, salad and rice, prepared on the beach by your guides. equipment is included in the price, so just simply show up and go.  5 p.m.  7. sun spots  now comes a tough decision: picking a spot of beach to watch the sun set. the island's best beaches are concentrated along its northern tip, in playa norte. they draw an easygoing mix of tourist families, young adults playing volleyball and the island's middle-class residents. drink shacks and thatch-roofed restaurants abound. most offer happy-hour specials that begin at 4 p.m. and don't end ''until you're drunk,'' as one waiter put it. that's easy to do considering the prices: two beers are about 25 pesos and two daiquiris go for 40 pesos.  8 p.m.  8. al fresco à la isla  after sundown, local restaurants transform the island's avenida hidalgo into a gastronomic gallery. tables spill out onto the pavement, and waiters hold out menus for passersby. there are dozens of options, but one standout is le bistro francais (avenida matamoros 29, near hidalgo), which serves well-priced french food in a bustling technicolor dining room that draws a mix of yuppies and sunburnt beach bums. dishes include chicken cordon bleu, onion soup or coq au vin, a house specialty. entrees cost around 70 to 90 pesos. a squawking green parrot often acts as maître d'.  10 p.m.  9. sea breezes and tequila  before you head back to downtown cancún, swing by la peña, a chilled-out nightspot in downtown isla mujeres (avenida guerrero between morelos and bravo; www.la-pena.myislamujeres.com) for tequila shooters, billiards and local bands who play pop covers and traditional mexican tunes. for a mellower nightcap, go upstairs to the rooftop terrace and grab a hammock. it's open late -- the doors don't close until 2 a.m. -- but don't forget that the last ferry departs at midnight.  sunday  10 a.m.  10. a jigger of la cultura  skeletons dance and devils grin in the tiny but fascinating la casa del arte popular mexicano, an arts and crafts museum wedged into the hotel zone (boulevard kukulcan; 52-998 849-4332; www.museoartepopularmexicano.org; 55 pesos). an audio guide (in english, french or spanish) takes you past drums made of butterfly cocoons, masks of conquistadors and antique tortilla presses. don't miss the wooden dioramas called retablos or the ceramic árboles de la vida (trees of life), an ancient mexican art form that tells the stories of the bible, bullfighters and fables through allegorical figurines bunched together like branches and leaves. best of all, you'll likely have the place to yourself.  12 p.m.  11. baywatch cancún  you didn't come to cancún just to look at art, so take a deep breath and dive into cancún's famous peninsula of talc-white beaches. the seawall of megahotels might seem impenetrable, but all of cancún's beaches are open to the public and free. simply walk througha hotel lobby. if you've got qualms about traipsing through a hotel other than your own, look for any of the 10 access paths that connect the main road to the beach. playa tortugas, at kilometer 6.5 of boulevard kukulcan, is a popular spot for spring breakers, kayakers, divers and parasailers. restaurants and changing areas can be found on either end of the beach. playa delfines, at kilometer 18 of boulevard kukulcan, offers a more solitary spot to sunbathe. just mind the treacherous currents.  basics  flights bound for cancún pour out of the united states. a four-hour flight from kennedy airport in new york costs about $600 on american airlines. from cancún international airport, the best way downtown is on a comfortable ado bus. the 45-minute ride costs 35 pesos (about $3.15 at 11.17 pesos to the dollar). bus information is at www.ticketbus.com.mx and available by calling (800) 950-0287 from the united states.  staying downtown will likely save you some money over cancún's hotel zone. prices below are for double rooms, including breakfast, during the december to april high season.  el rey del caribe (uxmal 24; 998 884-2028; www.reycaribe.com) is an eco-friendly hotel in central cancún with a garden and courtyard pool. rooms have kitchenettes. rates from around 800 pesos.  xbalamqué (yaxchilán 31, 998 884 9690; www.xbalamque.com) is a bit closer to the central plaza and a bit more luxurious, with a pool, a sauna, yoga classes, massages and other thrills of a spa. from around 850 pesos.  for a great snapshot of life on isla mujeres, pick up the bilingual magazine atando cabos, which publishes oral histories and captures the flavor of life on the island.  36 hours  