giants pick eagles assistant as defensive coordinator   the giants, whose championship hopes this season collapsed when their defense collapsed, turned to their bitter rivals, the philadelphia eagles, for a new defensive coordinator.  steve spagnuolo, the eagles' linebackers coach and a defensive assistant for the team for eight years, was hired yesterday to replace the fired tim lewis. in philadelphia, spagnuolo coached defensive backs brian dawkins, bobby taylor and troy vincent for three years and linebacker jeremiah trotter for the past three. all have been pro bowl players.  expecting to rely on their defense in 2006, the giants suffered from serious injuries to defensive ends michael strahan and osi umenyiora and linebacker lavar arrington, and often-erratic play by others. in the second half of the season, they lost four games in which they led or were tied in the fourth quarter.  four days after their playoff loss to the eagles, the giants fired lewis, their defensive coordinator for the past three seasons. in a teleconference yesterday, coach tom coughlin said he had researched many potential successors but had interviewed only spagnuolo.  coughlin spoke from mobile, ala., where he is monitoring daily practice sessions for the senior bowl. he said he was impressed by spagnuolo's achievements with the eagles.  ''i was looking for a guy who had an opportunity to work with outstanding people in the league,'' coughlin said, ''not just an aggressive system, because the system here has been aggressive. it is a plus that he knows our division, and is also a plus that he comes from a program that has andy reid as a head coach and jim johnson as a defensive coordinator.''  spagnuolo, 47, played wide receiver at springfield (mass.) college. he graduated in 1981 and started his coaching career a year later.  he joined the eagles in 1999 as a defensive assistant/quality control coach. before that, he was the defensive coordinator at massachusetts and at maine and an intern, scout, personnel aide and assistant coach for more than a half-dozen college and professional teams.  this season, the giants' defense allowed 342.4 yards a game, eighth most in the n.f.l. the eagles allowed 328.1, but their reliance on blitzing helped them to a 10-6 record. in the playoffs, they defeated the giants on a last-play field goal, then lost to the new orleans saints.  the giants finished with an 8-8 record and a need for defensive changes. coughlin, however, said all of the assistant coaches on defense would remain. he said spagnuolo's defense would be based on personnel rather than philosophies, and that seemed fine with spagnuolo.  in the same conference call, spagnuolo said: ''you've seen the giants against the eagles the last two years, and that's the bulk of what i want to do. it may be a slight advantage facing the eagles, but i don't know if that is going to make a difference between winning and losing. i may know what they're going to do, but i don't know what they're going to do on that play.''  pro football  