in close-knit town, 'horrific' killing of family rattles the residents   even as it expands with new housing and new businesses, this dutchess county town remains an old-fashioned community, where people pay good money -- $129.99 -- for a rocking chair at cracker barrel and the only thing menacing about the place is its name.  death usually comes naturally, slowly. on friday, it came unnaturally, all at once, for a family of five.  a husband, his wife and their three children were found slain early friday in their home, which had been burned, apparently to cover up the killings. five members of the morey family were killed: manuel a. morey, 33, a fence builder known as tony; his wife, tina, 30; and their three sons. the eldest, manuel, who like his father was known as tony, was 13. the youngest, ryan, was 6. adam, the middle child, was 10.  the dutchess county medical examiner's office ruled the deaths homicides. on saturday, the medical examiner, dr. kari reiber, told the poughkeepsie journal that autopsies revealed that mr. morey died of a gunshot wound to the neck and mrs. morey died of gunshots to the chest and head. two of the children, tony and adam, died of multiple stab wounds, and ryan died of blunt trauma to the head, the newspaper reported.  a state police official said yesterday that investigators were reviewing numerous leads and had identified several persons of interest. he declined to elaborate.  firefighters responded to the blaze at 203 route 82 at 3:15 a.m. on friday. the intense fire gutted the house, and the five bodies were found inside. a car had been taken from the residence about the same time as the fire and was found nearby, the authorities said. the car, a purple kia, had been set on fire.  on saturday, as investigators continued to comb through the residence, fishkill residents said they were stunned. the county's american red cross chapter dispatched mental health workers to console the moreys' neighbors, friends and relatives. the town supervisor, joan a. pagones, was scheduled to give her state of the town address on wednesday, but she decided to postpone it because of the killings.  ''it's just something that was so out of the ordinary and so horrific that it just touches home,'' said mrs. pagones, who lives less than a mile from the morey house. ''this is not the type of crime statistic that we see on an everyday basis.''  indeed, residents had to think long and hard about the last time anything like this had happened in fishkill, a town of 20,000 people about 60 miles northwest of manhattan. it had only one murder in the past three years, the police said, and according to state criminal justice figures, it had none from 1996 through 2003.  people talked about 1998, in nearby poughkeepsie, the county seat, when kendall l. francois was charged with murdering eight prostitutes and hiding their bodies at his home. mr. francois, who later confessed to the crimes, was sentenced in 2000 to eight consecutive life terms. people even talked about november 1930, in stanfordville, when james germond, a farmer, and his wife and their two children were found stabbed to death in their home.  but no one could remember anything comparable in fishkill, the name of which comes from the dutch words for fish (vis) and creek. ''it's such a small area,'' said joe calabro, 53, who sat with a budweiser at gino's cafe next to the morey house. ''everybody knows everybody in some form or fashion.''  the town has both a rural and a developed feel, its historic past -- it was home to a military encampment during the revolutionary war -- mixing, and occasionally clashing, with its suburban present. the moreys' old concrete house on route 82, with its dirt lot, wooden steps leading to the front door and $1,350 monthly rent, is a short drive from new town houses and large malls with chain restaurants.  one of the largest employers in the area is ibm, which has a $3 billion microchip plant in east fishkill.  ''you still have the hometown experience of little league and county fairs,'' said mrs. pagones, who has lived in fishkill since 1971. ''we're a large town, but we're a small town, if that's possible.''  on saturday, outside the burned home, someone put a plastic vase with flowers into the soil next to the mailbox. the boys' grandmother and other relatives nailed a white sheet of paper to the wooden fence with a handwritten message: ''we love you!! you will be missed.'' on the sheet was each boy's class picture.  the house, a white-painted, two-story residence a few feet from route 82, was a charred shell. a corner of the slanted roof had collapsed, yet here and there were touches of home: an old all-terrain vehicle near the woods out back, tiny christmas lights carefully decorating the fence.  neighbors knew the moreys for their raucous parties and their late-night rides on all-terrain vehicles. their landlord said they had not paid rent since nov. 1. a friend of mrs. morey's, peggy gersch, 47, who works at a mobil gas station, said that mrs. morey went to the station about a week ago and told her that she was leaving her husband and moving with her children to virginia.  some residents believe the murders were an isolated occurrence, and they said they were not worried about their safety. yet others said they were uneasy, without an arrest and without knowing a motive. one woman said her 10-year-old granddaughter asked her to stay over friday night because her father was working late, even though her mother was home.  t. j. bailey, 16, who works at schneider's fishkill bowl on route 82, said the killings have been on everyone's mind. ''people are definitely worried,'' he said, ''about what might happen next.''  