expecting? make that angst-ridden   what to expect when tv characters were expecting once meant glowing, knowing moms and jittery dads building toward a very special episode, complete with a requisite madcap race to the hospital.  the abc series ''notes from the underbelly,'' which is to make its debut later this season, tries a less sentimental approach: a sweet and sour look at impending parenthood. jennifer westfeldt, who co-wrote and starred in the 2001 film ''kissing jessica stein,'' plays lauren, an ambivalent alternative to the surefooted mother-to-be. ms. westfeldt said that she had read scripts for a dozen pilots about parents last year, and that ''underbelly'' was the only one to look at the subject from the expectant phase.  ''it's not just a random day in the life of a mom,'' she said. ''it's: 'whoa! we're pregnant, and i'm not ready for it.' '' as lauren, who counsels high school students on their college choices, says at one point, ''we're barely in our 30s and these days that's like being in your 20s, which is actually an irresponsible age to have children.''  imagine carrie bradshaw and her posse five years down the road. that, said stacy traub, the executive producer of ''underbelly,'' is the basic concept for this series. ''in the way that 'sex and the city' looks at relationships and dating,'' she added, ''i'd say this is going to look at pregnancy and parenthood.''  ms. traub adapted risa green's 2005 novel of the same name, but unlike ms. green's sharp-edged book, the show is narrated by the husband, andrew (played by peter cambor), a landscape architect who is well intentioned, if often clumsy, in his support of the impending arrival.  ''the beauty of a pregnancy,'' ms. traub said, ''is there's a built-in arc.''  as ms. westfeldt put it: ''you can see me get bigger and bigger as the season progresses. you're going to follow the journey with these characters like you do with 'desperate housewives.' ''  and if the show succeeds, season 2 has a ready blueprint in ms. green's sequel, ''tales from the crib,'' which was published last spring.  television programming has long been driven by female viewership, particularly by young women in recent years. but hits like abc's ''desperate housewives'' have ''jump-started the shift toward catering to older female viewers,'' said francie calfo, that network's executive vice president for development and current programs, referring to the mature end of the 18-to-49-year-old demographic.  the only realistic ''housewives'' character, lynette, is the refreshing voice of maternal imperfection and ambivalence, an antihero who has resonated with real moms. even so, ''there's something very sexy about having a baby right now,'' ms. calfo said.  it wasn't necessarily the sexiness that appealed to ms. traub and the producers, kim and eric tannenbaum (whose credits include ''two and a half men''). ''risa tapped into something that i think a lot of people of our generation feel but haven't wanted to say,'' ms. traub said. ''no one really told us that it's o.k. to complain a little and to be a little bit selfish.''  ms. westfeldt said she hoped to ''represent the young mother out there who really doesn't know what she's doing and doesn't want to become overwhelmed by the mommy police and the mommy patrol -- this legion of women out there who have become professional mothers.''  kari lizer, the creator and executive producer of the cbs sitcom ''the new adventures of old christine,'' knows the territory well. her show, which stars julia louis-dreyfus in the title role, features a scornful and sanctimonious duo ms. lizer called the ''meanie moms.''  ''they're sort of christine's conscience,'' she said. ''they give voice to the things she feels she's failing at -- not packing the right lunch or that somehow her divorce will ruin her kid. christine's worst nightmares come out of these women's mouths.''  the bittersweet depiction of modern motherhood in comedies like ''underbelly'' and ''christine'' can hit a raw nerve even as they make viewers laugh. ''i think what's being represented on television is that we reject the notion of super mom, but we still feel guilty that we're not super moms,'' ms. lizer said. ''it's conflicted.''  television  