blinding ourselves in space   you don't have to be a space or climate expert to recognize that this country's ability to track climate and environmental changes from space is heading in the wrong direction. at a time when concerns about global warming are rising, the bush administration is sharply reducing the number of satellites that can measure the impact of rising temperatures and a host of other environmental trends.  the administration's hypocrisy is stunning. for years, the president and top officials have justified their refusal to grapple seriously with global warming by insisting that more research is needed. now, after pledging that such research would be the centerpiece of a new climate change strategy, the administration is underfinancing some of the most important efforts to gather data.  a report issued last week by the national academy of sciences projected an alarming decline in vital studies and monitoring. the national aeronautics and space administration currently has a sizable number of earth-observing satellites and instruments in orbit, but since 2000 its budget for earth sciences has decreased over 30 percent when adjusted for inflation.  by 2010, the number of operating sensors and instruments on nasa satellites that observe the earth is likely to drop by 40 percent as old equipment fails and is not promptly replaced. meanwhile, at the national oceanic and atmospheric administration, huge cost overruns and technical problems have delayed planned launchings of key climate and weather-monitoring satellites and forced the elimination of instruments essential for climate science.  the setbacks are bound to hobble efforts to understand whether hurricanes and heat waves are becoming more frequent and intense, whether ice sheets will collapse and drive sea levels dangerously high, and how fish stocks, deforestation, drinking water supplies and air pollution are affected as populations grow and economies take off. we clearly need more data in coming years, not less.  the academy's panel estimates that some $7.5 billion in new money is needed through 2020, mostly at nasa, to conduct high-priority observational missions. nasa's resources are already grievously overextended. it must finish building the international space station, keep flying the rickety shuttle fleet and start developing a follow-on spacecraft to explore the moon and get ready to travel to mars.  with little new money to carry out these costly tasks, the agency has been forced to rein in other parts of its budget, including earth science studies. unless congress gives nasa more funds, the agency should shift money internally to give earth observations higher priority. studies that could affect the livability of the planet seem vastly more consequential than completing a space station or returning to the moon by an arbitrary date.  editorial  