endgame plays out in brooklyn   for the seven men and five women considering the fate of ronell wilson, the first verdict was the easy part.  beyond a reasonable doubt, the jurors concluded, mr. wilson did murder two undercover police detectives by holding a .44-caliber revolver inches behind their heads and propelling a bullet through each man's brain.  ''ronell wilson,'' his lawyer said in court as the penalty phase began last week, ''accepts your verdict.''  now comes the hard part: what kind of a person would do such a thing?  the question is not clear, not precise, not even based in discernible fact. it is existential. spiritual, even. requiring the peering into another man's soul.  but it is the central and arguably the only matter left to guide jurors as they ponder whether mr. wilson ought to die by lethal injection or live out his days in prison.  here on the horizon of human comfort with human law, where some fear encroaching on the work of god, the law itself becomes unintentionally ambiguous.  as judge nicholas g. garaufis explained to the jury in federal district court in brooklyn, the government must prove certain factors defined by congress. prosecutors may also offer additional ''aggravating factors,'' an elaborate legal term for things that make this killing seem worse than others.  defense lawyers may demonstrate mitigating factors, or arguments for leniency, by a lower standard of proof.  all the complexity and rigor seem to fit the federal penal code, a system that ranks life stories numerically and prescribes prison time in months. but the precision is a wizard's curtain: when the process is done, the jurors will remain free to disregard the evidence and spare mr. wilson's life for mercy's sake.  a lone juror can force that conclusion. in the 161 federal cases the death penalty information center has counted since 1988, when the modern capital punishment statute was enacted, only 51 juries have voted for death sentences.  and so these men and women, so carefully chosen through months of refined questions to dissect their views on the death penalty, their dispositions toward law enforcement and their relationships with their mothers, now must come to know this man. to grope inside his heart. and finally to take the measure by which all misdeeds come to an ultimate reckoning: is he sorry for what he has done?  since november, he has been seated before them, a truck's length away, slumped in a leather chair, his expression a wash. by his lawyer's account, he is earl ronell wilson, born in 1982 in a fatherless motherless heartless loveless drug-ruined den on coney island. a wishful and unheeded child.  ''ronell loved his mother,'' said his lawyer, mitchell dinnerstein. the woman he spoke of, cheryl wilson, has attended much of the trial, but she was not in the courtroom to hear the lawyer tell how she rejected her son, to hear herself called ''a drunk, angry, bellicose woman.''  to prosecutors, he is a mad dog in full mettle, a dangerous member of the bloods gang, street name rated r, his only remaining ambition ascendance to the first rank of o.g., original gangster.  by his own words, in rap lyrics submitted as evidence, he is ''da light-skin kid, most hated rated.''  but how hated now, precisely? in the courtroom, his life is flashing before his eyes. one after another, sworn witnesses describe the contours of his worldly path. piece by piece, they assemble a collage of his character. last week, prosecutors called his fellow inmates, his guards, a kid he punched back in junior high. this week, defense lawyers plan to call his mother, his sister, his cousins and more.  and will the real mr. wilson stand up? judge garaufis has ruled that he will be permitted to read a brief statement of remorse that was filed with the court before the penalty phase began. he will stand at the defense table, bound by no oath to truthfulness, vulnerable to no cross-examination.  amid all the evidence of mr. wilson's crimes, his behavior in prison, the circumstances of his childhood and the pain of his victims, prosecutors and defense lawyers alike sense the gravity of this endgame. this is the jurors and the killer, the jurors and the man inside, shorn of filter and translation. clear.  no one will walk away unscathed. friends of the slain detectives, james v. nemorin and rodney j. andrews, are collecting news accounts of the trial for the five children half-orphaned by the murders. the oldest, christian andrews, 16, testified on tuesday that he misses his father ''giving me a little advice and joking around with me.''  should he read the news accounts, christian will learn that mr. wilson returned to a federal detention center after 9:30 that night and wrote another letter of remorse, spanning more than a page. his lawyers submitted the new letter under seal, seeking to allow its public reading in place of the earlier brief statement.  prosecutors strenuously contested the substitution. ''if mr. wilson wants to speak to the jury at length, he has the right to do so,'' said one prosecutor, jack smith, arguing that the proper forum is the witness stand, where mr. wilson would have to answer the government's questions.  a defense lawyer, kelley j. sharkey, countered that ''mr. smith wants to sanitize this, to prevent the jury from knowing just what it was that was coming from mr. wilson.''  late friday afternoon, judge garaufis ruled that unless mr. wilson is willing to take the witness stand, he will not be allowed to talk to the jury about the prosecutors' arguments, his reaction to christian andrews's testimony, ''difficulties he encountered during his life, how he will comport himself if he is imprisoned rather than sentenced to death, or his purported desire to counsel children not to engage in a life of crime.''  but he will be allowed to state his remorse. that part of his letter has already been heard in the courtroom, though not yet by any of the 24 ears that count.  with the jurors gone and the spectators drifting from the gallery on thursday evening, mr. wilson's lawyer read aloud to the judge: ''i am truly sorry for the pain i have caused. i say again and again, i am so sorry.''  news analysis  