milan takes a pledge of sobriety   strange how mood swings can affect a whole industry. maybe this is not so much the case in the semiconductor business, but in fashion (as with the movie and television trades) people are suddenly swept up in contagious spells of manic behavior, diva tantrums and operatic grandiosity that are then somehow mirrored on the catwalks.  this is not always a bad thing. just as american films of the 1970s might have been a lot duller had fewer directors spent the decade vacuuming white powder through rolled 20s, fashion too has probably benefited from bouts of excess. no sin, no redemption, for one thing, and the italian fashion business has been in serious need of rehab.  ''we had some problems for a while,'' admitted mario boselli, the president of the camera nazionale, the industry's governing trade group. ''before, the business was all starting to go outside to china and india.'' then, mr. boselli added, ''there were problems with quality in those places and people came back.''  they did, but not exactly in droves. after a serious dip in 2005 revenues, the italian fashion industry posted a respectable (although not stellar) overall growth rate of 6 percent in 2006.  if it is not immediately apparent what this has to do with this runway season, consider that -- quietly and with an almost puritanical lack of fuss or ostentation -- the designers here seem to have produced one of the finer showings of italian men's wear in some time.  you might call it a 12-step season, so cautious and deliberate was it. with few exceptions, the shows this past week were built around what one might refer to as sober core values. giorgio armani, for instance, has not often been more in tune with his idiom. the soft suiting and slightly feminized shapes that were his early adaptation to neapolitan tailoring were, for once, not sidetracked by excursions into stuff that looked like costumes for some imaginary summer in 1920s biarritz. there was no kooky headgear, no character pastiche.  true, mr. armani projected photographs of luchino visconti and gabriele d'annunzio above the runway, perhaps to give the show an aristocratic aura. but he kept things quiet and class-appropriate by offering suits in muted dark colors, and with a minimum of pattern, and by also producing forgiving, but not jokey, full trousers that any prosperous dentist would be pleased to wear.  for tomas maier of bottega veneta, the season was frankly an homage to the unsung gods of the neapolitan workrooms. ''it's all about that line,'' he said backstage after a fine show. his affection for what remains the last great italian tailoring tradition was clear from the way suit shoulders were set, using a slight roping effect, a dandyish bit of finesse that mr. maier offset by taking his customary luxury fabrics and stomping the fanciness out of them. some looked as if they'd been dragged behind a car.  a lot was made in the italian news media of donatella versace's quiet collection. ''sober'' was the word tossed around (and it probably always will be now that she has come clean about her past drug problems). there was speculation that her almost clerical collection -- the coats looked just like cassocks, the suits were severe enough to wear when taking a deathbed confession from a mafia don -- came about because this year is the 10th anniversary of gianni versace's death, a date to be marked by a retrospective this summer at the palazzo reale in milan.  the truth may be a little more lighthearted. like everyone else in italy now, ms. versace has been tuning in to a real-life vatican soap opera featuring msgr. georg gänswein, private secretary to pope benedict xvi. handsome and sporty (he used to be a tennis pro), this mediagenic priest has developed so ardent a fan club that it has caused rumblings in the holy see. that monsignor gänswein also happens to be a clotheshorse cannot have escaped ms. versace's attention. she is sure to be aware that his clothes are likely to be tailored at gamarelli, the roman atelier where the most stylish popes and cardinals have had their vestments made for centuries.  this is trivia, albeit trivia with roots deep in the history of a country that very nearly turned tailoring into high art. and although it would be easy to look at some presentations -- like the finely tuned marni show of consuelo castiglioni, whose square cut jackets, fingertip-length coats and cashmere leggings were so low key and assured they were ostentatious in their simplicity -- and gripe about a failure of imagination. ''my impression of the week?'' said michael roberts, the fashion director of vanity fair. ''a blank. what have we seen? a suit, a tie, a jacket. so what?''  the question is fair. but as the filmmaker jean renoir once pointed out, in a letter to ingrid bergman, there is danger in overreaching. the cult of great ideas, renoir wrote, is not always so good for creative people. better, he said, to stick with ''daily, humble work within the framework of a profession.''  it's not a very contemporary approach, and certainly not one destined to get a designer noticed on the red carpet or ''project runway.'' yet without doubt the most bracing experiments this past week involved nothing more radical than a subtle reworking of a label, as christopher bailey did at burberry, ringing numerous able changes on the classic trench coats he unearthed from the archives of a company whose origins were in military uniform supply.  similar restraint was displayed by raf simons at jil sander: there were narrow body-hugging suits, starkly simplified raincoats, blazers of double-faced cashmere, a cloth ms. sander used briefly decades ago and then never again. because mr. simons's approach was so disciplined, almost egoless, it lent the collection a kind of ethereal dimension. it is probable that one will never be able to afford mr. simons's clothing for the sander label. (double-faced cashmere does not come cheap.) so what? one will never be able to afford an agnes martin painting, either, yet it's nice to know that quality of that kind still exists.  it's refreshing, too, to see good work produced by two very dissimilar designers -- miuccia prada and alexander mcqueen -- neither of whom lacks for either ego or vision. but who might have more in common than one would think.  ms. prada is a powerfully cerebral designer; mr. mcqueen is a creator who works almost entirely from intuition and a wealth of sartorial skill.  each designs clothing that can sometimes seem to derive less from an interest in commerce than from other and less obvious compulsions. each has a powerful narrative drive. (mr. mcqueen's shows typically merit a separate review as works of theater.) each is obsessed with the way class is expressed through the medium of an image language. each is made manifestly uneasy by the formal constraints dictated by the human body and not the least of those involving sex. in another culture -- hindu, perhaps -- ms. prada's and mr. mcqueen's mutual interest in sexual plurality would not be so striking. here, they seem to be struggling for a way to clothe a third gender.  ms. prada this season slashed her shapes to the point where the models resembled constructivist dolls, barely able to balance on their soles. she put men in stirrup trousers, sent a model or two onto the runway in a hairy fronted sleeveless sweater that brought barney rubble to mind, made shortish jackets that were both lean and somehow boxy, and once again secured her position as the sole italian designer who influences everyone.  the shapes at mr. mcqueen's show were more rigid and armorial; boiler suits, shaped neoprene coats with outsize shoulders, the outline dictated by the way the unyielding material was pieced and seamed along the top. his use of plastics, x-ray prints, traditional men's suitings like prince of wales checks were supposed to suggest some sort of clash between civilization and atavism. in a venus in furs way, they did.  unlike mcqueen or prada, frida giannini, the stylist (''designer'' is probably not the right word) at gucci has an operative relationship to sexual presentation that is so uncomplicated and kittenlike that she makes her predecessor tom ford seem like some tortured soul at a judith butler seminar. ms. giannini's show was as sexually transparent as the others were freighted or obscure.  in a way, it was not a fashion show at all. with its fur benches and fieldstone fireplace, the show resembled the set for an andy williams special in aspen, circa the days when the magnesia-voiced crooner was still married to claudine longet.  life was an innocent romp when the world and gucci were young. people wore fur boots, as they did on ms. giannini's runway. they wore fur parkas and carried fur totes (to keep their fur wallets warm) and if, as it actually happened, the williams marriage would turn out to have been a mess; and ms. longet and mr. williams would eventually divorce; and ms. longet would take as her lover the skiing star spider sabich, whom she would shoot and kill in a tabloid-tale incident for which she was sentenced to 30 days (she performed community service), these small details should not detract from what is of true significance here. everybody really does look sort of groovy in zillionaire ski bum clothes.  fashion review  