webdenda: people and accounts of note   kiran advani joined zapwater communications, chicago, as group director. she had been running her own media relations and specialty-marketing agency and before that managed public relations and special events for the terra museum of american art, chicago.  american advertising federation, washington, elected seven additional members to its advertising hall of fame. they will be honored at a luncheon in new york on march 20. the new honorees are: david bell, chairman emeritus at the interpublic group of companies; vincent t. cullers, former president and chief executive at the vince cullers group; roquel (billy) davis, former music director and senior vice president at mccann erickson; bruce gordon, former president for retail markets at verizon communications; arthur ochs sulzberger, chairman emeritus at the new york times company; stuart b. upson, chairman emeritus at saatchi & saatchi; and robert l. wehling, former global marketing and government relations officer at the procter & gamble company.  jan-eric anderson joined barkley, kansas city, mo., formerly known as barkley evergreen & partners, as vice president and group account director. he had been vice president and media director at starcom worldwide, chicago, part of the starcom mediavest group unit of the publicis groupe.  avenue a/razorfish, seattle, part of aquantive, is entering japan with what it calls a ''significant capital investment'' in digital palette, tokyo, an interactive agency owned by dentsu. financial terms were not disclosed. digital palette will be renamed, as of feb. 1, dentsu/avenue a/razorfish.  scott bassen and stewart devlin joined the new york office of taxi. mr. bassen becomes associate creative director; he had been a group creative director at deutsch, new york, part of the interpublic group of companies. mr. devlin becomes design creative director, a new post; he had most recently been a freelance design director.  risa bernstein, who helped found flashpoint medica, new york, part of the omnicom group, is returning to the agency and resuming her post as a managing partner, working with the other two founders, helen appelbaum, chief operating officer, and charlene prounis, managing partner. ms. bernstein took a leave from the agency in july 2005 to deal with a family medical emergency.  the chicago transit authority awarded titan worldwide, new york, a three-year contract, effective feb. 1, to sell advertising media. the contract had previously been handled by cbs outdoor, owned by the cbs corporation.  lisa devriese joined doner, southfield, mich., as senior vice president and account director, responsible for managing the daily operations of several direct-marketing accounts as the agency increases its focus on direct marketing. ms. devriese had most recently been senior manager and director for the direct marketing group at the troy, mich., office of bbdo worldwide, part of the omnicom group.  moksha fitzgibbons, advertising director at complex magazine, new york, was promoted to associate publisher, a new post. also, jeanette lukasik, an advertising sales coordinator, was promoted to account manager, and kelly mccabe, fashion assistant, was promoted to market editor. complex is owned by the designer marc ecko.  mary ann frerman joined westwayne, atlanta, as vice president and creative department manager, a new post. she had most recently been creative department manager at hamilton partners, healdsburg, calif.  beth goss joined turner broadcasting system, new york, part of time warner, as executive vice president of the cartoon network's advertising sales, marketing and enterprises group. she assumes duties from kim mcquilken, who left last summer to pursue other interests outside turner, the company said. ms. goss had been executive vice president for the consumer products group at universal pictures, part of the nbc universal unit of the general electric company.  stephanie hanaway joined the american academy of family physicians, leawood, kan., as director for its publications division and publisher for its three medical journals: american family physician, annals of family medicine and family practice management. she succeeds joetta melton, who is retiring. ms. hanaway had been director for event media sales at ascend media, overland park, kan.  david hensley joined the london office of lippincott mercer, part of the mercer specialty consulting unit of the marsh & mclennan companies, as a senior partner. he had run his own consulting company, hensley partners, and before that was managing partner at vivaldi partners and consulting director at futurebrand.  tony imperato, associate publisher at ladies' home journal, new york, owned by the meredith corporation, was named publisher of another meredith magazine, country home. he succeeds amy wilkins, who is leaving to pursue other opportunities, the company said.  katherine johnson, vice president for turner entertainment promotions and marketing, new york, was promoted to senior vice president. turner entertainment is part of the turner broadcasting system unit of time warner.  lg electronics worldwide, seoul, south korea, chose y&r advertising, part of the young & rubicam brands unit of the wpp group, as agency of record for a new line of full-high-definition, flat-screen tv sets. the y&r new york office will manage the assignment, to create campaigns that are to start appearing in the spring. spending has not been determined. y&r and a subsidiary, brandbuzz, create campaigns for lg in countries like mexico, south africa, turkey and the united states. y&r was awarded the assignment after a review between the agency and euro rscg worldwide, which creates campaigns for lg in markets like europe and latin america.  jeff odiorne joined the neiman group, harrisburg, pa., as partner and executive creative director. he assumes duties from rudy banny, who left in september to open tattoo, an agency in charlotte, n.c. mr. odiorne had been a partner and co-director at phasmatrope studios, haverford, pa., and before that was a founder of odiorne wilde narraway & partners, san francisco, now defunct.  matt orser and alvaro ramos solanes joined la comunidad, miami as art directors. mr. orser came from carmichael lynch, minneapolis, part of the interpublic group of companies, and mr. solanes from the lima, peru, office of leo burnett worldwide, part of the publicis groupe.  pinnacle foods, mountain lakes, n.j., chose three agencies for various packaged-foods products with combined spending estimated at $40 million. merkley & partners, new york, part of the omnicom group, will handle aunt jemima frozen breakfasts, duncan hines baking mixes and mrs. butterworth's syrups. nelson henry, minneapolis, will handle armour canned meats and lender's bagels. and publicis & hal riney, san francisco, part of the publicis groupe, will handle hungry man frozen dinners, mrs. paul's seafood, van de kamp's seafood and vlasic pickles. fogarty klein monroe, houston, had been the lead agency for pinnacle.  bob scarpelli, chairman and chief creative officer at ddb worldwide, part of the omnicom group, will serve as the president of two juries at the 2007 international advertising festival in cannes, france. mr. scarpelli will lead the film (commercial) jury and the press (print) jury. the 54th annual festival is scheduled to be held on june 17 to 23.  susan solano, vice president for marketing at telemundo, miami, was named senior vice president for consumer marketing. she assumes most of the duties of michelle bella, who became vice president for advertising sales marketing; ms. bella's duties for on-air promotions have been assumed by carlos bardasano, executive vice president for entertainment. telemundo is part of the nbc universal unit of the general electric company.  eric webber, vice president and communications director at gsd&m, austin, tex., part of the omnicom group, left to open webber/mcj communications, austin, with two partners, mark mcgarrah and bryan jessee. the new agency, specializing in public relations, is separate from mcgarrah/jessee, which is owned by mr. mcgarrah and mr. jessee, who also formerly worked at gsd&m.  wildlife conservation society, new york, named deutsch, new york, part of the interpublic group of companies, as its agency of record for the creative and media duties on its account. the creative assignment had been handled by y&r, new york, part of the young & rubicam brands division of the wpp group, and the media assignment by mediaedge:cia, new york, also part of wpp. spending has not been determined. the society oversees the new york aquarium and four zoos: the bronx zoo, the central park zoo, the prospect park zoo and the queens zoo.  wyse advertising, cleveland, was sold by lois and marc wyse, who founded the agency in 1951, to a group of employees led by michael marino, president and chief executive. financial terms were not disclosed. the new ownership team also includes sharyn hinman, creative director; dave jankowski, account management director; and margaret weitzel, administration director.  drew zoller joined enterprise ig, new york, part of the wpp group, as vice president for business development, a new post. he had been running cordster, new york, a consumer-product company that he founded in 2004.  webdenda  