in n.f.l., violence sells, but at what cost?   by the time i reached him late thursday afternoon, gene upshaw had already read the article in the new york times about andre waters, the philadelphia eagles safety who committed suicide in november after years of battling depression. one neuropathologist said the condition might have been related to the concussions that waters sustained as a professional football player.  upshaw, speaking from his office in washington, said he had known waters.  ''i just got him into an n.f.l. europe internship where he could coach, because he was coaching at some small university,'' said upshaw, the head of the n.f.l. players association. ''when we heard about it, it was one of those things where you couldn't believe it.''  upshaw sounded annoyed by the buzz created by the article. ''i think everyone is getting a little riled up because this guy's out there trying to sell this damn book,'' he said. upshaw was referring to chris nowinski, author of ''head games: football's concussion crisis.''  nowinski's book offers an eye-opening look into an n.f.l. quagmire, and i think that upshaw, in his heart of hearts, knows nowinski is doing more than trying to sell books. he's shedding light on one of the n.f.l.'s most persistently haunting safety issues.  upshaw represents 1,500 latter-day gladiators known as professional football players who rent their bodies for use in a violent sport. few come out unscathed, and many will not know the real damage to their minds and bodies until years after they retire. waters might or might not have been a casualty of mild traumatic brain injury, but there is enough evidence to scare the daylights out of anyone who played the game, especially in the n.f.l., for any length of time.  ''we all get alarmed when we see something like this,'' upshaw said, referring to the article about waters. ''but it's not like we've been just sitting on our hands. that's what's being implied here, that no one is looking at this, that no one's studying this, that no one cares about this. if that was true, i'm irresponsible and i haven't been doing my job, and neither has the n.f.l.''  his job, of course, in partnership with the n.f.l., is facilitating violence; it's been a job well done.  what can you do about concussions in a sport whose popularity is rooted in violent collisions?  bizarre as it sounds, boxing has an effective method of dealing with concussions: a fighter who sustains one is not allowed to fight for at least a month. in contrast, a football player who sustains a concussion can return to the game.  a football player who sustains a concussion should not return to the game in which the injury occurred and should be held out for at least one game, perhaps more, depending on the severity of the concussion.  upshaw doesn't seem to like the idea. ''the last thing that we want to do and the n.f.l. wants to do, and it's the last thing i want to do as a union, is to mandate something that's not medically proven,'' he said. ''that's why we have doctors.''  every n.f.l. team puts its players through a baseline neurological test. when a player sustains a concussion or head injury, the team retests the athlete to make sure he is back to normal, or near normal, before allowing him to play. during a game last month, the jets' laveranues coles sustained a mild concussion. he was allowed to play in the same game. he also played the next week.  coles's situation gets to the heart of the concussion problem. in a league driven by ferocious competition, a league in which the athletes have virtually no job security, players must be protected from themselves.  coles could have said, and probably should have said, that he wouldn't play. even when the jets cleared coles to play, if he wasn't feeling right, he should have gotten a second opinion and opted out.  ''players are going to always say they're fine because they want to play,'' upshaw said. ''they did it when i was playing and they do it now.''  upshaw knows better than anyone that players will always go back on the field, healthy or not, concussion or not.  ''they're protected as well as they can be,'' said dr. thomas mayer, the union's medical adviser. ''but this is a warrior mentality, this is a warrior sport.'' football is a violent and often brutal game. players love it; fans love it; so do the news media. we hype it, we celebrate it, we promote it. there will be plays during this weekend's postseason games when a receiver is reduced to jelly or a quarterback is crushed by a blindside tackle. thanks to high-definition television, the violence is so clear and graphic you can practically see the brain shifting in a player's cranium.  once upon a time, when players fought for their rights, upshaw was like the good shepherd. he watched over the flock and went to extraordinary lengths to fight for even that one lamb who went astray. but the flock has grown, and the stakes are higher. everything, violence included, has become corporate-minded.  i've read the new commissioner's statements and sifted through the doctor's studies. but the life and tragic death of andre waters is the only thing that resonates, the only thing that's truly real.  upshaw must get back to being the good shepherd. even one lost lamb is one too many.  sports of the times e-mail: wcr@nytimes.com  