flames flare over naked shorts   unsuspecting readers of certain stock message boards may be forgiven for believing they have stumbled into a flame war among 14-year-old boys. but the increasingly vicious online dispute actually involves, among others, the chief executive of a publicly traded corporation and a longtime business journalist.  the chief executive is patrick byrne, who in recent years has taken to asserting that a vast conspiracy of securities traders, journalists and government officials is bent on bringing down the stock of his company, overstock.com, a peddler of excess inventory. the journalist is gary weiss, the author and former businessweek reporter who has made a second career out of ridiculing mr. byrne on his blog (garyweiss.blogspot.com).  entries on message boards devoted to discussing overstock.com asserted that mr. byrne was behind an anonymously written web site, antisocialmedia.net, that focused on bashing critics of overstock and of mr. byrne's crusade against so-called naked short selling (a complicated form of trading borrowed shares that is explained at wikipedia.com). mr. byrne denied knowing who ran the site, though he publicly supported it (investorvillage.com).  the site has had little to say about naked shorting or overstock. rather, it is devoted to combing through message boards and other web sites to present ''proof'' that mr. weiss misrepresented himself on amazon, wikipedia and other sites to promote his own books and settle personal scores.  beyond calling the accusations ''lies,'' mr. weiss hasn't addressed most of the details of the site's ''findings,'' though he denied having edited wikipedia entries under a pseudonym. instead, he pointed out that mr. byrne has himself posted under pseudonyms on various message boards.  mr. weiss became especially exercised after the new york post reported last week that the anonymous operator of antisocialmedia was judd bagley, overstock's director for social media. calling mr. bagley ''hideous'' and a ''nauseating spectacle,'' mr. weiss lit into mr. byrne and his online lieutenant in post after post (presumably during breaks from writing his column for forbes.com and his next book).  mr. bagley owned up to running the site (eliciting the headline ''sleazey mcsleaze admits to sleaziness'' from dealbreaker.com), and mr. byrne set about defending him. ''judd is a reporter,'' he wrote. ''the first amendment applies to us, too'' because ''we citizens are the journalists.'' he also wrote that antisocialmedia ''receives support from neither myself nor overstock.''  in december 2004, about when mr. byrne began talking publicly about a naked shorting ''conspiracy,'' overstock shares traded at $72. by nov. 5, 2006, just before overstock released third-quarter results showing widening losses and declining revenue, the stock was at $17.78. on dec. 21, the motley fool columnist seth jayson declared it ''the worst stock for 2007'' (fool.com). the shares closed yesterday at $14.43.  wall street's priorities -- michael lewis, in his column this week for bloomberg news, noted that in 1998, the most-read stories on the financial news service tended toward the ''bizarre and macabre.'' in 2006, they tended to focus more on wall street, but not in a good way. bloomberg readers last year showed ''an overwhelming interest'' in ''stories that implicate, in one way or another, what wall street people might be paid at the end of the year.''  and even the most popular topic, the fall of the hedge fund amaranth advisors, revealed a certain self-absorption. the most compelling stories about amaranth's implosion were bypassed in favor of those that focused on ''three simple questions: who won, who lost and, above all, how much?'' (bloomberg.com).  trivial pursuit -- since so many inventions and ideas are called ''the best thing since sliced bread'' it seems unfair that otto frederick rohwedder, who invented it in 1928, isn't as well known as thomas edison. but mr. rohwedder gets his due on the i did not know that yesterday blog, which is loaded with facts like that (ididnotknowthatyesterday.blogspot.com).  dan mitchell  what's online  