patent trial near, bristol-myers counts on resilience   bristol-myers squibb staggered, but the drug maker has remained on its feet.  that is the view of the company's interim chief executive, james m. cornelius, who on friday compared the company's struggle with a generic competitor to a boxing competition.  ''a less resilient, less solid management and employee base would have crumbled under a billion-dollar hit,'' mr. cornelius said during an interview at a company office here. ''we took a body blow, but we didn't go down for the count.''  mr. cornelius said the damage from last summer's market onslaught by a generic copy of bristol-myers's blockbuster drug plavix, a blood thinner, would exceed $1 billion, but the company had ''more or less'' already made up the money.  the financial details of that comeback, he said, will be revealed next thursday when the company releases its fourth-quarter results.  the blow was dealt last summer by the canadian company apotex, which sold its plavix imitator for only three weeks in august, before a federal judge ordered a halt. but during that period an estimated six-month supply of generic plavix flooded the united states market.  the episode followed bungled efforts to settle a patent dispute with apotex. and it eventually cost the bristol-myers chief executive at the time, peter r. dolan, his job.  apotex has hardly gone away, though. even as mr. cornelius expressed optimism yesterday about the company's future, lawyers were making final preparations to begin a trial monday in federal court in manhattan. there, bristol-myers and its marketing partner, the french company sanofi-aventis, will defend the plavix patent against the apotex challenge.  the trial's outcome will be critical for bristol-myers, which derives nearly a third of its revenue from plavix. the drug's 2005 sales in this country were $3.8 billion and its use is growing. worldwide sales of plavix exceeded $6 billion in 2005, making it the second-largest drug, behind lipitor from pfizer.  in a four-week trial where much of the testimony is expected to involve scientific minutiae, bristol-myers and sanofi will be asking judge sidney h. stein to uphold their plavix patent.  ''starting monday is an important historic event for this company,'' mr. cornelius said, adding that the company was so optimistic about its chances of winning the case that it is proceeding to break ground on a $750 million biologic drug plant in devens, mass.  bristol-myers plans to give more details of its 2006 performance, including how it has compensated for the lost plavix sales, on thursday. the company has been predicting that earnings for the year will wind up at 97 cents a share.  ''i don't think we're going to disappoint anybody,'' said mr. cornelius, who is in some ways bristol-myers' accidental chief executive.  nearly a year ago, after a long career at the drug maker eli lilly and then a stint as chairman and interim chief executive of the device maker guidant, mr. cornelius thought he had engineered an early retirement from the pressured environment of big corporations.  after closing the $27 billion sale of guidant to boston scientific, following an exhaustive takeover battle with johnson & johnson, mr. cornelius had planned to settle into a new life dominated by charity volunteering, long stretches at his second home in maui and avid support for the indianapolis colts.  an indianapolis resident, he owns colts season tickets on the 42-yard line.  but mr. cornelius, who is 63, said he ''parachuted in, a somewhat reluctant volunteer'' to take the reins of bristol-myers in september after mr. dolan's ouster. mr. cornelius had served on the bristol-myers squibb board.  since then, the company's board has continued a search for a permanent replacement for mr. dolan -- mr. cornelius said he was not interested in the job -- and also has been exploring a sale or merger of the $52 billion company.  even as the patent trial begins, the company is the target of a federal investigation focusing on whether it violated federal antitrust laws in its attempt earlier last year to settle the litigation with apotex.  when those settlement talks unraveled, apotex flooded the united states market with its generic version of the drug before judge stein ordered distribution to stop, ruling that it was likely that the plavix patent would be upheld.  despite the judge's ruling, apotex had already shipped enough of its version of the drug that prescriptions for plavix plunged 32 percent in the third quarter.  the stock took a hit, too. bristol-myers shares, which had traded at nearly $26 in july, fell to just above $20 in august. the stock has since recovered, closing friday at $26.63 -- a level that mr. cornelius said was partly a result of the company's strong pipeline of new products.  mr. cornelius said yesterday that the market for blood thinners was still working through the remaining inventory of apotex's drug, clopidogrel bisulfate, but that more than half of prescriptions were now being filled with the bristol-myers product, and its share was growing steadily.  the trial also comes at an important time for united states patent law, in which courts lately have generally favored innovator companies. meanwhile, a supreme court ruling is expected this year on a patent case, ksr international v. teleflex inc., involving automotive gas pedals.  the key issue in that case -- the question of what constitutes an ''obvious'' and, hence, invalid patent -- could have a bearing on the plavix patent.  among other arguments, apotex has claimed that the formula for plavix would have been obvious to a scientist, based on an older patent that expired in 2003. judge stein had rejected that argument during preliminary proceedings.  ''if ksr raises the bar for nonobviousness, judge stein may need to rethink his conclusion that the plavix patent is not obvious,'' said c. scott hemphill, an associate professor of law at columbia university.  mr. cornelius said the company had other options if apotex won the plavix case. ''if we lose we have a backup plan that changes the nature of everything we do, but we don't plan on losing,'' he said.  instead, he said, he sees 2007 as the beginning of a new era for the company, which recently signed a $1.35 billion deal with astrazeneca to jointly develop two diabetes compounds. the company is also entertaining the idea of finding partners for some of its other products in the development pipeline, he said.  ''when i first joined eli lilly, everybody said, 'i hope lilly can someday be like bristol-myers squibb,' '' mr. cornelius said, acknowledging that bristol-myers was no longer the industry role model. ''i'd like to get it back there. that's the target -- '07 is going to be the beginning of that.''  correction:  january 23, 2007, tuesday  an article in business day on saturday, about efforts by the drug maker bristol-myers squibb to recover from a competitive challenge to its best-selling blood thinner, plavix, misstated the board's position on potential merger or takeover deals involving the company. while bristol-myers executives have said repeatedly that they would be open to considering such deals, the board has not actively pursued a merger or sale.  