what's on   8 p.m. (animal planet, discovery) ocean's deadliest -- they're awfully pretty, but the crystalline waters off australia's eastern shore are teeming with some of the most dangerous creatures on earth. in this documentary, steve irwin's final (he was killed by a stingray during its filming), irwin (above, with a stonefish) and phillipe cousteau, the grandson of jacques cousteau, plunge into its depths to get close to salt-water crocodiles, venomous sea snakes, a blueringed octopus and great white sharks, and examine their places in the ecosystem. at 9:30, teri irwin, the widow of steve irwin, and other family members and friends look back on the life of the crocodile hunter and reflect on his legacy in ''crikey, what an adventure!''  7:30 p.m. (11) reba -- who goes there? reba discovers that brock has been living secretly in the garage for several days to spend time apart from barbra jean.  8 p.m. (nbc) grease: you're the one that i want -- a crop of potential sandys and dannys undergo a weeklong intensive training with professional acting, dancing and singing coaches before judges send the best 12 on to the next round.  9 p.m. (13, 49) jane eyre -- ruth wilson (left) plays the title role in this new ''masterpiece theater'' adaptation of charlotte brontë's gothic novel about a spirited but plain governess who falls in love with the manor's brooding owner, mr. rochester (toby stephens). francesca annis is lady ingram, who has him in her sights for her daughter, blanche (christina cole).  9 p.m. (sci fi) the dresden files -- a 10-year-old boy comes to harry dresden (paul blackthorne), private eye, claiming that monsters are after him in this new supernatural detective series based on books by jim butcher. he may be right. and if anyone can see them, it's dresden: he's a wizard.  9 p.m. (nbc) the apprentice: los angeles -- carey got fired last week, despite his argument that there was a market for his very brief swim trunks. (and that doesn't count donald trump, who suggested he could wear them, if only they weren't pink.) tonight, last week's losers compete against each other to create hollywood sightseeing tours, while the winners get to take the week off.  10 p.m. (hbo) extras -- andy (ricky gervais) runs into david bowie in a club's v.i.p. area. but what's that song he's singing?  10 p.m. (showtime) the l word -- l is for lassoed: bette's boss, phyllis (cybill shepherd, right), decides to get in on the action at the planet. meanwhile, bette's (jennifer beals) teaching assistant has a thing for the teacher.  kathryn shattuck  