brodeur goes about his business: winning   his 35th birthday is less than four months away, and the devils' martin brodeur is beginning to sound like a goaltender who has been around a while. he says he now appreciates recognition much more.  but he is not fading away, either. he appears to be in the midst of a resurgence. midway through what could turn into his finest season, brodeur leads the n.h.l. with eight shutouts, and his goals against average has dipped below 2.00, the thin line between being brilliant and very good.  brodeur has never posted more than 11 shutouts, and the last time he finished with a goals against average of less than 2.00 was in 1998, when the devils had won only one stanley cup. brodeur says he has been peppered with the same questions: is his technique better? is he in better shape? is he more focused on the game because he is older?  ''i haven't changed anything,'' he said friday. he says that he is just being consistent.  last season, the devils started slowly, which led to the resignation of coach larry robinson. they did not hit their stride under the interim coach, lou lamoriello, until 20 games remained. lamoriello retreated to his general manager's office after the season and hired claude julien, whose coaching strategy is similar to his. julien, a former coach of the montreal canadiens, pulled together the devils quickly. the devils (28-14-5), who play philadelphia on saturday in their final game before the all-star game break, are 9-1-2 since christmas.  ''it's nice to jump back in the mix, to be a team that people respect, to be dominant again,'' brodeur said. ''the stability with the team, as far as the lines and everything are concerned, has stayed the same to a certain extent from day 1.''  during a career that began march 26, 1992, brodeur has usually played down his contributions. julien clearly likes that characteristic. as competitive as brodeur is, he gauges himself on the team's success.  ''he's very down to earth, and he's always team oriented,'' julien said. ''even though all of these things are happening to him record-wise, he's always team first.''  brodeur now passes milestones regularly. with a 2-0 victory against the flyers on dec. 8, he moved into second place on the career goaltenders list with 462 victories. he moved into third place, past glenn hall, with his 85th career shutout dec. 26.  ''i think he's in one of his zones,'' defenseman paul martin said. ''even when he's not in a zone, he's one of the best goaltenders in the game.''  brodeur did not pause. he shut out the islanders four days later. he shut out the canadiens in montreal on jan. 7, and three days after he lost a shutout in the last second of regulation in a 2-1 overtime victory against the islanders, he defeated the rangers, 1-0.  ''we're not winning games, 5-4, because we're not a high-scoring team,'' said the captain, patrik elias. ''marty's been awfully good and strong in tight games. he just goes about his business and works hard at practice. that makes us better.''  the devils practice on the lesser-used rink at richard j. codey arena, which the locals still call by its original name, south mountain arena. the workouts draw a handful of spectators, and the devils move through drills with quiet precision.  but brodeur is chattering away at his teammates, usually at the far end of the ice from the locker room. he is issuing challenges. julien said brodeur liked to create competitions for the devils because they made him sharper. he craves close games.  after the most recent game against the islanders, brodeur said, ''it's hard mentally to play games that are meaningless.''  the devils continue to be chided by their critics for a style that is perceived to be dull. they have the second-best record in the eastern conference, but they are 13th among 15 teams in goals.  their games are often compared with chess matches -- the devils wait for a mistake and pounce on their opponent. brodeur affords them that luxury.  ''he's going to make the big, big saves,'' right wing sergei brylin said. ''it's not like you can make stupid mistakes, but there's going to be a pretty good chance he's going to stop the puck for us if something does happen.''  hockey  