knowing noreen   lisa belkin's inability to accept that she left her children with some hybrid of a sociopath has left her still emotionally entangled with the woman a decade after the fact (jan. 7). belkin says you can know about a person only ''what he or she allows you to see.'' but she chose to ignore all manner of things about noreen mulholland that made her uncomfortable. belkin seems to think mulholland's worst sin was that she could not admit that she was wrong: ''she couldn't admit fault -- even to herself. i was furious with her.'' that sounds more like belkin's criticism of herself for hiring a woman who scared her 5-year-old son.  ellen freilich  new york  belkin's story was new to me in the extremity of its details but familiar in its emotions. i've often thought about an element absent from the narrative: class. we of the middle class recognize our desperation for someone (sometimes anyone) to relieve us of the time constraints of raising children, but what about the desperation of those working-class women we depend on? to fulfill the unrealistic expectations of their employers, on whom they depend for their income, they must develop, or seem to develop, an instantaneous ''love'' for children with whom they have no real bond. financially, child care is one of the least desirable jobs; small wonder it attracts people who have few other options.  kathleen ossip  hastings-on-hudson, n.y.  belkin, who had once written to the baby sitter that she ''must have come from a loving family to show such love,'' was told by the woman, ''wow, did i put one over on you.'' judging by belkin's response, she seemed to feel that she was conned. however, as a therapist, i can say it reminds me of one of the axioms that 12-step programs espouse; ''fake it until you make it.'' i think the baby sitter, by acting loving, in fact did feel friendship for the family and was trying to push her life in a healthier direction. i don't think fooling belkin was the goal. but i agree that the woman's inability to acknowledge and deal with her problems led to her eventual downfall.  elaine m. edelman  east brunswick, n.j.  noreen told lisa belkin that ''kids lie,'' and this may be true. however, if a child tells a parent that someone ''scares me,'' it certainly doesn't seem prudent to tell the alleged scarer what the child has confided to the parent, even if that parent ''trusts'' the baby sitter at this point.  ruth harvey  chatham, n.j.  i'll bet that despite belkin's stated intentions, many mothers are casting a sideways glance at their informally trained hired help, wondering what darkness might lie within.  julie goldstein  west hartford, conn.  why noreen mulholland was employed by naas general hospital, in the capacity of night nurse, despite her failure to pass muster at blackrock, a clinic in dublin, is a question for the irish to answer. a pertinent question for an american journalist to investigate might be how such a person could graduate from an american nursing school, with honors, and then be found to be such an unsuitable candidate for the field by a respected clinic in another country -- and go on to prove the tragic truth of that finding.  claire h. lambe  woodstock, n.y.  