judith hernandez and christopher castro   christopher castro had no worries about where his fiancée was, even though she was more than an hour late for their wedding on dec. 30. he calmly placated the guests and the minister fidgeting in the crowded chapel. he had been in tighter spots with his tardy bride, and this, after all, was just a late limousine.  judith hernandez and mr. castro are new york city police officers and, as onetime partners in the department's housing bureau, they made heroic rescues during the 9/11 attacks.  the searing memory of that day -- how they cheated death together, the lives they saved together, and those they could not save -- pulled them steadily closer afterward, as did the year of 16-hour days they spent together sifting through the ruins at ground zero. it finally persuaded them to end their police partnership and become partners in marriage.  as they stood exchanging vows and lighting candles, ms. hernandez, 42, and mr. castro, 33, said that they could not help but think about how they stood together five years ago watching the chaos around them.  on that day in 2001, mr. castro, ms. hernandez and another officer working with them, steven oemcke, were near city hall in a patrol car when the first plane hit the north tower. all three entered that tower looking for injured people to evacuate from the sublevels of the building. when the south tower collapsed, it rocked the north tower and spewed smoke and debris into the concourse below.  ''chris and i called out to each other and realized neither of us were hurt,'' ms. hernandez said.  when ms. hernandez recognized that officer oemcke was unaccounted for, she began searching in the dark. the collapse had thrown him down an escalator, where he was unconscious with severe back and shoulder injuries. she found him by feeling her way along until she came across officer oemcke's gun belt, said ms. hernandez, who is just over 5-foot-1 and weighs 110 pounds. when she yelled his name, he regained consciousness. ''i crawled under him and carried him on my shoulders two levels up the broken escalators,'' she said.  no easy task -- officer oemcke is six feet tall and weighs 190 pounds.  they soon reunited with mr. castro on an upper concourse, and he helped her carry the injured officer to the street and to safety just before the second building trembled and collapsed. for her efforts, ms. hernandez was awarded the medal of honor by the police department, its highest award for an officer.  ''as horrible as that day was, it brought us closer together,'' ms. hernandez said. ''the more we thought back on it, we realized we valued our relationship more than if we hadn't gone through it. so many people around us died, we wondered if god had a different plan for both of us.''  at that time, they had been partners on the force for six months. ms. hernandez was in a serious relationship and was known among her fellow officers for being chatty with the public and for being able to tolerate paperwork and tedious departmental duties and details.  mr. castro, at 6-foot-3, was strong and silent and married. a former marine, mr. castro was known as the poker-faced enforcer. each had young children.  ''we formed a strong bond immediately,'' ms. hernandez said. ''we were like brother and sister, or best friends. we just did everything together.'' that included spending time with their kids and attending each other's family functions.  but the two kept it platonic.  ''your partner is your lifeline, so we didn't want to ruin the partnership,'' mr. castro said. ''so starting a romantic relationship was not an option.''  by 2004, her boyfriend was gone and mr. castro's marriage had ended in divorce. he had been assigned as a youth officer, so they were no longer partners.  in the summer of 2004 mr. castro and ms. hernandez, who had never been married, had their first true date. they walked the streets and parks near the neighborhood that they once patrolled, and they wondered if they could be as good together as a couple as they were as partners.  three months later they decided to spend a week together in las vegas without the children. the only real reminder of their everyday lives was the fake skyline on the new york new york hotel.  ''we were just two people in a place where no one knew us, and we tried to get to know each other as civilians, without all the other stuff between us,'' she said. ''on the plane coming back, chris turned to me, and in a way that wasn't by the book and professional, he told me he loved me. when we got back to new york we were ready to begin our life together.''  they decided to combine their households and lives. ''at this point we knew this was it,'' ms. hernandez said.  her sons, cesar rosa, 13, and christian brian ruiz, 18, had grown attached to mr. castro. so when their mother told them that she and mr. castro were going to marry, they cheered.  cesar and christian attended their wedding with mr. castro's children, christopher emil, 9; kristian, 3; and mariah, 4. they and the couples' extended families all watched as the rev. julio mercado, an interfaith minister, officiated at astoria world manor in queens.  jacqueline colon, 44, a recently retired police officer who had worked with the bride and bridegroom said that ''9/11 was definitely their awakening day.'' she was sitting at a table during the reception with a group of police officers, including mr. oemcke, who has also retired.  mr. oemcke looked out toward ms. hernandez, who was dancing the salsa with her father, and mr. castro, who was dancing with his children. ''i wouldn't be alive if not for them,'' he said.  the bride was in a reflective mood in the days before the wedding and spoke about how during their patrols together she and mr. castro would find themselves discussing what it was each wanted in a relationship. both had expressed a desire, she said, for ''someone family oriented and professional and who sees things through, and is a good parent.''  ''we finally realized we were describing each other,'' she said.  weddings/celebrations: vows  