care in old age: confronting the inevitable   ''my mother absolutely refuses to discuss any of this stuff,'' my friend linda said grumbling as we walked out of our exercise class in montclair, n.j. .  the hard stuff, she meant. the questions about what will happen if her mother -- who is 80 and starting to develop heart problems, dizziness, the usual unwelcome signals -- grows seriously ill or too frail to manage her own care. the stuff everyone should talk through before a crisis hits, but hardly anyone can bear to.  linda thinks her stepfather may have some sort of legal document, or maybe her cousin does, but she doesn't really know. her attempts to gently raise the subject of the future lead only to brusque dismissals. so one day -- in three years or three weeks, who can say? -- linda will have to embark not only on a crash course in elder care, but possibly an exercise in mind-reading as well. worse, she may face combat with other family members who have other ideas.  i tend to have such conversations a lot lately, as people learn i'm working on a book about families who care for aging parents. everybody's got a story.  and their stories make me particularly grateful for my father.  he's 84, in reasonably good health and so busy -- between runs to pick up the morning paper for neighbors, volunteer envelope-stuffing, synagogue events and regular poker games -- that my sister and i often have trouble reaching him on the phone. ''up and around,'' he reports jauntily when i finally get through. ''can't complain.''  i don't want to canonize my dad. he's not the go-to guy for heartfelt talk about emotional matters. we probably should forswear all debate about the middle east. and he's so cheap -- though always generous to my sister and me -- that when he and a friend realized they were sending their discover card payments to the same address, they started mailing them in a single envelope to save postage. (when the company understandably misapplied one's check to the other's account, did they suspend the practice? no, they merely began stapling their checks to their payment stubs, thus preserving an annual savings of $2.34 apiece.) he can, in short, be maddening.  but my father is  admirably clear-eyed about what lies ahead. several years ago, for no urgent reason except that he's an even bigger believer in ''be prepared'' than the boy scouts, he and my mother sold their little bungalow with the steep porch steps. they moved into an apartment building with an elevator, and when she developed terminal cancer not long afterward, we were relieved that they had.  now that dad's on his own, we've had long discussions about things like someday hiring aides so he can stay in his south jersey apartment (too isolating, he thinks) versus moving into assisted living. we have even toured a couple of local assisted living places, debating whether one's too spartan, another unnecessarily chandeliered.  at times, i'm aware that his realism has limits. dad was alarmed by the tiny closet in one of the assisted living apartments. ''i'd have to get rid of a lot of stuff,'' he muttered, most likely imagining his energetic self in this new setting, not a weakened man who may not require an extensive wardrobe.  but he knows he's not immortal. when i drive down to visit, he leads me into the den to show me, once more, the important papers, all signed and witnessed.  one folder holds the advance directive for health care, authorizing me to make ''any and all health care decisions  including decisions to accept or to refuse any treatment,'' if he is unable to make them himself.  in another, he has stored the durable power of attorney that allows my sister and me to handle his financial affairs and ''do whatsoever they think necessary on my behalf'' if he's incapacitated. it also contains his will.  it's startling how few people have taken these steps. only 29 percent of americans have drafted a living will or an advance directive, the pew research center reported earlier this year. even among severely or terminally ill patients, the federal agency for healthcare research and quality has found, fewer than half have advance directives in their medical records.  it's not hard to see why. frailty, disease, ultimately death -- what older person wants to contemplate those? delay and denial seem preferable.  but consider the consequences of that distaste. i know a baltimore woman whose mother blithely rejected all such discussion. ''a will is just something for children to fight over,'' she insisted, right through her 80's. now, alzheimer's disease makes her no longer competent to sign any legal document, even if she could be persuaded to. without a power of attorney, her children can't get access to her savings or sell her house to help care for her. going to court to seek guardianship could cost thousands of dollars better spent for aides and drugs.  when my father falters, i expect to be just as anguished, frightened and overwhelmed. the services and programs available for ailing parents are bewildering and frequently inadequate and the costs daunting; having an advance directive doesn't guarantee better decisions.  but at least i won't have to wonder, or argue with relatives about, what my dad wants, because he has told me. at least i'll have the legal ability to take care of him.  i feel for friends whose otherwise rational elders announce, ''i don't want to talk about it.'' or who say, ''just promise you'll never send me to a nursing home,'' a pledge no one without a crystal ball can honestly make. or even -- a daughter in rockland county passed this along -- ''i'm not moving anywhere except into your house.'' they're abdicating their roles, forcing their children to be the responsible parties, even before they have to be.  my father probably isn't a popular guy at discover card, but i see how hard he works to remain the protector, the one who makes the hard calls, the one who spares his children. i don't need his protection any longer, but i deeply appreciate what may turn out to be his final act of parenthood.  generations paula span teaches at the columbia university graduate school of journalism and is at work on ''when the time comes: aging parents, tough choices,'' to be published by springboard press next year.  