chasing spring: an american journey through a changing season   by bruce stutz  scribner, 239 pages, $24 hardcover  nothing mends the heart, even one convalescing from surgery, quite like a road trip across america. at least that's the theory behind this travelogue by a former editor in chief of natural history magazine. mr. stutz set off from new york city one grim november day with a plan to heal his damaged, middle-aged ''pumphead'' by following the sun to the south, west and extreme north, all the while observing the seasonal renewal of the earth.  mr. stutz's plan more or less succeeds. each day of his chronicle he notes with gratitude the lengthening hours of daylight. by the time he ends his journey on june 21 at the arctic circle, where the sun never sets for 96 hours, and where he watches the migration of caribou across the alaska national wildlife refuge, his eyes ''burn from glare, wind, and tears.''  modeled on alexander frater's ''chasing the monsoon,'' which traced the path of seasonal storms across india and forged a new and unlikely genre, the meteorological memoir, this americanized effort at such an alliance is neither as substantial nor as dashingly written.  mr. stutz's jocularity often clashes with his scholarship, not to mention his environmental message.  even so, he is a learned guide, as quick to cite primo levi as wilderness advocates like robert marshall. from reading sir james frazer's ''golden bough,'' mr. stutz knows that pagan beliefs underlie the spring festivals of easter, passover and lupercalia. an assortment of friends and scientists whom he consults along the way explain without technical jargon how cycles of temperature and rainfall have shaped history.  on the road in a 1984 chevy impala, bought from a heidegger scholar in pennsylvania, he meets naturalists who explain why certain bats need cactuses to survive, and vice versa. a fractured-rock hydrologist for the environmental protection agency in colorado warns about the delicate, increasingly fraught, relationship between snowmelt and agriculture in the west.  mr. stutz joins thousands of volunteer migrant workers who travel from california to the state of washington in search of forest mushrooms, and he beholds a carpet of morels ''with heads as big as pinecones.''  this book may be a hard sell on the east coast this winter. when january feels like june, what's the hurry for april? mr. stutz would not be surprised by the country's recent extreme weather patterns. everywhere he went, he found troubling, if inconclusive, evidence of global warming. under cover of penning a hymn to vernal rebirth, he has written a quiet jeremiad about climate change.  ''see spring for yourself,'' he writes. ''see spring now, because it is changing.''  richard b. woodward  armchair traveler  