senate newcomer is designated to encounter president bush yet again   senator jim webb, a spirited democratic freshman from virginia, looked uneasy as he hand wrote his very first letter of condolence to a grieving constituent who had just lost her soldier son in the iraq war. the senator, a lantern-jawed marine veteran with his own son at war, brightened noticeably as he discussed the surprising invitation from his party's leaders to deliver the main response for the democrats to president bush's state of the union address on tuesday.  normally, no one pays much attention to the opposition's rebuttal to a state of the union address. but the capital's mood as the war spirals downward is palpably, if not desperately, expectant of some change, somehow. and in washington, fresh rhetoric must be invested to feed any chance of change.  with their narrow victory, the democrats newly in control of congress are being turned to as if they are the loyal opposition in the british system, expected to be ready with a shadow cabinet wielding dossiers of perfectly worded alternatives.  it won't work quite that way on tuesday night when senator webb speaks for a perennially discordant party full of upholders of yes-buts and whereases and why-nots. but mr. webb, whose upset victory was fueled by stinging, uninhibited criticism of the bush administration's bungling of its war, clearly has something closer to a glinting riposte in mind than some boilerplate response for the record.  ''my sense is people really want to see something different here,'' said the senator, dismissing the administration's dispatch of another 20,000 troops as not even a doomed strategy, but a ''flailing around'' for public relations cover. ''sooner or later we are going to withdraw from iraq,'' mr. webb explained. ''the circumstances under which we withdraw are the debate.''  tuesday will not be the first time the president and mr. webb have had a close encounter. after the election, the senator-elect declined to stand in a reception line and be photographed with mr. bush. news reports told of how the president later sought him out, asking, ''how's your boy?''  ''i'd like to get them out of iraq, mr. president,'' mr. webb responded, broadening the question.  ''that's not what i asked you,'' mr. bush replied, sounding snappish. ''how's your boy?''  ''that's between me and my boy, mr. president,'' said mr. webb, showing some of the instincts he honed as a former member of a republican president's administration and a former boxer.  in choosing mr. webb, the party seems to be inviting some of his patented iconoclasm to tinge its image, particularly since he is not among the democrats who first backed the war. speaker nancy pelosi, who was against the war from the first, journeyed from the house to privately tell her senate colleagues that the party has nothing less than a moral imperative to move the iraq issue in a new direction.  and so expectations are being raised. party leaders made sure that representative tim walz of minnesota, a combat veteran of afghanistan who speaks knowingly of the troops and their families, had the radio rebuttal last weekend when president bush accused the democrats of ''proposing nothing,'' for all their objections to the latest version of his war plan.  a former secretary of the navy for ronald reagan, mr. webb says he ran as a democrat because his own politics are rooted in national security interests, and he found that issue despoiled by the bush administration. ''hurricane katrina was the thing that pushed me over into running,'' he said. ''katrina and the war were parallel situations in terms of failed leadership.''  for the senator, the way out of iraq is ''from the outside in'' -- the full-scale regional diplomacy eschewed by the administration -- rather than from inside washington's misplaced sense of being the center of all solutions.  he is not alone. republicans have been talking to democrats about the wording of nonbinding resolutions of disapproval of the president's troop increase. senator olympia snowe of maine joined senator chuck hagel, a fellow republican from nebraska, in the protest. others were privately dickering.  maybe nobody will be listening on tuesday. but as a freshman, senator webb likes the early feel of things. he has already presided at the head of the chamber, aided by stage cues from a parliamentarian.  ''i closed the senate down on friday, and i was teasing the republican staffers that since there was nobody on the floor, i was going to ask for unanimous consent to withdraw from iraq.'' the recollection prompted a booming laugh from the new senator that rolled forth like a preamble to tuesday night.  ''told them we're going to be out of iraq by the time i'm done.''  editorial observer  