a note to women travelers: be too cute to leave behind   most frequent travelers like their passports, with all those exotic stamps. but the passport photo is another matter. many people hate theirs. mine, for example, looks like dick cheney after two hard days in a drizzly duck blind.  deborah norville, the television newswoman and world traveler, has a different problem with her passport photo. ''i have without a doubt the best passport photo,'' said ms. norville, who is the anchor of ''inside edition'' and spent years as a network correspondent.  the great passport photo was merely an accident. ''i was having publicity stills done a couple of years ago, and my passport was coming due,'' she said.  publicity photos, shot in lengthy sessions by fashion photographers, tend to be glamorous. ms. norville is, by her own admission, practical. rather than going to kinko's for a new passport photo, she asked the photographer if he would cut a couple of passport-size photos from the session.  ''now, every time i come through customs, they look at the photo, and it clearly looks like deborah norville, the lady on television -- which is certainly not what the frazzled human being standing in front of them looks like,'' she said. ''one customs guy said, 'hey, that's a great picture.' i said, 'yeah, that's what i aspire to look like, but i've been on a plane for nine hours.' ''  i occasionally like to feature female business travelers in this column. that's because there is a difference between men and women (duh), and the travel industry has become acutely aware of it.  there are no good figures on the number of frequent business travelers who are women. occasionally, you'll read somewhere the assertion that 40 percent of business travelers are female. but that figure turns out to be based on the number of women who take at least one business trip a year. most heavy-duty business travelers are male.  but it's been clear to me, anecdotally, that the number of women who take 20 or more business trips a year is growing substantially. so we'll be checking in here more often on the female segment of the business travel market. who do you think is responsible for the revolution that has forced every major hotel chain to substantially upgrade bedding, lighting and bathrooms over the last six years or so?  women, it seems to me, simply put the puzzles of frequent business travel together with great skill, especially when they also have children at home.  here's a tip from jan tomlinson, an executive vice president at the chubb group who spends half of her time each month traveling around the world: ''never unpack your toiletries. keep a set of toiletries and cosmetics for home and another for travel.'' and another tip: ''don't fly blind. check out the political climate of the region and visit tourism web sites. it may not be safe to jog near your hotel.''  ms. norville has cut back on international travel now that she has three children and a job that doesn't require suddenly dropping everything and flying far away on an hour's notice. in a phone conversation recently, she was brimming with advice on how to navigate the complexities, including dressing nicely when flying.  once, she told me, she realized she forgot her passport as she tried to board a flight at kennedy international airport to cover a breaking story in tunisia. she dashed frantically out to the curb where an assistant arrived with the passport, and then ran back to the gate. the jetway door was closed. but through the window she caught the pilot's eye as he prepared to push back.  ''i was jumping up and down, waving the passport and my ticket and alternating with my hands clasped in a prayerful motion,'' she said.  ''it worked. he had them bring the jetway back and open the door, and i literally leapt on board. now, this was before 9/11, but even then you weren't supposed to run up the cabin and hug the pilot, which i did, saying: 'oh, thank you so much. you saved my job; you saved my child's education.' and he told me, 'honey, you were too cute to leave behind.' ''  she continued, ''i was wearing jeans, black cowboy boots, a navy blazer and a white shirt, which was my standard traveling uniform. and as i buckled in, breathless from the running, i thought, you know, you should always try to be too cute to leave behind. think about that.''  i told her: ''i just did. i do have cowboy boots and a white shirt, but i think in the same situation, that plane takes off without me.''  on the road e-mail: sharkeyj@nytimes.com.  