what's the coolest way to accessorize an ipod? buy it a car.   apple's ipod seems to be everywhere. we can attach them to our home stereos and stick them into portable devices to bring them into our bedroom, kitchen and even the bathroom. with cases that clip to a shirt pocket and velcro holders that wrap around an arm, it is hard to imagine a place where an ipod can't go.  but the one place that has long been a challenge has been the car. vehicles built before the ipod revolution have had to make do with fm transmitters and cassette adapter connections, neither attractive solutions. after market companies provide sound systems with ipod and generic mp3 player connectors, but owners often have to rip out or alter their factory systems.  in new vehicles, however, the ipod has found a home. manufacturers are routinely providing sound systems with auxiliary jacks to hook up mp3 players and, in a nod to the supremacy of the ipod, which apple says has 75 percent of the market, many manufacturers are also offering dealer-installed kits just for that device.  and digital music in cars is beginning to move beyond the ipod. the latest thing is hard drives, so owners can move their music collections out to their cars and leave their players at home. of course, the hard drives were the latest thing a few weeks ago, but ford motor's announcement at the detroit auto show this month that it had teamed with microsoft on a voice-activated audio system shows how fast the technology is changing. what's next, an icar?  ''the growth is exponential,'' said christina ra, a honda product planner. ''when we look at new car models three to five years out, we're almost leaving a blank space for the audio technology.''  for now, the basic universal music connection is an auxiliary jack, but it has limitations. while the music from the player is easily passed via its headphone jack to the car's sound system, the player can't be controlled from the dashboard. functions such as next song, searching for music and viewing playlists have to be done from the player, a distraction best left for a passenger.  ipod-only connections, made through a cable that is often placed in the glove box, let owners control, and charge, the player right from the car's sound system. if the car has a display and it's large enough, like the screen on a navigation system, that can be an easy process, but small displays that let users read the information only in bits and pieces can be more distracting than scrolling through the player itself.  ''the most commonly used piece of equipment is the ipod, and from honda's point of view it's the most important to accommodate,'' ms. ra said.  honda, general motors, daimlerchrysler, ford, lexus and bmw are among the automakers that offer an ipod kit for some of their models. these kits often cost about $200 installed, and some can be retrofitted on older cars. honda also tackles the distraction problem with its music link system, offered as a $200 dealer-installed option on hondas and acuras. in addition to charging and controlling an ipod, it offers hands-free music searching through voice commands.  daimlerchrysler is one of the companies offering a hard-drive-based system. nick cappa, a company spokesman, said its mygig music system, built around a 20-gigabyte hard drive (which also stores data for the car's navigation system), had space for about 1,600 songs in about 6 gigabytes of dedicated space. it is offered as an option on the chrysler sebring, jeep wrangler and dodge nitro.  heather may, manager of engineering communications for daimlerchrysler, said owners would be able to copy music into the hard drive from cds or from a portable hard drive through a u.s.b. connection.  it's unclear if hard-drive systems will spread. ford, for example, considered them, but has stepped away for now. one reason is that while mp3 players are ready to use as soon as they are plugged into a car, hard drives require work. all that music in itunes on your home computer has to be transferred into your car. imagine sitting in the garage for hours copying all your cds onto your car's hard drive (it took me eight minutes to load the cd ''low spark of high heeled boys'' by the group traffic onto the lexus ls hard drive) after having already done the same thing on your home pc.  using a portable hard drive that is connected to your home pc is easier, but you still have to put your collection onto the drive, remove it from the pc and plug it into the car's u.s.b. connection (if it has one), then copy the music to the car's hard drive.  daniel eran, a technology consultant who runs the tech-oriented roughlydrafted.com, said hard-drive systems ''couldn't be easily kept in sync with a user's home system.''  mr. eran said that most automakers ''are interested in extending the ipod, not trying to replicate it.'' indeed, ford said it had not offered a hard-drive system because customers were showing little interest.  ''our customers are saying, 'why would i want to have a whole other hard drive in the vehicle if i already have an ipod?'' said nick twork, a ford spokesman.  the microsoft system the two companies announced at the auto show does not have a hard drive. the system, called sync, will be initially offered on 12 ford, mercury and lincoln models this fall. kevin keling, the marketing strategy manager for ford, said users would be able to plug in and play from many digital players and u.s.b. thumb drives through a u.s.b. connection. the system will also recharge the players, allow users to see a full music display and choose songs using voice commands. the audio system will also read incoming text messages from a connected cellphone.  honda's music link also offers voice commands, but some owners have had problems with the system. steve vigneau of shelby township, mich., said he had music link in his civic and found the system hard to use and slow to operate. the software uses honda's text-to-speech technology and needs to be installed on a home computer so it can link with itunes.  chris naughton, a honda spokesman, said that text-to-speech ''has not been as trouble-free as we expected, but many music link users are still quite pleased that with a single connection they can get a high-quality audio connection, head unit control and constant charging.''  for older cars with no mp3 connections, audio companies are also working with the ipod. jaed arzadon, a spokesman for pioneer electronics usa, said the company had been making its stereo units ''ipod-capable'' for two years.  at fairfield auto radio and security in connecticut, alfonso chiulli was recently installing a $2,500 stereo, with a subwoofer and a trunk-mounted amplifier, into a 1987 porsche carrera. aside from lighting up in rainbow colors, the pioneer unit also had an ipod connector.  ''ninety percent of the stereos i sell today have some form of ipod connectivity,'' mr. chiulli said.  logan fox, president of neo car audio systems of san diego, which makes a $200 ipod adapter for many cars, said that specialist suppliers sometimes offered the best way to play digital music in a car.  ''we try to stay ahead of the trends,'' he said. ''by the time carmakers put something into the vehicle, it can already be obsolete.''  technology  