bush expected to make call for improved fuel economy   there is widespread anticipation, inside government and outside, that president bush will call for better fuel economy in his state of the union address on tuesday.  the white house has posed questions to the transportation department about various options. one idea under consideration, government officials and car company executives who have consulted with the white house say, is to do away with the existing system of fleet averages, as has already happened with light trucks, and set a standard for each vehicle, based on its ''footprint,'' or distance between the wheels.  the president asked for the authority to do that last year, but congressional democrats rejected his request, saying the white house should use its existing power to simply raise the average. a standstill has resulted.  the federal official in charge of gasoline mileage rules, nicole r. nason, has been telling members of congress that when the current rules for car mileage were set, in 1975, she was 5 years old. ms. nason, administrator of the national highway traffic safety administration, says she hopes that when her 5-year-old daughter starts driving, the standard will be higher. but that hope has not been enough to budge either side.  raising the number from the current 27.5 miles per gallon would cause hundreds more highway deaths each year because automakers would meet the goal by moving to smaller cars, the administration argues. it also says that the system puts an undue burden on companies that specialize in large cars -- that is to say, american automakers.  a problem for the democrats is that, once there is no fleet average, the debate gets murkier because there is no single number to argue over. simply reforming the system without setting specific goals is ''a license for obfuscation,'' said clarence m. ditlow, director of the center for auto safety, which monitors the auto industry and government safety regulators.  critics are pushing hard. representative edward j. markey, a massachusetts democrat who wants to increase fuel economy, said: ''our problem in dealing with the bush administration is that when they want to send troops to fight for oil, they do that whether they have the authority or not. when you ask them to reduce the need for oil, suddenly they're concerned about authority.''  higher-mileage cars can be just as safe as gas-guzzlers, mr. markey said, and to argue otherwise would mean ''that the ford escape hybrid is less safe than the regular ford escape.'' he plans to reintroduce a bill that would push the standard up by one mile per gallon per year for the first 10 years, and 4 percent per year thereafter.  the car portion of the corporate average fuel economy system, known as cafe, has not changed since 1990, and the rule governing pickups, vans and sport utility vehicles is only slowly changing. mr. bush, however, is expected to take steps to encourage the development of batteries used to power hybrid-electric vehicles and further raise production of ethanol.  established in 1975 after the arab oil embargo, the system set a minimum standard for cars twice as high as the average at the time, pushing the standard to 27.5 miles per gallon in 1985. after minor adjustments from 1985 to 1990, the car standard has been frozen at 27.5 since 1990, first by congressional order and now by a dispute over how the rules should be structured.  over that 17-year period, domestic oil production has declined nearly a third, to 5.2 million barrels a day from 7.4 million. as demand has grown, imports have risen by more than two-thirds to fill the gap, to 10.1 million barrels a day from 5.9 million. ethanol, liquids from coal and tar sands are all possible alternatives, but none will make major contributions in the near future; using less oil will require reducing driving or using vehicles with better gasoline mileage.  the rule has produced unintended consequences. for example, it led car makers to redefine many household vehicles as ''trucks,'' because those had a more lenient standard. and automakers got credit under the system for building vehicles that could run on ethanol or other alternatives, even if the vehicles actually ran on gasoline.  and the window sticker has added a wry phrase to the american vocabulary: your actual mileage may vary. last year, in an effort to fix that, the e.p.a. reduced the mileage promised by the sticker.  last spring, under the ''footprint'' system for light trucks, ms. nason's agency set rules for model years 2008 through 2011.  the rules will push a typical ford explorer to 25.2 miles per gallon in 2011, from 19.4 in the 2007 model year, as measured by the environmental protection agency. a pt cruiser (which daimler-chrysler has classified as a light truck, helping it meet the truck average) to 28.1 miles per gallon in 2011, up from 27.4 in 2007.  (both ford and daimler-chrysler have the option of complying with the old rules based on a fleet average rather than the new vehicle-by-vehicle rule, which takes effect between model years 2008 and 2011.)  the industry's official position is that the decision should be left to the highway traffic safety administration. gloria bergquist, a spokeswoman for the alliance of automobile manufacturers, which represents all the major companies except honda, said, ''they're supposed to crunch the data and come up with a sweet spot, between affordability, safety concerns, jobs, and technology, and come up with the number.''  the technology to go farther on a gallon of gas is no secret, but it costs money that detroit auto companies have been loath to spend, especially now that they all have financial problems. for years, the automakers have argued that fuel economy is not a priority for buyers, and they have built a product line that follows that assessment.  robert heavenrich jr., who retired last year as a fuel economy researcher at the e.p.a.'s ann arbor laboratories, said there was lots of room for modernization. more modern technology would use less fuel to do the same work. for example, mr. heavenrich said, he drives a 1985 general motors sierra cutlass with a 231-cubic-inch engine. ''you can go down to a buick dealer today and get that same engine-transmission combination,'' he said.  mr. heavenrich said that many japanese cars used a hardware-software combination that allowed some cylinders to shut down during periods of low demand, like highway cruising, to save fuel, but that american manufacturers had generally not incorporated that innovation because it would raise production costs.  the e.p.a. report on fuel economy trends that mr. heavenrich produced annually until last year said that mileage would be about 30 percent higher if buyers would settle for the vehicle size and performance characteristics that prevailed in the mid-1980s. but what sells is heavier, zippier cars.  to some extent, though, consumers have voted for higher standards. the actual average fuel economy for cars sold in the 2005 model year, the most recent one for which numbers are available, was just over 30 miles per gallon.  correction:  january 30, 2007, tuesday  an article on jan. 22 about the likelihood that president bush's state of the union address would call for increasing the fuel efficiency of cars referred incorrectly to the use of a technology by american and japanese carmakers to save fuel by shutting down some engine cylinders when they are not needed. it is american companies, not japanese ones, that are the largest users. (the white house set a target of improving fuel economy by 4 percent a year, beginning in the 2010 model year for cars and the 2012 model year for light trucks, according to materials released with the speech.)  