in another plot twist, williams is a contender   few would have imagined, perhaps not even serena williams, that when the second week of the australian open began, she would still be in contention for the title and the defending champion amélie mauresmo would not.  but williams, in the latest surprising twist in her fiction-trumping life, has quickly gathered momentum and belief after beating two of the better players in the world: fifth-seeded nadia petrova of russia and 11th-seeded jelena jankovic of serbia. even members of williams's entourage were shaking their heads in disbelief sunday night after she had played a fine match from start to finish to beat jankovic, 6-3, 6-2.  ''i kept hearing she's not in shape,'' jankovic said. ''but she was running corner to corner and hitting great shots. it just shows that with her, you never know what to expect. you never know.  ''if she plays like she did today, she can maybe even win it.''  that would really be a plot twist, considering how little tennis williams has played in the past five months, but her draw, so daunting early, is no longer brimming with heavyweights. nobody else left in her half has been to a grand slam final.  ''i like being a dangerous floater,'' said williams, who arrived here ranked 81st and has guaranteed herself a spot in the top 50 by reaching the quarterfinals.  her opponent will be 16th-seeded shahar peer, the first israeli to reach this stage in a major tournament. peer, a determined 19-year-old counterpuncher now being coached part time by josé higueras, upset third-seeded svetlana kuznetsova, 6-4, 6-2, after saving two match points against tatiana golovin in the third round.  williams won their only previous match in straight sets, but that was in 2005, before peer truly took flight. ''she's young and agile and fit, so i have to really be ready,'' williams said.  the other quarterfinal in her half of the draw will be an all-czech, all-teenager affair between 10th-seeded nicole vaidisova and unseeded lucie safarova, a left-hander, who upset mauresmo, 6-4, 6-3, in the fourth round. in the other half, martina hingis advanced to the quarterfinals by beating li na of china, 4-6, 6-3, 6-0. she will face kim clijsters, who defeated daniela hantuchova, 6-1, 7-5.  on friday, williams was on the verge of elimination against petrova. but trailing by one set and 3-5 in the second, she suddenly found her range and stormed back to a three-set victory. against jankovic, it was as if williams was still riding the wave, and this time she was impressive from start to finish.  jankovic, long ponytail flapping, had beaten williams in their past two meetings and had had a great deal more success of late. williams has not reached a final since the 2005 australian open. jankovic reached the united states open semifinals last year and started this season by winning in auckland, new zealand, and coming close to beating clijsters in the final in sydney, australia.  ''she knew that if she didn't come out strong, i'd get on top of her, because i have two wins over her,'' jankovic said. ''but she did come out strong, and i was feeling a little tired, a little flat.''  williams took a 3-0 lead before rain forced them briefly off court. when they resumed under a closed roof, jankovic lifted her play and won the next two games. but williams, despite the occasional unforced error, did consistent damage on jankovic's serve, which is the weakest part of her game. williams broke jankovic four times and held her own serve all but once, generating the sort of controlled power that no other woman in the game can manage.  ''it's scary,'' jankovic said. ''when i was looking at the clock, i was seeing 200 kilometers per hour, and i was thinking what would happen if it came too close to my body, and i couldn't get out of the way and it hit me in the stomach. would it go through me?''  williams clearly still has the power to intimidate, but the most impressive part of her game sunday was her ability to hold her own and more in the extended baseline rallies. she is carrying extra weight but still covering the court quite well.  ''i have it in me,'' said williams, who has not beaten two players of this caliber back to back since she won here in 2005. ''i believe in my game and more than anything i believe in me. it doesn't matter what people say or people write. at the end of the day, i'm my biggest fan. maybe my dad. but other than that, you have to always be your biggest fan. i'm just working on staying positive.''  meanwhile, the future of men's tennis and the present of men's tennis remain just that after they exchanged serves and returns sunday. for all his obvious talent, 19-year-old novak djokovic could not take so much as a set from roger federer in the fourth round.  switched on from the start, federer swooped from baseline to net and back again, thwarting all that big-hitting, two-handed ambition on the other side of the court with his trademark blend of power and finesse to win, 6-2, 7-5, 6-3.  next up in the quarterfinals for federer: tommy robredo, seeded seventh, a high-energy spaniard whom federer has beaten six times in six previous matches.  it has been that sort of tournament thus far for the defending champion federer, who despite nursing a mild cold has yet to lose a set and yet to become entangled in the traps that this tournament can spring.  while maria sharapova, the top-seeded woman, had to find a way to win despite self-described delirium tuesday as she played in brutally hot conditions, federer was relaxing on his day off. he did not have to bother with the blustery conditions sunday because he played djokovic under a roof because of intermittent drizzle.  federer's primary rival in the top half of the draw, the american andy roddick, has had to slug his way through a rough section: beating the former australian open champion marat safin in four intense sets friday, then requiring five more to get past ninth-seeded mario ancic on sunday.  not that the australian fans are complaining. they have once again come to melbourne park in record numbers despite the opening-day riot between serbian and croatian fans, and roddick's matches have provided some of the best entertainment. he will now provide the tournament with another fine story line in the quarterfinals, in which he faces his childhood friend and former housemate mardy fish, the only unseeded man left in the tournament.  but that is not quite as big a surprise as williams. ''you guys keep burying her, and she keeps coming back to life,'' mauresmo said as she prepared to head back to france.  tennis  