soul-searching by suspect's neighbors   for more than four years, the residents of the south holmes apartments here in this quiet suburb of st. louis lived alongside shawn hornbeck and the man who is accused of being his kidnapper and captor, michael devlin, a pizzeria manager.  they did laundry together, came and went through the same small parking lot, and let their children run through sprinklers in the same barren courtyards.  still, shawn was not found and freed until mr. devlin, 41, who lived in a ground-floor unit, became the suspect in another kidnapping, the abduction of william ownby, 13, from a nearby town just over a week ago. mr. devlin has since been charged with felony kidnapping in both cases, and is in police custody awaiting court action.  the charges carry the possibility of life in prison for mr. devlin, who was known among his neighbors as a stickler for parking rules, and for little else other than keeping to himself.  among neighbors in the small rectangle of apartments where the two teenagers were rescued last week, first came surprise, then overwhelming gladness. now, a second wave of emotions is surfacing here: the grief, the second-guessing and the soul-searching over why no one noticed something -- anything -- that might have saved the boys sooner.  the six low-slung brick buildings are home to many short-term renters, mostly low-income workers like waitresses, house painters and health care aides. they pride themselves on being friendly but not nosy, and on working hard to get by.  ''this was just a perfect place for it to happen, bottom line,'' said matthew cole, a cook whose kitchen window looks out onto the courtyard where shawn used to play. ''life's so hard now, it takes all your energy just to focus on your own trouble. the people around here are good people, but they're just trying to make the rent, keep the lights on. then something like this happens, and you can't say you noticed a thing.''  he added: ''i don't think anyone's proud of it. i have to say, i feel bad.''  inside city hall, mayor mike swoboda echoed those same sentiments on a larger scale, signaling that mr. cole and his neighbors were not alone in their pain.  ''i'm not going to try to make any excuses,'' mr. swoboda said. ''i think kirkwoodians are somewhat chagrined that we didn't as a community take notice. i feel that wherever i go.''  some people assumed shawn was a dropout. they thought nothing of his being around all day, not in school. they had less time to notice william, who was known as ben. he was missing for only four days when the police found him inside mr. devlin's apartment. but the neighbors wonder about him, too. had they seen him? did they simply think he was the new kid on the block?  the police found the boys on jan. 12 when they went to the complex to serve a warrant to one of mr. devlin's neighbors in an unrelated case. outside the building, they noticed a truck that matched the description of the vehicle seen speeding away after ben was abducted on a country road near his house. it had been the only clue in the case.  for kirkwood, mr. swoboda said: ''i think it's a very proud time and it's intertwined with sadness. it's a wakeup call, all this mixed together. we feel pride, but we're also bruised.''  while perhaps unexpected, those emotions are not unusual, experts said, and are a direct consequence of how modern americans live their lives. shawn's four-year captivity right beneath the noses of dozens of neighbors can be seen as a cautionary tale for the price of minding one's business. but it should not necessarily be an indictment of the neighbors.  ''in public life nowadays, we have a norm of noninvolvement,'' said kathryn e. kuhn, a professor of sociology at st. louis university, ''and we feel it's polite not to notice other folks. it's almost considered a faux pas to get into someone's face and say, 'how's your family life?' ''  dr. kuhn said the idea was the exact opposite of the more old-fashioned notion that ''it takes a village to raise a child.'' she said the family unit today was considered private, almost sacred ground, not to be disturbed.  most of mr. devlin's neighbors said they had assumed that he and shawn were a family, and that they had had no reason to interfere or think otherwise.  ''people had no grounds; there were no disturbances that i heard of,'' dr. kuhn said. ''obviously in this case there were negative consequences, but it doesn't make those neighbors bad neighbors or bad people.''  kirkwood, a city of roughly 27,000 located 12 miles from downtown st. louis, is a suburb, but hardly of the cookie-cutter mold. laid out in 1853 as a railroad stop, it still displays reminders of its 19th-century past.  old brick storefronts and newly constructed condominium units share space downtown along a main thoroughfare. the train depot, built in 1893, still stands, staffed and maintained by dozens of volunteers.  homes that cost more than $1 million are not uncommon in kirkwood, one of the wealthier suburbs of st. louis, and housing ranges from smaller, well-kept bungalows to palatial victorians. (missouri's newly-elected senator, claire mccaskill, a democrat, has a home here.)  it is a place that prides itself on its civic spirit and close-knit neighborhoods. that is why what happened with shawn and ben is particularly hard to accept.  ''the questions that arise from this are going to be pondered for a great long time,'' said officer tom ballman, the spokesman for the kirkwood police department.  while the south holmes apartments attract tenants who might be struggling financially, they did not appear to struggle much with each other. officer ballman said the police were rarely summoned to the complex, and when they were, it was typically for something minor, like vandalism.  in all of kirkwood last year, there was not a single homicide.  mr. devlin's neighbors said the peace and quiet gave them a sense of security. they said they gravitated toward this particular complex, sandwiched between railroad tracks, because it was known to be safe and affordable in a city where much real estate is priced out of reach.  ''there have been nights when we forgot to lock the door,'' mr. cole said. ''i didn't think nothing of not locking the door. it's kirkwood. nobody's going to 'get you' out here. it's safe.''  sitting around the kitchen table, thinking back on all the times she saw shawn around the building, renee cole, mr. cole's wife, said, ''that's why we moved here -- because it's the type of place where you don't have to worry about some crazed person bothering you.''  mr. cole added: ''our lax mode put that kid in even more danger. what if we would have slept on this a little longer? that bothers me.''  already, mr. devlin is being considered a likely suspect in other kidnappings around missouri, although no additional charges have been filed.  harry c. reichard iv lived in a second-floor apartment above mr. devlin. he said that he and his roommate had occasionally heard loud noises coming from the apartment, and that shawn had often appeared sullen. but he did not think that that was cause for alarm. teenagers often appear withdrawn, mr. reichard said. and shawn was just as often riding his bike and seeming to have fun.  ''a lot of us are down on our luck and living paycheck to paycheck,'' he said. ''when you're just trying to survive, you don't pay a lot of attention to people around you.''  suzette kibble-hicks, who was born and raised in kirkwood, was having her hair done by one of mr. devlin's neighbors one recent evening. she shared mr. reichard's view.  ''has society gotten caught up in the day-to-day so much, have we gotten so used to the grind, that we're not paying attention to the red flags or not even seeing them?'' ms. kibble-hicks asked. ''everyone sees without really seeing.''  that is exactly what james grimm and susan figge-grimm, who live in a house across the street from mr. devlin's apartment, speculated might have happened with them.  ''we never saw him,'' mr. grimm said, just as his wife interrupted: ''no, we may have actually seen him, not knowing that we were seeing him.''  