connecticut's diaspora   the young are leaving connecticut in droves. according to the connecticut economic resource center, between 1990 and 2000, we lost a larger percentage of 18- to 34-year-olds than any other state, 23 percent, or more than 200,000 people.  one big reason is that it is becoming difficult for any person, particularly a young person, to buy a home here without having a very high salary. rents, too, are exorbitant. the median price of a single-family home in fairfield county was more than a half-million dollars in 2005, and monthly rents for two-bedroom apartments in the stamford-norwalk area on average were around $1,500.  the lack of affordable housing has created a huge problem for businesses who are finding fewer bright applicants. the high price of homes not only turns people away but also forces those who have jobs to live further and further from their workplace, contributing to highway gridlock and adding to connecticut's considerable traffic woes.  transportation and housing are linked. how the state handles these two issues will determine the health of the economy. the state has made a good start with transportation, earmarking billions of dollars for more trains and revamped highways. but affordable housing is a more difficult issue.  the state has had an affordable housing law for nearly 20 years that allows developers, under certain conditions, to bypass zoning laws to build housing without the blessing of town hall, as long as a percentage of units are low cost. but the law has largely been a failure because it infuriates local governments, enables development to take place on unsuitable sites and creates litigation. as it stands, in only 30 towns and cities does affordable housing make up 10 percent or more of existing homes. in most of the other 139 towns, affordable housing makes up 5 percent or less of housing units.  the nonprofit partnership for strong communities, a housing advocacy group, suggests scrapping the law. it also suggests that the state help communities pay the cost of affordable housing with subsidies for infrastructure, giving communities some say in where the housing is built.  proponents of a new law suggest that the state should pick up the costs of educating any additional schoolchildren as an incentive to communities that resist affordable housing because they feel it would overburden their school systems. but asking the state to entice already-wealthy towns to build housing they should have welcomed years ago seems contradictory at a time when the state can't seem to find the money to help genuinely needy communities struggling with high special education costs.  that said, the state cannot afford to ignore the astronomical cost of housing here and pretend that the problem will fix itself. the state needs an improved housing law, without which it faces continued economic stagnation, traffic gridlock and the loss of connecticut's young.  connecticut  