ariana rose, william komaroff   ariana jane rose and william charles komaroff were married last evening at tribeca rooftop in new york. rabbi mara s. nathan officiated.  the bride, 32, was until jan. 11 a nurse practitioner at the murray hill medical group in manhattan. she graduated from the university of texas and received a master's in nursing from columbia.  she is a daughter of dr. robert m. rose of galveston, tex., and the late sara p. rose, and is a stepdaughter of kay rose. the bride's father is the executive director of the mind, brain, body and health initiative, a research network studying the relationship between brain and bodily function, at the university of texas medical branch in galveston. the bride's mother was a real estate broker with charna graber real estate, also in galveston.  the bridegroom, 41, is an assistant united states attorney for the southern district of new york. he graduated from dartmouth and received his law degree from the university of michigan.  he is a son of rosalyn komaroff and stanley komaroff of new york. his mother is an owner of cmr travel corporation, a travel agency in hartsdale, n.y. his father, who retired as the chairman of the new york law firm of proskauer rose, is now the senior adviser for henry schein, a medical supply company in melville, n.y.  ms. rose and mr. komaroff met on an early sunday morning in july 2002, on the platform of the lexington avenue subway station at 59th street. both were on their way, along with hundreds of others, to participate in the bronx half marathon. train delays and conflicting announcements led the two to strike up a conversation. by the time the train doors opened at the bedford park boulevard station, they knew they liked each other but did not know each other's surnames.  ''i thought 'wow, he was a really nice guy, but that's that,' '' ms. rose said.  but for mr. komaroff there was more to it than just that.  ''i was angry at myself for not getting her name,'' he said. ''i thought i might see her during the race or after, but somehow, i missed her.''  so the following day, he went on a web site that listed race results and searched for the name ''ariana.'' he found it, along with her last name, and called directory assistance. she was listed. he started dialing.  ''i was shocked when he called,'' ms. rose said. ''in the world of running, what he did to me is known as results-stalking.''  mr. komaroff assured ms. rose that he was no stalker and asked her out for dinner. ''most of my friends thought he was a wackadoo,'' she said. ''but i was won over by his resourcefulness in tracking me down, so i went out with him.''  last july, the couple competed in the ford ironman in lake placid, n.y., where they swam 2.4 miles, biked 112 miles and ran 26.2 miles.  ''we trained for eight months,'' mr. komaroff said. ''it was a great bonding experience.''  as was the case when they ran the half-marathon in the bronx four years earlier, mr. komaroff finished the ironman race before ms. rose.  ''but this time'' he said, ''there was no missing her at the finish line.''  weddings/celebrations  