israel releases $100 million withheld from palestinians   israel transferred $100 million in palestinian tax revenues to the office of the palestinian president, mahmoud abbas, as part of a plan to bolster him and keep money out of the hands of the hamas government, israeli officials said friday.  the money is intended to meet needs for food, medicine and other basic expenses but not to pay the overdue salaries of palestinian government workers, according to israeli officials.  it was transferred ''to a special account to ensure the money does not reach the hamas government and cannot be used for perpetrating terror against israel,'' according to a statement from the office of israel's prime minister, ehud olmert.  israel collects more than $50 million a month in taxes and customs money on behalf of the palestinians under an arrangement dating from the 1990s, when the two sides were holding peace negotiations.  however, israel began withholding the money after hamas won the palestinian elections a year ago, gaining control of the cabinet and legislature. israel has not said precisely how much money it has withheld, but it is believed to be over $500 million.  at a meeting last month, mr. olmert agreed to hand over $100 million as part of a package of moves designed to help mr. abbas in his power struggle with hamas. israel also has removed some west bank roadblocks, but palestinians say they still face many obstacles when they seek to travel.  palestinians say that the money belongs to their government and that it is not up to israel to dictate how it should be spent. ''israel can say whatever it wants,'' said muhammad dahlan, a palestinian legislator and a leading member of mr. abbas's fatah movement. ''this is our money.''  israel has not said whether it would release more money in the future. before israel began withholding the money last year, it was sent to the palestinian finance ministry.  also on friday, defense minister amir peretz of israel suspended the establishment of a jewish settlement in the west bank.  when mr. peretz said on dec. 26 that he had approved the maskiot settlement in the jordan valley, it provoked sharp criticism by the palestinians, as well as american concern.  mr. peretz ordered a ''freeze in the plans for maskiot in order to evaluate them thoroughly,'' his office said in a statement. the plans called for the construction of about 30 homes for settlers to be built on an old army base.  israel has more than 100 formal settlements in the west bank and many informal ones. israel pledged to stop building new settlements in the 1990s, and the so-called road map, the stalled mideast peace plan introduced in 2003, calls for israel to freeze settlement activity.  still, the population of the israeli settlements on west bank is increasing by more than 10,000 a year, and is now more than 250,000. the figure does not include residents of east jerusalem, which israel captured in the 1967 war and later annexed.  in another development, mr. abbas is traveling to syria, where he will hold talks with president bashar al-assad. he will also be looking for a solution to the deadlock between his fatah movement and hamas, the two main palestinian factions.  the factions have been trying, without success, to form a national unity government for months, while gunmen from the two groups have periodically battled in the streets.  mr. abbas's envoys have been holding talks with hamas leaders in damascus, the syrian capital, including hamas's exiled political chief, khaled mashal. palestinian officials say a meeting between mr. abbas and mr. mashal is possible, though not certain.  in remarks on friday, mr. abbas said again that the palestinians should establish a government that would be acceptable to the international community, or hold new elections. ''it is very clear how to get a national unity government that can break the siege,'' he said in the west bank city of ramallah after playing host to the european union foreign policy chief, javier solana.  a 10-year-old palestinian girl, abir aramin, died friday from wounds sustained when she was hit by fire from the israeli border police on tuesday in the west bank town of anata, near jerusalem, palestinian witnesses and relatives said. abir and her classmates were on recess from school when the israeli forces fired on stone-throwing palestinians with rubber bullets and stun grenades, according to the palestinians.  abir was hit in the head and collapsed, the palestinians said. the border police said they were investigating the report.  