subpoenas sought against 2 times reporters   a defense lawyer in the case involving anthony pellicano, the hollywood private eye accused of masterminding a long-running wiretapping ring, called yesterday for two new york times reporters to be subpoenaed to find out who leaked them recordings of conversations and other evidence in the case.  on jan. 11, the times printed excerpts of 33 recorded conversations that mr. pellicano had with terry n. christensen, a lawyer for kirk kerkorian, the billionaire hollywood mogul. the newspaper also put audio excerpts of the conversations on its web site. mr. christensen has also been charged in connection with the wiretapping.  in papers filed last week in federal court, mr. christensen called on the judge, dale s. fischer of united states district court, to force the two reporters, david m. halbfinger and allison hope weiner, to reveal their sources.  in a hearing yesterday in los angeles, terree a. bowers, the lawyer representing mr. christensen, told the judge that the reporters might be ''criminally liable'' for their actions. he said in a telephone interview after the hearing that he told the judge that their posting of the conversations on the internet violated his client's presumption of innocence.  the judge asked mr. bowers to spell out specifically what relief he is seeking and how he would like her to deal with the case. in a statement, catherine j. mathis, a spokeswoman for the new york times company, said: ''we believe it is critically important for reporters to be able to protect their confidential sources of information and will continue to advocate for their ability to do so.''  the judge also said she wanted to meet privately with robert ciaffa, the assistant united states attorney in san diego, who is investigating the source of information leaked to the times over the last year in what the government has said was a violation of the judge's order. mr. ciaffa, who did not attend the hearing, said in a telephone interview that he had no comment.  judge fischer also indicated yesterday that she was studying a similar case involving two reporters for the san francisco chronicle who have refused to reveal their sources and are facing up to 18 months in jail. the reporters, mark fainaru-wada and lance williams, published federal grand jury testimony in which athletes admitted to using steroids supplied by the bay area laboratory cooperative, known as balco. the jail terms, as well as a $1,000-a-day fine imposed on the chronicle, have been suspended pending an appeal, to be heard in march.  the trial of mr. pellicano has been delayed until august because of the complexity of the case, the volume of evidence and lawyers' scheduling conflicts.  