new buzz for centuries-old city   hyderabad, one of india's largest cities and the capital of andhra pradesh state, has long been appreciated for its islamic minarets, hindu temples, british colonial architecture and centuries-old pearl markets. but now, helped by an influx of global software and financial companies like microsoft and ubs, hyderabad is a happening city, buzzing with coffee bars, stylish restaurants, bouncer-at-the-door clubs and sophisticated boutiques.  situated on the musi river in central india, hyderabad is experiencing an economic boom that is not only attracting business travelers, but has also put the city's splendid monuments, spicy cuisine and bustling bazaars on the cultural map.  in the past three years, the number of international air arrivals has doubled to more than one million a year. from new york, round-trip flights start at about $1,300, while in india, low-cost domestic carriers like air deccan and jet airways bring tourists from mumbai, new delhi and beyond for quick pearl-shopping and sightseeing fixes. (you can do both by visiting the shops near the famous charminar, the majestic 400-year old arched gate.) a new airport is scheduled to open in march 2008.  the taj hotels chain operates three luxury hotels in the city, but new developers are challenging its dominance. the leela group, affiliated with the kempinski chain, has announced plans for a 300-room leela palace, while the indian-american hotelier vikram chatwal is looking to import his ''dream'' brand of designer boutique hotels.  despite its new riches, hyderabad retains a certain shabbiness, with crumbling concrete buildings and tent cities to prove it. still, for an introduction to hip hyderabad, take an auto-rickshaw through the scary traffic to banjara hills, an upmarket area west of the commercial district, where you'll find some of the city's newest, most cosmopolitan eateries.  fusion 9, on the third floor of a modern building (6-3-249/a, first avenue, road no 1, 91-40-6557-7755/22), is a coolly contemporary space with a huge bar, open kitchen, eclectic menu and, unusual for this city, an international wine list (though indian wines, like the sula sauvignon blanc, are surprisingly drinkable). the crowd is young and casual, and seems to be as comfortable ordering wood-fired pizzas (255 rupees, or about $5.60 at 45.36 rupees to the dollar) as they are biryanis (235 rupees), the city's famous meat-and-rice dish.  for a more romantic evening, book a private, open-air pavilion in the junglelike gardens of our place (8-2-602/e charan pahadi, road no. 10, 91-40-2335-3422). the tandoori and other north indian dishes (about 150 rupees) are terrific. between courses, you can check out handmade linens, picture frames and crafts at the classy bombay store just next door.  to see what's going on after dinner, pick up a copy of the monthly english-language magazine wow! but be warned: some of the hottest nightclubs like touch in banjara hills (trendset towers, road 2, 91-40-2354-2422) and bottles and chimney (near the airport in begumpet, 91-40-2776-6464) are known to turn away single western men, for fear they might get a little too rowdy.  on a recent wednesday night, a jeans-clad crowd of locals and n.r.i.s (non-resident indians) packed the small dance floor at ahala, a subterranean club in the taj krishna hotel (road 1, 91-40-6666-2323). the space was filled with comfy cushions, glowing candles and pulsating house music.  ''i felt like the oldest guy in the room,'' said a 35-year-old n.r.i. from kansas as he left the club just after 12 a.m. for all of hyderabad's newfound hyperactivity, closing time is still midnight.  surfacing: hyderabad, india  