roddick shows his confidence and dismantles safin in a duel   anyone who has taken a marathon flight from the united states to melbourne -- ''eight movies and you're there'' an australian once said -- could sympathize with jimmy connors as he sat courtside friday night, having arrived a few hours earlier.  but the huge-hitting, intermittently deep-thinking match between connors's protégé andy roddick and one of the game's unpredictable yet essential men, marat safin, was a fine antidote to jet lag. it was only the third round at the australian open, but in tone and quality the match was worthy of a much later round. when all the big swings -- emotional and otherwise -- had been completed, roddick advanced with an impressive 7-6 (2), 2-6, 6-4, 7-6 (2) victory.  ''jimmy, he's doing a pretty good job with him,'' safin said.  connors has spent little time with roddick in recent weeks because of concerns about his mother and coach, gloria, who died jan. 8 at home in belleville, ill. but the fruits of connors's and roddick's mutual labor in the past six months were on display in rod laver arena. roddick put his improved backhand and more effective approach shots and volleys to frequent use against his volatile russian opponent, who won this title in 2005.  ''obviously, we've been thinking a lot about jimmy the last couple weeks,'' said roddick, who came to australia with his brother john and his trainer, doug spreen. ''and for him to be here in the flesh, we're real happy about that.''  this is a court where roddick has experienced some of the biggest buzzes and busts of his career. it was here that he defeated younes el-aynaoui in a 2003 quarterfinal with its epic 21-19 fifth set. it was here that he looked tactically befuddled last year in a stunning loss in the fourth round to marcos baghdatis.  but this 3-hour-and-12-minute match, which began outdoors and finished under a closed roof because of rain, was another one to savor. ''from the whole strategic standpoint, this was one of his best matches,'' said patrick mcenroe, the united states davis cup captain. ''this is a different andy. he comes in now, and he comes in like he means it. he used to come in wondering what he's doing up there. now you see after he hits his approach, he explodes into net.''  safin still made him pay on occasion, producing brute force and deft angles with his backhand passing shots. but the sixth-seeded roddick hit enough acrobatic volleys and touch shots around the net to keep safin from settling into a groove.  from the backcourt, roddick held his own, except for one error-filled stretch in the second set and the first few games of the third. his own two-handed backhand, particularly down the line, is a more effective shot now, and safin, who had split his first six matches against roddick, gradually realized that some of his longtime tactics against roddick were not paying dividends, in part because roddick is covering the court better than in the past while sticking closer to the baseline.  ''right now, the guy is moving,'' safin said.  top-seeded roger federer, who is in roddick's half of the draw, advanced with a straight-set victory over mikhail youzhny, last year's flashy united states open semifinalist from russia. federer will face novak djokovic, a 19-year-old from serbia, in the fourth round. federer's only true difficulties so far have been with the electronic line-calling system, which is being used here for the first time. federer, a traditionalist, has not been a fan of the system from the start and has yet to show the same gift for challenging calls as he has for whipping forehands.  ''i wish i had none all the time,'' he said of the challenges.  seventh-seeded tommy robredo of spain put an end to the american youngster sam querrey's first australian open, 6-4, 6-7 (5), 6-2, 6-1. querrey, a 19-year-old from california who will break into the top 100 after reaching the third round, roared back from a 2-5 deficit in the second-set tie breaker. but he soon ran low on resources.  ''if i would have just kept running back and forth, i would have cramped,'' querrey said. ''i was just trying to hit the forehand as hard as i could. he's tough, though. i had to rip 10 shots side to side in order to get a point against him. it was annoying.''  mardy fish barely had to sweat at all to reach the fourth round. his opponent, australia's wayne arthurs, lasted only three games before retiring because of the effects of a pain-killing injection for a hip injury that not only deadened the pain, but also caused him to lose temporary control over his right leg. the 35-year-old arthurs said he would not have taken the risk of an injection if this were not his last australian open.  fish, presumably well rested, will now face 16th-seeded david ferrer, who erased a two-set deficit against martina hingis's fiancé, radek stepanek, to win in five sets. stepanek, a czech, was back to being a spectator saturday as hingis reached the fourth round of the women's event with a 6-2, 6-1 victory over akiko nakamura of japan. top-seeded maria sharapova also advanced, defeating tathiana garbin of italy, 6-3, 6-1.  on the men's side, eighth-seeded david nalbandian came from two sets down and fended off three match points to beat sebastien grosjean, 5-7, 4-6, 7-6 (4), 6-4, 6-1  friday was a trying night for safin, once the world's no. 1 player before injuries and meandering motivation knocked him back. in the third set, he skinned the pinky finger on his right hand while diving unsuccessfully for a drop shot and required treatment. before the start of the fourth set, he lost his temper after wayne mcewen, the tournament referee, insisted he play on after a slight rain delay. although the roof had been closed, safin was concerned that the court area outside the lines had not dried, and he spent much of the set expanding on his argument and frustration, in sometimes profane fashion, with mcewen, and the chair umpire, pascal maria.  safin, as is his custom, did not let his rant ruin his rhythm. but roddick proved to be a fresher, more consistent player down the stretch. after struggling in tie breakers at the end of 2006, roddick won both handily against safin.  darren cahill, andre agassi's longtime coach who is in melbourne to do television commentary, said there were three big differences in the roddick of last year and this year. ''confidence, confidence and confidence,'' cahill said, laughing.  ''i don't think the backhand is much different. he's just playing it closer up in the court and is willing to take it down the line and willing to pull a few triggers with it,'' cahill said. ''i think you need the confidence, the ability to make the shot, and once you have that, he's a much more aggressive player. so he's got a good break game at the moment, and we know how good his hold game is. he's a threat, a threat to everyone.''  it is early to start sounding triumphant. roddick has yet to get past the fourth round in this event, and this year's opponent will be another power player, ninth-seeded mario ancic of croatia. roddick holds a 4-0 edge in their matches but sees plenty of improvement in ancic.  ''mario is a different player now than even when i played him in the semifinals of wimbledon,'' roddick said. ''i have the next highest-seeded guy i would have possibly played in the fourth round, so it definitely doesn't get any easier.  ''it started out tough this year,'' added roddick, who struggled to get past the french wild card jo-wilfried tsonga in the first round. ''i was up against it in the first round, and it seems like it's just going to continue to be that way. some tournaments are like that, and you somehow just try to survive an event.''  tennis  