shutting doors where a drug-making giant began   pfizer is closing the plant in the borough where it was born.  as part of broad cutbacks announced yesterday, pfizer will phase out its brooklyn manufacturing plant over the next two years, eliminating 600 jobs.  the building, on flushing avenue, is pfizer's oldest active manufacturing plant and is on the same site where pfizer was founded in 1849 by the cousins charles pfizer and charles erhart of germany.  ''colleagues were shocked and disappointed by the news, but acted very maturely,'' said bill barberich, the plant's site leader, standing outside the three-and-a-half acre compound after a morning meeting where employees were told the news. ninety jobs will be cut between now and march 31, with the rest to follow gradually this year and next. ''it's a very bad day for a lot of people,'' he added.  the cutbacks are because of increasing competition from generic drug makers and are an effort to improve efficiency and cost-effectiveness. according to pfizer officials, several of the products made at the plant have recently lost patent protection or will soon. mr. barberich said it was impractical to maintain the brooklyn plant because of changing technologies.  ''this was a very difficult decision for the company to make,'' macdara lynch, pfizer's vice president for manufacturing for the eastern united states and canada, said in a press release. ''our colleagues at the brooklyn plant have contributed significantly to pfizer's success over many years and we're committed to providing them with as much support as possible during this transition period, including severance, job placement assistance and other benefits.''  some employees stopped to talk as they exited the company parking lot, saying they had been anticipating the closing for a while. however, the announcement still came as a surprise.  ''before today it was just rumors,'' said johnny ortiz, 35, who has worked at the plant for 10 years, most recently as a product supervisor. ''it's shocking, but what can you do.'' he said he intended to apply for other positions with pfizer.  mr. barberich, who has, like everyone else, been given no future job guarantee, started at the plant as an engineer in 1988 and has worked in packaging and manufacturing during his 16-year career there. ''this is a great facility, and i've really enjoyed working here,'' he said. ''the people here are just fantastic. there's a lot of history. there's a lot of pride.''  besides the 660,000-square-foot plant, which takes up the block between marcy and tompkins avenues, pfizer owns additional real estate nearby totaling 15 acres. company officials said they were working with government and community leaders to find an appropriate use for the various properties, which include a charter school which will remain open. also nearby is pfizer's original 1849 building, which the company plans to restore.  a pfizer employee, jessica ortiz, who grew up across the street from the plant, said she hoped they will turn it into a museum. she says the plant holds many memories for her, including meeting her husband on the job there several years ago. ''it's a pfizer love story,'' she said, laughing, as she followed her husband's car out of the lot. she added that she found the news something of a relief after expecting it for so many months. ''we're looking at it as a new start.''  it was far less of a relief in michigan, where news that pfizer will eliminate about 2,400 jobs there stunned a state already suffering through the worst stretch of the job losses since the depression. over the last six years, michigan has lost more than 200,000 factory jobs, mostly in the automotive industry, and gov. jennifer m. granholm has been campaigning to restructure the economy around high-technology fields like life sciences.  besides hindering that effort, pfizer's actions are an unexpected setback for ann arbor, which is less than an hour's drive from detroit but had managed to avoid much of the turmoil. google recently opened an office in ann arbor, home to the university of michigan, and eventually plans to employ 1,000 people.  but the 177-acre ann arbor campus that pfizer is closing had twice as many workers as google will have. in kalamazoo, 250 jobs will be lost, although manufacturing operations south of the city employing more than 4,000 workers will remain open, to the relief of officials.  ''this is a tough blow to a state that is already reeling,'' ms. granholm said at a news conference in ann arbor. ''this is a punch in the gut, but we are going to recover.''  the defensive stance that people in michigan have become accustomed to taking whenever a mass layoff is announced was evident at the news conference, where ms. granholm was joined by 10 state and local officials less than 90 minutes after pfizer detailed its cuts.  the governor took pains to point out that pfizer's decision ''had nothing to do with michigan being an expensive place'' and that there was ''nothing that michigan could have done'' to prevent the job losses. ''if we could have done it,'' she added, ''believe me, we would have done it.''  in fact, pfizer expanded its ann arbor research offices to two million square feet recently with a city-approved tax credit worth $800 million, the largest such package ann arbor had ever given.  although pfizer said that a ''substantial number'' of affected workers may be able to transfer to facilities elsewhere, governor granholm and local leaders said they hope to persuade many of those being laid off to stay in the area.  adding to the resentment felt in michigan toward pfizer's decision is the fact that the facilities affected were once the hubs of locally founded pharmaceutical companies -- parke-davis in ann arbor and the upjohn company in kalamazoo. upjohn once had 2,000 workers in downtown kalamazoo, but the cutbacks will leave that city with only 100 pfizer employees.  