quick bite/haddam; luckily, takeout serves more than 8   the name of the shop, the cooking company, sounds fairly mundane, but this extensive specialty-food supply store is anything but ordinary. among the daily choices are 2 freshly made soups, like tomato asiago or white bean and escarole, and 12 different sandwiches, including grilled panini (a favorite combination: smoked turkey, gorgonzola, pesto and roasted red peppers).  four or five salads are also part of the daily mix. the many rotating options include bow-tie pasta with asiago cheese in a lemon dressing; carrot and golden raisins, yellow rice and black beans; and greek and cobb salads. most popular is the chicken caesar pasta salad.  inside, the cooking company seats just eight (there is additional seating out front in warm weather). but a chef, pastry chef and two assistants turn out a good number of luscious dishes to go, including walnut-crusted pork loin with a mustard cream sauce, and many comfort foods, like chicken potpie, chicken enchiladas and various lasagnas.  desserts are a big deal here, said the owner, susan bauer, citing the peanut chocolate mousse cake, hazelnut mousse cake and coconut cake with passion-fruit mousse as being especially popular. virtually everything is made in-house except the breads, which are from fabled foods in deep river.  aside from all the goodies to enjoy at lunchtime, the cooking company also sells delicatessen items like genoa salami, maple-smoked turkey and spicy capicola hams. a freezer offers prepared-ahead frozen dishes and a refrigerator features dishes ready to heat up at home for dinner. there is a coffee bar near the entrance with daybreak coffees and a second room stocked with all kinds of gourmet goodies, including vinegars, olive oils, unusual jams, other preserves and various comestibles.  the cooking company, swing bridge market place, 1610 sabrook road, haddam; (860) 345-8008. open 10 a.m. to 7 p.m. monday through friday, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. saturday.  patricia brooks  connecticut  