williams hangs on to advance to semifinals   shahar peer did not make it easy, tracking down big shots that others might not have bothered to chase and rallying from a 4-1 deficit in the third set. serena williams did not make it easy on herself, struggling with her movement and timing and never looking entirely comfortable.  but in the end, williams's remarkable australian open continued tuesday with a 3-6, 6-2, 8-6 victory against the determined, fleet-footed peer, an israeli, putting her back in the semifinals of the year's first grand slam tennis event.  williams, who won this tournament in 2003 and 2005, will face the 10th-seeded nicole vaidisova, a powerful, temperamental 17-year-old who advanced by defeating the 19-year-old lucie safarova, 6-1, 6-4, in their all-czech quarterfinal.  vaidisova, whose talent was spotted and nurtured early by the international management group, has long been considered tennis's next big thing and promoted accordingly. but she began living up to the hype at last year's french open, where she reached the semifinals after defeating the top-seeded amélie mauresmo and williams's sister venus.  now vaidisova, a tall blonde who was born in germany, grew up in the czech republic and trained in florida, will have the chance to face another williams for the first time. she has been watching serena williams from close range since vaidisova was a 12-year-old at nick bollettieri's academy.  ''i was definitely a big fan of hers, admired the way she played,'' vaidisova said.  there has not been much playing to admire in the past two years; williams has kept her matches and victories to a minimum. she has not reached a final since winning here in 2005. this is only her second event since september, and she arrived in melbourne ranked 81st amid considerable skepticism about her fitness and commitment. she had a lengthy off-season, which was disrupted by an emotional trial; she and her father, richard, were involved in a breach-of-contract lawsuit.  but williams, despite a nagging cold, is now two victories from a third australian open title. she has already guaranteed herself a spot in the top 30 in next week's rankings. although vaidisova should be the fresher player, that was also true of williams's four previous seeded victims here: no 27 mara santangelo, no. 5 nadia petrova, no. 11 jelena jankovic and now the 16th-seeded peer.  ''i'm just happy to be out here and competing,'' williams said in her on-court remarks to the crowd at rod laver arena, punctuating her sentences with big sips from her water bottle. ''i'm just so excited. yet another seed!''  this was not nearly the same level of performance as her victory against jankovic in the fourth round. williams had 49 unforced errors to 30 winners and put less than 60 percent of her first serves in play against peer. but she maintained her good habits of serving well under duress and attacking the net effectively.  ''i was just feeling bad for her because she was so flat,'' said her mother and coach, oracene price, of the match's early stages. ''and she was getting down on herself. she didn't understand why she wasn't playing better.''  after peer had clawed back to 4-4 in the third, williams fell behind, 15-40, on her serve but got back to deuce with consecutive aces. she later saved another in that game with a first serve that peer could not handle. at 5-5, williams was down another break point and saved it with a huge first serve and swinging forehand volley that landed on the line.  but peer, 19, the first israeli woman to reach this stage of a grand slam tournament, held firm on her own serve until the 13th game. then, at 30-30, williams nailed a backhand passing shot crosscourt that peer volleyed long. peer then missed a backhand on the next point, allowing williams to serve out the match.  ''she's not quite there and still kicking butt,'' said price, who expressed pride and mild surprise at her daughter's performance here. she added: ''she's enjoying the competition and really wants to get back. hopefully now she can stay halfway healthy.''  while the women played in the warmth of the australian summer on tuesday, the temperature was much different a few hours earlier when the second-seeded rafael nadal finally managed to shake free of andy murray, a 19-year-old from scotland, in the most compelling match of the men's tournament.  for close to four hours in the fourth round, the 15th-seeded murray and nadal gave the few thousands fans left in the stands at rod laver arena much more than their money's worth. they turned terrific shots and lunging gets into the coin of their realm as they tested the limits of each other's abilities. when this first match between them had finally ended, nadal was a 6-7 (3), 6-4, 4-6, 6-3, 6-1 winner, and the prevailing sentiment was that it had better not be their last meeting.  if this is what the next generation has in store, then tennis is in good hands. for now, nadal, a left-hander from spain, has the advantage in terms of achievement, and physical and mental strength.  nadal, 20, has won the past two french open titles and 15 other tournaments. he has clearly established himself as the world's second-best player behind roger federer, whom nadal happens to have beaten six times in nine matches.  if nadal had not saved all 10 break points he faced in the final two sets, the match could have been very different.  ''i think this will be one of those matches i'll remember the most,'' said nadal, who will face the 10th-seeded fernando gonzález of chile in the first australian open quarterfinal for both.  gonzález eliminated the fifth-seeded james blake on monday, 7-5, 6-4, 7-6 (4). their fourth-round match could have been more compelling if blake had not failed to convert on three set points in the opening set with gonzález serving at 4-5, 0-40.  blake, who swept to a title in sydney this month and appeared in rare form here in the early rounds, also led by 4-2, 40-0 on his serve in the second set. but gonzález caught him from behind again, defeating blake for a fourth consecutive time.  ''i think that james got a little too angry,'' said patrick mcenroe, the united states davis cup captain. ''he doesn't play well when he gets negative. he plays better when he has fun and he's applauding the other guy's shots. i think he maybe felt the pressure a little bit. he also played a guy as hot as he was.''  the top-seeded player in the women's draw, maria sharapova, has recovered well after nearly staggering out of the tournament in 110-degree heat in the first round. on monday night, she had her troubles but defeated a tricky and resurgent vera zvonareva of russia, 7-5, 6-4.  sharapova is back in the quarterfinals, where she will face the 12th-seeded anna chakvetadze.  tennis  