bush administration, under criticism, warns iraq to fulfill its end of the bargain   president bush and his top advisers, after nine days of unrelenting criticism from congress, are warning the iraqi government that continuing funding for an american troop increase and other elements of mr. bush's new iraq strategy will be contingent on prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki's delivery on promises to quell violence, senior administration officials said in recent interviews.  ''it's going to be a little bit pay-as-you-go, and it's going to depend a lot on iraqis performing,'' stephen j. hadley, president bush's national security adviser, said friday.  ''as mr. maliki's government follows through on its promises,'' mr. hadley said, the administration will ''be in a much better position to resist any efforts to fence the funds'' when the iraq budget request goes before congress.  the warning is coming despite president bush's declaration, in an interview last weekend, that he had the sole authority to carry out the strategy, including an increase of about 18,000 troops to secure baghdad. now, administration officials, who have carefully avoided declaring outright that the american commitment in iraq would be cut back if mr. maliki fails, are using the open hostility of most democrats and the skepticism of many republicans as a way to underscore to the prime minister that the white house plan represents a last chance for him.  in recent days, however, as mr. bush's plan has come under attack in both houses, white house officials are trying to head off both a vote condemning mr. bush's approach and a longer-term effort to restrict money or limit the number of troops that can be sent.  the white house has dismissed some of that criticism as partisan and ''poisonous,'' the word it used in response to house speaker nancy pelosi's charge on friday that mr. bush knows that ''because the troops are in harm's way, that we won't cut off the resources.'' she went on to charge, ''that's why he's moving so quickly to put them in harm's way.''  but even the ranking republican member of the senate armed services committee, senator john w. warner of virginia, has declared deep concern about the wisdom of sending more troops, and one of the nation's most senior retired marines, gen. joseph p. hoar, told the senate foreign relations committee that ''the addition of 20,000 troops is too, little too late.''  the result is that some members of the administration are already discussing what one called ''plan c,'' even as the administration publicly expresses support for mr. maliki. some senior officials, insisting on anonymity, are discussing alternative leadership for the iraqi government, including throwing american support behind another shiite leader, adel abdul mahdi. mr. mahdi is the deputy to abdul aziz al-hakim, the leader of the iranian-backed supreme council of the islamic revolution in iraq, a party known as sciri. mr. mahdi has long been a favorite of the white house to take the top job; he lost out last spring when the anti-american cleric moktada al-sadr, whose family has long feuded with mr. hakim's, threw his support behind mr. maliki in a vote within the shiite coalition.  administration officials maintain that there is no american plan afoot to encourage a removal of mr. maliki from power, and several senior officials said that if mr. maliki does not follow through on his promise to deploy iraqi army and police brigades in baghdad to quell sectarian violence, the iraqis themselves will move to replace him as prime minister.  some in the administration complain that backing a member of mr. hakim's party would quickly give iran enormous influence over the iraqi government; when american military forces picked up iranian operatives in baghdad late last month, the raid took place within mr. hakim's compound. those operatives were later released after iran and iraq claimed they had diplomatic immunity; the pentagon said one of the men was the chief of operations for an elite iranian military unit.  the conflicting signals here reflect doubt within the administration that mr. maliki will actually prove either willing or able to crack down on shiite militia groups, which make up a large percentage of his support base.  secretary of state condoleezza rice's recent trip through the region to sell america's sunni arab allies on mr. bush's iraq strategy, underscored just how much hostility there is among sunni arabs toward mr. maliki, administration officials said. ''what she heard was that maliki has failed completely, both politically and personally, and they don't trust him to crack down on the shiites,'' one senior administration official said.  mr. hadley expressed concern about mr. maliki in a memorandum to mr. bush in november, which was later leaked. but his comments on friday appeared to be the first time that any senior administration official had suggested that should those doubts grow, congress could imperil mr. bush's new approach.  administration officials, in interviews, said they were not conceding that congress was heading toward making a troop increase contingent on iraqi action. but by warning the iraqis of the possibility, they are clearly both using congress's dissatisfaction to gain leverage, and preparing for the possibility that the democratic majority may impose conditions that mr. bush has resisted.  last sunday, on the cbs program ''60 minutes,'' mr. bush insisted that he has the authority as commander-in-chief to execute his strategy, no matter what kind of objections congress raises. ''in this situation, i do, yeah,'' he said. ''now, i fully understand they could try to stop me from doing it. but i made my decision, and we're going forward.''  interviews with senior administration officials, however, indicated that now that question is no longer viewed in such black-and-white terms. while mr. bush clearly has the money to keep his strategy afloat for a number of months, there is a growing realization that domestic pressure to place a ''cap'' on troop levels or begin withdrawal could become overwhelming. so, in an effort to turn a potential constraint into a negotiating tool, mr. bush's aides have begun to tell iraqi politicians that congress's patience with the pace of the war is just about exhausted.  ''if they do perform in the next two months, we've probably bought ourselves another four months,'' said one senior administration official, referring to the iraqi government.  the hedging under way reflects a continuing debate within the administration about how explicitly to make the proposed troop increase conditional on iraqi performance, administration officials said. that debate was still on display even after mr. bush, in his speech to the nation on jan. 10, praised the maliki government's ''strong commitment'' to ending sectarian violence, and pledged that ''america will change our strategy help the iraqis carry out their campaign to put down sectarian violence--and bring security to the people of baghdad.''  but the next morning, both ms. rice and defense secretary robert m. gates struck a different note. ''among americans and iraqis, there is no confusion over one basic fact: it is the iraqis who are responsible for what kind of country iraq will be,'' ms. rice said during a news briefing at the white house. ''the president has conveyed to the iraqi leadership that we will support their good decisions, but that americans' patience is limited.''  mr. gates went further a week ago when he suggested that the united states had built ''off-ramps'' in case the troop reinforcement was not needed, and said that if they were used, ''you don't necessarily have to go to the full extent of the buildup.'' at another point, he said, ''we're going to know pretty early on whether the iraqis are meeting their military commitments,'' he said.  but american officials have been cagey about how they would respond if they conclude mr. maliki is unwilling or unable to face down shiite militias, or strike the deals necessary to reach a political accord with the minority sunnis. american leverage over mr. maliki is limited, especially because he has never been enthusiastic about an increase of american troops, and has even suggested that he is not interested in remaining the country's leader for long.  ''the baseline strategy is that we'll invest in good performance, not in things we consider foolish and destructive,'' said philip d. zelikow, the former counselor at the state department who participated in the administration's iraq strategy review. ''since the odds that the iraqi government are genuinely going to adopt'' the iraqi part of the troop increase ''are uncertain, recent events reinforce the need to underscore this baseline strategy, which may not seem to promise a big win but also doesn't seem to be placing such a big gamble,'' mr. zelikow said.  the struggle for iraq  