democratic governor of new mexico joins race   gov. bill richardson of new mexico said on sunday that he intended to run for the democratic nomination for president, joining a growing field that includes senators hillary clinton of new york (since saturday) and barack obama of illinois (since tuesday).  mr. richardson, elected to a second term as governor in november with a historic 69 percent of the vote, has a varied résumé. he was elected to congress to represent the santa fe area eight times, and then was chosen by president bill clinton to be ambassador to the united nations, and later, secretary of energy.  as governor, he has kept a hand in international politics, working to arrange a cease-fire this month between the government of sudan and rebels in the darfur region, and meeting several times with officials from north korea to discuss nuclear weapons.  mr. richardson, 59, was born in pasadena, calif., and spent part of his childhood in mexico city. his mother is from mexico.  in an interview sunday on the abc program ''this week,'' mr. richardson said: ''i believe this country is a very tolerant, positive country. i believe the country would be ready for a woman president, an african-american president, hispanic president.''  he added, ''but i wouldn't run as a hispanic candidate. i would run as an american, proud to be hispanic, proud of my heritage.''  video of his announcement appears on his web site in english and spanish.  mr. richardson also emphasized his experience as governor, dealing with budgets, health care, the environment, drunken driving and other issues. in his position as chairman of the western governors' association and at home in santa fe he has been a proponent of renewable energy sources.  mr. richardson is an enthusiastic campaigner. according to his campaign, the guinness book of world records cites him as the politician who shook the most hands in one day -- 13,392 -- during his 2002 campaign for governor, beating president theodore roosevelt's record of 8,515, set in 1909.  perhaps more relevant to a national campaign, mr. richardson is also a strong fund-raiser. while chairman of the democratic governors association, he raised more than $28 million for candidates for governor.  