yo quiero marry carla   before i proposedto my girlfriend, i asked for her father's permission. he's not particularly protective of her -- and i'm not particularly noble -- but i thought he'd appreciate the gesture. i assumed that it was a tradition in his native uruguay. in retrospect, i might have been confusing ''uruguay'' with ''medieval europe.''  first i needed to translate my request into spanish. my girlfriend's parents emigrated from montevideo to new york more than 30 years ago, but other than a few rudimentary phrases, they never learned english. i suppose they typify the conservative fear that immigrants don't assimilate. on the other hand, their daughter proved that successive latino generations are able to jump across class boundaries and date jews with chronic back pain.  when i first started dating carla, i bought a set of instructional spanish-language cds, which taught me that ''un toyota es un coche japonés,'' a phrase i sprinkled into conversation whenever possible. when i reached an eighth-grade level, i stopped studying. carla and i were serious by then, so i could stop trying to impress her with things like language skills or proper table manners.  i planned to ask roberto, my prospective father-in-law, for his daughter's mano when he gave me a ride to the airport one morning in his chevy malibu, un coche americano. roberto is compact and barrel-chested and has thick fingers like sausages. he has arthritic hips from decades spent working at a meatpacking plant in brooklyn. (we had bonded over the fact that we took the same painkillers.) usually carla translates for us, but she was absent on this trip, so we sat in silence. occasionally he would ask, ''you hungry?'' -- one of his few english phrases -- and offer me a banana from a small cooler.  when we arrived at the terminal, i cleared my throat and recited, in my feeble spanish accent, what i had committed to memory with the help of an online translator: ''roberto, deseo pedirle algo muy muy importante. ...''  when i finished, he was momentarily stunned. uh-oh. had i confused the word for ''marry'' with the word for ''impregnate''? but then he nodded and congratulated me. i reminded him not to tell carla, and i called him ''papi.'' we were going to be family.  as soon as i landed in chicago, my phone rang. it was carla. ''did you say something strange to my dad at the airport?'' she asked. ''because he just called to congratulate me on getting married.''  i swallowed my gum. ''uh ... that's weird. i don't know why he would say that. i certainly didn't tell him anything like that.''  ''my mother is crying in the bathroom because she thinks i got married without telling her.''  ''wow, i guess he must have, uh, gotten confused. you know, i have to get my luggage. can i call you back?'' i hung up on the woman i wanted to marry.  how could roberto have misunderstood me? i had double-checked the translation on two different web sites! then i realized: usually when i speak spanish to him, my syntax is a mess. this time, he must have assumed i was messing up as i always do, and he figured that when i said, ''i want to marry your daughter,'' i actually meant, ''i married your daughter.'' he had ''auto-corrected'' me. like microsoft word.  i took a deep breath and called her parents. ''yo no marry carla,'' i told them. ''yo quiero marry carla. en la futura! la futura!'' passengers at gate 6 stared at me, a crazy gringo bleating into his treo.  eventually i got them to understand what happened. but in order to still surprise carla with a proposal, i would need to lie to her, and i'd need to rope them into the lie too. i tried to come up with something worthy of a telenovela. ''o.k., o.k. esta el plan. yo voy dicer a carla que yo mentioned un otro wedding, y tu piensas que el otro wedding es nos wedding. comprende?''  it was ridiculous, but they figured it out. ''si, miguel. comprendemos.''  bueno. i called carla back and explained the whole crazy misunderstanding -- about the otro wedding, and how i had asked to borrow her dad's car for this otro wedding, and how he must have gotten confused and thought we got married.  ''uh-huh,'' she said, without a trace of gullibility.  ''yeah, it's weird, huh?'' i said. then i got off the phone as quickly as possible.  i waited a few weeks to make an actual proposal, hoping carla would have forgotten about this incident. meanwhile, we didn't speak about it. in fact, we avoided discussing any long-term plans or the future at all, as if one of us were terminally ill.  one morning i walked by her open laptop and noticed that she had conspicuously left up a web page showing particular styles of engagement rings. it was time to make my move.  i planned a proposal in the form of a puzzle, like something out of ''the amazing race'' and those other reality game shows that i refused to watch with her. a series of clues led carla around our apartment and eventually to the roof, where i waited with a ring that i somehow knew she would like. then i explained what had happened with her father, most of which she had already surmised. and i made her a promise: i would never, ever do anything noble again.  the funny pages: ii: true-life tales michael colton is a screenwriter and a panelist on the vh1 program ''best week ever.''  