today in business   selling the state lottery illinois took steps to sell its state lottery for as much as $10 billion to investors. in return, the buyers would operate the lottery and receive all revenues and profits for 75 years. [page a1]  pfizer cutting plants and jobs the drug giant pfizer said that it would cut 7,800 workers and close several manufacturing plants -- including one in brooklyn -- as well as some research sites as it tries to bolster earnings hurt by the loss of patent protection on certain drugs and to overcome setbacks in developing new products. [page c1]  good cholesterol from vitamin b pfizer halted late-stage trials of torcetrapib, a cholesterol drug meant to increase hdl, or good cholesterol. scientists now think an effective hdl booster already exists. it is niacin, the ordinary b vitamin. [f5]  passport problems the new requirement beginning today that americans use a passport when they fly between the united states and any point in the western hemisphere has increased demand for passports. the demand has hurt some last-minute travelers who are having trouble obtaining passports. [c1]  shake-up at citigroup citigroup shuffled its management ranks for the second time in a little more than a month in a shake-up that raises questions about the bank's ability to turn itself around. [c1]  big day for ethanol after three decades of surviving mostly on tax subsidies, the ethanol industry is poised to get its biggest endorsement yet. president bush, in his state of the union address tonight, is expected to call for a huge increase in the amount of ethanol that refiners mix with gasoline, a proposal that could double the current goal. [c1]  energy from a rock? the united states could generate as much electricity by 2050 as it does now from nuclear power plants by tapping into the heat in layers of granite, the energy department says. [c4]  chief is out at the gap for the last two weeks, members of the gap's directors were involved in a secret conference calls with fellow directors over whether to fire the chief executive, paul s. pressler. yesterday, mr. pressler stepped down. [c1]  sun and intel make a deal  sun microsystems and intel said that they have made a deal for sun to use intel chips in some of its computer servers, a setback for the rival chipmaker, advanced micro devices. the deal is of particular significance for sun, which has been struggling to recover since becoming a casualty of the dot-com bust that started in 2000. under the deal, sun will use intel's xeon chip in some servers starting late in the first half of this year. [c2]  more viewers, please the academy of motion picture arts and sciences and its television partner, abc begin their campaigns to encourage viewers to watch the 79th academy awards show feb. 25. but this year, the campaigns are significantly different. adverstising [c5]  music-copying limits could ease executives at midem, the global trade fair for the music industry, said that at least one major record company could move toward the sale of unrestricted digital files in the mp3 format within months. [c5]  orbitz's parent explores i.p.o. orbitz's parent company, travelport, has hired the investment bank ubs to explore an initial public offering for the subsidiary, according to a person briefed on the plan. [c3]  ford's new hybrid move over, gas-electric hybrid. ford has a new entry, the electric-electric hybrid. but there is only one car and it cost $2 million. [c3]  counter offer for reit equity office properties, the nation's largest office landlord, which agreed in november to be bought by the blackstone group, said that it would begin discussions with a rival group that have offered to top that price. equity office will now consider an offer from vornado realty trust.[c7]  comfy hotel? thank a woman  joe sharkey says he thinks the number of women business travelers is growing. and that, he says, has probably led the major hotel chains to upgrade bed, lights and bathrooms. on the road. [c8]  online  business briefing  articles on these developments are at nytimes.com/business.  the european union's chief trade negotiator said that efforts to restart stalled global trade talks were showing new vigor. but he sought to discourage expectations that a breakthrough could come during a meeting of trade ministers this week alongside the global economic forum in davos, switzerland. (nyt)  movie gallery, the video rental store operator, posted a third-quarter loss that nearly tripled the loss from a year earlier, weighed down by charges for store closings, the company's revamping and other items. (reuters)  the career education corporation, which operates more than 80 campuses in the united states and overseas, said that the education department lifted a ban imposed in june 2005 that limited acquisitions and expansion. (bloomberg news)  northwest airlines will take control of mesaba airlines, the bankrupt regional carrier, in a step toward its own exit from bankruptcy. mesaba will become a unit of northwest under an agreement with mesaba's parent, mair holdings. (bloomberg news)  swift, the beef and pork producer, said that it had hired jpmorgan chase to help review strategic alternatives, including a possible buyout, after receiving ''unsolicited inquiries'' during the last six months. (bloomberg news)  