giant does not blame bonds for link to positive drug test   this should have been a feel-good event, part of a fanfest weekend being staged by the san francisco giants. maybe some softball questions from reporters and some home run responses from the 14 giants players who were taking part.  but today's gathering at at&t park had a distinct edge to it, and in the middle of it all was a relatively anonymous player named mark sweeney, or at least he was relatively anonymous until he found his name linked to barry bonds last week in an article that said bonds tested positive for amphetamines in 2006.  the story, in the daily news, said that when bonds learned of the positive test, he initially tried to pass the blame to sweeney, a 37-year-old utility player, saying he had taken a substance from sweeney's locker. the same day that the story appeared, bonds issued a public apology in which he did not deny testing positive, stated that sweeney ''did not give me anything whatsoever'' but also did not deny that he might have originally implicated sweeney, a player who has all of 40 home runs in 12 major league seasons, or a lot fewer than bonds does.  there the matter has stood for a week, with speculation growing that the giants may try to back out of a tentative $16 million deal they have with bonds for the 2007 season. bonds was not present friday, so reporters gathered around sweeney, looking for answers from someone who acknowledged that he was ''usually under the radar.''  while the other players sat and ignored, sweeney did his best to cooperate. he said that bonds called him last week to apologize for his name being linked to the story, saying that ''barry has a heart, too, just like everyone else.''  more significant, sweeney seemed to absolve bonds of blame, implying that bonds had never mentioned his name at any point in connection with the amphetamines test.  ''my name somehow got linked to it and it wasn't through barry, so, no, i don't blame barry for this,'' he said. asked how his name could have been linked to bonds in the first place, if bonds did not mention him, sweeney said it was ''something for other people to solve.''  ''i've always been fine with barry, and nothing has changed,'' sweeney said in summation, which may be comforting words for the giants -- if bonds is part of the team this coming season.  no one knows for sure where the giants stand on the issue, and the team's general manager, brian sabean, calmly tried to deal with the reporters who gathered around him after they were done with sweeney.  ''there are things on his wish list we haven't come to closure with,'' sabean said of bonds, the 42-year-old slugger who needs 22 home runs to break hank aaron's career home run mark but also remains under investigation by a federal grand jury in connection with the bay area laboratory co-operative steroid-distribution case.  he said the giants and bonds had ''longstanding differences'' on contract issues, called bonds ''an unsigned player'' and said that ''i'm sure in time it will get resolved,'' although sabean seemed to be referring to the overall situation being resolved and not bonds's contract.  sabean also said he had a ''plan b, c and d'' but that he did not have another player ''definitively in mind'' to replace bonds if bonds is not a giant in 2007.  bruce bochy, who migrated north from san diego to become the giants' manager, took it all in and acknowledged that the bonds-sweeney questions were distracting.  ''we're trying to reignite expectations to win here,'' he said.  he will try to do that saturday, when giants fans get their turn with the players and perhaps will ask some of the same questions the reporters did.  baseball  