coaches bet in big spots, and players make them look wise   for a trip to the super bowl, bill belichick and tony dungy were willing to take chances.  both belichick and dungy coached aggressively during sunday's american football conference championship game. belichick, the new england patriots' coach, set the tone, giving his team early momentum by choosing to go for a first down, rather than punt, on two occasions during the first half. both times, the patriots made belichick look good, converting the first down. and on both of those drives, the patriots scored a touchdown.  the patriots built a 21-3 lead and stayed aggressive throughout. leading by 34-31 with 3 minutes 22 seconds remaining, they appeared to be going for the kill, rather than trying to kill the clock. they ran three straight passing plays and did not get a first down. new england was forced to punt after running only a minute off the clock.  the colts scored 1:17 later, aided greatly by a roughing the passer penalty on tully banta-cain, to win, 38-34.  belichick's first gamble came less than seven minutes into the game, facing a fourth-and-1 from the colts' 48-yard line. the game was still scoreless, and many coaches would have decided to punt, hoping to pin the colts deep in their own territory.  not belichick, who has a penchant for becoming more aggressive during the playoffs, contrary to coaches who become more conservative. the patriots made the first down with a huge play, when corey dillon ran through a gaping hole and rumbled 35 yards to the colts' 13-yard line. three plays later, the patriots scored a weird touchdown, when offensive guard logan mankins recovered a fumble in the end zone after a wild scramble.  leading by 7-3 early in the second quarter, belichick gambled again with the patriots facing fourth-and-6 from the colts' 34. belichick could have called for a punt, or for a long field-goal attempt by the rookie place-kicker stephen gostkowski. instead, belichick turned to quarterback tom brady, something he has done often.  ''i'll go back to another saying that i think would define my philosophy as a coach,'' belichick said thursday. ''in critical situations, think of players, not plays. i think a lot of coaches live by that motto. when it comes to a critical situation, you want your best playmakers critically involved in the play.''  on the fourth-and-6 play, brady found a familiar target, wide receiver troy brown, running free in the middle of the field. the fourth-down pass play from brady to brown covered 27 yards, giving the patriots first-and-goal at the 7. on the next play, dillon rumbled into the end zone to give the patriots a 14-3 edge.  but the colts rallied, giving dungy a chance to show his gambler's mentality. with just over four minutes remaining in the third quarter, peyton manning threw a 1-yard touchdown pass to defensive tackle dan klecko, who had come in on offense, to pull the colts within 21-19, then dungy called for a 2-point conversion. the colts had more than a quarter to catch up, and they could have kicked an extra point to pull within a point.  but dungy wanted to catch up immediately. his decision paid off, when manning connected with marvin harrison in the end zone for the conversion, tying the score.  pro football  