weeds in the garden state   despite its many problems, new jersey enjoys a reputation for tolerance among people of all backgrounds, and deservedly so. the state is one of the most diverse in the nation and its suburbs have increasingly become a home for immigrants from around the world.  it's disturbing, therefore, when an occasional ugly incident not only mars this reputation but causes great pain for those it's aimed at. two such episodes drew attention this month, and they were especially troublesome because this kind of behavior should have ended decades ago.  in south harrison, a still rural town just 25 miles south of philadelphia, charles tyson took office on new year's day as the town's first black mayor. but even before he was sworn in, anonymous callers were telephoning him with racial epithets, and the tires on his car were slashed. shortly after taking the oath of office, he received a death threat.  the incidents stopped after local officials sent letters describing what happened to almost all 2,700 town residents. town leaders defended their community for being tolerant, but the police chief said the calls were bias crimes. mr. tyson expressed disbelief that the incidents could still take place in the town he has lived in for 64 years.  in haledon, a town just outside of paterson, a gay policeman with 20 years on the force won $450,000 this month in settlement of a sexual harassment lawsuit that claimed, in part, that former town officials referred to him with anti-gay slurs. sgt. james len, backed up by other witnesses in sworn testimony, said that after he revealed in 2002 that he was gay, a former mayor described him as a ''three-dollar bill'' and a former councilman broadcast ''homo, homo, homo'' over the police radio.  with the settlement, haledon is paying a high price for the intolerable actions of a couple of officials, and we would hope that whoever is responsible will brought to justice in south harrison. the despicable actions of a handful must not be permitted to overshadow the genuine goodwill that the diverse people of new jersey have for each other.  new jersey  