kvetch   ''republicans,'' wrote mark leibovich and anne kornblut in the times, ''suddenly facing a minimum two-year sentence out of power, coalesced around a message of kvetching.''  ''it's not whining,'' insisted representative pat mchenry of north carolina, irritated at the way democrats were driving the early legislative agenda without permitting republicans to utter a peep (much as the g.o.p. members did when they were in the majority). ''it's a matter of calling them out on their rhetoric.''  the use of kvetching in the times not as a part of a quotation -- nor, for that matter, within quotation marks to indicate a slang or dialect expression -- is clear evidence that the word has been absorbed into the english language. merriam-webster's 11th collegiate defines the verb kvetch as ''to complain habitually''; it appeared in its citation files in 1952, the same year as its near-opposite, kvell, ''to be delighted,'' from the german quellen, ''to gush, swell,'' in most cases with pride. but within a decade, the grim kvetch, unlike the joyous kvell, made it as a noun.  it met a linguistic need that reflects the temper of contentious times: a kvetch is not merely ''a complainer, nag, sulker, grumbler, grouser, griper, whiner, moaner'' or the more formal ''malcontent.'' like most words imported to convey an especially vivid feeling, kvetch seems to sound like the quality it describes in a person. there is a lower-lip-biting itchiness to it; extended exposure to someone who is a kvetch may be subliminally related to the rhyming retch, or at least evokes the urge to spew out the onomatopoeic imprecation yecch!  usage of the word in all its forms -- verb, participle, now strongly noun -- has been assisted by ''born to kvetch: yiddish language and culture in all of its moods,'' by michael wex, and by what is described as ''a music/comedy cd'' by freddy and the froy boys titled ''kvetch 22,'' the name a pun on the unforgettable name of the 1961 novel by joseph heller. if the times is willing to adopt this yiddishism as both verb and noun (from kvetshn, from the german quetschen, literally ''to squeeze, pinch,'' the feeling you get from extended exposure to a kvetch), it is a breakthrough for color in reportage. makes every language maven kvell.  name that committee  who says the 110th house of representatives, with democrats in the majority, will be no different from the g.o.p.-dominated 109th? the names, they are a-changin': the word labor is back, with a capital l. in 1995, when the republicans took over after 40 years -- 14,610 interminable days -- in the minority wilderness, they changed the name of the education and labor committee to ''the committee on education and the workforce.''  why? because the word labor, capitalized, was taken to be ''big labor'' -- unions almost monolithically support democrats -- and here was a way to go over the union bosses' heads. the idea was to spread the committee's jurisdiction over the needs of all workers, especially the majority, who are not union members. (a bit of history: when president nixon accepted george meany's invitation to attend the annual a.f.l.-c.i.o. convention in bal harbour, fla., meany sat the president in the third row on the platform -- an unprecedented snub. charles colson, the white house counsel, came up with a fighting slogan afterward: ''remember bal harbour!'')  if labor was to be replaced, then with what? not workers; that word is associated with socialism (international workers of the world, or ''wobblies'') and communism (in its manifesto, ''workers of the world -- unite''). but there was another term, coined in 1931, during what revisionist republicans considered the unfairly maligned hoover administration: workforce. most dictionaries gave it two senses (and make it two words): ''all employees collectively, or those doing work in a particular firm or industry.''  therefore, one of the first actions in what speaker nancy pelosi dubbed ''the first 100 hours'' of the newly democratic house was to vote that ''clause 1(e) of rule 10 is amended by striking 'committee on education and the workforce' and inserting 'committee on education and labor.' '' nor was that all: the committee on government reform changed to the ''committee on oversight and government reform'' because reform is a goo-goo word and the democrats on it want to advertise that they intend to plunge into the oversight of the republican administration. oversight is a janus word, like sanction and the verb to table, burdened with opposite meanings. one sense of oversight is ''supervision with a touch of investigation''; the other is ''an error of omission; an inadvertent flub.'' presumably the feisty chairman, henry waxman, is interested in the former.  now we come to what the republicans called the committee on international relations. nobody admits it, but that's because the pre-1994 name, the democrats' committee on foreign affairs, had a racy connotation. one of its many senses is ''a romantic liaison of limited duration''; not even the senate used the phrase, preferring to call its committee foreign relations, which, if you have a dirty mind, is even more lascivious. besides, felt some in the g.o.p., there was a french feel to l'affaire.  at any rate, international relations is out and foreign affairs is back in, by order of the name-changing, clock-turning-back 110th house. one thought that has not occurred to those reveling in ''naming day in eden'': what's with the stuffy word committee? why not a military-based task force, or a with-it boardroom's working group?  the wall street journal's ''pepper ... and salt'' cartoon, happily returned to the editorial page, has a tv set blaring, ''and in other news, the house ethics committee today changed its name to the house 'everybody does it' committee.''  the way we live now: 1-21-07: on language  