beauty and the blizzard   while half of the country has been slammed with snow and ice, the other half has just begun to find its inner freezing point -- and hair and skin are feeling the fluctuations. clockwise from above, the winter beauty it list, products to brighten the grim mien of a dry white season.  this winter's secret weapon, curél targeted therapy deep-penetrating foot cream moisturizes for 24 hours, and at $4.99 a tube, why stop at your feet? (at wal-mart stores.)  overnight it:  patricia wexler m.d. dermatology intensive night reversal and repair cream does its work during long winter naps. ($42.50 at bath & body works stores).  all-purpose spot hydration is the mission of darphin's aromatic purifying balm. with 12 essential oils ($75 at bergdorf goodman).  tame tresses with frédéric fekkai winter hair anti-static weightless mist ($15 at saks fifth avenue stores).  from the cult beauty brand, amorepacific, time response intensive hand renewal creme is already selling out ($80 at neiman marcus stores, 888-888-4757 to order).  the face race: elixir ancien by fresh is a blend of pure oils and anti-aging extracts ($250 at www.fresh.com).  warming up as it lathers, collective wellbeing hot pore cleansing scrub addresses problem skin ($15 at whole foods stores).  sweet succor for dry cuticles, elbows, heels or any parched spot, courtesy of ile de tahiti's tamanoi balm ($20 at bath & body works).  lip moisturizer from malin + goetz, a serum, isn't sticky, greasy or fruity and doesn't taste like anything but a breath of fresh air ($12 at www.malinandgoetz.com).  just in time for spring break, paul labrecque's repair condition puts five ampules of lemongrass hair and scalp treatment in a kit for an intensive five-week conditioning course. ($55 at www.paullabrecque.com).  sunflower pollen extract is the inspiration for a new anti-aging collection from france, ultim.k killtime ($70 to $110 at www.blissworld.com).  to clear away that nasty brand of winter flake there is philip b. anti-flake relief shampoo ($35 at www.philipb.com).  exfoliate with caudalíe's vinothérapie gommage friction scrub, which comes in sauvignon, merlot or cabernet ($35 each at sephora).  pulse  