two deals stall, but a joke never gets started   you would think that when the red sox won the 2004 world series, it would have liberated their fans, enabled all of them to smile and laugh.  for whatever reason, however, some segment of that fan base doesn't recognize a joke when it encounters one -- unless, of course, the writer didn't tell it that well.  last week, i wrote a column about barry bonds and briefly mentioned j. d. drew, whose contract with boston, like bonds's contract with the san francisco giants, has yet to be completed. remarkably, the two players continue to be free agents seven weeks after they agreed on tentative deals with their respective clubs.  ''if both contracts were to fall through,'' i wrote in the last sentence of the first paragraph of the column, ''the red sox could sign bonds to play left field and move manny ramírez back to his original position in right.''  it was a joke, a throwaway line, but only one of more than two dozen readers who responded via e-mail messages seemed to figure it out.  ''i'm assuming,'' one fan wrote, ''that your comment about the sox signing bonds to play left and moving manny to 'his original position in right' was made tongue-in-cheek.''  give that man a cigar. as for the rest of the e-mail writers, do not pass go, do not collect $200.  ''manny ramírez in the expansive right field at fenway?!'' a new york lawyer and red sox fan wrote. ''why not make david ortiz the shortstop while they're at it.''  this was from the same lawyer who once vowed never to read another on baseball column by this writer but then sent a critical e-mail after the very next column about the red sox.  ''i thought you were never going to read another column?'' i replied by e-mail at the time.  ''i can't resist reading them,'' he wrote back.  to be fair, perhaps i failed to make it obvious that the bonds-ramírez idea was a joke; humor can be a dangerous area in which to tread. and, in the interest of full disclosure, it wasn't even completely my line. an editor was the first to say, in jest, that the red sox should just sign bonds instead of drew.  i laughed. i liked the line and i borrowed it. to make sure readers would understand i was joking, i even tossed ramírez into the mix. but that apparently didn't work too well.  ''further proof that you've become quite the laughingstock,'' one red sox reader wrote.  ''have you seen manny play in the outfield?'' another boston fan wrote. ''and you want to move him to the more difficult position at fenway?'' further, he added, ''why would the red sox want bonds and all the baggage?''  a good question, and one that can also be asked of the giants, who continue to negotiate with the agent for bonds amid questions about whether bonds will have anywhere to play in 2007.  ''all material terms of the deal are in place,'' jeff borris, bonds's agent, said yesterday. ''i have every reason to believe that things are headed in the right direction.''  he declined to say what had held up completion of the contract, and he said he couldn't predict a timetable for its completion.  brian sabean, the giants' general manager, left open the possibility that the two sides could fail to complete the deal.  ''i think it's going to be resolved one way or another very soon,'' sabean said yesterday. ''there are some issues that remain unresolved.''  last week, the feeling arose that the giants were exploring ways to get out of the contract. is there any possibility, sabean was asked, that the club and bonds would not complete the deal?  ''only if the parties didn't agree on what we're working on,'' he said, declining to say what they were working on.  the drew situation also remains unresolved. a red sox fan, apparently well connected, stated in an e-mail message last week that ''most sources agree that the drew deal will be finished within a few days,'' although more than a few days have passed since that message.  drew's agent, scott boras, told the associated press last friday that he expected to complete the contract ''in the near future,'' but he didn't define ''near future.''  john blake, a red sox spokesman, said yesterday: ''i'm assuming we'll get it done fairly soon, but we have nothing to announce right now. hopefully, it will be this week. it's going to get done. it's just a matter of timing.''  there's probably another throwaway line in all of this, but for now we'll refrain from offering one.  on baseball  