to critics, it's just pork; others see democracy   to some people, member items -- the grants that lawmakers award, with little debate and much secrecy, to community groups and pet projects back in their home districts -- symbolize the worst of new york's political culture. member items have gone to fix the roof of a hunting club near albany, help finance a pro-wrestling hall of fame in schenectady and, most infamously, open a cheese museum in the city of rome.  but to dale m. volker, a republican state senator from western new york, member items are nothing less than the legislature's purest expression of self-government and a bulwark against power-grubbing governors through the ages. it is a sentiment echoed by other lawmakers, who in interviews offered spirited defenses of such spending.  ''i personally believe it is the biggest democratization of the legislature in all the years that i've been there,'' mr. volker, a 32-year veteran of the senate, said in an interview. ''i contend that the reason we cannot get rid of member items is that it would reduce the power of democracy in the legislature. the problem we have is, a lot of our people truly believe in democracy.''  but the nonbelievers in this sort of democracy are legion. in recent months, member items have faced renewed scrutiny from government watchdogs, judges and some politicians. late last year, a court ruling forced both chambers of the legislature to release a precise list of member items, with the sponsors' names attached. and earlier this month, the new attorney general, andrew m. cuomo, said his office would begin combing through the current fiscal year's member items to ensure the grants were given properly.  critics of the items have also been bolstered by a spate of federal investigations into members' use of the grants.  state senator efrain gonzález jr., a democrat, faces charges that he diverted such grants for personal use, while assemblyman brian m. mclaughlin, also a democrat, was indicted last year on charges that he skimmed money from a queens community group to which he had directed grants over the years.  joseph l. bruno, the senate majority leader and the one of the capitol's most generous purveyors of member items, is the subject of an investigation that is examining, among other things, grants he steered to a company in which his friend was an investor.  but in interviews last week with lawmakers, members of both chambers energetically defended the grants. some, like mr. volker, described them as a way for rank-and-file members to have greater say in the allocation of taxpayer dollars, decisions over which governors and legislative leaders have typically exerted the most sway.  others put forth the traditional argument that despite the occasionally goofy item that grabs headlines, a vast majority of the spending goes to worthy causes.  ''you're not funding something that's illegal. you're not funding something that's wrong,'' said senator martin j. golden, a brooklyn republican who during the last two years has handed out $4.6 million worth of member items. ''you're funding something that helps your community: ambulances or fire patrol or health care.''  keith l. t. wright, an assembly democrat from harlem, noted that he and the assembly speaker, sheldon silver, gave millions to a biological research institute at city college, in mr. wright's district.  ''this center is going to help find the cure for cancer, for alzheimer's, for diabetes,'' he said. ''but all we hear about is money being given to the cheese museum.''  other members said that allowing lawmakers to hand out grants was superior to letting government agencies do it.  in a statement, senator owen h. johnson, a republican from suffolk county who disbursed $6 million in member items during the last two years, acknowledged that ''member item initiatives have received a great deal of attention and scrutiny lately, and many have argued that the process itself needs reform.''  regardless, mr. johnson said, he opposes allowing such appropriations ''to be made by bureaucrats in albany who have no intimate knowledge of the local communities in question or familiarity with individual groups that provide services.''  but not everyone agrees. assemblymen william l. parment, a western new york democrat, said he understood why his colleagues like member items, but believed they should be abolished completely.  ''i participated in the process, and i get a small amount of member items,'' mr. parment said. ''but i've always felt that the member item process is not a good public policy, and we really ought to have categorical grant programs. and if we want to fund little leagues or fire trucks, you create an item for it and the groups apply on a merit-based need.''  those criticisms were echoed by people outside the legislature who said the occasional cheese museum wasn't the only reason to oppose the way member items were handed out.  ''the critique of the system starts with the secrecy and its fundamental unfairness,'' said blair horner, the legislative director for the new york public interest research group. ''the money is doled out really outside of public purview. but on top of that, it's doled out as a function of political power, not based on need. so yeah, there are some wonderful programs that get funded, but the question is whether or not the system allocates money fairly.''  about $200 million goes to member items each year, including $30 million that is under the governor's discretion. and that does not include a number of similar grants financed with borrowed money. in the last nine months of last year governor george e. pataki and the legislature authorized borrowing nearly $1.9 billion for a number of initiatives, some similar to member items.  members of the majority party in both the senate and the assembly get far more money than the minority. in the senate, for example, mr. bruno and nine of his closest allies were responsible for nearly a third of the roughly $150 million in senate member items during the last two fiscal years.  some members argued last week that the system balances out, since the assembly is dominated by urban democrats, and the senate by upstate and suburban republicans.  ''you have the democrats in control of the assembly, and republicans control the senate,'' said senator serphin r. maltese, a queens republican. ''republicans can help the groups in their districts, and democrats can help the groups in their districts.'' (some districts, others point out, are represented by an assembly republican and a senate democrat, meaning that they don't have a state legislator in the majority in either chamber.)  relatively few lawmakers, however, expressed any great worry over the recent steps toward altering the member item process, such as gov. eliot spitzer's announcement with mr. bruno and mr. silver last week that they would end the practice of creating pots of member item money in each year's budget to be divvied up by the leaders in secret.  each grant will now be specified in the next budget, allowing a modicum of public scrutiny, although the budget will still include such pots for other kinds of state spending.  ''you have more transparency, but you still have the equity issue,'' said rachel leon, the executive director of common cause new york, a civic group.  mr. maltese, for one, said he welcomed the change. ''i've always felt full disclosure is the best course,'' he said. ''the only difficulty i've encountered is that when one group gets something, the other ones sometimes get jealous if they don't get the same amount. i solved that by giving equivalent money to all the different ambulance corps.''  mr. wright said he believed making the items more visible would, in fact, help lawmakers.  ''i like when people know that my folks are getting money,'' he said. ''it shows that i am somewhat of an effective legislator.''  itemizing the member money, he said, would also make it easier for him to find items he had requested when looking through the thousands of pages that make up the state budget each year.  ''sometimes, i don't know where my stuff is,'' he said.  