paid notice: deaths   moore, harrison w. jr.   moore--harrison w. jr., 88, of bronxville, died on january 16, 2007. beloved husband of martha (the former mrs. ivan bennett) and the late elizabeth crane moore (betty). loving father of chris moore and his wife mary sue. cherished grandfather of sally elizabeth moore and daniel harrison moore. dear brother of the late ethel mary moore. also survived by susan and her husband john anderson, paul bennett and his wife nancy rankin, katherine and her husband john evans, dr. jeffrey bennett, katie anderson, christopher anderson, laura bennett, rachel bennett, amaretta evans, and ivan evans. born in bennington, vt on september 9, 1918 to harrison sr. and ethel davenport moore. harry grew up in danbury, ct, and briarcliff manor, ny. he first was licensed as a ham radio operator as w2jqs in 1936 at his high school, birch wathen in nyc, and kept this key active into his 80s. he served a total of 41 years in the army and army reserves, ending as col commandant of 2086 army reserve service unit (norfolk, va usar school). he attended haverford college and finished his college education with a ba degree from columbia in nyc in october 1946. his civilian career included positions as a sales manager for fisher radio in nyc, work with radio stations in ma and va, and ownership of wrvc-fm in norfolk, va. he became the community affairs director with the norfolk chamber of commerce and in 1967 moved to sleepy hollow, ny, to become the staff executive of the us chamber of commerce where he served for 15 years. harry 'retired' in 1983 and with his wife betty started the new york institute for management studies, holding executive development seminars. harry 'retired' again 15 years later, after betty died in august of 1995. three years later, harry married martha rhodes bennett (formerly mrs. ivan bennett) of bronxville, ny, and together they remained active in many local organizations to this day. those organizations included hudson valley chapter 181 of the quarter century wireless association (a communications group where he served two terms as president and was active for more than 20 years) and the old timers club (a national group for ham radio operators who have been licensed for more than 40 years, where he served as vice president). he was an active member of the reserve officers associaton (serving as president of the westchester chapter), a life member of american radio relay league, a member of the radio club of america, and the antique wireless association. he continued active membership in the unitarian church (where he held leadership positions), the association of united stated army, the westchester emergency communications association and founded the local chapter of the world future society. he was active in the bronxville rotary club, the unit rotary club and served on the board of the united nations association, as well as the louis august jonas foundation (camp rising sun.) a memorial service celebrating harry's life will be held at the community unitarian church of white plains on sunday february 4th at 1:30 pm. in lieu of flowers, friends may contribute to the white plains red cross in memory of harry moore. to sign harry's online guestbook visit www.westchesterfuneralhome.com  