nascar increases field for the chase to 12 drivers   the field for the annual chase for the nextel cup will expand this year to 12 drivers from 10, one of several adjustments to the points and playoff systems announced monday.  nascar's premier racing series was already preparing for significant change this season, with the arrival of the manufacturer toyota, the former formula one driver juan pablo montoya and the safety-inspired car of tomorrow. espn will also be returning for half its telecasts this year.  now, drivers will work under a points system that has been adjusted for the first time since 2004, when nascar instituted the popular 10-race playoff chase at the end the season.  in addition to expanding the championship field, nascar officials will place a higher priority on winning -- quite a change for a series that rewarded consistency from week to week. starting this year, drivers will receive 5 more points for winning a race, making a victory worth 185 points. with 5-point bonuses awarded for leading a lap and for leading the most laps, a victory can mean as many as 195 points.  also, the seeding of the top drivers going into the chase playoff will no longer be based on the points standings through the 26 races of the regular season. seedings will now be based on the number of victories.  each victory will be worth 10 points in the seeding process. last year, for example, the driver kasey kahne went into the chase in 10th place because that was where he finished in the points standings through 26 races. but kahne led the series with five victories to that point. under the new system, he would begin the chase as the overall points leader, with 5,050 points. he would be 10 points ahead of the second-place drivers, matt kenseth and jimmie johnson, who each had four victories in the first 26 races last year.  the changes come three seasons after nascar began the playoff, which has been viewed as a success in its bid to draw fans and improve television ratings during the fall months of the schedule.  ''we believe the chase accomplished the original goals: made racing more competitive, made every race from the front end of the season or the postseason, the final 10 races, mean more,'' said brian france, nascar's chairman and chief executive, during a news conference at the nascar research and development center here. ''the key issue for us and remains today is this intersection between winning and consistency.''  so far, early reviews of the changes have been positive.  ''certainly the harder it is to get in, the more prestige there is in achieving that goal,'' the driver jeff burton said of the expanded chase field during a telephone interview monday. ''i think it's o.k. at the end of the day, having 12 teams competing for a championship only increases the excitement for the championship, and you're still going to have that battle for who gets in and who doesn't get in. so i think there's nothing lost.''  burton was among the 10 drivers to make the chase field last year. he went into the chase in eighth place, 35 points behind kenseth, the leader. under the new system, he would have started the chase tied for 11th with mark martin, 50 points behind kahne, because he had no victories in the regular season.  ''i'm o.k. with that,'' burton said, adding: ''people in the sport look at the sport as only how it affects them; i think that's a selfish attitude. part of the sport is growing the sport and making it better for the next generation.''  the changes will not be universally embraced in nascar garages. tony stewart, the 2005 champion, made his feelings about the chase field known before the announcement.  ''i still think it should only be 10,'' stewart said on his radio show this month. ''i mean, what's next? it goes from 12 to 15 two more years down the road, and then it goes from 15 to 20 and this and that? no more than 12. it shouldn't have been more than 10 to begin with.''  auto racing  