an enigmatic wild card in lebanon's high-stakes politics   in this land of divisive politics and sectarian tension, few have embraced controversy quite the way the christian leader gen. michel aoun has.  currently, general aoun is one of the leaders of the opposition demonstrations that have overtaken beirut and have threatened to bring down the government of prime minister fouad siniora. but this gambit is just the latest in a decades-long series of political surprises and controversies that have made him a political wild card here, breaking all the rules of lebanese politics while charging the country's political debate.  to his supporters, he is a lebanese de gaulle seeking to unite a fractious country and rebuild trust in its institutions. to his critics, he is a divisive megalomaniac willing to stop at nothing to become lebanon's president.  some accuse him, a christian, of splitting christians in lebanon into rival camps, further weakening them, while others blame him for abetting hezbollah, the iranian-backed shiite militia. but most of all, many say, general aoun has embraced a populist agenda for personal gain.  general aoun, as always, is unfazed by the critics. ''you could say i brought lebanese politics back to life,'' general aoun, 71, said in his home atop the hills overlooking beirut. ''until now, politics here has been moribund.''  general aoun's free patriotic movement, hezbollah and a handful of smaller groups began their protests on dec. 1, accusing mr. siniora of corruption that has left the country tens of billions in debt, and saying that the current government is not representative of lebanon's new realities.  the opposition wants mr. siniora either to step down or to broaden his cabinet to allow them greater say and even a veto power, but mr. siniora has rebuffed the demands, and insists he will not step down. government officials accuse the opposition of pursuing an iranian-syrian agenda.  the irony of general aoun, who has spent much of his life fighting syrian domination of lebanon, joining hands with hezbollah, with its close ties to syria, is not lost on his opponents, nor on followers in protests against the government. but such about-faces are nothing new to him.  two decades ago general aoun rose to prominence as the head of the christian-led lebanese army, taking on the christian militias and the syrians. he was appointed lebanon's interim prime minister in a caretaker government and waged a fierce revolt against syrian forces, before being bombed out of the presidential palace and into exile in france in 1990. keeping to his word, he did not return to lebanon until the last syrian soldier had left the country.  general aoun defends his ties to hezbollah, saying the alliance will ward off syria rather than allow it to return to lebanon. he adds that he had always pledged that he would seek friendly relations with syria once it ceased to be an occupier. but many accuse him of trying to ride the wave of hezbollah's popularity after the war last summer in order to win the presidency when the pro-syrian president Émile lahoud's term ends later this year. the 34-day war was widely seen here as a victory for hezbollah.  general aoun makes no secret of his hope to become president, a role reserved for christians in lebanon's complex sectarian political system. but many doubt whether he would make the best compromise candidate, one who would effectively smooth over tensions once the latest crisis of sit-ins and boycotts ends.  ''of course, i want to be president,'' he said. ''at first i was not that interested, but because there was so much stubbornness against me and because things got difficult, i am now intent on becoming president. i have the backing and popularity to do it.'' he has drawn his supporter base from the christian middle class, which sees itself losing ground to lebanon's other sects.  unlike many in lebanon's political stratum, general aoun comes from humble origins, having been born into a poor maronite family in haret hreik, which became a hezbollah stronghold in beirut's southern suburbs in the 1980s. his supporters play up that background, saying that it equips him to tackle issues like corruption, gerrymandering and inclusion in lebanese politics.  ''for us, he represents sovereignty and dignity,'' said gebran bassil, a longtime member of general aoun's free patriotic movement who is also married to the general's daughter. ''the general is not part of the corrupt system here, which is why the politicians are so much against him.''  nayla mouawad, lebanon's minister of social affairs, said she was struck by general aoun's ability to distill politics into slogans when she first met him in the mid-1980s, but long ago caught on to his oversize ambition. ''he clearly wanted to be president,'' she said, noting that she once warned her husband, rené, who was assassinated in 1989, to be wary of general aoun's intentions. ''i told my husband that when he gets it into his head to be president, be careful.''  few, however, expected the alliance with hezbollah, a group that, on the surface, appears diametrically opposed to the free patriotic movement's goals.  backed by iran, hezbollah is the sole remaining armed militia in lebanon; general aoun is the champion of a strong state and an opponent of militias. general aoun rails against foreign interference in lebanon, but hezbollah is almost completely financed by iran.  general aoun notes that the alliance should not be treated any differently than one between hezbollah and the governing coalition that helped them garner numerous seats in the 2005 elections.  still, the alliance surprised general aoun's supporters as much as his opponents.  ''remember, hezbollah was the devil a year and a half ago as far as we were concerned,'' mr. bassil said. ''we were the only side that had had no dialogue with them.''  last year, general aoun approached hezbollah's leader, sheik hassan nasrallah, and said he still intended to strip hezbollah of its weapons, but only after the group's main complaints with israel and with the government were answered.  ''it's not like i love hezbollah,'' general aoun said in an interview. ''i am not trying to defend hezbollah as much as i am trying to find a solution with them, because a clash with them would ruin us.''  that honesty, hezbollah officials say, engendered trust in general aoun. ''it created a sense of trust between shiites and christians,'' said ghaleb abu zeinab, a member of hezbollah's politburo. ''we don't want to establish an islamic republic, we want diplomatic and normal relations with syria, and we want a consensual democracy and so does the free patriotic movement.''  some analysts credit the alliance with helping stabilize conditions in lebanon after the war, as well as helping to change hezbollah's focus from regional issues to local ones.  ''it helped show hezbollah's real position and its understanding of lebanon,'' mr. abu zeinab said. ''it helped the party appear as a more lebanese party than it used to before.''  after years of playing third seat to sunnis and christians, lebanon's shiites have increasingly demanded a greater say in government, one proportional to their numbers. general aoun had seized on that change, analysts agree.  still, even his supporters are often uncomfortable with the alliance, and with the lack of progress of the demonstrations so far.  ''if i was in their place i might not feel comfortable with how things are going either,'' general aoun said. ''but i have infrared -- even infragreen. i can see what is ahead of me tomorrow, and i will eventually clarify things for them.''  the saturday profile  