arts, briefly   'stomp' outdoes the competition  displaying strong legs, literally and figuratively, the stepping movie ''stomp the yard'' (sony), right, spent a second successive weekend at the top of the movie rankings, grossing $13.3 million for a two-week total of $41.5 million, according to estimates released yesterday by the box-office tracking company screenline. ''night at the museum'' (fox) spent another week in second place, after three weeks as no. 1, taking in $13 million for a five-week cumulative gross of $205.8 million. the musical ''dreamgirls'' (paramount), with $8.7 million in its sixth week, finished third, followed by the only newcomer in the top five list, the horror film ''the hitcher'' (focus), starring sean bean as the road killer; it grossed $8.2 million. the up-from-poverty story ''the pursuit of happyness'' (sony) finished fifth, taking in $6.7 million for $146.5 million in its sixth week in theaters.  producers guild honors 'little miss sunshine'  question: who loves ''little miss sunshine''? answer: the producers guild of america. this low-budget comedy about a dysfunctional family on the road to california for a beauty pageant for young girls, right, was the surprise winner of the best-picture accolade from the association of film and television producers in los angeles on saturday, reuters reported. the honor -- achieved against the competition of ''babel,'' ''the departed'' ''dreamgirls'' and ''the queen'' -- transformed ''little miss sunshine,'' starring greg kinnear, steve carell and toni collette, into a formidable contender in the oscar race. nominees are to be announced tomorrow. the producers guild has predicted the winner of the academy award for best picture 11 times in 17 years of voting, but not the last two years.  major art museum opens in tokyo  japan opened its largest art museum yesterday, a futuristic institution without a permanent collection. ''we will be able to bring any collections from japan or abroad that we want at any time,'' kisho kurokawa, the architect of the national art center, tokyo, told agence france-presse. ''that unpredictable quality, coupled with our mission to attract young, new artists of quality, is the museum's main originality. this would be impossible with the louvre museum, but it is possible with the national art center. i think this is the 21st-century way of thinking.'' in the roppongi neighborhood with the mori art museum and the renovated suntory museum, the national art center, which cost $290 million, has 156,000 square feet of exhibition space. the first show, on loan from the pompidou center in paris, displays the work of foreign artists based in paris since 1900, and the new museum's walls are booked for years to come. the museum also includes a library, cafes and a restaurant supervised by the french chef paul bocuse.  book critics circle names nominees  novels by cormac mccarthy, richard ford, dave eggers, kiran desai and chimamanda ngozi adichie will compete for honors from the national book critics circle, the associated press reported. mr. mccarthy was nominated for ''the road'' (knopf); mr. ford for ''the lay of the land'' (knopf); mr. eggers for ''what is the what'' (mcsweeney's); ms. desai, above, for ''the inheritance of loss'' (atlantic monthly), the winner of last year's man booker prize; and ms. adichie for ''half of a yellow sun'' (knopf). winners in fiction, nonfiction, biography, memoirs, poetry and criticism will be announced on march 8.  oprah's book club reopens  on friday oprah winfrey plans to announce her first book club choice in more than a year, the associated press reported. her last pick, on jan. 16, 2006, was elie wiesel's holocaust memoir ''night,'' which sold more than 1.5 million copies as a result of her endorsement, according to its publisher, hill & wang.  bjork is back  the icelandic singer, songwriter and composer bjork, below, will issue her first new album since 2004 in late spring. according to her web site, bjork.com, the recording, as yet untitled, will feature collaborations with the hip-hop and r&b producer and rapper timbaland, the vocalist antony hegarty of antony and the johnsons and the drummer brian chippendale, among others. bjork also plans to tour, and billboard.com reported that in addition to issuing her album on the atlantic label, she may appear at a major american festival.  james brown moves on  james brown's body has been moved from a guarded, climate-controlled room in his home in beech island, s.c., to an undisclosed location, the associated press reported. his lawyer, buddy dallas, trustee of mr. brown's estate and longtime counsel, would not say why the body was moved, but he said no decision had been made on its final resting place. mr. brown, known as the godfather of soul, died at 73 on dec. 25. his six adult children plan to put his body in a mausoleum and perhaps turn his home, about nine miles east of augusta, ga., into a museum that would include his grave. they plan to consult with the family of elvis presley on graceland, the presley mansion in memphis, tenn., which draws 600,000 visitors annually.  