crash claims 13 on deadly day for u.s. in iraq   on one of the deadliest days for united states forces since the iraq war began, an american helicopter crashed in a sunni area north of baghdad on saturday, killing all 13 people onboard, the united states military said.  iraqi officials in the area said it had been shot down, though there was no immediate confirmation from american officials.  in separate episodes, five american soldiers were killed and three wounded in a battle with gunmen who attacked the local governor's office in the shiite holy city of karbala, and two soldiers died from other attacks, military officials said.  it was not clear whether all those on the helicopter were americans. if they were, 20 uniformed americans died saturday. on the worst day of the war for american forces, jan. 26, 2005, 37 american service members died. thirty-one of them died when a marine helicopter crashed in the western desert, and six others in combat that day.  an interior ministry official and the police in diyala province said saturday that the american helicopter was shot down about 4 p.m. by insurgents who had fired missiles or grenades from at least two locations. it crashed near tarrafa village, they said, over a rural area near the diyala river.  the american military said that debris had been immediately surrounded and secured. several hours after the crash, soldiers were still combing through the wreckage.  a spokesman declined to provide details on the type of aircraft or how it crashed. the number of people aboard suggested that it had been a black hawk transport helicopter, which typically carries about 10 passengers and 4 crew members.  the crash occurred northeast of baghdad near baquba, where american and iraqi forces have been battling sunni insurgents and shiite militia forces for months.  the american military also announced seven other deaths on saturday and three deaths from earlier in the week. in addition to the five soldiers killed during the battle in karbala, a soldier was killed in northern baghdad on saturday when a roadside bomb exploded near his patrol, and another, assigned to a unit of engineers, died of wounds from a roadside bomb in northern iraq.  the three earlier deaths were of a sailor from brooklyn who died wednesday in a ''noncombat-related incident'' at camp bucca, an american-run detention center in southern iraq; a marine who died friday from wounds suffered in combat in anbar province; and a soldier who died friday after being wounded by a roadside bomb in tikrit, north of baghdad.  the gun battle in karbala started when ''an illegally armed militia,'' according to a statement from the american military, attacked the offices of the provincial government in karbala with guns and grenades.  brig. gen. vincent k. brooks, deputy commander for multi-national division-baghdad, said american and iraqi security forces were meeting at the time of the attack to ensure that shiite pilgrims would be safe during the celebrations later this month for ashura, one of shiite islam's holiest days, which marks the seventh-century martyrdom of the prophet muhammad's grandson, hussein.  iraqi state television reported that at least two dozen gunmen assaulted the building, getting inside, and drawing a response from american troops who were dropped by helicopter onto the roof.  col. scott bleichwehl, a military spokesman, said it was not clear who or how many had attacked. by 10 p.m., the building had been secured, he said.  ''it was never lost,'' he said. ''it came under fire from a couple of directions. we responded to it.''  the attack nonetheless seemed to be the latest in a series of power struggles in the south among a patchwork of shiite tribes and political parties. american officials have been pressing the government of nuri kamal al-maliki to set a date for provincial elections, which they said would firmly establish new leaders and possibly reduce the fighting.  iraqi state television reported that a raid in south baghdad on saturday, with around 100 iraqi police commandos backed by six united states helicopters, killed 15 suspected sunni arab insurgents.  the police found 29 bodies in the capital, many with gunshot wounds to the head.  the struggle for iraq  