u.n. to audit its activities after reports on north korea program   ban ki-moon, the new secretary general, called friday for outside examination of all united nations activities after a published report that the united nations development program in north korea was making unaccountable payments in hard currency to local staff members and the north korean government.  mr. ban sought ''an urgent, systemwide and external inquiry into all activities done around the globe by the u.n. funds and programs.''  his prompt action, taken after a morning meeting with the program's associate administrator, ad melkert, appeared to be an effort to head off the kind of problems that his predecessor, kofi annan, faced after muddled united nations responses to reports of scandals.  ''we are very pleased with the new team's reaction,'' said richard a. grenell, the spokesman for the american mission. mr. ban, the former foreign minister of south korea, began his five-year term on jan. 1.  complaints about the united nations activities in north korea were raised over the past month by the united states mission in a series of letters to directors of the program and were made public on friday on the op-ed page of the wall street journal.  in the latest letter, dated tuesday, mark d. wallace, the deputy united states ambassador for management, said that the united nations development program's operation had been ''systematically perverted for the benefit of the kim jong il regime rather than the people of north korea.''  mr. wallace said that the local staff of the development program was dominated by employees of the repressive government, that the united nations had failed to conduct proper on-site audits and depended instead on ''sham'' ones by the north korean government, and that all payments were made at the government's demand in hard currency -- dollars or euros -- rather than the won, the national currency.  ''simply put,'' mr. wallace wrote, ''in the absence of real audits and site visits, it is impossible for u.n.d.p. to verify whether or not any of the funds paid to the d.p.r.k. for supposed use in u.n.d.p. programs have actually been used for bona fide development purposes or if the d.p.r.k. has converted such funds for its own illicit purposes.'' north korea is officially called the democratic people's republic of korea and sometimes referred to by its initials.  mr. melkert, the associate administrator, said that the program had spent $2 million to $3 million in north korea annually in the past two years.  he said it would cease making hard currency payments to the government, local vendors and individuals as of march 1 and would also start hiring local staff members in north korea the way it does elsewhere, by its own choice and on merit.  even making payments in the won currency will not stop a flow of hard currency to the government, however, because the united nations will have to buy the won from the central bank, he noted.  ''the question -- and it is an entirely legitimate one -- comes down to whether you want to operate as the u.n. in a country like north korea,'' mr. melkert said.  he said that he welcomed the call for external auditing of his agency's activities. currently they are examined in internal audits, which are then given to the united nations auditing board, which decides what to transmit to the general assembly.  asked about the american charge that funds might have been diverted to illicit ends, he said, ''the audits have not given any reason for suspicion about money not being used for the purposes meant. still, in order to make sure that there are no misperceptions or unintended consequences, we are supportive of an external independent audit.''  it was not clear how quickly or effectively mr. ban could impose his order across the range of united nations agencies, many of which have differing auditing procedures and over which he does not have direct budget authority.  ''it's worldwide; it's not going to be done overnight,'' said michèle montas, his spokeswoman.  