observatory   snakes on a color wheel  the green tree python doesn't start out that way. that is, it doesn't begin life either green or in trees.  juveniles are yellow or red, changing to green only when they reach a length of about 20 inches. and they spend their salad days on the ground at the woodland edges of rain forests in new guinea or northern australia, eating small reptiles and invertebrates. they head into the rain forest proper only when they are larger and can eat bigger prey like rodents and birds.  david wilson of the australian national university and colleagues have noted a connection between those two shifts. by turning green -- what is called an ontogenetic color change because it occurs during development -- the snake offers itself better camouflage from predators as it switches hunting grounds.  the researchers analyzed the reflectance of juvenile and older pythons and of various habitats, including the rain forest canopy and understory and the woodland edge of the rain-forest. the goal was to see how well the snakes would stand out, particularly to predatory birds like owls. the light frequencies that were analyzed corresponded to the common frequency range that birds use, which is weak in the ultraviolet.  as reported in biology letters, the researchers found that juvenile yellow or red pythons were far less conspicuous on the ground on the woodland edge than older green pythons would be. in the leafy canopy, as expected, the green pythons were much better at blending in.  and yet, the protection isn't perfect. green pythons stand out on the rain forest floor, where they hunt rodents.  but the researchers note that while the snakes hunt in the trees during the day, they do their ground hunting at night. by operating under cover of darkness they make up for their ineffective camouflage.  1,200 years of bug data  infestation by the larch budmoth, a bug that eats the needles and shoots of larch trees in the rockies and the alps, follows a classic pattern of boom and bust. most years it's not a problem, but every once in a while it causes widespread defoliation, turning whole valleys brown.  scientists aren't certain why these outbreaks occur, but they do know that for most of the 20th century they have happened regularly: roughly every eight or nine years in europe, for example.  new research by jan esper of the swiss federal research institute and colleagues reveals that this pattern goes back much further. by examining the growth rings in existing larch trees and in timbers used in old buildings of known date, the researchers trace the outbreaks to a.d. 832, with populations reaching a peak every 9.3 years on average. the findings are reported in the proceedings of the royal society b: biological sciences.  while it's interesting to have close to 1,200 years of data on the outbreaks, perhaps more interesting is what has happened more recently. the researchers point out that there have been no major outbreaks in the alps in the past 25 years, a period of exceptional regional warming.  this may be because with warmer temperatures, the budmoth larvae develop sooner, before their food source, the larch needles, becomes available. or there may be a more indirect reason. either way, the researchers say, the budmoth appears to be vulnerable to climate change.  a record for modified crops  last year was a record one for the cultivation of genetically modified crops, according to the international service for the acquisition of agri-biotech applications, an industry group.  the group reported that worldwide in 2006, 252 million acres of land were devoted to cotton, soybeans and other crops that have been engineered to be resistant to certain pests. that is a 13 percent increase over 2005.  more than half the land is in the united states, which has about 135 million acres planted with genetically modified crops out of about 450 million acres total. argentina is the second-largest adopter, with about 45 million acres, followed by brazil and canada. by contrast, france and germany each have less than 100,000 acres planted in such crops.  a bird's-eye view of ski trails' perils  while a ski trail can provide plenty of enjoyment (at least when there is enough snow to cover it), from an environmental standpoint it is a scar on the landscape. this is especially true for trails constructed below the tree line, where large patches of forest must be clear-cut to make way for skiers.  but such trails are more than just eyesores. they also chop up habitat for birds and other animals. studies have shown, for instance, that there is less bird diversity in forested areas along ski runs.  what about trails above the tree line, like those at high-altitude resorts in the alps? they may not seem so damaging, because no trees are harmed in their creation. but slopes are smoothed, rocks are removed, and the original vegetation -- low shrubs and grasses -- is eliminated.  a new study by antonio rolando and colleagues at the university of turin in italy shows that even these more open trails can affect birds that spend summers at high elevation. dr. rolando and his team studied populations of water pipits, black redstarts and other birds in and around high-altitude ski trails in northern italy, including some built for the 2006 turin olympics. they counted birds in three types of plots: within a trail, adjacent to it and far away.  the plots within ski trails had relatively few birds over all and low species diversity -- a measure of both the number of species and the number of individuals in each species. adjacent and far-off plots had higher diversity, but adjacent plots had low bird density as well. the findings were reported in the journal of applied ecology.  ''habitat loss is surely very important,'' dr. rolando wrote in an e-mail message, ''because most species during summer forage in grass, and some also make nests on the ground.'' the researchers found that the habitat loss also affected arthropod populations; there were fewer insects in the trail plots, so there was less food for the birds.  dr. rolando said that while there were still many undeveloped areas in the high alps, further construction of trails could affect certain birds considered under threat. resort operators, he said, could help by modifying their construction methods, grading slopes less and removing less vegetation, though not to the point of making trails unsafe for skiers.  ''the best thing,'' he wrote, ''is to preserve as much soil and natural vegetation as possible.''  observatory  