i want my howard stern and oprah   on wednesday, i was in the middle of a long phone conversation with craig moffett, the wall street analyst who follows broadcasting for sanford c. bernstein & company. his purview includes the country's two satellite radio companies, xm and sirius. although mr. moffett is more positive on xm than sirius, he sounded a little sheepish when i asked him whether he was bullish on the sector.  ''it's hard to say,'' he replied. ''it's a very good product but the stocks have been such dogs.'' he continued: ''these guys have real challenges.''  for months now, wall street has been promoting a seemingly simple solution to the problems facing xm and sirius, including mounting losses, enormous fixed costs and a slowdown in subscriber growth. (each charges subscribers $12.95 a month.) the street would like to see the two companies merge.  merger speculation has been stoked, in part, by the sirius chief executive, mel karmazin, who has made a number of public comments suggesting that a deal would be good for shareholders. more recently, xm has also seemed to warm up to the idea. neither company would talk to me about the merger possibility; but just a few weeks ago, a rumor gained currency that xm and sirius would announce at the detroit auto show that they were combining. (the rumor was false.)  just as mr. moffett was describing the benefits of an xm-sirius merger for me, he was interrupted by another call. he put me on hold. when he got back to the phone, he said, ''i just heard that chairman martin made some negative merger comments.''  that would be kevin j. martin, the chairman of the federal communications commission, which will have a lot to say about whether the two companies can merge. in response to a question at the end of an f.c.c. meeting, mr. martin pointed out that a commission rule forbade one company from owning both satellite radio licenses.  almost as soon as the news hit the wire, the stocks of the two companies began tanking.  as it turns out, mr. martin's comments were not as definitive as the early reports suggested. as a commission spokesman pointed out to me -- and as a number of wall street analysts wrote to their clients -- mr. martin was simply answering a straightforward question about whether such a rule existed. but he also said that if the companies tried to merge, the f.c.c. would take a close look at it.  ''the commission can and does change its rules,'' noted kenneth ferree, a former senior commission official now with the law firm of sheppard, mullin, richter & hampton. naturally, the stocks of the two companies started to rise again.  it is impossible to know whether the commission would ultimately approve a merger that would allow the satellite radio duopoly to become a monopoly. normally, any right-thinking person would instinctively be opposed to such a move -- don't we have antitrust laws to prevent mergers that would give companies monopoly power? but the situation with satellite radio raises a question that is becoming more and more important these days: when it comes to new and emerging technologies, what exactly constitutes competition?  there is no doubt that xm and sirius are fiercely competitive with each other. they have no problem touting their own prospects and denigrating (privately, of course) the achievements of the competitor. sirius brags about going to 6 million subscribers from 3.3 million in 2006; xm points out that its rival will wind up with a 2006 loss of more than $1 billion getting to that number. (xm, which has over 7.6 million subscribers, is likely to post a 2006 loss in the $700 million range.)  sirius says that it rang up two-thirds of all sales in retail outlets in the fourth quarter of last year, but fails to mention that the retail channel has been dwindling fast. xm notes that quarter after quarter, it gains more ''gross subscribers'' than sirius but plays down the fact that because of the percentage of its subscribers that quit the service each quarter, sirius has, in recent quarters, had more ''net subscribers.'' for two companies that are losing gobs of money, they sure do seem to enjoy trash talking.  they also compete, of course, for content. most famously, sirius has howard stern, who signed a $500 million five-year deal with the company and moved his shtick to satellite radio at the beginning of last year. (last week, the company announced that mr. stern had earned an $82 million bonus, claiming that he brought in far more revenue than he cost the company.) xm has an oprah winfrey station. sirius has professional football and has pried nascar away from xm. xm has major league baseball -- and took the national hockey league away from sirius. both have loads of news and talk and music channels, but xm's channels tend to be more eclectic than sirius's.  on the face of it, this all sounds terrific for consumers. ''choice is always a good thing,'' said ryan saghir, who blogs about satellite radio at orbitcast.com -- and opposes the idea of a merger. but it is not quite as terrific as it sounds. for one thing, what if you are a fan of both baseball and football? what kind of choice is it to have to decide between them? or what if you like both howard stern and oprah? (well, o.k., that's not a good example.) it is hard to think of another technology that forces subscribers to make that kind of choice.  more saliently, the primary means by which most people are learning about -- and subscribing to -- satellite radio is through automobile sales. the two companies have lined up most of the major automakers to preinstall satellite radio in some or all of their models. although sirius disputes this figure, the general consensus is that xm has 60 percent of the auto business, which is why most analysts think it is the better-positioned company, despite not having mr. stern. and nobody chooses a car based on whether it carries xm or sirius. so the consumer has to opt either for the service that comes with the car or no satellite radio at all. in that sense, howard stern matters a lot less than how many car companies the satellite guys can line up.  ''when you look at the competition between the two companies,'' said blair levin, a former f.c.c. official who is now an analyst at stifel nicolaus & company, ''one can argue that the real beneficiary wasn't the consumer so much as it was the content provider: howard stern and the n.f.l.''  one can also argue that that form of competition has created financial strains for the companies, especially the free-spending sirius, making it difficult for what amounts to a niche product to close in on profitability. the obvious appeal of a merger is that it would give the companies the ability to eliminate much of the duplication, while making it far less expensive to sign talent, because the two companies wouldn't be bidding against each other. that strikes me as a consumer benefit.  of course, the big worry is that if satellite radio ever became a monopoly, the company left standing would have the ability to raise rates with impunity. but that is where we get back to the issue of what its competition really is.  reed hundt, the former f.c.c. chairman back when the commission passed its rule preventing a satellite radio merger, told me that when they were preparing to auction the spectrum for satellite radio in the 1990s, it wasn't clear that satellite radio would compete with local terrestrial radio. so the commission wanted to be sure that there were two companies that could compete with each other. but now it is quite clear that satellite radio and terrestrial radio do, in fact, compete. one reason sirius has never raised its rates -- and xm has done so only once -- is that the competition from free radio keeps prices in check.  and so do other forms of competition, especially ipods. ''you can buy an ipod and download music and then plug it into your car,'' mr. hundt said. ''how is that different from satellite radio?'' eventually, cars will come equipped with wireless internet, which will mean all kinds of options for streaming audio content. once that happens, it seems to me that satellite radio is going to be just another technology fighting to keep pace with the internet.  which is also why, somewhat to my surprise, mr. hundt believes that the rule he helped formulate should be repealed. ''i think we did the right thing to begin with,'' he said. ''you wouldn't want to change it if it weren't for the fact that it is so obvious that you can get content in so many different ways. that wasn't really true then.'' as mr. levin put it, ''circumstances have changed.''  satellite radio is at a precarious point in its existence. with fewer than 14 million subscribers between the services, it has had a modest impact. many people -- myself included -- resist the idea of paying a monthly fee for radio, even really good radio. it is impossible to know at this juncture whether that will ever change. but satellite radio is far more likely to be successful if the two companies aren't spending themselves into oblivion, and if one satellite radio company has developed enough financial strength to compete successfully against the greatest business model destroyer ever created: the internet.  besides, i like baseball and football.  talking business  