an ex takes the spot   although he knows i still have strong feelings for him, my ex-boyfriend applied for a training program at my workplace. may i ask my supervisor to prevent this? the company has many other offices around the nation where he could train without it being at my emotional expense.  name withheld, austin, tex.  you may not sabotage, or even unsettle, this guy's career because you used to go together. you may ask him to reconsider out of deference to your feelings or concern for his own tranquillity, but that's between the two of you. don't drag it into the office.  in fact, in some states, according to one lawyer i consulted, it is a tort -- a civil offense -- if someone ''intentionally destroys your chance of getting a job for nonlegitimate reasons'' (''legitimate'' presumably having little reference to romance and its stings).  once your ex arrives, he must be courteous, and if he is not, you can report this to your supervisor. but you may not pre-emptively demand his transfer to the neptune office.  update: this person did not approach the supervisor but did ask the ex to reconsider. he refused. he was accepted into the program but postponed his arrival for unrelated reasons.  as the owner of a new small catering company, i must generate contacts. while catering an event at a venue where i hadn't worked before, i mentioned to the manager that any business she could send my way would be of financial benefit to her. my wife says this is tantamount to offering a bribe. was my proposition ethical?  p.l., florida  if you were not making a general observation that a rising tide (of gravy) benefits all boats financially but were instead proposing to kick back some cash to the manager in exchange for referrals, then your wife is right: this is a bribe, and you were unethical to offer it.  the manager has two sets of obligations that you tried to subvert -- a duty to her clients to recommend a caterer on its merits, not its willingness to grease her palm, and a duty to her boss to serve the clients well, not use them as a bribe magnet. had she accepted your offer, she'd have been lured into two simultaneous conflicts of interest -- efficient, but not honorable.  i have the good fortune to look considerably younger than my age. when i travel on business i could take advantage of seniors' discounts, but i would have to produce evidence of my antiquity in front of my younger colleagues -- a bunch of 20-somethings who would love to have my job. instead i pay full fare, and my employer reimburses me. is this ethical? is there a better solution?  a. w., brooklyn  there is a better solution: book the senior fare online, from your office, with the door closed. your junior colleagues will remain ignorant of your onrushing decrepitude, as they should. they may even assume you're doing something youthful in there, like illegally downloading music or beguiling the time on youtube.  for those few situations in which privacy is elusive -- at a hotel check-in desk, for instance -- talk to your boss. he or she may agree that it's worth a few extra bucks to bolster your morale and buttress your career. but if your boss disagrees, then you may reasonably -- and ethically -- be expected to make up the difference out of your own pocket.  the way we live now: 1-21-07: the ethicist  