beatrix potter's life becomes a lake district travelogue   even though it might not be a box-office hit in the united states, renée zellweger's recent film, ''miss potter,'' is giving the lake district of england, the region where the majority of the movie about the children's book author beatrix potter, right, was filmed, a much-needed boost in tourism.  ''the movie is helping our overseas visitors finally get over those horrible images of foot-and- mouth disease in the english countryside,'' said andrew poole, deputy manager of the world of beatrix potter, an attraction based in bowness-on-windermere, which centers on the author and illustrator's life and storybook characters.  ''already we are seeing more visitors,'' he said, noting that there were only 5,000 american visitors last year and 30,000 from japan. japan uses potter's books regularly in children's english classes.  anticipating a surge of visitors, the national trust, www.nationaltrust.org, is hard at work finishing its winter conservation work on hill top in hawkshead, potter's first home in the lake district, which served as the inspiration for many of her books. hill top, which had 65,000 visitors last year, is reopening early this year on march 3 for weekends only, but starting march 31, will be open from saturday to wednesday (the house also has a shop and a garden).  seven miles away from hill top in the village of coniston sits yew tree farm, which potter bought to save from developers in 1930 and which was used in ''miss potter'' as the location for hill top. now a bed-and-breakfast (the bedrooms are being renovated until april), the farm also has a tea room (open daily from june through october, and on weekends during the winter) decorated with potter's original furnishings, paintings and ornaments; www.yewtree-farm.com  beatrix potter fans can also stay in windermere at lindeth howe country house and hotel, www.lindeth-howe.co.uk, which potter rented as a vacation home and later bought for her mother; eat in a nearby pub that was depicted in the ''tale of jemima puddle duck''; or check into the ''miss potter'' suite at holbeck ghyll, the hotel where ms. zellweger stayed while shooting the film (www.holbeckghyll.com).  a map showing all the lake district movie locations can be found at www.visitmisspotter.com.  in transit  