the neediest cases; mother flees to america, only to face new struggle   there were two moments when life changed forever for jennifer coello.  the first was when her boyfriend, in a rage, held a kitchen knife to her pregnant belly. still a teenager, she fled her native ecuador to america, where she lives with relatives in the bronx.  the second was when her son, michael, was about to be born in a new york hospital. the doctors told her, she said, ''your child is going to be born with a problem with his head, and we don't know what it is.''  today, michael is a cheerful child, with a bowl haircut, a lopsided smile and a slightly cross-eyed gaze. he cannot talk, and he crawls on his knees.  ms. coello, now 24, and michael, 7, live with her grandparents in a dilapidated apartment building in the bronx, near franz sigel park. it is two flights up, on the third floor. there is no elevator.  michael is 80 pounds and because he cannot walk, ms. coello must carry him up the stairs, 32 steps in all, his left arm holding on to her neck and his right hand playing with a toy. she catches her breath on the first floor.  ms. coello spoke recently in spanish, which was translated by silvia morales, her social worker.  ms. coello was born in guayaquil, ecuador's largest port and the city from which tourists typically depart for the galápagos. when she was 16, she became pregnant and lived with her boyfriend's family.  they were poorer than most and there was never enough to eat. asked if she ever went to bed hungry, ms. coello replied, in english, ''many times.''  she worried about her unborn baby. ''if i'm hungry,'' she recalled thinking, ''then michael must be hungry.''  her boyfriend slapped her, flew into mysterious rages, she said. she did not know why. then, one day, she said she had had enough and wanted to break up with him. he held a knife to her abdomen and told her to never leave him. she was five months pregnant.  ms. coello wrote to her grandmother in the bronx, begging for help. she was sent a plane ticket to america.  ms. coello told her boyfriend that she would help him get a visa so he could also come to america. she didn't.  by june 1999, she was 17, pregnant and living with 13 other people in the bronx apartment she lives in today. (a brother and the families of an aunt and an uncle have since moved out.)  as ms. coello was about to go into labor in october 1999 in nearby lincoln medical and mental health center in the bronx, doctors detected something troubling. ultrasound images indicated a growth at the back of michael's head.  ''we see like a ball, a ball of water,'' ms. coello remembers the doctors telling her.  after michael was born, doctors diagnosed his illness as hydrocephalus, a buildup of excess cerebrospinal fluid, which cushions the brain within the cranium. the excess fluid is present at birth and the body cannot absorb the fluid fast enough, so it must be drained with a shunt, or tube. the buildup can damage the brain, hurting intellectual and physical development.  when michael was born, ms. coello said, ''i saw a real cute boy, as i imagined, but i felt so bad when i saw the back of his head.''  today, michael needs special education, as well as physical and occupational therapy, despite regular draining of the excess cerebrospinal fluid.  last summer, ms. coello turned for help to catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund, which issued a $102 grant. the money was spent mostly for a used children's wheelchair for michael. he had outgrown a baby stroller.  but what ms. coello really needs is a long-term wheelchair for michael. she said that such specialized wheelchairs made of alloys light enough for her to lift but strong enough to support michael as he grows are expensive. they are typically $1,000 to $2,000.  ms. coello has little money or free time. she gets some public assistance, and her grandparents, who pay for much of the $920-a-month rent with pension and other payments, can contribute little.  ms. coello also received a grant and is studying english. she also enrolled in a program with the asa institute of business and computer technology to become a medical technician.  for the moment, she has other concerns. ms. coello also used part of the $102 in neediest cases money to buy an air mattress, sheets and blankets to replace bedding infested with bedbugs, which remain a problem in the apartment.  when ms. coello goes to sleep at night, what does she think about? ''i wonder,'' she said, ''how many bug bites i'm going to wake up with.''  previously recorded -- $7,032,350.29  recorded thursday -- 64,824.54  total -- $7,097,174.83  last year to date -- $6,434,748.71  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau ofcommunity service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at(800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  