fire leaves dozens homeless in elizabeth   a 10-alarm fire spread by blasts of winter wind gutted a city block of apartment buildings and businesses early on saturday, leaving nearly 50 people homeless, the authorities said.  despite the size of the fire and the damage it caused, no one needed to be hospitalized; two firefighters and a handful of residents were hurt, the authorities said, but all could be treated at the scene.  the elizabeth fire department began receiving emergency calls about 3 a.m., said its director, onofrio vitullo, and the first crews found five buildings on spring street, part of routes 1 and 9, engulfed in flames.  routes 1 and 9 were shut down for several hours as approximately 200 firefighters, some from neighboring departments, battled the blaze through the cold early morning.  at 9 a.m., two ladder trucks were still pouring water on the charred shells of the two- and three-story buildings, between emma street and flora street and about a mile from newark liberty international airport.  the origin or cause of the fire, which also destroyed a pentecostal church and a laundromat, had not been determined, mr. vitullo said.  residents sought shelter inside the siloam-hope presbyterian church, across from the charred buildings.  ramone velin, 52, who lived in a second-floor apartment on the corner of emma street for the past four years, said he had been awakened by screams and quickly ran downstairs with his mother and sister.  ''there were sparks and then more sparks,'' he said. ''then the fire tore up and just moved faster and faster. there was no stopping it.''  mr. velin, who spent the morning waiting for housing assistance from the red cross, stood in the church parking lot staring at the remains of his apartment and said the whole experience felt surreal.  ''i hate this,'' he said. ''i wish it was a dream, but i pinch myself and it's real.''  correction:  january 27, 2007, saturday  a picture in some copies on sunday about a 10-alarm fire that gutted a block of buildings in elizabeth, n.j., carried an erroneous credit. it was by aaron houston for the new york times, not colin archer of the associated press.  