can their love survive the french election campaign?   ''the presidential election is no soap opera,'' ségolène royal, the first woman to be nominated by a major party for the top position in france, insisted recently.  but the french have eagerly followed every episode of ms. royal's not-so-private life with françois hollande, her companion of 26 years and the leader of the socialist party.  a public disagreement on tax policy and questions about their own tax bills suddenly catapulted the couple into the campaign spotlight this week, feeding the intrigue surrounding a relationship that is very much of the 21st century but as yet untested in world politics.  the lovers became rivals for the socialist nomination last year. ms. royal prevailed in party primaries. now that she is the star, is mr. hollande living up to his official mission to support her?  ''he wants her to win, but he does not want to be relegated to the back seat, that is becoming very clear,'' said jean-christophe cambadélis, a member of the socialist party's top leadership. ''this is a new situation -- for them, for the party and for the country.''  after falling in love at the École nationale d'administration, france's elite breeding ground for civil servants, ms. royal and mr. hollande began in politics working on françois mitterrand's successful run for the presidency in 1981.  after that, mr. hollande, known for his quick wit and fierce intellect, rose through the ranks of the party, becoming its chief in 1997. ms. royal, meanwhile, held three ministerial portfolios in socialist governments from 1992 to 2002.  the two have been at pains to emphasize their unity. glossy magazines snapped them sunbathing together last summer, and some of their four children have told the french press that she tends to set the table while he cooks.  their eldest, thomas hollande, 21, is in charge of his mother's internet campaign. he said it was an ''exceptional advantage'' for a presidential candidate to have a partner rallying the party.  but the harmonious image has been shaken in recent days. when mr. hollande announced last week that a future socialist administration should increase taxes for anyone earning more than about $5,200 a month, ms. royal swiftly retorted, ''i'm not in favor of increasing taxes.''  then, late wednesday, one of her spokesmen, arnaud montebourg, told a television interviewer that mr. hollande was a liability. ''ségolène royal has only one flaw -- and that is her partner,'' he said. when silence followed, he quickly said that he was joking. but ms. royal was not amused, and suspended mr. montebourg for a month.  that flap came on top of media reports all week -- most spectacularly in the newspaper le monde, where a reporter got an unidentified socialist party leader to keep a phone line open during a strategy meeting -- suggesting that the socialists were at a loss to understand ms. royal's campaign, and how to participate.  ms. royal's popularity seemed to take its first serious hit in months. a survey published this week by the csa institute showed that in a straight runoff against her center-right opponent, interior minister nicolas sarkozy, he would win.  the couple's life has been scrutinized in other ways this week, after allegations, which turned out to be false, surfaced on the internet that they had set up a shell company to dodge the wealth tax. but the accusations prompted ms. royal to disclose that they had taxable assets worth about $435,000 and owned an apartment in paris and houses in western france and in the alps.  with the political differences between ms. royal and mr. hollande in headlines all week, speculation about relationship resurfaced. some commentators pondered whether all that was left of the couple was a facade for a political partnership of convenience.  but others dismissed talk of a rift. ''they live together, they go on vacation together, they call each other all the time,'' said jack lang, a former minister and member of ms. royal's campaign team. ''when i phone the house in the morning, sometimes he answers, sometimes she does.''  differences between presidential candidates and party chiefs are nothing new in france. in 2002, lionel jospin famously said that his presidential program was ''not socialist,'' in an ultimately failed attempt to appeal more to centrist voters. in 1988, mr. jospin, then party leader, left on vacation in mid-campaign because he disagreed with president françois mitterrand's re-election slogan.  any such split would certainly bring special headaches for mr. hollande and ms. royal.  ''the fact that the two are a couple means every word is weighed and every action dissected through the lens of their private life,'' mr. cambadélis, the party leader, said. ''they are together, but they don't agree on everything, that's all there is to it.''  