senior aide to blair is arrested in graft inquiry   the police arrested and questioned a senior aide to prime minister tony blair on friday in what seemed to be a widening inquiry into allegations that political leaders had traded high honors for campaign contributions made as loans.  the aide, ruth turner, is the director of government relations in the prime minister's office at 10 downing street and, in a statement, denied ''wrongdoing of any nature whatsoever.''  mr. blair said he had ''complete confidence'' in ms. turner, 36, who was appointed as a special adviser in 2005. she is one of the officials who control access to mr. blair.  ''ruth is a person of the highest integrity for whom i have great regard,'' the prime minister said.  however, a police statement said that ms. turner had been questioned not just in connection with the honors inquiry, but also ''on suspicion of perverting the course of justice.'' under british law, that often means that someone has failed to cooperate with or has frustrated an investigation. the police statement seemed to suggest that the inquiry was breaking new ground, and it drew questions from opposition politicians about a possible cover-up. the police said this ''new development'' would require investigators to extend their inquiries.  since last year, mr. blair has been embroiled in questions about campaign financing before the may 2005 national election. the police are investigating whether people who made loans to the ruling labor party did so in return for promises that they would be appointed to the house of lords. the amount of the loans and other contributions was equivalent to $27 million.  mr. blair himself was questioned by investigators last month, adding to the potential stains on his record as he sought to mold a legacy after almost 10 years in office. when he took power in 1997, he promised voters that labor would enshrine a commitment to corruption-free administration. he has said that he will step down later this year but has not given a date.  in parliament, edward davey of the liberal democrats -- the smaller of the two main opposition parties -- said the ''sorry saga'' of the police inquiry showed that ''the blair government is in its dog days, increasingly mired in sleaze.''  the inquiry was started after a complaint by a scottish nationalist member of parliament, angus macneil, who said friday: ''water is now lapping around blair's neck. the investigation is now right inside the door of no. 10,'' referring to the prime minister's office address.  the police said that ms. turner was arrested at her home in london early friday and was released to allow time for further inquiries without charges being brought against her.  in her statement, issued by mr. blair's office, ms. turner said: ''i have already given the police two lengthy interviews and made it clear to them that i was happy to speak to them at any stage. i have been completely open with the police throughout, and will continue to cooperate with them fully.''  a spokeswoman for the prime minister said ms. turner remained in her post.  while many people, including mr. blair, have been questioned in the inquiry as potential witnesses, only four people have been arrested, including ms. turner and mr. blair's main fund-raiser, lord levy.  