colts are running into path of a colossus   when snow flurries briefly fell friday, it created a home-team dream tableau, the white flakes dusting buildings bathed in blue light as if the town had ordered up the weather, along with pep rallies and towering banners, to cheer on the colts in the american football conference championship game.  it is a long way from when coach tony dungy arrived in indianapolis in 2002 and found himself in a basketball town. the pacers and the hoosiers dominated the landscape, while former colts coach jim mora's ''playoffs?!'' rant played on a continuous loop as background music.  mora's meltdown has been revived in a beer commercial and it seems taken from so long ago that the colts may as well still call baltimore home. women having lunch at a suburban chili's this week all wore blue and white peyton manning jerseys. a ''go colts'' banner hung high on the skyline's tallest building. there were pep rallies with former colts players signing autographs at a local mall. civic leaders were hoping to link this enthusiasm with a bid to play host to a super bowl in a stadium that is under construction.  even with such excitement, the gallows humor that cushions losing has not completely gone. the colts' opponent is no laughing matter, though, not after what the new england patriots have put the indianapolis colts through in the playoffs. even last season, when the colts were the a.f.c.'s top-seeded team only to lose their first game to the pittsburgh steelers, does not seem to sting as much as the two playoff losses to the patriots, particularly the championship game of the 2003 season.  if playing the patriots again is not exactly their worst nightmare, then the colts could probably have come up with a long list of preferred opponents.  ''it wouldn't have totally bothered me if we were playing oakland,'' peyton manning joked friday at a news conference. as for new england, he said: ''it makes for a good story, with the past history. i, like most players, assumed the patriots would beat the jets. then you look at going to san diego and i'm thinking, 'they'll beat the chargers.' i had a pretty good idea they'd be in this game.''  manning and most professional athletes are adept at compartmentalizing the past, sticking it in a mental box for review after retirement. it is their way of avoiding the paralysis that would come from giving too much weight to trends and statistics. mention the previous patriots victories and members of the colts are quick to dismiss history, conveniently forgetting that the four most important people in the game -- the coaches and quarterbacks -- are exactly the same.  in a way, of course, the colts are correct. the chargers crushed the patriots when they last played in the 2005 regular season and it did not help them at all last sunday. but the patriots seem to have a special hold on the colts, disproportionate to the frequency of their games or the margin of their victories. manning has thrown one touchdown and five interceptions against the patriots in the playoffs. his postseason performance is, of course, the only significant blot on his otherwordly career.  with the colossus again directly in the colts' path to the super bowl, the public's trepidation has begun to set in even if, as manning suggested, the only game that might bear review is their last one, in november, which the colts won, 27-20. that, at least, offered a look at exactly the same roster, coached by exactly the same staff.  no matter. on one internet message board for colts fans, there is a thread in which participants come up with their sarcastic worst-case scenarios in hopes of warding them off, the garlic to the patriots vampires. one entry read, ''after all, it's not a true peyton playoff choke job if it isn't at the hands of the pesky patriots.''  behind the giggles, of course, there is a shred of truth, and a tiny bit of dread, too.  ''there is the not-again feeling,'' said jen schaller, 37, who lives in columbus, ohio, but grew up in indianapolis and is a moderator on the message board. ''then again, it couldn't happen any other way.''  the irony is that from 1970 to 2001, the colts and patriots were in the same division and the games never meant much because one, or both, of the teams usually stunk. but it is no accident that in the past two regular seasons, the n.f.l. has scheduled a game between the colts and patriots for the first week in november -- sweeps week for television networks.  the colts had little trouble dispatching the patriots in the past two regular seasons, but almost everybody agrees that the patriots are a different opponent in the postseason: practiced, disciplined, waiting for an opponent to make a mistake. maybe only the red sox, who were foiled so often by the yankees, can appreciate the position the colts are in, needing to topple an empire before they can even play the biggest game.  ''you have to play them and not their mystique,'' dungy said this week. ''but that's hard to do, because all you hear about is their mystique and you see the rings and you know how good they are. i think we all felt in our heart of hearts that we'd see new england at some point in the playoffs. for us to get where we want to go, we're going to have to beat them. it's probably poetic justice.''  dungy joked that maybe it would help that the colts have three players who were once with the patriots. but it may be only one -- the kicker adam vinatieri -- who makes the difference. a player with a unique flair for the dramatic, he seemed to grasp the historic implications of this game for the colts.  ''this game means a lot for both teams, but it's one of those things for the colts, we always felt if we're going to take the next step, you've got to knock off the champions,'' vinatieri said. ''it's a rite of passage. you don't get the honor of playing in the super bowl unless you knock off the champions.''  of course, the patriots aren't even the champions. it just feels that way.  and it feels as if -- if the colts finally make it to super bowl sunday -- they will have passed through an unusual gantlet. against the chiefs, they had to prove their maligned defense could stop a dominant runner and beat one of dungy's best friends, coach herman edwards. then the colts faced the venom of a return to baltimore to beat the ravens. and now they must beat a nemesis that has grown larger than life, a supervillain in a cut-up hoodie.  ''that's the kind of poetic imagery i pay no attention to,'' bill polian, the colts' president, said.  the rest of the city does, as it waits for the patriots again.  pro football  