beauty in the eye of the renter   for richard e. waits, leading the life of an itinerant performer meant always being someone's roommate.  ''usually, i just throw my shoes down and it doesn't matter,'' said mr. waits, a singer/dancer/actor/waiter. but this time, somehow, it did matter. he wanted a home of his very own, ''a place i could nest and recharge, because new york is a lot to handle.''  mr. waits, 43, studied theater in his hometown, at buffalo state college. he followed the work to san francisco where, for a year and a half, he had what felt like a real home -- his own lease on his own apartment. then it was off to perform in the caribbean and europe. mr. waits, a baritone, is currently aiming for a role on broadway, ideally in ''chicago'' or ''the color purple,'' while waiting on tables at il cantinori in greenwich village.  when he arrived in new york seven years ago, he lived with two roommates on west 14th street. but his rent kept rising, so he moved to a basement railroad apartment on west 45th street, paying $725 for his half.  it was well located and cheap enough to allow for voice and dance lessons. but the perpetual mess from his roommate -- a dancer who seemed only to audition but never to work -- bugged him. and whenever his roommate needed to get to the bathroom, she had to walk through his room.  last month, the landlord, to whom mr. waits paid his rent directly, told him the roommate was thousands of dollars in arrears. ''there was talk of eviction, and i didn't want any part of that,'' he said. ''you have to be careful with your credit.''  he was more than ready for a change. ''the formula my mother gave me was one week's salary for rent, one for bills, one for spending and one for saving,'' he said. so, according to his mother, he had to keep his monthly rent to -- well, between $700 and $1,200.  the bulletin board at the actors' equity association, his union, yielded mostly short-term sublets in distant neighborhoods. on craigslist, the web site, places in his price range were gone immediately. and most of those were shares, usually with requests for female roommates.  his regular customers at il cantinori, whom he regaled with tales of his housing woes, couldn't help. those in the real estate field told him they didn't deal in his price range.  ''i started freaking out a little,'' mr. waits said. ''i kept going to my classes because when things start to go crazy, i need someplace to put my foot down. at work i know what to expect and at class i know what to expect.''  he checked out a $500-a-month rooming house on west 178th street, where he found three guys in one apartment. there was a bed, a desk and ''a door with a deadbolt because it was connected to another guy's room,'' he said. ''i was curious and i wanted to give myself options. you never know. it wasn't totally disgusting.''  two roommate situations had possibilities. on west 52nd street, the roommate was ''very nice, very courteous and we weren't dealing with a freak,'' he said. the room was $1,140. on west 109th street, a dancer friend was renting out a bedroom for a more reasonable $800. when he visited, the cat hissed.  but the best option, he knew, was to pay a broker to find him a lease of his own. ''i had been saving for my trip to paris,'' he said. ''brokerage fee or paris, one or the other. the child in me said to move in with my dancer friend. the adult said, richard, be responsible and get your own place. paris will be there.''  his restaurant customers weighed in on his hunt. one said: ''suck it up and pay the fee. listen, you will be living with your ex for a whole year trying to move out because you don't want to pay a fee, and after a year of being tortured and finding nasty notes on your pillow you will find a more expensive place. that's what happened to me because i didn't want to pay a fee.''  he liked the lesson. ''that gave me strength -- it's no big deal,'' he said. ''i was making such a drama in my head it was stymieing me.''  so he leapt at a narrow studio for $1,200 in a big building on west 19th street. it was pricey, but ''i was nervous so i wanted to live there,'' he said. ''chelsea is familiar.'' the agent later told him the place went to someone else.  he answered an ad for a studio renting for just $775. he and the agent, walter l. pierce iii of mosaic properties, took the subway to west 148th street in hamilton heights. ''i was a little anxious because it is far away and i will be in the subway all the time,'' mr. waits said. ''and i said, just open yourself to the experience.''  the rent-stabilized studio, with a main room of 200 square feet, was nicer than he expected. the maximum allowable rent is $1,045, but the unit has a preferential rent, sometimes granted when market conditions warrant -- in other words, when the rent climbs too high and the landlord has trouble finding a tenant willing to pay.  the fee was $2,000, mosaic's minimum, even though it usually charges 15 percent of a year's rent ($1,395 in this case). so few low-end rentals are available that typically ''you've got to get creative in finding the apartment or making the deal happen with the landlord,'' said brian dusseau, a manager at mosaic properties. also, ''if people can afford to pay our fee, we know they can afford to pay that rent every month,'' he said.  mr. waits negotiated the fee to $1,750 and happily moved in. he plans to replace his air mattress with a sofa bed and to cover the linoleum floor with carpeting.  he can see the neighborhood changing. a new apartment building is rising next door. buying paint at the hardware store, he overheard a customer persuasively request delivery. ''the guy never delivered before,'' mr. waits said. ''this is his first delivery.''  as he knows, $775 doesn't buy a palace. he has seen trash strewn in the hallway and smelled urine in the elevators, one of which is broken. the bathroom has no outlet for his electric razor.  no matter. ''it is my place to lock out the world and regenerate, and each day it becomes a more beautiful apartment,'' he said. ''i'm making a home for the second time in my life, instead of just a place to live.''  when he broke the happy news to his restaurant regulars, they thought he had bought an apartment. after all, ''this is a hot section of town,'' he said. ''i was like, 'no, i didn't buy, i am renting.' we are not dealing with the same reality.''  the hunt e-mail: thehunt@nytimes.com  