marquette hands pitt a rare loss at home   marquette point guard dominic james wore dark blue knee-highs sunday afternoon to warm his legs, not because he was trying to make a fashion statement. but his team's play definitely made an impression.  ''they're a great team, don't get me wrong,'' james said. ''but we're here. we're here.''  the golden eagles ended sixth-ranked pittsburgh's 12-game home winning streak with a 77-74 overtime triumph, their fourth consecutive victory over all and third in a row on the road.  james, who scored a game-high 23 points, made two free throws with less than a second remaining in overtime to secure the victory for no. 24 marquette (17-4, 4-2 big east).  james and the golden eagles passed through a capacity crowd of 12,508 and a panthers team that began big east play with a 5-0 record matched in team history by only the 2002-3 team.  the winning streak for pittsburgh (17-3, 5-1) included victories against georgetown and connecticut in the past eight days.  in the past two weeks, the golden eagles have won at uconn, at louisville and at pitt.  ''pitt, they're going to go on and win a lot of games,'' said james, a 5-foot-11 sophomore. ''they're not going to lose many more games at home. but for us to come in and get a win, especially in their home, that gives us a great deal of confidence.''  the golden eagles forced 18 turnovers by the panthers, who led the n.c.a.a. in assist-turnover ratio, and held them to a 41.8 shooting percentage.  pittsburgh, which still leads the big east after second-place syracuse lost to st. john's earlier sunday, trailed by as many as 11 points with nearly 12 minutes remaining and by 9 with four minutes left.  the panthers clawed back when marquette failed to make a basket in those final four minutes, relying on 11 second-half points from guard ronald ramon and free throws. ramon, who finished with 21 points, sent the game into overtime on two free throws with 3.5 seconds left that tied the score at 64-64.  marquette entered the game shooting 63 percent from free-throw line. but wesley matthews, who finished with 14 points, and james converted all 10 marquette free-throw attempts in overtime. the golden eagles made their final 15 attempts after missing 7 of their previous 11.  ''when you go 10 for 10 in overtime, you're not going to see too many teams lose,'' pittsburgh coach jamie dixon said.  dixon watched aaron gray (16 points, 9 rebounds) go 1 for 4 from the free-throw line in overtime. pittsburgh owned leads of 72-69 and 74-73 in the extra period but frittered away chances.  gray missed two free throws with 2 minutes 7 seconds left in overtime and had a pass by levon kendall carom off his fingertips in the final 30 seconds.  james was fouled after dribbling into a forest of arms with nine-tenths of a second left. james made both free throws; right before, marquette coach tom crean joked about getting pizza when it was over. matthews added two more with one-tenth of a second left after he intercepted pittsburgh's inbounds heave.  ''a lot of people have said, 'this team can't shoot free throws,' '' james said. ''statistics show that. but we all believe in each other.''  crean afterward denied he had called pittsburgh ''dirty,'' as panthers forward mike cook was quoted as saying in the pittsburgh post-gazette on sunday.  the dispute stemmed from a collision between pittsburgh's antonio graves and james last season that injured james. the issue bubbled over sunday when crean raised it before the game. the officials called 54 fouls.  ''i want to put that stuff to bed,'' crean said. ''it's over.''  but the big east season is far from over. marquette will face only one more currently ranked team on the road, no. 20 notre dame on feb. 24.  it will end the regular season against pittsburgh on march 3.  and about james's long socks that crean criticized before the game? ''i feel like after the game i had today,'' james said, ''he can't say anything about it.''  college basketball  