expect havoc near brooklyn bridge, but it's just for a movie   do not be alarmed, the police warned new yorkers yesterday, should they see army and coast guard helicopters or police and military vehicles swarming near the brooklyn bridge tonight. it's just a movie: in this case, a film starring will smith about the last human in new york.  more than 1,000 extras and the cast and crew of the film, ''i am legend,'' will be staging an evacuation of manhattan by barge, just one of many scenes being shot around the city in recent months for the movie, which is expected in theaters in december.  scheduled to last about a week, this leg of filming near the brooklyn bridge will include military tanks and hummers parked at locations on south street and dover street, as well as a black hawk helicopter flying overhead tonight, the police said.  the barge, about 200 feet long, will be anchored just south of the brooklyn bridge, illuminated by floodlights. according to the movie's plot line, the barge provides a means of escape for some new yorkers who have so far avoided a biological plague that turns humans into bloodsucking, night-crawling creatures.  coast guard members will help secure the scene on the east river and keep traffic on the river flowing during the shoot. several of them will also take part in the filming, driving coast guard vessels, said daniel bender, a coast guard spokesman.  lt. anthony chapman, commander of the police department's movie and tv unit, said that at least 10 members of his unit would be on hand to ensure safety and to minimize disruption on the city's streets. ''there will be unbelievable coordination on all this,'' lieutenant chapman said. ''safety is the most important thing.''  officers under his command will oversee some intermittent traffic delays on dover street and south street in the afternoon before 7 p.m. then sections of the two streets will be closed or traffic will be diverted until about midnight, a city official said. those intermittent delays and closings will continue on weekdays until next tuesday on south street. dover street will not be affected after tonight.  julianne cho, associate commissioner of the mayor's office of film, theater and broadcasting, said that the production company, warner brothers, ''has fliers up all around that area,'' and ''the community board has been notified; we make every attempt to make people know it's a mock scene for a film shoot.'' she added that the movie would employ about 3,000 new yorkers over the course of its filming, which ends in march.  