q & a   i am having a problem finding travel insurance for my 82-year-old mother-in-law who lives in moscow and is planning to visit us in switzerland. because of her age, and the fact that she has had a heart problem, her russian travel insurance may not be adequate. she would be staying with us for four to six weeks. can you help?  -- clive d. harbutt, nyon, switzerland  the harsh reality is that insurance becomes ever harder to get when you are over 65. indeed, 69 is the upper limit for many companies, and for companies that go beyond that, premiums can rise steeply each year, especially for pre-existing medical conditions.  a comprehensive worldwide annual policy for travelers (costing from $150 to $500 a year) will include medical coverage and emergency repatriation; personal accident; personal liability; cancellation; baggage loss; and legal advice and expenses. but each trip will normally be limited to a maximum of 60 to 90 days (31 days with some policies).  finding any kind of travel insurance for people over 80, however, is a challenge. for united states travelers, the issue is also affordability. ed perkins, a contributing editor to smartertravel.com and the former editor of the consumer reports travel letter, said: ''almost all the big insurers cover senior travelers, and quite a few go into the 80s. pricing, however, goes up exponentially when you go over 80, to the point that travelers in that range should seriously consider self-insuring trip cancellation.''  he added that ''seniors traveling outside the u.s. might well want to buy medical policies, since medicare doesn't cover anything outside the u.s. and regular medicare supplements don't cover much.'' mr. perkins recommends checking out online comparison sites to find the most appropriate policies. among the sites he suggests are www.1travelinsurance.com, www.insuremytrip.com and www.quotewright.com.  among the companies that insure older travelers are columbus direct (www.columbusdirect.com), which offers single-trip coverage up to the age of 88; global travel shield (www.globaltravelshield.com), an american express product available to united states residents, regardless of age; and international health insurance danmark (www.ihi.dk), a danish company that insures many nationalities, including americans, but only up to age 79.  however, even columbus direct did not include russia in its extensive list of ''countries of residence.'' i suggest that you talk with your own health insurance people in switzerland in the hope that they might give your mother-in-law health coverage from the time she arrives in geneva to the time she leaves.  roger collis  q & a  