paid notice: deaths   newman, eva e. (nee feilchenfeld)   newman--eva e. (nee feilchenfeld), on january 21, 2007, peacefully in her own bed after an extraordinarily full and varied life which she enjoyed to the fullest and which she recounted with joy for her enthralled listeners. born in berlin to henry (who died in bergen belsen weeks before the liberation in 1945) and hannah (nee kadisch), who survived the camps, eva graduated law school in berlin in 1932, and had entered upon a civil service career in the judiciary when, in april 1933, the nazis passed the ''law for the restoration of the professional civil service,'' banning jews from employment in government. shortly thereafter, she and her family emigrated to the netherlands, where she lived for six years before emigrating to america, in august 1939, with her husband, randolph (1904-1975) and three young sons (thomas, steven and robert). after moving to new york, eva and her husband returned to law school and became members of the new york bar. eva graduated from brooklyn law school (then part of st. lawrence university) class of 1943, first in her class and valedictorian. she subsequently became one of new york city's first licensed women cab drivers; though the one-year weekend career was intended to explore potential for her husband's investment in taxi medallions, she pursued it with the same enthusiasm she brought to all her varied activities. from about 1960-1975, together with her husband, she represented claimants seeking restitution from the german government for loss of property and professional opportunities during the nazi era. eva returned to europe in 1970, and, for almost 30 years, she was mentor, confidant, advisor and role model to her children and grandchildren, and a generous hostess, and indefatigable tourguide to relatives and countless friends at her home in nice. there she formed lifelong friendships with colombian fanny arenas and tunisian hajer el-ouardani, with each of whom she shared her apartment for several years. she moved back to new york in 1999, to isabella house, where thanks to a wonderfully caring and supportive staff she was able to live in her own apartment with maximum possible independence to her very last day. she is predeceased by her husband randolph, a prosecutor on gen. telford taylors staff at the nuremberg war crimes trials (i.g. farben), a sister ruth and brother gerhard, and friede (monte) schoeneberg, who helped raise and care for four generations of eva's family. she is survived by sons thomas, steven and robert, grandchildren lisa, jonathan, suzanne, tony, seiji, vivi and hana, greatgrandchildren serena, sumiko, madeline, sal, emi and eva, nephews charles and john, and nieces marion and elizabeth. she was beloved and admired by all who knew her and will be missed enormously!  