ex-congressman is sentenced to 2 1/2 years in abramoff case   former representative bob ney, the only member of congress to admit guilt in the jack abramoff lobbying scandal, was sentenced friday to two and a half years in prison, longer than had been requested by the justice department.  judge ellen s. huvelle of the federal district court in washington said she had decided on her somewhat tougher sentence for mr. ney, an ohio republican, because his crimes involved a ''significant and serious abuse of the public trust'' over several years. the 30-month term she imposed was three months longer than prosecutors had asked.  ''you have a long way to go to make amends,'' judge huvelle told the former lawmaker, citing tens of thousands of dollars' worth of luxury overseas travel and other gifts he accepted from mr. abramoff and the corrupt republican lobbyist's partners in return for official favors.  mr. ney, who served six terms in the house before resigning in early november, will be able to keep his congressional pension. legislation now in congress, similar to a bill for which he once voted that never became law, would deny pension payments to lawmakers convicted of crimes like bribery and fraud, but the measure would not apply retroactively.  the precise amount of mr. ney's pension cannot be independently known, because of a variety of factors, but it will not be as large as those of many senior members, given his relatively few years in office. further, since he is only 52, he will not get any payments for at least four years.  in a brief statement to judge huvelle, mr. ney apologized friday to his family and his former constituents and suggested that his crimes had resulted in part from alcoholism.  he said he was continuing to ''battle with the demons of addiction that are within me,'' and requested through his lawyers that he serve his sentence at a federal prison in west virginia that has a rehabilitation program.  the justice department had sought a 27-month term, the shortest possible under judge huvelle's interpretation of federal sentencing guidelines, because a plea bargain that mr. ney struck last year allowed the government to avoid a long trial. the judge could have sentenced him to as much as 33 months.  judge huvelle also ordered that mr. ney pay $6,000 in fines and that after serving his prison term, he be placed on two years' probation, during which he must abstain from alcohol.  in his plea bargain, mr. ney confessed that he had essentially sold his office to mr. abramoff's lobbying operation and others. mr. abramoff himself pleaded guilty last year to conspiring to corrupt public officials, and the scandal surrounding him, which opinion polls suggest was a factor in the democratic congressional victory in last november's elections, has brought a number of officials under scrutiny.  just last week a lawyer for j. steven griles, who formerly served the bush administration as the no. 2 official at the interior department, confirmed that mr. griles had been notified that he was likely to be indicted in the abramoff inquiry.  