paid notice: deaths   goldberg, lisa   goldberg--lisa. the faculty and staff of nyu medical center deeply mourn the sudden and untimely passing of lisa goldberg, wife of our university president, john sexton, and extend our heartfelt sympathy to dr. sexton and all his family. kenneth g. langone chairman board of trustees nyu medical center robert m. glickman, m.d. dean and ceo nyu medical center eric c. rackow, m.d. president nyu hospitals center  $(6$)goldberg--lisa the board of directors, faculty and staff of the new york university child study center mourn the loss of lisa goldberg, wife of nyu president john sexton, mother of jed and katie, mother-in-law of danielle, grandmother of julia, ava and natalie and friend to many of us. she was a woman of great wisdom and grace, beautiful inside and out. we will miss her strength and her ability to help those around her to see what was truly important. our thoughts are with her family and all those who love her. brooke garber neidich, chair harold s. koplewicz, m.d., dir. nyu child study center  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. the american jewish committee mourns the untimely death of lisa goldberg, president of the charles h. revson foundation. lisa, a wise and inspiring individual, was deeply committed to building a new generation of jewish leadership, and we were privileged to work with her in that effort. we extend our deepest condolences to her family and colleagues. e. robert goodkind president david a. harris executive director  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. we, the provost and members of the council of deans at new york university, express our profound sadness at the devastating loss of lisa goldberg. lisa was president of the charles h. revson foundation where her leadership of issues, both local and national, set new standards for philanthropy. a thought leader, an inspirational mentor, and a creative genius behind many scenes, the legacy of lisa goldberg will endure for generations. lisa was the wife and best friend of our dear colleague, nyu president john sexton, an amazing mother to katie and jed, admiring mother-in-law of danielle, and grandmother extraordinaire for julia, ava, and natalie. we will miss her. david mclaughlin, provost mary brabeck, dean, steinhardt school of education sally blount-lyon, undergraduate dean, stern school of business mary schmidt campbell, dean, tisch school of the arts, associate provost of the arts thomas f. cooley, dean, stern school of business george downs, dean for social sciences, faculty of arts & science suzanne england, dean, school of social work richard foley, dean, faculty of arts and science robert m. glickman, dean, school of medicine leslie greengard, director, courant institute of mathematical sciences robert lapiner, dean, school of continuing & professional studies carol mandel, dean, division of libraries ali mirsepassi, interim dean, gallatin school of individualized study richard revesz, dean, school of law matthew s. santirocco, dean, college of arts & science ellen schall, dean, wagner graduate school of public service daniel stein, dean for science, faculty of arts & science catharine r. stimpson, dean, graduate school of arts and science edward j. sullivan, dean for humanities, faculty of arts and science richard vogel, interim dean, college of dentistry mariet westermann, dir., institute of fine arts  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. the united states holocaust memorial museum mourns the passing of lisa goldberg, president of the charles h. revson foundation. she will be remembered for her dynamic and visionary leadership whose legacy will endure. the museum extends its deepest condolences to her family and the revson foundation. fred s. zeidman, chairman, joel m. geiderman, vice-chairman, sara j. bloomfield, director  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. the entire nyu community shares a profound sense of sorrow and loss over the tragic death of lisa goldberg, the beloved wife of nyu's president, john sexton, and a cherished and esteemed friend to us all. she was brilliant, wise, generous with her counsel, and a truly lovely person. she was president of the revson foundation and a leader in foundation circles. lisa was someone to whom everyone in new york turned when they needed sound and thoughtful advice. for her family she was a source of unlimited love, strength, grace and humor. the world will be a far poorer place without her. we share our friend john sexton's heartbreak; he, katie, jed, danielle and all of lisa's family and loved ones are in our thoughts and prayers. martin lipton, chair, nyu board of trustees  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. the association for a better new york is deeply saddened by the passing of lisa goldberg, wife of abny steering committee member john sexton. our condolences and sympathies are with john's family during this difficult time. william c. rudin chairman michelle a. adams executive director  $(6$)goldberg--lisa, we helped welcome you to new york and can't imagine new york without you. love to the goldberg sexton family, whom we hold dear in our hearts. ellen schall and steve kelban  $(6$)goldberg--lisa, hebrew union college-jewish institute of religion records with profound sorrow the tragic and untimely death of lisa goldberg, beloved wife of john sexton. she had been tireless in her resourcefulness and personal advocacy on behalf of others. she was a catalyst for change through her singular leadership at the revson foundation. with boundless energy she dedicated herself to her family, whom she adored. we extend our heartfelt condolences to their entire family whose loss we deeply share. may they find comfort together for all those who mourn for zion and jerusalem. rabbi david ellenson, president barbara friedman, chair, board of governors  $(6$)goldberg--lisa e. the board of directors and staff of the charles h. revson foundation mourn the heartbreaking loss of the foundation's brilliant and devoted president. lisa's exceptional leadership and enlightened grant making were owed to her boundless intellectual curiosity, her voracious reading, her effortless mastery of diverse realms of knowledge, her technical prowess, her prescient recognition of groundbreaking ideas, her delight in helping young people develop as leaders, her ardent commitment to women, her dedication to jewish history and culture, and her belief in the power of law to redress injustice. lisa was remarkable in her gift for friendship, her capacity to find humor in adversity, her ability to celebrate accomplishment and her unfaltering sustenance in times of sorrow, her adept problem solving, her immutable loyalty, her panache, her grace and profound compassion, her unique combination of tenderness and rigor, her ready laughter, and her attentive mentoring of every member of the revson staff. surpassing all was her love for her family--john, katie, jed and danielle, julia, ava, and natalie, donna and jeff and their children, and philip. incapable of small-mindedness, modest about her stunning talents, lisa released the generosity in every person fortunate enough to know her. she left the world immeasurably better. may her memory continue to bless us. charles h. revson foundation philip leder, m.d. chairman  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. the board of directors and the staff of the fund for the city of new york mourn the loss of our esteemed and beloved colleague, friend and supporter, lisa goldberg. lisa was a quietly powerful force for good in this city and a person of great intelligence, insight, courage and compassion. we will miss her deeply. our profound condolences to her husband john, her daughter katie, and son and wife, jed and danielle and their children. robert curvin, chair, board of directors mary mccormick, president  $(6$)goldberg--lisa e. taken swiftly by a massive cerebral hemorrhage suffered sunday evening, she died monday, january 22. every day of her life she lit the world with her intelligence, grace, generous spirit and concern for others. she was the lynchpin of her beloved family, which she nurtured and shaped with rare wisdom and inexhaustible love. as a leader in the world of philanthropy, ultimately serving as the president and ceo of the charles h. revson foundation, she was second to none as a force for understanding, progress and the common good. from her creativity, to her conceptualizing and supporting breakthrough documentaries, to her dedication to ending discrimination and empowering the poor, to her commitment to dialogue across race and religion, to her dedication to jewish heritage, lisa was, for all she touched, simultaneously leader, role model, dear friend and counselor. even as we, her family, long for her continued physical presence, we vow to carry her and her love with us forever. born may 1, 1952, in brookline, massachusetts, she graduated with honors from both radcliffe college (1973) and harvard law school (1979). after law school, she worked in the carter white house for the president's commission on an agenda for the 1980s, a prescient 12 volume exploration of the trends which have dominated the ensuing decades. in 1982, she became a program officer at the revson foundation, where over a 25 year career she built alliances with americas major foundations to produce some of the most effective initiatives of the period. she is survived by a cherished husband, john sexton, president of new york university; a treasured daughter and son, katie sexton and jed sexton; a beloved daughter-in-law, danielle decrette; three wonderful granddaughters, julia (five), ava (two) and nathalie (two); a sister, donna eskind and her husband jeff, of nashville and their three children, david, matthew and sara; and a brother, philip, presently the united states ambassador to bolivia. a memorial service will be held in late february. this week, the family will receive friends at 37 washington square west on wednesday and thursday, january 24 and 25, between 3:00pm and 5:00pm and between 7:00pm and 9:00pm; and on friday, january 26, between 2:00pm and 4:00pm. the family asks that in lieu of flowers contributions be made to the lisa goldberg fellowship fund at nyu's wagner school of public service. checks can be sent care of dean ellen schall.  