with jefferson on his side   cameron sinclair is no sentimentalist. ''my grandmother once told me, 'only fools rely on luck,' '' he said.  so he has not waited for luck to track him down. a former architect, mr. sinclair was a founder of architecture for humanity in 1999, with the idea of taking architecture -- that is, housing and community facilities -- to people in need, like sri lankans struck by the tsunami of 2004 and gulf coast residents hit by hurricane katrina. the organization has grown faster than he could have imagined; today mr. sinclair is almost always in transit and would have little room for lucky charms, even if he were prone to them.  still, one modest possession carries just enough currency and takes up just enough space for him always to have it on his person. it is a $2 bill he received as change at a starbucks in manhattan three years ago. at the time he was working out of a chelsea studio with eight other people as he struggled to get architecture for humanity off the ground.  ''i had never got one before,'' said mr. sinclair, a british subject who has lived in the united states since the early 1990s. ''and i realized that it would make a good good-luck charm because jefferson was the only president who was an architect.''  in one neat, extremely portable package, the bill, with jefferson gracing its front, hinted at mr. sinclair's realization that he needed more than an architecture degree to achieve his goals. ''you need to be a businessman and a politician to get a building built,'' he said.  and presto! the bill adhered to the first rule of magical thinking, as set forth by the anthropologist james george frazer -- that is, the law of similarity, which holds that a charm's effects should somehow be traceable to the charm itself. as mr. sinclair pointed out, ''that year we went from a $40,000-a-year outfit to $1.4 million.''  then, the bill met lucky-charm rule no. 2: the law of contagion, by which a charm seems to exercise magic effects after its first moment of power has passed. in 2006 mr. sinclair won the prestigious ted (technology, entertainment, design) prize, which is awarded by the sapling foundation for ''having a positive impact on the planet.'' the award led dr. dean ornish, the founder of the preventive medicine research institute in sausalito, calif., to offer free office space there.  you'd knock wood and say ''monticello'' three times, too.  not that there is anything rare about this particular talisman. since 1861, when the treasury department began producing the national bank notes known as ''greenbacks,'' $2 bills have not been out of print except for 10 years, 1966 to 1976 (but not out of circulation). there are approximately $1.5 billion of them in circulation today.  yet neither the $2 bill nor the various $1 coins issued over the years have ever really caught on. partly this is because they are hard to keep handy in cash registers with a limited number of slots for bills and coins. it is also because their perceived rarity (see sinclair, cameron) leads people to hang on to them instead of putting them back into circulation (ibid).  even so, the bill's supply -- there are roughly 12 $1 bills for every $2 bill -- comes with a bit of an edge for mr. sinclair, who likes to point out that ''54 percent of the people in the world live on less than $2 a day.'' having what he calls a scotsman's sense of thrift, he would clearly prefer a fiscally conscious souvenir of the united states.  one suspects his grandmother would be proud.  possessed  