prominent trainer retreats from claim he held title   michael khodarkovsky is a prominent trainer and coach, and president of the kasparov chess foundation. but is he, as he has claimed, an international master? no, according to the world chess federation, and now he is backing off the claim.  khodarkovsky, who immigrated from ukraine 15 years ago and lives in new jersey, coaches at montclair kimberley academy and the spence school in manhattan.  he is also on a committee of the federation that administers credentials for trainers and coaches, and he has been awarded the title of senior trainer, the highest designation.  the question of whether he is an international master is not academic; coaches and trainers are often hired based on their own chess skills as well as on how well their students do.  in a telephone interview on jan. 9, khodarkovsky said he had earned the international master title, a lifetime title awarded by the federation, based on two tournaments he played in yugoslavia in 1989 and 1990. khodarkovsky said he did not have the tournament results or other proof, but he said that after the second tournament, his rating was ''exactly 2450.'' an international master must, among other things, have a rating of at least 2400.  according to the federation's web site, the requirements for the title of senior trainer include having had ''world/international successes'' as a player and a rating of at least 2450 at one time.  on the web site of the kasparov foundation, which sponsors scholastic tournaments, a press release dated aug. 16, 2004, about mackenzie molner, a student of khodarkovsky's who won the national high school championship, said khodarkovsky was an international master. by thursday, the title had been removed from the release.  information on the federation's web site also supported khodarkovsky's contention, at least briefly.  a world chess federation press release on oct. 15, 2006, announcing a chess convention in singapore in december at which khodarkovsky ran a seminar for coaches, said he was an international master.  the federation's ''personal card'' for players with an international rating showed two weeks ago that he was an international master, with a rating of 2260. by last tuesday, the title had been removed from the card.  mikko markkula, chairman of the federation's qualification commission, said he removed the title after becoming aware that it was added sometime in the last month. he said he investigated khodarkovsky's tournament history and concluded that he had never earned the title.  markkula said that khodarkovsky had asked that some changes be made to correct the spelling of his name, but that someone had also altered his card to give him the title of international master. markkula said that this could not be done accidentally and that he was investigating ''because i find this very serious.'' he added that whoever had changed the card was ''absolutely cheating.''  dirk j. a. de ridder, chairman of the federation's titles and ratings committee, said he found the federation's press release citing khodarkovsky as an international master disturbing and speculated that the person who wrote it might have given khodarkovsky the title because other instructors at the conference were titled players. ''i am having the slight impression that in order not to embarrass mr. khodarkovsky, this title was added,'' de ridder said. he added that having the international master title would make it possible for khodarkovsky to charge more for his services.  in an e-mail message, markkula said he had looked up khodarkovsky's entire rating history and found that he had played a tournament in yugoslavia in 1990, but could not find a record of him playing another tournament during this period. markkula also wrote that khodarkovsky's peak rating, which he obtained after the yugoslavia tournament, was 2290.  in a follow-up interview on tuesday, khodarkovsky said the directors of the yugoslav tournaments told him his performances were enough to qualify for the title, at least provisionally, until his rating got above 2400.  khodarkovsky said he was puzzled that his federation rating was so low. in the soviet union, he said he had a soviet rating of 2335 to 2345 and he thought his federation rating was ''on par'' with that.  khodarkovsky also said he had been awarded the title of soviet master before he emigrated, and ''i always say that i am a soviet master because i value this more than international master.''  about the mention of his title in the press release on the kasparov foundation site, khodarkovsky said that it was written by the foundation's ''p.r. person'' and that he did not know where that person had gotten the information.  khodarkovsky said that he also had no part in writing the press release about the singapore conference for the federation, known as fide. ''if fide said i am an international master then probably they have records,'' he said. ''if they don't, then they should erase this. i did not commission this, and i have no interest in doing this.''  in the end, khodarkovsky said, it is ''meaningless'' whether or not he is an international master. he said that to be a good trainer or coach requires a skill set different from what is needed to be a top player and that his profession is as a coach, not a player.  ''i am not a player anymore for a long, long time. i am a coach and a good coach, and i continue this career. that's so far all i care about,'' he said. ''i am very proud of what i am doing. every student that i turn out, i am very happy about it. it really doesn't matter about the title.''  chess  