works to touch by artists who can't see   the new exhibition at the conrad l. mallett art gallery at capitol community college differs from other exhibitions in at least one respect: touching the art is allowed, even encouraged.  ''we're thinking of having the guards here say: 'yes! you can touch,' '' said pedro valentin, the college's art instructor and the exhibition's curator.  but there is another difference: this exhibition showcases the work of several connecticut artists who are blind. in particular, it displays the art of david waite of mansfield, who lost his sight over eight days in 1997 from a combination of diabetes and graves' disease.  mr. waite, who had been a pen-and-ink artist, was working as a courtroom sketch artist for wfsb-tv, channel 3, in hartford at the time. he had to give up his job and initially did not know what to do with himself, until one day a friend suggested that he try working with clay. with that, mr. waite became a sculptor.  ''if a picture is worth a thousand words, these works have to be worth a thousand feelings,'' mr. waite said recently, as he stood among several of his sculptures at the exhibition. ''i use no tools. i use my fingers, and it flows.''  his work, and the work of other connecticut artists who are blind or whose sight is impaired, will be on display through jan. 31. the exhibition is easy to see through the front windows of the college, which moved four years ago to a building on main street that once housed g. fox & company, at one time hartford's largest department store. the building's transformation into a school included the restoration of its large storefront windows. what passers-by see are mr. waite's anatomically realistic depictions of a chief of an american indian tribe, an escaped slave, the biblical moses, a mother grieving for a child lost to war, and the infant jesus and the virgin mary.  ''you really work by faith rather than by sight,'' mr. valentin said to mr. waite.  also clearly visible inside and out are drawings and mixed-media works from students throughout the state. these include a plate that has been made into the likeness of a human face, and an ethereal pencil drawing of angels, both created by pamela cintron mejias, an 8-year-old fourth grader at the samuel huntington school in norwich; pottery shaped by ayesha ali, a 12-year-old seventh-grader at newtown middle school in newtown; and a mixed-media work by ashley dixon, 19, a student at aces whitney high school east in hamden.  ''we are always trying to promote connecticut artists here, especially those least represented,'' said mr. valentin, who is also a painter and illustrator.  free admission. hours: 8:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. or by appointment. an artists' reception will be held from 4:30 to 6:30 p.m. on jan. 25; 950 main street, hartford.  the week  correction:  january 28, 2007, sunday  an article last sunday about an exhibition by blind artists misspelled part of the name of the college in hartford where it is being held. it is capital community college, not capitol.  