great neck students and their cars   to the editor:  a senior at great neck north high school, i was stunned by ''hey, let's ride bikes to school (yeah, right),'' by corey kilgannon (the island column, jan. 14). if mr. kilgannon had compared the number of cars parked in the lots with the number of seniors in the student body, he would have discovered that the vast majority of students do not drive to school in the absurdly expensive cars he described.  in addition, after a tragic car accident at great neck south high school a few years ago, our school instituted a policy that prevents students from driving during the school day. thus, the need for a security guard is to ensure the safety of the students, not to protect the questionable investments of a select few great neck parents.  joanna melnick  great neck  to the editor:  in my 33 years as a public school teacher at the elementary level, i never met an overindulged child who benefited from excessive parental expenditures. in ''hey, let's ride bikes to school (yeah, right),'' the children's attitudes are a sad reflection of their shallow values.  the behavior of the parents reveals how shortsighted they are in not knowing what is best for their children in the long run. one hopes that as the children mature, they will feel the personal satisfaction of accomplishments earned through their own hard work.  arlene scholer  new hyde park  to the editor:  surely corey kilgannon does not mean to imply that a shiny late-model luxury car is de rigueur for great neck students. a little wider sampling would have shown there are plenty of kids who find other ways of getting to school in the morning. egads! some, like my son, even walk.  michael e. zuller  great neck  to the editor:  ''hey, let's ride bikes to school (yeah, right)'' did nothing more than glorify the receipt of luxury cars by overprivileged children who have done nothing to deserve such ''gifts.'' corey kilgannon did not mention the high incidence of accidents and deaths that occur with teenage drivers.  as a pediatrician trained at north shore university hospital, i routinely cared for these kids from great neck and neighboring communities, many of whom sustained permanent injuries. i am sure that many of the students, teachers and administrators at great neck north high school could have shared stories of friends and students who have had unfortunate outcomes.  david c. collymore, m.d.  the bronx  to the editor:  i read ''hey let's ride bikes to school (yeah, right)'' with disgust and alarm. the bigger problem is that it is not only in great neck.  the high school students in freehold, n.j., who were killed on jan. 10 were driving a cadillac, apparently too fast. this situation seems to be prevalent everywhere.  phyllis freeman  roslyn heights  