news summary   international 3-15  pakistan said to aid taliban  western diplomats and pakistani opposition figures say pakistani intelligence agencies are seeking a restoration of the taliban, motivated not only by islamic fervor but by a longstanding view that the jihadist movement allows them to assert greater influence on pakistan's western flank.  1  u.s. helicopter crashes in iraq  an american helicopter crashed in a sunni area north of baghdad, killing all 13 aboard. the military also reported 7 other deaths, making yesterday one of the deadliest days for the united states since the war began almost four years ago. 1  images of american soldiers being gunned down, of victims of shiite militias and unflattering coverage of shiite leaders, are being broadcast around the middle east by a banned iraqi satellite television station. 8  army faults colonel in deaths  investigators say that col. michael d. steele issued improper orders to his soldiers that contributed to the deaths of four unarmed iraqi men during a raid in may.  10  turks hold suspect in killing  turkish police arrested a 17-year-old in the killing of a prominent newspaper editor who was shot as he left his office the day before, turkish authorities said. 4  mexico sends kingpins to u.s.  mexico extradited four major drug traffickers to the united states, signaling that the country's newly elected president is serious about cooperating to dismantle cartels.  15  colombian scandal widens  the government of president Álvaro uribe has found itself ensnared in a scandal as revelations surface of a secret alliance between some of the president's most prominent political supporters and paramilitary death squads.  15  national 16-27  senators vie for donations  senator hillary rodham jumped into the 2008 presidential race, immediatelysquaring off against senator barack obama and the rest of the democratic field in what is effectively the first democratic primary, the competition for campaign donations.  1  declaring himself a proud conservative before a crowd of cheering supporters waving american flags, senator sam brownback of kansas became the first republican to formally announce his candidacy for president. 27  refugees face local hostility  more than 900,000 refugees have been admitted to the united states since 1993, and their presence seems to bring out the best in some people and the worst in others. in a small georgia town a boys' soccer program called the fugees highlights the challenges facing resettled refugees amid local hostility.  1  bush addresses health care  president bush intends to use his state of the union address to tackle the rising cost of health care with a one-two punch: tax breaks to help low-income people buy health insurance and tax increases for some workers whose health plans cost more than the national average.  1  new orleans population falls  hurricane katrina may have recalibrated new orleans' demographics, setting the city firmly on the path its underlying characteristics had already been leading it down: a steep decline in population.  1  new york/region 29-33  changes in east harlem  the pounding of hammers and the presence of construction workers signal east harlem's transformation from a puerto rican enclave to a more heterogeneous neighborhood with a significant middle-class presence, worrying many puerto ricans, who fear that they will be displaced by luxury condominiums and stores, including a home depot. 29  chess 33  weather 35  