departed collector opens film celebration of art and artists   they're throwing a party for allan stone this week in pleasantville, but he won't be there.  the purchase resident -- whose obsession with collecting was as well known as his talent for championing artists like willem de kooning and wayne thiebaud -- died on dec. 15 at the age of 74. mr. stone was to have appeared at an opening-night reception following a screening and discussion of ''the collector,'' a documentary about him directed by his daughter olympia stone.  ''the collector,'' which is having its premiere in the new york area on wednesday at the jacob burns film center in pleasantville, is the first of six films being shown as part of the center's ''frameworks: art on film'' series. ms. stone, 37, the youngest of six children, said she drew inspiration for her film, which has been in the works since 2001, from the compassion and honesty she saw in ''my architect,'' the 2003 film that nathaniel kahn made about his father, louis kahn. like mr. kahn's film, ''the collector'' provides a small, private window onto the world of a larger-than-life character.  mr. stone's gallery on the upper east side was a center for groundbreaking artists during the 1960s and '70s -- from robert mallary and cesar to richard estes. he had an insatiable appetite for exquisite art, and the film shows every available space in his house occupied by a piece of art. sitting among his priceless possessions, mr. stone candidly compares his habit to that of a heroin addict, but he refuses to delve any deeper than that, saying one does not pull a flower out of its pot and examine the roots to see why it is pretty.  kathryn bonomi, film programmer for the jacob burns film center, said ''the collector'' was the perfect film to open the ''frameworks'' series because of its local star and because so many westchester residents have a passion for art collecting. ''it's about the collector's eye, and a lot of people either have that impulse or they know someone who does,'' she said.  after ''the collector,'' the series continues on jan. 31 with ''louvre city,'' which was released in 1990 by nicholas philibert after he gained access to the museum during its five-month renovation in 1988.  ''eadweard muybridge: zoopraxographer,'' scheduled for feb. 7, is a showcase of the 19th-century english-born photographer that was released in 1975 and was recommended to ms. bonomi by john walter, whose 2002 film ''how to draw a bunny'' was the most talked about film in last year's ''frameworks'' series.  ''matthew barney: no restraint'' (feb. 14) is probably the oddest offering. mr. barney, an installation artist who counts bjork as collaborator and creative partner, commandeered a factory whaling vessel and used 45,000 pounds of petroleum jelly for his film project ''drawing restraint 9.'' this documentary, released last year, follows him as he creates a ''narrative sculpture.''  on feb. 21, ''who gets to call it art?'' (2006) will trace the path that henry geldzahler took from art critic to the first contemporary art curator for the metropolitan museum of art. like ''the collector,'' it delves into the turbulent new york city art scene of the 1960s.  the last film in the series, ''the rape of europa,'' a 2006 documentary about the systematic theft of art by the nazis, was produced by bonni cohen, a tarrytown native. despite its historical basis, ms. bonomi noted its timeliness. ''museums around the world are doing a lot of provenance research to learn things like how did a particular piece of art end up in someone's hands,'' she said. ''there are all these blanks in history.''  guest speakers play a crucial part in all the screenings. when ''christo in paris'' played last year, christo and jeanne-claude spoke there. when ''louvre city'' is shown at the end of this month, it will feature an appearance by stephen rustow, the lead planner and senior designer (along with i. m. pei) of the louvre expansion. and on wednesday, in mr. stone's absence, ms. bonomi has secured lorraine shemesh, an artist he represented, as well as james grashow and gil shapiro (all of whom are in the film) to join ms. stone for the discussion that follows the screening.  ''i'm sure it'll be an emotional night for the family and friends,'' ms. bonomi said.  ''the collector'' will be shown at 7:15 p.m. on wednesday as part of the ''frameworks: art on film'' series. the screening is sold out, but the series will continue every wednesday night through feb. 28 at the jacob burns film center, 364 manville road, pleasantville. information: (914) 747-5555 or www.burnsfilmscenter.org.  arts and entertainment  