records of arrests at '04 convention can be released   a federal judge in manhattan has ruled that hundreds of city records, including documents, videotapes and testimony, can be made public in connection with lawsuits brought by people arrested during the 2004 republican national convention.  in a 49-page decision released yesterday that rejected the city's efforts to keep the material secret, magistrate judge james c. francis cited ''the patent inadequacy of the type of formulaic incantations of harm'' made by the city. the city had argued that the release of the material would be embarrassing, misleading or dangerous.  the city will take a few days to decide if it will appeal, a spokeswoman for the law department said. the release of the records had been sought by the new york civil liberties union, which is representing seven people arrested during the convention, and by the new york times.  ''the public has an important interest in knowing what was behind the mass arrests and prolonged detentions of protesters during the convention,'' said christopher dunn, associate legal director of the civil liberties group.  the city, which has argued that the 1,806 arrests during the convention were legitimate, said the release of its internal police documents ''would cause embarrassment and mislead the public if publicized,'' judge francis noted.  ''the mere fact that documents were not intended for public view when they were created does not justify a protective order,'' he wrote. ''nor, again, does the fact that the n.y.p.d. would prefer to continue to keep those documents from the public.''  the judge rejected the city's argument that a number of the records should be withheld because they contained information that is ''unreliable or subject to misinterpretation.''  ''the city gives the general public very little credit when it contends that readers will be unable to grasp that the information contained in these documents might be incomplete or inaccurate,'' he wrote.  