one-armed bandits, working for the public   new york state seems to have found an ingenious way to gainfully employ able-bodied men and women who have idle time on their hands.  on a recent midweek afternoon, hundreds of people were toiling away at video terminals as glittering objects -- cherries, bells, hearts and golden 7s -- reeled round and round and bobbed up on their screens. sure, this was a casino, the three-month-old empire city at yonkers raceway, a gaudy room two and a half football fields in length that is filled with 4,300 slot machines with enticing names like wheel of gold and gift from the gods.  but new york would rather you don't think of these people as gamblers. the state says they are earning money for public education, as are customers like them at seven other racetracks. according to the lottery division's web site, the slots at yonkers have earned $55 million since opening day, oct. 11, and $29.9 million of that will be spent on education.  if you're not too fussy about persistently lackluster reading scores, despite the more than $2 billion that the state's lotteries earned last year for schools, then keeping these people at video terminals must be a worthwhile investment. but an argument can be made that new york is nurturing more gamblers than graduates, and should find another way for people to occupy themselves.  until october, gamblers in the new york area had to drive two hours to atlantic city or eastern connecticut to play slots. now yonkers provides one-armed bandits right in their backyard. new york refers to them delicately as video gaming machines, but they are the same ones you find in las vegas.  dina badgeat, a 34-year-old hairdresser from elmont, n.y., still goes to atlantic city once a month to play live blackjack, but now she also drives 20 minutes to yonkers twice a week to play slots. she loves the rush when she wins, and she's had lots of rushes. she claims to be ahead $16,000 at yonkers.  no dope, she realizes that the slots, as she put it, ''are all rigged,'' since they are programmed to pay players back only 92 percent of what they bet. if she plays long enough, the $16,000 will melt. still, she has come to prefer no-skill slots to cerebral table games like poker for reasons that the state education department should love, obsessed as it is with imparting critical thinking skills.  ''playing a table game, you have to make a decision,'' she said. ''with a machine, there's no decision.''  the atmosphere around her is eerie. the vast carpeted playing floor is windowless and hums with dissonant music -- something john cage might have dreamed up. perhaps the music blocks out distracting conversation, but some players suspect it is a siren song, luring them to spend.  james maney, executive director of the new york council on problem gambling, said that gambling itself is a distraction. ''when i'm doing this, i'm not feeling whatever's going on in my life,'' he said. by one yardstick, the state already has 680,000 destructive gamblers, and studies have shown that new casinos increase their ranks. however, timothy rooney jr., the raceway's general counsel, argues: ''the vast majority of people here are just enjoying themselves.''  in midday, players are largely working-class people -- nurses, barbers, merchants -- looking for escape on a day off. many are retirees, a disproportionate number in wheelchairs or using walkers. visiting the casino is a way to while away an afternoon when aging bodies rule out other amusements. the retirees bring limited bundles of cash and know that, over time, they won't lose that much. then again, this may be their lucky day.  ''i bring $500 with me, and if i blow it, i blow it,'' said ben stabile, 82, of astoria, queens, a retired baker visiting with his wife, sister and brother-in-law.  but other retirees are more complicated. michael vetere, 61, spent his career handling payrolls for the new york city subways. now he drives two or three times a week from woodside, queens, to feed cash to the slots.  ''someone else would say, 'you're addicted,' '' he said with a sheepish smile. ''i guess i am. i came here one day with $20 in my pocket and i left with $448. because it's only 20 minutes from my house, i came back the next day and lost the $448.''  although he says he loses about $20,000 a year, he vindicates himself by remembering that he has lost $40,000 on the stock market. besides, as a pensioner, he is morally opposed to finding useful work.  ''if i'm supporting myself and my family, and someone else needs that job, let that someone have that job,'' he said.  some gamblers are more self-critical. while ms. badgeat contends she is not addicted, she says that if she were making policy, she might discourage casinos.  ''it's like smoking,'' she said. ''smoking is going to kill people, and gambling will break a lot of people.''  e-mail: joeberg@nytimes.com  