out of the cradle, endlessly talking about the family   in my blood  six generations of madness and desire in an american family  by john sedgwick  illustrated. 414 pages. harpercollins. $25.95.  john sedgwick is part of a venerable massachusetts family with connections to both george washington's congress (the politically ambitious theodore sedgwick) and andy warhol's factory (edie). he believes that this lineage has shaped his destiny. he cites manic depression as the trademark sedgwick ailment, but his new book reveals other traits as well. the sedgwicks have long struggled with their sense of privilege and worried as much about status as about sanity.  another part of the family curse has been an urge to aggrandize all things sedgwick. memoirists seem as common as suicides on the family tree. so john sedgwick's new book, ''in my blood,'' runs the risk of seeming like a vanity project, thought it proves to be legitimate and substantial.  mr. sedgwick wrote two novels and three nonfiction books before readying himself to tackle the family's story. it's clear from the articulate, insightful ''in my blood'' that his literary credentials are at least as interesting as his genetic ones, and that he can take on any subject he chooses.  many of his forebears have written primarily about their own lives. but ''in my blood'' is about the whole sedgwick pie; that term, by the way, describes the family's unusual circular graveyard in stockbridge, mass. it is arranged so that children lie at the feet of their parents and generations form concentric circles.  mr. sedgwick says that the pie has always been a source of ridicule and embarrassment, but that sounds like hereditary sedgwick disingenuousness. given the pride of pedigree that looms large in ''in my blood,'' the fame of the family plot cannot be such a liability. and it's one more reason the family warrants a book-length biography.  ''in my blood'' has sent mr. sedgwick down a long trail of research, prompting him to study everything from early land dealings in stockbridge between english settlers and indians to the physiology of mental illness. only occasionally does he strain for effect, as when he lies down on a bed in the family manse in stockbridge and tries to imagine the loneliness of pamela, theodore sedgwick's long-suffering and ultimately despondent wife.  pamela was the daughter of a williams, of the williams college williamses. and it is to this ancestor that mr. sedgwick traces the family's first amped-up signs of hypomania. that frenzied behavior would show up in henry dwight sedgwick, known as harry. he was a son of pamela and theodore's, and his manic business dealings made him the first (but hardly the last) sedgwick sent to the then-new mclean asylum for help.  also in harry's generation was catharine maria sedgwick, who became a successful 19th-century novelist and exemplified another family trait: self-absorption. ''beloved mother!'' she wrote, upon the occasion of pamela's suicide. ''the thought of what i suffered when you died thrills my soul!''  john sedgwick shows his strength as a memoirist by taking a realistic measure of such outbursts. ''what she suffered?'' he asks. he then goes on to write insightfully about the near-pathological clinginess that kept catharine unmarried but unshakably attached to another of her brothers, robert, and a self-appointed keeper of the sedgwick flame. ''as nuns are said to be brides of christ,'' he writes, ''she was a bride of the family.''  john sedgwick is a great-great-grandson of harry, and a grandson of harry iii, who was known as babbo. babbo alone wrote 38 books (and immortalized a childhood memory of looking up at the family seamstress but realizing that, for reasons of class, he ought to be looking down). born in 1861 babbo also lived through a pivotal period in the family's fortunes, as the sedgwicks' regional predominance was suddenly eclipsed by the newly rich tycoons of the gilded age, some of whom built vast houses in nearby lenox. faced with a likely downward trajectory, some sedgwicks found it opportune to marry up.  john's father, r. minturn sedgwick, was known as duke. his first marriage (john is a child of his second) was to helen peabody, daughter of the rev. endicott peabody, who founded the groton school. future sedgwicks would thus go to groton whether it suited them or not, and john recalls the strange sensation of feeling that the faculty knew more about him than he knew about himself. he also recalls how dearly his otherwise distant father -- a man who each morning did the royal canadian mounties' calisthenics to the tune of ''ol' man river'' -- cherished his old boarding-school blazer.  when john sedgwick published his first novel in 2000, publishers weekly gratuitously noted, ''f.y.i.: sedgwick's family includes warhol groupie edie sedgwick and actress kyra sedgwick.'' but kyra plays no role in ''in my blood,'' and edie's famous meltdown is put in perspective. it was not an isolated event. edie was one of three siblings who killed themselves and the surviving one, saucie, called their father, francis, a ''filthy old creep'' and said he had made a pass at her.  when francis, the most loathsome sedgwick in this book, met andy warhol, ''the clash of cultures was so complete, there was no clash at all, for there was no possible point of contact,'' john sedgwick writes. ''it was like two armies that have mistakenly massed for battles on different continents.''  ''in my blood'' ultimately arrives at a delicate question: how do its author's troubles, including a breakdown in 2000 (at the age of 46) and subsequent divorce, fit into the family's big picture? its answer is melodramatic. (''i was a sedgwick, guilty as charged,'' he writes. ''i could never peer into my own soul and find nothing, for my soul is not entirely my own.'') but by and large, despite occasional overreaching, mr. sedgwick provides a clear, incisive view of a complicated family. he needn't claim that ''the sedgwick story is the story of america'' to make it feel that way.  books of the times  