mother of victims killed by police car questions handling of inquiry   at least five people saw the new jersey state police car as it sped along stagecoach road one night in late september. one witness guessed it was going 80 miles an hour; another described it simply as a ''white streak.''  the car slammed broadside into a dodge minivan, killing two teenage sisters on their way home from buying a gallon of milk. the trooper received minor injuries.  four months later, there is still no word on whether the trooper who was driving the car will be criminally charged, leading the victims' mother and some of the witnesses to question how the investigation has been handled. the case has renewed concern about the practice of letting the state police investigate matters regarding its own officers, and revived distrust of an agency that has struggled to restore its reputation since revelations a decade ago about widespread racial profiling in its ranks.  ''i am so livid,'' said melinda lipstein, who saw the crash from a parking lot about 50 feet away. ''what he did was wrong, but everybody's protecting him.''  the deaths last sept. 27 of christina becker, 19, a student at richard stockton college of new jersey, and her sister, jacqueline, 17, a senior at ocean city high school, are under investigation by the prosecutor's office in cape may county in southern new jersey, and by the state police. both agencies refused to discuss the case in any detail. the cape may county prosecutor, robert l. taylor, said in a brief interview that since the state police has jurisdiction over the roads in upper township, it ''is normally the first agency that investigates.''  the victims' mother, maria cafaia, the principal at the northfield middle school in nearby atlantic county, has filed a notice of intent to sue the state. ms. cafaia's lawyer, lewis april, said the authorities have refused to turn over any information, including police reports from the night of the accident.  ms. cafaia, who has no other children, said troopers at the scene of the crash turned aside her questions even as she paced behind the morgue truck, telling her only after more than two hours had passed that the victims were her daughters.  ''i left that night without knowing how they got in the accident,'' she said. ''i found out the next morning from the newspaper that there was a trooper involved and that he ran a stop sign.''  the authorities say that the trooper, robert higbee, 34, ran the stop sign where stagecoach crosses tuckahoe road, crashing into the beckers' minivan and pushing it into a third vehicle, another minivan, whose occupants suffered minor injuries.  the trooper was ticketed for careless driving and failure to stop. he has been assigned to administrative duties, according to a spokesman for the state police.  mr. higbee's lawyer, d. william subin, said he could not respond to witnesses' comments to reporters, and called the case ''a tragic accident.''  ''we prefer to wait until this matter is resolved in a proper forum rather than attempt to give information piecemeal to the media,'' mr. subin said. ''trooper higbee would like to have this matter resolved as soon as possible. his heart goes out to the family of the victims.''  while the authorities say trooper higbee was following a speeder, several of the witnesses said in interviews that they saw no car ahead of him, and that he was not using overhead lights or a siren. the police and prosecutor's office say the trooper was tailing a speeder but was not officially in pursuit, which would have required him to turn on overhead lights and the siren.  mr. april, the lawyer for the victims' mother, said even if the trooper was trying to make a traffic stop, he should have obeyed the stop sign.  the authorities have not stated publicly whether trooper higbee was speeding; several witnesses say he was traveling well over the posted 35-mile-an-hour limit.  ''he was hauling,'' recalled mary pomlear, who said she looked out her bedroom window at 10 p.m. and saw the state police car speeding on stagecoach road almost a half-mile before it crashed. ''i'd say he was going 70 or 75.''  karen giblin, who lives about 300 feet from the intersection, ran outside upon hearing a racing noise. ms. giblin said that she did not see the impact but that ''i would guess that he was going at least 80.''  the driver of the second minivan, robert c. taylor, who is not related to the prosecutor, declined to be interviewed for this article. but mr. taylor has told the press of atlantic city that he and his son, who was seated in the passenger seat, saw the police car coming at them, ''going way too fast down the road.''  melinda lipstein said that she and a friend, anthony r. cinaglia, saw the crash from a parking lot near the corner. ms. lipstein said they were startled by the trooper's car, which mr. cinaglia described as a ''white flash,'' and then saw the crash. ''he was flying down the road, with no lights on,'' mr. cinaglia said.  like the other witnesses, mr. cinaglia said he saw no other cars. ''i was so close to the road that if there had been somebody else i would have known,'' he said.  mr. cinaglia and ms. lipstein said that a few days after the accident they were interviewed at the state police barracks by a trooper and an investigator from the prosecutor's office. mr. april said that the taylors were interviewed immediately after the crash, but have not heard from the police or prosecutors a second time.  ms. giblin, who placed a 911 call at the crash scene, said a police investigator called to question her about a week after the crash. ms. pomlear said she had not been contacted by the state police or the prosecutor's office.  mr. april criticized the state police for keeping much of the evidence from the crash, including the crumpled vehicles, at the barracks where trooper higbee worked, and said the investigation has been stymied by a ''blue code of silence.''  mr. cinaglia, one of the witnesses, said that state troopers ''put themselves in harm's way and they should be commended.''  but, he added, ''whether it was an accident or error, this woman lost both her daughters.''  correction:  january 26, 2007, friday  a picture credit with an article on sunday about criticism of the pace of an investigation into a crash in which a new jersey state police car struck a minivan in september, killing two teenage sisters, misidentified the source of one of two photographs. only the picture on the right, of a memorial to the victims, was by laura pedrick for the new york times. the other picture, of the victims and their mother, was provided by the family.  