no smoking, but leaping? step right up   it is illegal in this city to light up a cigarette in a bar because the secondhand smoke can be hazardous, and you never know. someone across the room might end up with cancer in 25 or 30 years.  it will soon be unlawful for a restaurant to serve french fries cooked in artificial trans fats because they could raise levels of bad cholesterol, and you never know. someone could succumb to heart disease in 25 or 30 years.  but let's say you want to parachute from the top of a tall building, simply for the heck of it, even though you never know. you just might land on some unfortunate soul and squish him, not in 25 or 30 years but right now, in real time.  that is perfectly legal.  here is new york, as e. b. white would have put it.  here is new york now that a judge has tossed out an indictment against a professional parachute jumper named jeb corliss, who tried last spring to leap from the observation deck of the empire state building. security guards stopped him as he climbed onto a ledge.  the jump, it seems, was long a dream for mr. corliss, a 30-year-old californian who is said to have parachuted from grand heights everywhere from paris to kuala lumpur, malaysia. (this, mind you, is what he calls a profession. and from this, my mother might have asked, he makes a living?)  prosecutors in manhattan were not charmed, neither by mr. corliss nor by his interest in one of our leading landmarks. to them, attempting to jump from the 86th floor of the empire state building was a hazardous venture that warranted a charge of reckless endangerment. mr. corliss faced possible time in prison, where he would have been fitted for a jumpsuit of a different sort.  but to his rescue rode justice michael r. ambrecht of state supreme court in manhattan.  yes, the planned stunt was ''outrageous,'' justice ambrecht said the other day. yes, it was ''admittedly dangerous.'' yes, mr. corliss's conduct was not only dangerous but also ''ill conceived.'' but reckless endangerment? nah, said the judge.  after all, he said, mr. corliss wore a parachute, didn't he? he was experienced in these matters, wasn't he? he had studied traffic patterns, hadn't he, to ''maximize chances of landing when traffic was stopped''?  ''the evidence failed to establish a grave risk of death to anyone,'' justice ambrecht said, and thus there was nothing to sustain the reckless-endangerment charge. the man who would fly was allowed to walk, free to pursue what his lawyer called his constitutional right to freedom of expression.  left unclear was how the judge could be certain that no cars and no pedestrians might have appeared out of nowhere, only to have mr. corliss land on top of them -- splat! we're talking about new york, where anything can happen, and usually does.  other things, however, have become clear since the ruling.  one is that the judge has yet to find his name mentioned in the same breath with oliver wendell holmes. newspaper editorials have pilloried him, one going so far as to call him a ''knucklehead.'' wearing a knucklehead label is generally not considered a good career move for a judge.  another thing that happened is that the district attorney's office said it would not take the decision lying down. an appeal will be filed, a spokeswoman said yesterday.  a third development is that a state senator from brooklyn, martin j. golden, plans legislation in response to a judicial ruling that he called ''about as asinine as it gets.''  mr. golden wants a law that would make mr. corliss's type of jumping a crime. the parachutist's lawyer, mark jay heller, had all but boasted at one point that he could find no law in new york prohibiting a leap from buildings. that situation needs to be changed, mr. golden said yesterday, so that ''we don't have any more of these clowns causing us undue harassment.''  laws are rarely passed in a hurry, though. we are likely to remain for some time in a town where it is deemed dangerous to smoke in a bar or to fry a potato in a certain kind of oil, but o.k. to jump from the 86th floor if you can claim to know what you are doing.  and this, we are led to believe, is the hallmark of a well-ordered city.  don't know about you, but should we find ourselves at fifth avenue and 34th street, beneath the empire state building, we plan to look up. just in case.  nyc e-mail: haberman@nytimes.com  