a reason to scream, but a coach who won't   now for a pause in indianapolis's super bowl party.  peyton manning had x-rays on his right thumb yesterday, a day after he marched the colts on an 80-yard touchdown drive in the closing minutes to defeat the new england patriots, 38-34, in an epic american football conference championship game.  late in the game -- after the colts had rallied from an 18-point first-half deficit -- manning hit his thumb on the helmet of colts left tackle tarik glenn.  the thumb was bruised and painful after the game.  colts coach tony dungy was quick to head off a civic panic as fans continued to celebrate the team's first trip to the super bowl since moving to indianapolis from baltimore in 1984.  ''from everything i hear, it's going to be o.k.,'' dungy said yesterday at a news conference. the colts' owner, jim irsay, told the associated press last night that the x-rays found no broken bones.  players were off until tomorrow -- the team was not expected to travel to miami until monday -- so manning was unavailable for comment. but the thumb would probably have to be removed for him to consider missing super bowl xli on feb. 4. it will be the first super bowl appearance of manning's record-setting career, and his performance sunday validated years of regular-season prowess and removed the stigma that he could not win the big games.  no one has questioned manning's hardiness, though. he has started 156 consecutive games, including playoff games, in a nine-year career. the streak is second in the n.f.l. to brett favre (257 including playoffs). manning has missed only one play because of injury, in a 2001 game against the dolphins when a helmet-to-helmet hit fractured his jaw.  the colts are not without significant injury questions. cornerback nick harper -- who was so confident the week before the patriots game that he said the colts were in quarterback tom brady's head -- left the game during the first half with an ankle sprain and did not return. dungy said he was unsure yesterday if harper had a high ankle sprain, an injury that usually takes at least a month to heal.  for indianapolis, the vanquishing of the patriots in such dramatic fashion -- scoring the go-ahead touchdown with a minute remaining and intercepting a brady pass on a last-gasp drive -- seemed to signal the beginning of a new respect for the colts and dungy.  the colts' ability to withstand the patriots' early onslaught showed how much they have assumed dungy's placid persona.  losing at halftime by 21-6, dungy reminded the colts that if they got a good kickoff return and scored, they would trail by only one score.  ''this team, i don't want to say mellow, but we don't lose our cool,'' defensive back marlin jackson said after the game. ''we rarely lose our cool, and that is because of our head coach. he is not a guy to lose his cool, and we take on that same personality. we were in here. we knew what we had to do.''  dungy spoke to bears coach lovie smith late sunday night. the two are close friends and will become the first african-american coaches to lead teams at the super bowl. in the immediate aftermath of the game, dungy was reluctant to dwell on the significance of race.  but yesterday he was expansive, telling of an early job interview during which he was asked if he would shave his beard because, dungy said, ''people were looking for a certain kind of person.''  the presence of dungy and smith in the super bowl may signal a sea change of another sort for the n.f.l.: the triumph of the nice guy. as the patriots and their dour coach, bill belichick, exited the playoffs, they were replaced by dungy, who seemed to keep football in the kind of perspective that allowed him to dine with a friend, chiefs coach herman edwards, the night before their teams met in a playoff game.  in praising smith, who like edwards was on dungy's staff when he coached the tampa bay buccaneers, for not using profanity and intimidation as coaching techniques, dungy could have been speaking about himself.  he was also speaking about a vision he has for coaching that is far removed from the style of belichick and his mentor, bill parcells.  ''i really wanted to show people you can win all kinds of ways,'' dungy said yesterday. ''i always coached the way i've wanted to be coached. i know lovie has done the same thing. for guys to have success where it maybe goes against the grain, against the culture.  i know i probably didn't get a couple of jobs in my career because people could not see my personality or the way i was going to do it.  ''one guy did ask me in an interview: 'if you get this job, is this going to be the most important thing in your life? are you going to treat my team as the very most important thing?' i said, 'no, i'm not.' ''  dungy laughed at the memory. ''i didn't think i was going to get that job, and i didn't,'' he said. ''for your faith to be more important than your job, for your family to be more important than your job, it's things we all talk about, we all know that's the way it should be, but we're afraid to say that sometimes. lovie's not afraid to say it, and i'm not afraid to say it.''  the whole league will be listening for the next two weeks.  pro football  