behind the wheel/2007 jeep wrangler; more doors for the great outdoors   some thoughtful people say there is wisdom in introspection, but i think a good nap is more rewarding. still, self-examination is wise when considering whether to buy the 2007 jeep wrangler.  the wrangler has always been the few-frills jeep, a role it literally wallowed in, given its serious off-road abilities. so when engineering the first all-new wrangler in a decade, jim issner, the chief engineer, said the idea was to maintain that off-pavement prowess while adding room and comfort.  the company has succeeded, up to a point, producing a wrangler with more room inside. but this is still a vehicle that is at its best off road, and it remains a rough customer in everyday use. so buyers need to reflect on how they're going to use the jeep -- as a serious tool, or a fashion accessory? -- before they commit.  the conventional two-door has been joined by the first four-door wrangler, called the unlimited (which should not be confused with the 2006 unlimited, a stretched two-door). base prices begin at $18,765 for a wrangler x with four-wheel drive and run to $28,895 for the unlimited rubicon. i tested both versions.  the rubicon label signals that this is the most capable wrangler off pavement; the rubicon has several standard features intended to improve off-road performance. one is a button to disconnect the front stabilizer bar. during normal driving, the stabilizer bar controls body lean on corners, but off pavement the bar can hamper movement over wildly uneven surfaces.  still, the unlimited comes up short on a few standard features. power windows and power door locks, for example, are part of an $800 package.  one interesting option on my rubicon test vehicle was the $1,585 freedom top, which allowed either a snug-and-dry hardtop or open-air motoring if any or all of three roof panels were removed. when all the options were added up -- including $825 for an automatic transmission -- my unlimited rubicon test vehicle was $33,505. the wrangler x two-door was a relative bargain at $22,005, including options like a $1,240 comfort package (the main features of which were air-conditioning and a height-adjustable driver's seat) and an automatic transmission ($825).  the wrangler x has a standard soft top that can also be folded back, which seemed like a good idea on a lovely, 51-degree fall day in northern new hampshire. unfortunately, the instructions on how to lower the ''easy folding soft top'' were long enough to be a novella. i gave up and went inside to take a nap.  the big advantage of the unlimited is its extra interior room; finally, here is a wrangler that can serve as a practical everyday vehicle. at 173.4 inches, the unlimited is 20.6 inches longer than the two-door x.  while the front legroom is the same in each model, the unlimited has 37.2 inches in the rear, a meaningful advantage of 1.6 inches that allows a 6-foot adult to sit there.  just getting to the back seat in the two-door was a gymnastic challenge, despite a humorously named, totally inadequate ''easy access'' feature that moves the front seat forward.  if six-foot adults reach the back seat, they will find barely enough room, making it best suited for small children. for adults, the problem is escaping. it took me two tries.  the four door's cargo capacity is greater. jeep says there is 46.4 cubic feet of space with the back seat upright, compared with about 17 cubic feet on the two-door.  the interior of either model has a basic-functional look with lots of plastic. the x even has plastic, zip-down windows, which are not only inconvenient, but they make ferocious noise at highway speeds.  and despite the wrangler's theme of unadorned practicality, there is a puzzling lack of compartments to store the everyday junk of motoring.  all wranglers now have electronic stability control as standard equipment. if it senses that the jeep is sliding sideways, it tries to correct the skid by selectively applying individual brakes and cutting the power.  i took the wranglers off road at the team o'neil rally school here in the north woods outside littleton. with little effort the unlimited rubicon eased down a gooey bank and up a muddy rise, and it crossed a large, wet and incredibly slippery log. then it worked through more muck to terra firma several hundred feet away.  the wrangler x comes with mud-and-snow tires not nearly as aggressive as the knobby mud-terrain tires on the rubicon. looking at the muddy trail i had just navigated in the rubicon, i wimped out. maybe the x could have made it, but with those tires it was begging for the kind of trouble that involves a tow rope, a lot of work and some bad words.  later, the x easily followed a series of steep, narrow trails through the woods. its off-pavement performance would be improved considerably with more aggressive tires.  the switch from two-wheel to four-wheel drive can be made while moving, but the part-time four-wheel-drive system is for use only on a slippery surface. using it on dry pavement is likely to damage the system.  all wranglers move along nicely with a 3.8-liter v-6 rated at 202 horsepower and 237 pound-feet of torque. that is up from 190 horsepower in the ancient 4-liter in-line 6 that the wrangler previously used.  the standard transmission is a six-speed manual, but the test wranglers had the optional automatic.  the gear ratios were chosen thoughtfully, and the relatively large v-6 has enough torque for good response on or off the road. the government estimates fuel economy with the automatic at 16 m.p.g. in town and 19 on the highway.  the wrangler continues its classic body-on-frame truck construction, but jeep says the structure is much stronger, helping to improve the ride and handling on pavement.  nevertheless, on anything but a smooth surface the two-door's ride is choppy and rough. the unlimited rides more comfortably because of its much longer wheelbase, although its occupants still take some licks.  unlike most modern passenger cars, the wrangler does not have an independent suspension. instead, jeep kept solid axles in the front and rear, a robust design favored by off-roaders. but those solid axles mean that when one side hits a bump, the unpleasantness is shared all round.  the on-pavement handling is competent -- in other words, a lot better than it used to be -- and the wranglers are reasonably friendly to drive with a few sacrifices. but it is clear that pounding the pavement is not their primary purpose.  understanding that primary purpose is the key to happiness. unlike many vehicles that handle a wide variety of tasks with overall competence, the wrangler remains a specialist aimed at backwoods trails. its on-pavement performance, while improved, could easily become aggravating without a consolation prize -- like finding yourself in places where no cars have gone before.  inside track: dirty fun at a price.  behind the wheel | 2007 jeep wrangler  