psycho analyst   false self  the life of masud khan.  by linda hopkins.  525 pp. other press. $35.  ifi were a snob, a liar, a drunk, a philanderer, an anti-semite, a violent bully, a poseur and a menace to the vulnerable, i would want linda hopkins to write my biography.  masud khan, an anglo-pakistani psychoanalyst notable in the 1960s and '70s, was all of those things. hopkins, a psychologist and psychoanalyst, has written the story of his life with the kind of generous forgiveness, insistent evenhandedness, patient understanding and restrained judgment one might hope for in a very good analyst of a certain kind, or a wise, exceptionally forbearing and insightful mother. she sees his life as a tragedy, lived ''on a scale grand enough to match ... his favorite characters: shakespeare's king lear and dostoyevsky's prince myshkin.'' khan also identified with dostoyevsky himself and was particularly pleased when one of his later girlfriends showed signs (briefly) of living up to the high benchmark of anna dostoyevsky's devotion (''so robust and militant in her loving regard for her husband's nobility of soul,'' as he put it).  hopkins describes khan's dostoyevsky delusion as she does his lies about being a pakistani prince; his drunken rages; his sleeping with patients, with patients' wives and with the daughters of friends -- always more in sorrow than in anger, and with the reminder that khan may well have suffered from a bipolar disorder. hopkins faults the psychoanalytic community for not saving him in the face of what may have been illness and was indisputably bad behavior and poor judgment: ''his former analysands provided him with the care that should have been provided by an extended family or others from khan's private life, but khan had nobody to do that for him,'' she writes. surprisingly, she does not ask, why not? and she does not say, how selfish and unprofessional that he should put that burden on his patients.  most americans don't know who masud khan was. most psychotherapists don't know who masud khan was, unless they have studied the work of d. w. winnicott, the great english pediatrician, child psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, who died in 1971. (if you ever went back to the playground after dark to retrieve your toddler's blankie, you have successfully incorporated clare and donald winnicott's notion of the necessary ''transitional object''; if you have thought that it's just as important to learn how to say no in a firm, clear way as to say yes, you have absorbed winnicott's concept of ''the good enough mother.'') khan was one of winnicott's disciples, co-author of some significant works and his editor -- as well as one of his patients.  this seems like a bad idea to those of us who like our therapists from the old school: in their office, in their chair, not chatting on about their own private lives, not having sex with us, not socializing with us, not gossiping about other patients (which might be great, except for the possibility that they gossip about us too, or like the others better). but, as a number of writers, including hopkins, have pointed out, khan learned about boundary jumping from his elders. anna freud was analyzed by her own father. melanie klein analyzed her son, eric, then handed him over to winnicott for treatment, supervising that analysis and praising winnicott for his skill in concealing all this from him. winnicott himself, it turns out, interrupted khan's sessions with his patients to chat and gossip -- sometimes about those patients.  masud khan, born in the punjab in 1924, came to oxford to study modern greats. he became an analyst and then, after three attempts, a training analyst. he married not one but two beautiful ballerinas and, through his second wife, became friendly with julie andrews, mike nichols and the redgraves. he was dashing and boldly self-promoting in a professional community in which those things were rare.  before his death in 1989, khan wrote two very good and interesting books, ''the privacy of the self'' (1974) and ''alienation in perversions'' (1979); one interesting book, ''hidden selves'' (1983); and one disaster, ''the long wait'' (1988), in which the occasional insight breaks through a sea of rambling prose and anti-semitic goofiness (''i was freeing myself of the rigid yiddish shackles of the so-called psychoanalysis''). his warmth, intuition and maverick style helped some patients: a number spoke up on his behalf at the end of his life, when he was investigated and finally expelled by the british psycho-analytical society, and spoke warmly of him in long interviews with hopkins. several women asserted that he had been a brilliant if unorthodox psychoanalyst, although some did remark that it had not been therapeutically helpful for khan to have initiated sexual relationships with them. ''if i had been less ill, and he more sound, it might have been wonderful,'' one said. hopkins, in her non-judgmental way, writes of this analysand only that it is ''easy to assume she must be in denial about the harm done to her by khan, but it is perhaps more honest to grope with the possibility that there may be some validity to her subjective experience.'' it seems to me that it is not only his patients but his admirers, including his biographer, who may be struggling with some denial about the harm done by an alcoholic married analyst who initiated sex with female patients, encouraged affairs between patients, threatened patients who terminated treatment and abandoned those who did not meet his own emotional needs.  khan began to fall apart in the early '70s, after his mother and winnicott died within months of each other. and his spectacularly erratic behavior -- once, in a restaurant, he sent a piece of cake to an obese diner and shouted, ''so that you might die sooner!'' -- set the stage for what now seems his greatest legacy: a complete and long overdue change in the training and ethical standards for english psychoanalysts.  hopkins persuades me that masud khan was fascinating at a dinner party (unless there was too much wine), interesting as a thinker, given to the occasional brilliant intuitive flash, handsome as the devil and twice as charming. but she does not persuade me that english bigotry brought about his downfall (though as for whatever schadenfreude followed it, i certainly believe that there were some english psychoanalysts ''somewhat acutely alive to the existence of class distinctions,'' as p. g.wodehouse put it). she does persuade me that this is a sad story of a talented man, that khan's own emotional troubles made him at first gifted in treating difficult patients, and later, incapable of being anything else. as one former analysand wrote in 2000, ''somebody could write a tragicomic account of this.'' hopkins's biography is thoughtful, thorough and insightful. but i never felt the tragedy she asserts, and only bruce jay friedman or iris murdoch could have done justice to the other.  amy bloom's most recent book is ''normal.'' her novel ''away'' will be published in august.  