learning from lauren: smells like teen spirit, looks like hard work   for three years mtv has tried to get viewers to fall in love with lauren conrad, the star of the docusoaps ''laguna beach'' and ''the hills.'' wary, watchful, cheerless lauren with the many-layered cosmetics: audience adoration has always seemed unlikely.  but that was before the premiere of the second season of ''the hills,'' when lauren appeared in a sweet and lonely scene, sorting laundry in her los angeles apartment.  there was a mountain of unironed clothes and there was lauren, the fashion student, focused on her folding. as she brought the straps of an overworn lilac tank top in line with its hem, as if it were fine linen, she was suddenly adorable. for the first time she was lauren, laundress of reality television. i found love at last.  the diligent lauren punched into the reality-tv dimension three years ago, and her shift's not over yet. after starring in ''laguna beach'' for two seasons, and then in her very own ''hills,'' which chronicles her travails as an intern at teen vogue, lauren has, without fanfare, turned her whole young adult life over to panopticon scrutiny.  she writes on her official web site (laurenconrad.com) of her initial venture into exhibitionism, which largely showed her nervous and heartbroken: ''it turned out to be such a cool experience. it changed us all in a good way and i feel very fortunate to have my own personal video yearbook of those great times.''  it's surprising her memories are so fond, as she has often seemed like the big loser on her shows. after mooning over a beautiful surfer on ''laguna beach,'' she lost him to breezy kristin. on ''the hills'' last season she gave up a paris internship so she could spend the summer fighting with jason, her deadbeat boyfriend.  but lauren -- well, she's tough. her web site quotes her sounding like jeffrey katzenberg: ''when someone tells you 'no' it's only the beginning of a conversation.''  so no doesn't mean no to laundress lauren, whose intelligence might be little more than simple hardheadedness. neither does losing mean losing. kristin briefly held a high card, but even as a teenager lauren knew that the real high card wasn't the bimbo boyfriend; it was airtime and shrewd management. kristin preened in the tabloids, but lauren was busy getting to yes with bigger guns. she lined up her own show, ''the hills,'' and it's an artful and dignified one, rendered with the same affectionate nostalgia as ''laguna beach.''  maybe it's been a mistake to expect the best reality players to be the most naturalistic. on vh1, flavor flav, a bona fide barker, has made a far more interesting lover, with his dance moves and courtly rhymes, than the easygoing guy on ''the bachelor.''  lauren's artificial, anxious and arch style have similarly suited her to the role of a latter-day sister carrie on ''the hills.'' had she been too much of a naïf, unwise to the cameras, she would have been swept out to sea on ''laguna beach'': passed-out drunk, abused by a boyfriend or (at least) caught in a quotably stupid soliloquy. but lauren has always played a close hand, kept her head up and sipped weak drinks.  ''the hills'' proceeds, as does ''laguna beach,'' with off-screen prepping. participants are supplied with topics to discuss, for maximum drama. as a result exchanges can seem rigged: boys dive into improbably intimate discussions with one another, and girlfriends appear to broach afresh subjects they must have already parsed a dozen times.  lauren's personality lends itself to such feints. as an aspiring producer of fashion shows, she likes a scripted event and a planned line; and as these shows regularly reveal, she doesn't mind white lies, staged diversions and concealed feelings. she's also keenly attuned to affectations, as becomes clear tonight on her date with hollywood's junior-varsity womanizer, brody jenner.  he praises her smile, somewhat by rote, and she protests that it's flawed, exhibiting some wit on the subject of features that purportedly give a face ''character.'' this austenian playfulness about courtship confounds dopey brody, and he resorts to repeating, dumbly, ''you have a beautiful smile.''  no wonder she's not sure if she likes him. lauren's not sure she wants to be just the beautiful smile. her controlling, behind-the-scenes nature is, paradoxically, on bright display on this season of ''the hills,'' and this quality now registers as charm.  though she's almost always the prettiest girl in the room, she's also the one most often on her knees, pinning hems and admiring the other girls' shoes and bags. last season she yielded the role of model to whitney, her (taller) fellow intern at teen vogue. when she and jason broke up on last week's episode, she cried while he cavalierly said sayonara. but she also made sure he had his golf clubs, which she delivered punctually in her convertible, hauling the bag like a production assistant.  she's takes another scullery role at a fashion show in the second episode, appearing tonight. a kooky designer asks that she light a witchcraft candle for good luck. lauren sets about finding the buried wick in the idiotic candle, and does so with good humor. implicitly she understands that artists are artists, and she's not one of them, just as ingénues are ingénues, and she's not one of them either.  instead she's lauren conrad: laundress, gaffer, scullery maid: or, maybe before long, executive producer.  maui fever  other blondes, other tans, other waterproof eyeliners. yet maui, at least the maui of mtv's ''maui fever,'' almost entirely lacks the undertow of gravitas that makes ''the hills'' worth watching. it's a reality show about all that's comprised by the word partying, a mighty theme indeed, but the good-looking kids of kaanapali just have no words with which to form listenable dialogue.  ''we need to go jell-o wrestling,'' is one girl's opening line, which sounds like a big fraud, but passably provocative; there's no reply.  other gambits use hyperbole and banality in equal measure: ''are you shattered? what's your deal?'' one guy says to his presumably lovelorn surfing buddy. this cruel, blank, phony teen-speak captures neither the stuttery muteness of adolescent desire, nor its bravado, nor the originality of spontaneous slang.  the accents, moreover, sound like those in ''fargo,'' and that seriously detracts from the drama and sexiness of the hawaiian landscape, as well as from the drama and the sexiness of the sex. (which is mostly had vengefully and when blackout drunk.) in short ''maui fever'' is tacky, and suggests that if all you caught from these bed-sharing drunks was a fever, you'd be lucky.  the hills  mtv, tonight at 8, eastern and pacific times; 7, central time.  created by adam divello; tony disanto, liz gateley and mr. divello, executive producers.  maui fever  mtv, tonight at 11, eastern and pacific times; 10, central time.  created by morgan j. freeman; tony disanto, liz gateley and mike powers, executive producers; christy spitzer, development executive; steve michaels, jonathan koch, mr. freeman and russell heldt, executive producers for asylum entertainment.  television review  