paid notice: deaths   arning, lee d.   arning--lee d. wall street's ''marryin' sam'' dies at 83. lee d. arning, former senior vice-president of operations for the new york stock exchange during the 1960s and early 1970s, died at his home in ocean view, new jersey at the age of 83 of congestive heart failure. mr. arning, a seventeen year veteran of the nyse, ran the exchanges operations during an era of great turmoil and change within the wall street investment institutions. mr. arning was part of a team that created the central certificate system and other innovative reforms that created investor confidence. mr. arning was dubbed marryin sam by business week for this ability to forge mergers with disparate, under-capitalized brokerage firms such as hayden stone. arning was also responsible for bringing ross perots and edss technological expertise to wall street and involving it in the f. i. du pont & glore, forgan merger. mr. arning was born august 12, 1923 in palenville, new york. a wwii veteran, he served in england and france in the u.s. army air corps as a sergeant from 1943 to 1946. upon returning stateside, he married sallie bickell deacon in 1947. he began his career working for dun & bradstreet from 1947 to 1955 when he joined the nyse. he graduated with a bs in business administration & accounting from rutgers university at night. after leaving the exchange in 1972, mr. arning became the executive vice president and treasurer at tucker anthony & r.l. day. in 1976, arning was named president and chief administrative officer of uslife corporation where he remained until he retired in 1984. mr. arning was an active civic member of every community in which he lived or worked (nyc and nj). he served extended terms on each of the following: board of the lighthouse international; trustee of the montclair savings bank; chairman and board member of the montclair chapter of the american red cross (nj); board member of the montclair board of education; executive board member and president of the eagle rock council, boy scouts of america; and board member of mountainside hospital in montclair. upon his retirement to avalon, mr. arning became an emt for the rescue squad, and its chief fund-raiser. in 1990, he joined the board of directors of burdett-tomlin memorial hospital (nj), a term that would last ten years and saw great improvements in the hospitals management. mr. arning is survived by his wife of 59 years, sallie deacon, his daughter, cynthia lee scott, his two sons, charles h. b. and lee d. jr.; his grandchildren c. michael arning, kevin scott and keith scott and his great-grandson, tyler scott. a memorial service will be held at 11am, on saturday, january 27th, at st. marys episcopal church, stone harbor, nj. in lieu of flowers, the family requests that memorial donations be made to: burdett-tomlin memorial hospital, cape may courthouse, nj; the avalon rescue squad, avalon, nj; and lighthouse international, nyc.  