archives of spin   since franklin d. roosevelt dedicated the first federal presidential library -- actually an archive and history museum -- in 1941, each president has had a hand in developing his own memorial. the national archives and records administration now oversees 11 presidential libraries that draw about two million tourists and thousands of scholars each year.  the uproar over president bush's plans to store his papers at southern methodist university has drawn new attention to the role of our system of presidential libraries. it is a system facing at least six challenges that need to be addressed by congress, current and former presidents, host universities and the american public.  first, according to the office of presidential libraries, it will take up to 100 years for the papers and records at the recent presidential libraries to be processed, primarily because of an explosion in the number of records created by the executive branch. the roosevelt library has 17 million pages of documents, while the clinton library has more than 76 million, but the number of archivists has not kept pace.  a wait of 100 years is unacceptable. to be able to learn from our history, scholars, journalists and the public need access to a majority of records in presidential libraries within 20 years after a president leaves office. to meet this challenge, the newer libraries must add a substantial number of archivists, as well as new processing protocols and systems.  second, we should insist on historical accuracy, completeness and balance in the museums in presidential libraries. although the federal government's office of presidential libraries states that the museum exhibits in presidential libraries should be accurate, historical amnesia is common in relation to a president's mistakes and controversial policies. for example, the museum in the reagan library does not mention the iran-contra scandal.  the exhibits in newer presidential libraries often amount to little more than extended campaign commercials in museum form, because the former president and his supporters essentially control the content. if a president wants a museum of political propaganda, let him make that plain by not asking the federal government to administer it, but instead raising the large endowment needed to run it as a private memorial.  since 99 percent of visitors to presidential libraries are there for the museum exhibits, this is an important issue. the exhibitions in older libraries usually improve after the president dies and the power of his supporters slowly wanes, but it should not take 20 to 50 years to get historically accurate displays in taxpayer-supported museums.  the office of presidential libraries, however, bows to presidents' wishes for whitewashed museums. congress should pass appropriate legislation on this issue. each museum should be evaluated in a non-partisan fashion by a group of historians, and then changes should be made to ensure that the public gets the quality of information expected from a branch of the national archives.  third, the fund-raising for presidential libraries needs to be made transparent. starting with roosevelt, presidents have raised money from private sources and then turned their libraries over to be administered by the federal government. currently donations are unregulated, and donors -- whether individuals, corporations or even foreign governments -- can remain anonymous. these donors can potentially wield real influence over a sitting president, without the knowledge of the public. congress should require the disclosure of the identities of large donors and of the amounts involved.  fourth, only a few libraries have strong educational programs. the truman library, for one, has developed an innovative program for middle and high school students called the white house decision center. the decision center recreates some areas of the west wing, where students play the roles of president truman, his advisers and members of his cabinet while dealing with a variety of historical crises. the decision center curriculum meets state and national standards for social studies, sharpening students' skills in cooperative group work, problem solving, and communication, while teaching them history using copies of primary documents from the library's archive. libraries and congress should find the private and public funds to develop other educational programs with serious historical content.  fifth, presidential policy institutes associated with universities should be subject to academic oversight. this oversight should involve the appointment of a significant number of people from a variety of departments from the sponsoring university to the institute's governing board. the administration of the institute should be designed so that the university and the institute both gain from the association.  finally, president bush's 2001 executive order limiting access to the records in presidential library archives needs to be overturned. this order allows current and former presidents to block the release of materials from their presidential libraries for any reason, even because they are politically damaging. records that might compromise national security are already protected from release by other laws and statutes, so this directive is clearly about political expediency.  president bush's order is contrary to the spirit and letter of the laws that previously governed presidential libraries. although so far only a small number of records have been blocked from release, the potential for the abuse of power exists. congress should overturn this executive order.  presidents are not required to have presidential libraries. since watergate, presidential records are not owned by each president but by the nation; a president could simply hand over his or her records to the national archives. but if a president chooses to have a library, it is up to congress, current and former presidents, host universities and the public to ensure that each library operates in the public interest.  at their best, presidential libraries are vital institutions that help us learn from our history. but if we give in to the worst impulses of presidents and their supporters, these libraries risk becoming temples of political propaganda.  op-ed contributor benjamin hufbauer, a professor of art history at the university of louisville, is the author of ''presidential temples: how memorials and libraries shape public memory.''  