the pitcher, the singer and the bricklayer   it's a tough time of year for joe gaeta.  ''my giants have been eliminated, and my yankees don't start up for a few more months,'' he said, sighing. ''it's kind of depressing around here.''  gaeta, a retired construction worker from oakdale on long island who spends winters in margate, fla., did get a bit of good news last week.  ''i went online and saw the yankees' spring training schedule,'' he said. ''baseball is right around the corner.''  gaeta, who turns 80 in march, has watched or listened to most giants and yankees games since he began rooting for them in the mid-1930s. he grew up in astoria, queens, where he played football, baseball and stickball with a couple of neighborhood boys named eddie and tony.  ''eddie and i went to the same open tryout for the yankees in 1946,'' gaeta recalled. ''man, could eddie pitch.''  the yankees felt the same way, eventually signing edward charles ford. he became a hall of fame left-hander better known as whitey. gaeta did not fare as well.  ''i loved the yankees so much, and when they passed on me, i got angry and said i would never root for them again,'' he said. ''but when eddie made it, i thought, hey, at least they took one of us from astoria. i could live with that.''  what about tony?  ''oh, he was a terrible ballplayer, maybe the worst i've ever seen at swinging a stickball bat,'' gaeta said. ''my brother vinny, he once tied a tennis racket to the end of a stickball bat and gave it to tony and said, 'here, try hitting it with this.' tony didn't think that was too funny.''  ''but i will say this,'' gaeta added, ''that tony bennett kid could really sing.''  ford, who is 78 and lives in fort lauderdale, fla., said he vaguely remembered gaeta.  ''the name rings a bell, but we are talking about more than 60 years ago,'' ford said. ''he and i were no different than most of the kids in astoria back then. we played baseball, stickball and roller hockey. we stayed busy.''  ford remembered the yankees' open tryout in 1946.  ''there were over 300 guys there,'' he said. ''i went there and tried out at first base, but after the yankees saw me hit, they thought i'd be better off pitching.''  as for gaeta, he became a bricklayer.  over the years, he said, he took a radio with him to listen to games. on an october afternoon in 1956, he was informed that radios were not allowed.  ''i told the foreman that the yankees were playing a world series game, and that if i couldn't listen to my radio, i was going home,'' gaeta said.  the foreman relented, he said, and as gaeta laid brick after brick, don larsen put away brooklyn dodger after brooklyn dodger en route to pitching the only perfect game in world series history.  the next summer, before the start of a yankees game, the electricity went out in the queens apartment he shared with his wife, anita. desperate for yankees baseball, he dropped about 75 feet of extension cords from a neighbor's window to a park bench, where gaeta watched the game.  ''when we were married, my husband told me that sports comes first, and he wasn't kidding,'' anita gaeta said. ''he never loses his enthusiasm. you're talking about a man who owns a giants doll and dances with it every time they score a touchdown.''  gaeta's most memorable celebration came in 1996, when he was asked to drive his friend's 1946 pontiac convertible in the yankees' world series parade.  ''i get behind the wheel and wade boggs jumps in,'' gaeta said. ''i had the time of my life.''  gaeta, who works each fall as a referee of high school football games in suffolk county, has three children, gerald, ralph and lori. whether in new york or florida, they often see him in his giants jersey or his lucky yankee t-shirt.  ''if the yankees lose two in a row, i wear the shirt,'' he said.  his wife added, ''he won't let me wash it.''  when a giants or yankees game is televised and he cannot watch, gaeta said, he places a team shirt and cap on a chair facing his vcr.  ''it's as if i'm actually sitting there in the jersey and cap, rooting for my teams,'' he said. ''if i can't be with them in person, at least i can be there in spirit.''  cheering section e-mail: cheers@nytimes.com  