'idol' judge says she's healthy and sober   paula abdul, the ''american idol'' judge whose strange behavior in recent televised interviews has been the subject of widespread speculation, said saturday that she was healthy and sober and had not been under the influence of drugs while working to promote the show.  at least three videos of ms. abdul have surfaced online in recent weeks showing her slurring words in interviews, giving nonsensical answers to questions and swaying in her seat. in one interview she appeared to fall asleep, keeping her eyes closed for about five seconds. most of those taped segments, which had been posted on video-sharing sites like youtube, have been removed from the internet in recent days.  in an interview after a panel discussion with television journalists in pasadena, calif., on saturday, ms. abdul said she had not been impaired during the interviews, on the show or at any time during her work promoting ''american idol,'' fox's hit reality show.  ''i've never been drunk,'' she said. ''i'm not under the influence of anything.'' referring to her tenure as a judge on ''american idol,'' she added, ''the first five years no one said anything about how i behaved or how i talked.''  gossip about ms. abdul's behavior started last year, when she seemed to make nonsensical comments on the show about some contestants. in one march broadcast, when asked about one contestant's elimination, she said, ''simon says because one of them ate pizza and the other one ate salad.''  on the same show she also tangled her words when she tried to explain a strange proverb about a moth and a melon, prompting randy jackson, another ''idol'' judge, to wonder aloud what she had been drinking.  on saturday ms. abdul and simon cowell, the third ''idol'' judge, said that incident started when mr. cowell whispered a made-up proverb about a moth and a melon in her ear just before the cameras turned to her. confusion ensued.  this month an interview with a seattle television station went awry when ms. abdul seemed to be answering questions different from those being asked. she said the problem was twofold: first, she was tired after doing three hours of interviews with stations across the country to promote the show; and second, during the seattle interview, the audio feed into her earpiece was coming from two separate television stations. she said she believed the audio glitch was being addressed while she was off camera; instead the camera was on.  ''that was a mistake i had nothing to do with,'' ms. abdul said saturday. ''i didn't know i had two studios in my ear. i wish it were a better story, but that's it.''  she said it is her nature to make fun of situations that cause her stress, like appearing on live television. ''i'm doing my job and having fun,'' she said. ''although i might not take myself seriously, there are young girls watching me, and i know i'm a role model. i've been a teacher, and the fact that some of them would look up to me and want to be the next choreographer or the next singer, i would not violate that trust.''  during the session with television reporters mr. cowell also responded to complaints that his recent comments to contestants on the show have seemed cruel, focusing on their appearance more than on their singing ability. last week on the show's two-night season premiere, he mocked one contestant's appearance, comparing him to a jungle creature, and made fun of another's heft. one contestant mr. cowell mocked appeared to be mentally impaired; mr. cowell said saturday that he had not been aware that the young man was a former special olympian.  mr. cowell said that he understood why his remarks were criticized but that he felt it would be wrong to censor himself.  ''i take your point, which is, it's a singing competition, and why should i call someone, i think it was a 'bush baby,' '' he said. ''the appeal of this show is that we've never tried to censor this show. and there are times, trust me, when i watch it back and i just think, 'god, i wish i hadn't said that, and why do they put it in the show?' but it's something we all sign up for, good things and bad things. i feel more comfortable being on a show where we are prepared to show the warts as well as the good things.''  