twin cornerstones catapult the patriots to amazing heights   a few weeks after the 2000 n.f.l. draft, robert k. kraft, the patriots' owner, left his office and passed a tall young man carrying a pizza box under his arm.  ''mr. kraft, we haven't met,'' the young man said. ''i'm tom brady.''  kraft replied: ''i know who you are. you're our sixth-round pick from michigan.''  brady said: ''that's right. and i'm the best decision this organization has ever made.''  retelling this story friday, kraft sat behind his desk at gillette stadium and smiled. having won three super bowls during their run of excellence, the patriots aim to win sunday's american football conference championship game against the indianapolis colts, led by brady, a second-day draft choice who became their star quarterback, and bill belichick, a driven leader making the most of his second chance as an n.f.l. head coach.  sunday is an anniversary for kraft, who bought the patriots 13 years earlier, on jan. 21, 1994. at that time, the patriots were in disarray, coming off five consecutive losing seasons. today they are a dynasty, looking to become the second team to win four super bowls in a six-year span, a feat accomplished by the pittsburgh steelers, who won four from the 1974 to 1979 seasons.  brady and belichick have been the anchors during the patriots' run, a clutch quarterback who deftly orchestrates the offense and a shrewd coach who orchestrates his players like chess pieces. who expected a quarterback drafted no. 199 and a coach who failed with the cleveland browns to form such a dynamic duo? they have become one of the great coach-quarterback combinations, like vince lombardi and bart starr with the green bay packers and bill walsh and joe montana with the san francisco 49ers.  brady does not entertain the thought of playing for another coach. every week during the season, brady has tuesdays with belichick, meeting for at least an hour to ensure that they stay in sync.  ''sometimes it's all football; sometimes we talk about other stuff,'' brady said this week.  ''we have the same goals. i always get a pretty good feel for what he is thinking and how he wants to approach the week. he is always pretty consistent with the way he thinks and the way he reacts to the team, and the way he coaches. from a player's perspective, he is so consistent. he's never up or down, he's always kind of the same. whether we win or lose, we always have to do things better. there's no coach i'd rather play for.''  the patriots' ability to avoid complacency is a key component of the belichick-brady era. belichick is demanding, yet players produce for him, year after year, unspoiled by the team's success. what is belichick's motivational secret?  ''if you're not getting the job done, bill will just find somebody else to do it,'' linebacker mike vrabel said. ''i think that's motivation enough.''  it has been suggested that kraft and scott pioli, the vice president for player personnel, believe they can replace anyone, as long as they have belichick and brady. kraft disagreed with that assessment.  ''i think belichick is the best coach in the business, and i think brady is the best quarterback,'' kraft said. ''but in the end, it's far more than belichick and brady. scott has done a wonderful job evaluating and acquiring talent. and there's a core group of players here, there's a great coaching staff, and there's a culture in the locker room. they believe if they do what bill tells them to do, they'll win.''  brady sets the tone for the patriots' core group, along with nine other players who have been with the patriots for all three super bowl victories: wide receiver troy brown; defensive end richard seymour; linebackers tedy bruschi, larry izzo and vrabel; tackle matt light; guard stephen neal; long snapper lonie paxton; and running back patrick pass, who is on injured reserve.  one of the first players to arrive daily, and one of the last to leave, brady has earned respect, not only for his talent, but also for his work ethic. ''you've got one of the best quarterbacks in the history of the game, and he holds himself to a high standard,'' the backup quarterback vinny testaverde said. ''when other players see that, and how he works in the classroom, in the weight room, on the field, the practices we go through, the other players want to keep up with him. that's a big part of why they've been so successful here.''  asked why the patriots rarely have locker-room turmoil, seymour cited the locker-room leadership.  ''guys come in and buy into the system that we have,'' he said. ''you don't want to be the guy who kind of derails the whole thing. you see a lot of teams where maybe they've won before, kind of lose their edge. one thing that i really like about this football team is, it doesn't matter what you've done a year ago.''  many key people have been replaced during the patriots' run, coaches and players. one, colts place-kicker adam vinatieri, will play against his former teammates sunday. but while the names change, the winning continues.  when charlie weis left as offensive coordinator to become notre dame's coach, belichick did not name a successor for last season and shared the play calling with the quarterbacks coach, josh mcdaniels. belichick promoted mcdaniels to offensive coordinator last january.  the rise of mcdaniels, 30, showed belichick's preference for coaches familiar with his system, regardless of their age. belichick named eric mangini as his defensive coordinator when he was 34, then mangini left to become the jets' coach.  all n.f.l. coaching staffs work hard, but the patriots pride themselves on working smart. some of their practice time is devoted to situational football, and it paid off during last weekend's playoff victory at san diego. on fourth down in the fourth quarter, with the patriots trailing by 8 points, brown made perhaps the postseason's most alert play, stripping the ball from chargers defensive back marlon mccree, who was returning an interception. the patriots recovered the fumble and scored on the ensuing drive.  the patriots may need a play like that to win sunday. but belichick and brady long ago won over people who underestimated their ability. asked why he hired belichick in 2000 after he had one winning season in five with the browns (1991-95), kraft said he trusted his instincts.  ''it was not a real popular choice,'' kraft said. ''i got criticized because people looked at his tenure in cleveland. but in the end, there are certain things that have to be judged that you can't put on paper. bill is unique. he understands not only players, but how they fit.''  in new england, the pieces have fit well. and if belichick, brady and the rest of the patriots can solve the sunday puzzle presented by peyton manning and the colts, another trip to the super bowl awaits.  extra points  safety rodney harrison will miss sunday's game against the colts, the patriots said saturday. he injured his right knee in the patriots' last regular-season game and has not played since.  pro football  