unhappy quarterback has razorbacks reeling   coming off its best season in nearly 20 years, arkansas is embroiled in a controversy involving the heralded quarterback mitch mustain that has bitterly divided razorbacks fans.  arkansas coach houston nutt announced tuesday that mustain, who was 8-0 as a freshman starter this past season, had been granted his release from the university, which would allow him to transfer to the university of his choice.  mustain, who lost the starting job for the final five games, is seemingly concerned about the direction of the razorbacks' offense, which may be too conservative for him. gus malzahn, mustain's high school coach who was hired in 2005 to be arkansas's offensive coordinator, left this week to become an assistant at tulsa.  but mustain re-enrolled at arkansas yesterday afternoon, said steve voorhies, the university's manager for media relations. he has not rejoined the team and is not likely to stay.  with college football's signing day feb. 7 and most teams consumed by last-minute recruiting efforts, mustain's return this semester allows him more time to explore his options.  should he transfer to another n.c.a.a. division i-a university, he would have to sit out next season, but he would then have three years of eligibility remaining.  mustain, 18, visited tulsa on thursday, said his mother, beck campbell. mustain has also been linked to oklahoma, texas el-paso and texas tech.  neither mustain nor his mother could be reached for comment yesterday, but campbell said thursday night that she wanted him to be enrolled at a university by monday.  nutt did not comment yesterday, and athletic director frank broyles did not return a telephone message left for him.  on tuesday, nutt told reporters that he hoped that mustain would decide to remain at arkansas, despite being given his release from the university.  ''naturally, i don't want him to go,'' nutt said. ''i want him to stay here. but also, we want the ones that really want to be here. i have given him his release, so let's just see.''  he added: ''very few freshmen can do some of the things he has done. he was put in a very difficult situation, and i'm very proud of him.''  mustain committed to arkansas in august 2005 and withdrew the commitment four months later, only to sign with the razorbacks last february.  campbell declined to elaborate on her son's time spent at arkansas.  ''i don't want to get into it right now,'' campbell said in a telephone interview. ''we don't want to say anything that disrupts other recruits.''  rated as the nation's top incoming freshman quarterback coming out of springdale high school in arkansas, mustain came off the bench in arkansas's season-opening loss to southern california and then started the next eight games. but he lost the starting job to the sophomore casey dick for the season's final five games.  mustain completed 52.3 percent of his passes for 894 yards with 10 touchdowns and 9 interceptions. he and dick were to compete in spring practice to be the team's starter next season.  kurt voigt, the high school sports editor at the morning news in springdale, who wrote a book on springdale high's 2005 season in which mustain criticized nutt and called his offense boring, said the saga had become a referendum on nutt and broyles.  ''i had someone the other day refer to it as a civil war, and it is,'' voigt said in a telephone interview. ''it really is. it's incredible. you have people in offices getting into fights, not fistfights, but real yelling debates.''  on thursday, a half-page advertisement paid for by the committee to save university of arkansas athletics appeared in the arkansas democrat-gazette calling for nutt and broyles to resign immediately.  the ad, which cost $5,550, in part read, ''the management of the athletic department by the athletic director and the football head coach has cast a pall over this once proud institution to the point where the uofa athletic dept is now a liability rather than an asset.''  mustain's release came just a day after malzahn was named the assistant head coach and co-offensive coordinator at tulsa. the razorbacks hired malzahn in december 2005 after he and mustain had won a state championship at springdale high, which is 10 miles north of the university of arkansas.  malzahn, in his first year as a college assistant, was not allowed to run his trademark hurry-up, no-huddle offense, and his move to tulsa was precipitated by rumors that he would have to share play-calling duties at arkansas next season. efforts to reach him yesterday were unsuccessful.  last month, the parents of mustain and two other freshmen from springdale high had a meeting with broyles about malzahn not having enough influence in the offense.  one of those players, wide receiver damian williams, a freshman all-southeastern conference selection last season, has since transferred to u.s.c.  keith jackson, a senior defensive tackle this past season, said this week that nutt was not at fault for mustain's decision and that he supported his former coach.  jackson said of mustain, ''he likes everything his way.''  nutt, the sec coach of the year, challenged those tuesday who think his team is unstable. ''i don't believe that whatsoever,'' he said.  colleges  