unassuming steakhouse is the real deal   kinderkamack road is the spine of north-central bergen county -- an 11-mile strip of commercial and residential miscellany connecting at least half a dozen mini-downtowns like that of park ridge, which go by in a blink if you hit the traffic lights correctly. who would figure that one of those anonymous-looking converted frame houses, wedged between a funeral home and a diner, would hold a terrific new american steakhouse?  not too many people, apparently, because the park steakhouse has been cruising under the fine-dining radar since it opened three and a half years ago. it has received hardly any reviews and has generated none of the excitement that attends better-publicized heavy hitters like roots in summit and avenue in long branch (to name two of many).  yet the park's chef and co-owner, john a. halligan, 45, is the real thing -- a veteran of high-style hotel dining rooms in manhattan who has received many awards. like other city chefs who moved to the suburbs (in this case, nearby river vale) to raise a family, mr. halligan discovered a preference for the slower lane. luckily for bergen county, that slower lane is kinderkamack road.  when he set up the park (renovating a far less ambitious restaurant of the same name), mr. halligan imported a room-size refrigerator for dry-aging beef. he has the red-meat thing down pat, turning out gorgeous hunks of certified black angus that will satisfy anyone's atavistic cravings.  the park's $42 porterhouse, in particular, would be a contender in any steakstakes: a pound and a half of highly tender new york strip and filet mignon, served on the bone, with a fine mineral flavor that speaks of three weeks of aging. while it just about covers its large plate, there's room for a small but satisfying haystack of crunchy shoestring potatoes -- meaning that ordering a separate side dish, imperative at many steakhouses, is not so necessary here. (although the onion rings are sensational.)  nor was there anything to fault in the other steaks we tried: a 12-ounce filet mignon, a two-inch-thick new york sirloin and an off-menu special, rib-eye, which came with well-executed accompaniments of mashed potatoes and grilled asparagus. but in the end, steak is steak; once you attain a certain level of quality, it's hard to separate one steakhouse from another. what makes the park interesting is everything else.  for example, sushi, which is offered in one appetizer at each meal. mr. halligan says he learned the craft on a five-month trip to japan, and he turns out a mean tuna roll, with just the right balance of rice, seaweed and first-rate fish. even better were sweet bay scallops, served in their shells and balanced by a restrained vinaigrette.  and even better than the sushi was a starter of two large sea scallops with foie gras, gently sautéed, combined with white-truffle vinaigrette and then thrust into tiny superheated cast-iron pans. they arrived at the table smoking and fragrant, making a spectacular entrance.  basil-pesto risotto came with a nice bonus alongside it: crabmeat with lemon-butter sauce. the obligatory $16 foie gras appetizer had a christmas-dinner accompaniment of spiced gingerbread and apple-cranberry chutney. and butternut-squash bisque with a pleasing edge of ginger held a little island of short-rib ragout, sweetened (but not too much) with maple syrup.  nonsteak entrees were less inventive but satisfying, notably seared halibut over baby bok choy (now listed on the menu with oxtail ragout and red-wine butter sauce). roasted duck -- the breast sharp and gamy, the leg rich and mild -- came with braised cabbage, calvados reduction and a little cup of sweet-corn custard. the only disappointment was braised short ribs in a dark guinness stout sauce that was oddly short on flavor.  to my taste, the best dessert was the cheese platter, enough for four people, with five generous samples that ran the gamut from sharp and firm to mild and creamy. unfortunately, it was a chore to get our dour, impatient server to identify them. the waiter on our other visit was friendly and down to earth, and the park is like that -- a sophisticated restaurant in local-joint clothing, where, as mr. halligan told me, ''landscapers in flannel shirts sit there eating foie gras.'' now, there's democracy in action.  park steakhouse  151 kinderkamack road  park ridge  (201) 930-1300  www.theparksteakhouse.com  very good  the space comfortable, though hardly lavish -- a neighborhood restaurant with a large bar, an 80-seat dining room and a lower level with 60 more seats. the main room and the restrooms are wheelchair-accessible.  the crowd casual but well-heeled couples and foursomes.  the staff generally friendly, accommodating and well trained.  the bar a 200-bottle wine list, on the expensive side.  the bill lunch entrees, $21 to $38. dinner entrees, $24 to $42. all major credit cards.  what we like butternut squash soup, sushi, sizzling sea scallops, risotto; all steaks, halibut, roasted duck; cheese plate, banana upside-down cake.  if you go lunch: monday to friday, noon to 3 p.m. dinner: daily, 5 to 10 p.m. reservations recommended (necessary on weekends). on-street parking is limited; the restaurant offers valet parking.  reviewed jan. 21, 2007  dining/park ridge  