quartet's harmonic voices, pleasure clearly understood   in 1562 the council of trent recommended that church masses be written with singing ''constituted not to give empty pleasure to the ear, but so that the words may be understood clearly by everyone, and that thus the hearts of listeners may be drawn to the desire of heavenly harmony.''  centuries later, when even fewer understand latin, the heavenly harmonies of the music of lassus (1532-1594) and palestrina (1525-1594) provide an almost sensual, earthly pleasure, especially when sung by the superb hilliard ensemble. this venerable male quartet, consisting of the countertenor david james, the tenors rogers covey-crump and steven harrold, and the baritone gordon jones, performed a program (part of the music before 1800 series) of works by the two composers at corpus christi church in morningside heights on sunday.  palestrina and lassus were extraordinarily prolific writers of polyphonic liturgical music, although lassus is sometimes more associated with the lively secular songs he wrote in french, german and italian. palestrina also wrote secular madrigals in his youth, but they caused this conservative composer regret in his later years.  the hilliard ensemble sang movements of lassus's ''missa pro defunctis'' interspersed with motet settings by palestrina of psalms and responsories from the burial service and from the offices of matins and vespers for the dead.  in his motets and madrigals lassus was a colorful word painter, although his mass is more austerely pure. but the hilliard never sounded cold, singing the verses with voices that swelled with subtle crescendos, then tapering phrases in unison to an immaculate close.  there is vivid word painting in some of the palestrina works, like the comparatively emotive ''ad dominum cum tribularer clamavi,'' in which the phrase ''sagittae potentis acutae (''sharp arrows of the mighty'') is colored with a rapidly ascending scale of eighth notes. other palestrina works, like the ''miserere mei, deus,'' sound more pious, mixing plainchant and polyphony.  the hilliard singers performed with their well-honed seamless blend, fine phrasing and subtle dynamic shadings.  a work arvo pärt wrote for the group seemed a fitting encore. its one line, ''most holy mother of god, save us,'' was repeated with increasing intensity before gently dissonant tension was resolved in the last syllable. the council of trent had a point: liturgical music becomes a less decadent pleasure when you can understand the words.  music review  