fair housing, free speech and choosy roommates   gene kavenoki wanted to rent out a spare bedroom in his west hollywood apartment and he had a few requirements.  ''i am not looking for freaks, geeks, prostitutes (male or female), druggies, pet cobras, drama, black muslims or mortgage brokers,'' he wrote on roommates.com.  other users of the web site were more adamant about their desires. ''must be a black gay male!'' one said. ''please no flakes, deadbeats or white trash!'' another said.  and some were a little creepy. a 57-year-old man said he was offering ''free rent for the right woman'' in exchange for ''quiet companionship in an intimate place.'' he preferred, he wrote, ''a hispanic female roommate so she can make me fluent in spanish or an asian female roommate just because i love asian females.''  those postings are part of a lawsuit by a fair housing group against roommates.com, a matching service that does pretty much what its name suggests. the suit says the site violated fair housing laws, which forbid publishing real estate ads that indicate preferences based on race, religion or sex.  fair housing is important, but so is free speech and so is the right to choose who is puttering around in your living room. congress has taken two stabs at striking the right legal balance, but what it has created is a tangle of contradictions.  the fair housing act of 1968 says, in what everyone calls the mrs. murphy exception, that discrimination is acceptable by the owner of a residence who lives there and rents to no more than three other people or families. (mrs. murphy was an apocryphal bigot with a boardinghouse.)  but another part of the same law takes back part of the mrs. murphy exception. it says it is illegal to say or publish anything about the discrimination it just made legal. it applies to people placing ads and to businesses that publish them.  forbidding speech about lawful conduct makes no sense and is at odds with the first amendment. but some legal scholars, notably robert g. schwemm of the law school at the university of kentucky, have defended the current approach.  minority readers who see ads containing discriminatory language may suffer emotional distress, professor schwemm has written. that is undoubtedly true, but the distress caused by actual and legally sanctioned face-to-face discrimination is surely worse.  to compound matters, congress created a second kind of mischief in 1996 when it enacted the communications decency act. almost in passing, that law made online companies immune from lawsuits over information they transmit but do not create.  the effect of the law is to treat online classified advertisements differently from printed ones. if this newspaper published mr. kavenoki's ad in the paper, it would violate the fair housing act. if it published the same ad on its web site, it would face no liability. the same is true, as the fair housing group has conceded, of roommates.com, at least so long as it merely acted as a passive transmitter of mr. kavenoki's speech. the group's suit now focuses on a questionnaire on the site.  in a sense, the mrs. murphy exception is both too narrow (it applies only to owners) and too broad (it applies not only to roommates but also to standard-issue tenants).  but a revised version of the exception still makes sense. in choosing a real roommate -- somebody who shares your bathroom and kitchen -- you should be allowed to have and disclose whatever idiosyncratic ideas you have about your living arrangements, even discriminatory ones.  roommate ads are more like personal dating ads, where discrimination is rampant and accepted, as opposed to real estate ads, where discrimination is properly forbidden.  and the distinction made in the 1996 law, which was meant to nurture a nascent internet, is causing problems, too. why should hard-copy and virtual publishers of the same advertising be treated differently? and why should either one be conscripted into the government's efforts to combat speech it disfavors? if the underlying speech is unlawful, attack the speaker.  there were some odd moments at the appellate argument in the case in pasadena last month. judge alex kozinski, who is often both libertarian and contrarian, mused that users seeking only gay men could be missing out. some women, he said, should be allowed to make a pitch.  ''i may not be a gay man,'' judge kozinski suggested such a woman might say, ''but i have a lot of things in common with gay men. i'm very tidy. i have a great sense of decoration. whatever.''  as for mr. kavenoki, he is a graduate student in linguistics who first heard about the lawsuit from me recently. ''i had no idea my little humorous attempt to find a stable roommate in west hollywood three years ago had achieved such objectionable notoriety,'' he said in an e-mail message. he said he hoped not to be portrayed as ''the slobodan milosevic of roommates.com.''  ''evidently some people interpreted my ad as discriminating against blacks,'' mr. kavenoki said. ''i was doing no such thing. i was discriminating against people who don't share my slightly warped sense of humor.''  sidebar  