in the n.h.l., east is east and west is west   the n.h.l. all-star game, to be played wednesday in dallas, will pit the eastern conference against the western, but everyone knows it does not really decide anything. the game is merely an easygoing exhibition.  besides, we know which conference is better -- and the differences in the style of play.  the way the n.h.l.'s regular-season schedule is set up, the east and the west are close to being separate leagues. each club plays 72 of its 82 regular-season games against the teams in its conference, and only 10 against teams from the opposite half of the continent.  quite understandably, that 87.8 percent emphasis on intraconference play has had an effect: each conference has a distinct personality.  the eastern conference is more wide open, the western a bit more defense-minded. entering yesterday's games, eastern teams were averaging about 3.06 goals and western teams 2.89.  eastern teams, through midweek, had also given up a lot of shots: 30.7 a game, as opposed to 28.6 in the west.  eastern and western teams have taken penalties at about the same rate -- 14.3 minutes a game in the east, 14.7 in the west -- but western teams are far more prone to fight. through midweek, they accounted for 305 major penalties for fighting this season, while eastern teams were called for 244.  on the whole, western goalies have been a bit better than their eastern counterparts. they had a collective save percentage of .903 through midweek; eastern goalies were at .900.  thus a portrait of the two conferences emerges. the east, home of sidney crosby, alex ovechkin and the league's top team, the buffalo sabres, is more goal-hungry.  the west, home to potential hall of fame defensemen like nicklas lidstrom and scott niedermayer, is more responsible in its own zone.  each side has excellent goalies, but the west seems to have a couple more. maybe the difference is nashville's chris mason and tomas vokoun, who are first and eighth in the league in save percentage.  and in the truest measure of quality, interconference games, western teams have a 57-31-8 record against the east -- a winning percentage of 58.8.  the surprising predators  before 1998, the idea of hockey in nashville sounded to many about as appetizing a combination as ice cream and hog jowls. now in their eighth n.h.l. season, however, the predators have become a force.  after a 6-3 victory over chicago last night, nashville was 34-12-3, putting it a point ahead of buffalo and 2 ahead of anaheim in the league's overall standings. predators general manager david poile and coach barry trotz have been in their posts since the team's inception, a rarity among expansion franchises.  with the exception of the clever forward paul kariya, the predators lack a marquee offensive player. they succeed with depth, two-way hustle and, most of all, outstanding goaltending. kariya, 32, a longtime anaheim duck, scored the 350th goal of his career last month and leads nashville with 53 points in 49 games.  the supporting cast of forwards includes martin erat, a 25-year-old czech on his way to a breakout season with 42 points in 46 games; steve sullivan, 32, a 5-foot-8 journeyman right wing, who is behind kariya with 46 points in 44 games; the 20-year-old rookie sensation alexander radulov (11-9-20 in 33 games); the 6-4, 220-pound jason arnott, 32, signed away from dallas to take on the role of no. 1 center in nashville, and with more than 1,000 career penalty minutes, by far the team's most physically imposing forward; and david legwand, who has 18 goals and 42 points in 46 games.  nashville's top defensemen -- kimmo timonen (9-26-35 in 49 games), ryan suter, shea weber and marek zidlicky -- all contribute on offense. but the team's real strength is its two goaltenders with shaved heads.  vokoun, a 30-year-old czech who was among the league's best goalies last season, tore a tendon in his hand on thanksgiving and was out of action for six weeks. in his absence, his unheralded backup, mason, 30, was even better. he is 20-8-2 and is stopping pucks with a stellar .930 efficiency, and helping the predators get near the top of the heap.  crosby objects  with 14 points in his last nine games, sidney crosby, pittsburgh's 19-year-old superstar, has been pulling away from his rivals for the n.h.l. scoring title. he also pulled back from questions about an incident in tuesday's 5-2 victory over the islanders in which he was speared by jason blake, the isles' leading scorer.  blake was not penalized, but crosby's reaction earned a minor for unsportsmanlike conduct.  ''it just kind of knocked the wind out of me,'' crosby told reporters the next day. ''it's done and over. there's a lot more important things to worry about. it's not good to see it, but it happens.''  penguins coach michel therrien was less sedate, suggesting that blake should be fined or suspended.  ''it was a cheap shot, and we're not going to accept those things,'' he said.  blake, who will be teaming with crosby in wednesday's all-star game, said, ''there was no intention to hurt sidney.''  ice chips  last week, daniel alfredsson, the ottawa captain, became only the second n.h.l. player to score a winning goal in four consecutive games. he accomplished the feat tuesday in the senators' 5-2 victory over washington.  according to the elias sports bureau, montreal forward newsy lalonde scored five straight game-winners in february 1921. alfredsson missed tying lalonde's record on thursday, when ottawa lost, 2-1, to the canucks. he did, however, score the senators' goal.  the blues' first-year president, john davidson, continues to oversee a revival in st. louis. the team entered last night's game at san jose having earned 26 of a possible 38 points since davidson, a former msg network analyst, replaced mike kitchen with andy murray as coach on dec. 11. since then, the blues have shot up from last place in the west and were 9 points from the final playoff berth.  last weekend against the kings, the blues made all concession food free until the third period and drew 17,868 fans to the game.  in the wake of a 90-minute ceremony the red wings held jan. 2 to retire steve yzerman's number comes the two-day festivities planned by the oilers for the retirement of mark messier's number. the climax will be when the no. 11 worn by messier, an edmonton native, is raised to the rexall place rafters on feb. 27 before a game against the coyotes, who are coached by his former oilers teammate wayne gretzky.  hockey: sunday shootout  