is a 'mansion tax' deductible?   q -- is the 1 percent ''mansion tax'' imposed by new york state on a house that costs $1 million or more deductible on the buyer's federal income tax return?  a -- joel e. miller, a queens tax lawyer, said that mansion taxes, whether imposed by new york or another state, are not deductible on a buyer's federal tax return. he added that the federal tax code specifies the types of taxes that are deductible: for example, real property taxes and state income taxes are specifically deductible for people who itemize.  mr. miller noted that while a mansion tax is not deductible, it does increase the property's tax basis. the basis -- basically the purchase cost plus the cost of any capital improvements made to the property -- is subtracted from the sale price to arrive at the capital gain realized on the sale of the property. since the mansion tax is added to the basis, that will ultimately reduce the tax paid on a gain on the sale of the property.  can a building change its rules about dogs?  q -- my building went co-op 20 years ago, and we have always been allowed to have pets. but this month, the new board of directors adopted a change to the house rules that now states owners' dogs can weigh no more than 50 pounds.  my present dog, a golden retriever that weighs in at 65 pounds, will be grandfathered in. but does the board have the right to suddenly limit the weight of the dogs in the building? if so, how would it enforce this rule? would it have the right to demand that we get our dogs officially weighed?  a -- ''the right of a co-op shareholder to harbor pets is governed by the proprietary lease and house rules,'' said aaron shmulewitz, a manhattan co-op and condominium lawyer. ''and while a precise response would depend on this particular co-op's documents, most co-ops do permit a board to regulate and restrict pets and to adopt and change house rules.''  if the rule change is authorized by the documents, mr. shmulewitz said, it would be enforceable, and the co-op would have the right to compel dogs to be weighed and to bar dogs that weigh more than the prescribed limit.  he noted, however, that new york city law provides that if a tenant (including a co-op shareholder) openly has a pet for at least 90 days and the landlord (including a co-op corporation) does not commence legal proceedings to evict the tenant for violating a pet provision, the landlord is then barred from doing so for the life of the pet, provided it doesn't create a nuisance.  and that could create a problem in this co-op. for example, mr. shmulewitz said, if a resident gets a puppy, it will most likely weigh less than 50 pounds and will be allowed in the building. once the dog has been there for 90 days, it will then have the right to stay for the rest of its life, even if it later exceeds the 50-pound limit.  jay romano  q & a  