the sound and the fury   heather millstone had a bucolic childhood, living with her parents in suburban rockville, md., in a peaceful home that bordered a farm. that idyllic setting, however, didn't last.  ''we had woods right near the house, where i would go deer-spotting with my father,'' recalled ms. millstone, an impish 32-year-old with curly brown hair. ''and all of a sudden, we were straddling a highway.'' transportation officials, it turned out, had decided that the area needed a major thoroughfare. ms. millstone was bereft; she had lost her stamping grounds.  if competition over space pops up occasionally in open areas like ms. millstone's maryland neighborhood, it does so continuously in places like new york, where people live not only cheek by jowl, but even stacked up on top of one another. unfortunately, though, the upset and rancor that new yorkers feel in such collisions are no less intense. the hubbub of the city, it seems, does not thicken anyone's skin.  just ask ms. millstone, or her neighbors, or local officials, or anyone else involved with heathers, the bar in the east village that ms. millstone opened in the fall of 2005. it is a case study in hurt feelings and hard choices.  ms. millstone, for example, said she believed she had built an impenetrable acoustic defense between her bar and the apartments above -- an issue she said she was sensitive to in light of the noisy road built near her maryland home. the anti-noise barrier at heathers seems impressive: the tin ceiling tiles encapsulate a total of 14 inches of fiberglass wool insulation, two fire-coated layers of plasterboard and two suspended layers of heavy-duty soundboard.  but frank hartin does not have high regard for the soundproofing. he lives directly above heathers, and in just the bar's first nine months, he said, he called 311 to complain about the noise ''probably about 50 times.'' he also has kept a detailed log of his attempts to seek relief from ms. millstone, the police and various city officials -- a practice that illustrates the frustrations and all-consuming nature of these disputes.  and as in other bar fights, the discontent over heathers has broadened to include analyses of ambient sound and decibel meters, jurisdictional issues, licensing laws, tavern economics and much more.  night life and noise are always a fraught topic in the city, but they are particularly so now. an overhaul of the city's noise code, the first in more than 30 years, will take effect on july 1. moreover, in light of the growth of bars in gentrifying areas and the spillover of smoking patrons onto sidewalks because of the no-smoking laws, officials are taking a close look at night-life regulation.  late last month, for instance, the city council made public a report on new york night life that among other things, calls for creating a special body to rule in cases involving ''problem'' bars and clubs, and even a citywide office of nightlife to oversee the industry. two days earlier, the state liquor authority published the findings of its licensing task force, which recommended ways to tighten up licensing.  if the case of heathers demonstrates anything, it is that the council and the liquor authority will have their hands full. perhaps it is inevitable given the ethereal, fleeting nature of noise, but complexity seems to be a hallmark of such disputes, as is the principle that what you see -- or hear -- depends very much on where you sit.  'a glorified watchdog'  the entrance to heathers, which is on 13th street between avenues a and b, is a discreet, understated affair, though not quite as discreet as that of its predecessor, brownie's, the last of the old-school alphabet city after-hours joints. the bar has no bouncer, only a few panels of obscured industrial glass and a heavy, dull black steel door. ms. millstone jokes that there is a ''please don't notice me'' sign outside, and the same could almost be said of ms. millstone herself, who has a small-town, dressed-down look.  despite her low-key demeanor, though, ms. millstone has drive. when she created heathers, taking out a mortgage on her alphabet city co-op, her ambition was nothing less than to plant the seeds of an artistic resurgence.  ''i've tried to have an avant-garde element,'' said ms. millstone, who holds a master's degree from the school of visual arts. ''i was nostalgic for a period i never actually experienced, the early '80s, when there was a thriving art scene in the east village.''  toward that end, heathers holds regular video screenings, and brunches that double as auctions for original art. adjoining the bar is a large window display devoted to curated artwork; currently featured is a series of photographs by manuel sander, great-grandson of the german photographer august sander.  beer and vodka free of glutens, which are proteins often found in wheat and other grains, are served at heathers, because ''many artists have dietary issues,'' ms. millstone said. she says that she suffers from gluten intolerance, which can set the stage for an illness known as celiac disease.  but heathers is no quiet museum. it is a bar, and it is a bar that plays music, unapologetically, and can accommodate 60 or so chattering patrons.  ms. millstone notes that she has taken steps to avoid disturbing local residents. besides the multiple layers of soundproofing, for example, she has placed about the bar a variety of neat little placards telling patrons to be respectful of the neighbors and not to congregate outside the premises. also, heathers employees monitor patrons on the sidewalk to keep them from disturbing the neighbors.  nevertheless, ms. millstone said, she has been forced into battle mode by the local community board and an active minority of residents.  ''they want to shut me down,'' she said. ''i'm a casualty of the blanket opposition to new establishments. it doesn't matter what you do. first they tried to get my commercial status revoked. i had to hire a zoning lawyer, which cost me $10,000 and left me broke. now they'd like to take away my liquor license.''  last june, heathers was raided by a multiagency task force that included representatives of the city's buildings, health, sanitation, fire and environmental protection departments, all under the command of the ninth precinct's cabaret unit.  ''they unleashed the cavalry,'' ms. millstone said with a nervous smile. ultimately, some citations were issued concerning fruit flies and the absence of a notice with the owner's name outside the bar. ms. millstone paid a fine to the health department for the fruit flies, but she has been cleared of all other violations, including a noise citation issued last october.  whatever the outcome of such enforcement actions, however, ms. millstone said the stress of continually dealing with the police and hostile neighbors had made her resentful and disenchanted.  ''i can relate to people who are bothered by loud music or a noisy clientele,'' she said. ''but i'm operating a perfectly legal, respectful establishment. we shouldn't have to live in a bubble.'' her dream for heathers as a center of an east village artistic revival, she said, is getting lost. ''instead of basking in a kind of creative effervescence,'' she lamented, ''i've become a glorified watchdog. i talk to the cabaret unit all the time.''  'loud music is loud music'  ''bars have taken a heavy toll on the community,'' said alexandra militano, chairwoman of the subcommittee of community board 3 that oversees applications for liquor, beer and wine licenses in the bustling east village and lower east side. ''we are oversaturated. a lot of residents in this community are subjected to really horrible conditions.''  but the board strives for fairness and neutrality, she said. ''we get materials and we review the materials and we try to make the best decision for the community, the most informed decision, and take the interests of the person who's applying into account,'' she said, speaking at the board office on east fourth street in october. ''i think we do a fairly good job.''  in the case of heathers, ms. militano draws a conclusion very different from ms. millstone's concerning her request for board support in her license application in the summer of 2005. ''she came before my committee,'' ms. militano said, ''and was completely heard.''  ''and denied,'' interjected susan stetzer, the board 3 district manager.  ''and denied,'' ms. militano confirmed.  one issue that the board considered was a state liquor authority rule that if a manhattan bar is within 500 feet of three other such premises, it can be licensed only if it confers a public benefit.  ''her rationale for being a public benefit to the community,'' ms. militano said, ''was that she had a gluten intolerance and was going to open a business, albeit a bar, that was 20 or 30 percent, a small percentage, gluten-free.''  board 3 was not persuaded. the state liquor authority nevertheless ruled in ms. millstone's favor -- but she will have to appear before ms. militano's committee again this september when her liquor license comes up for renewal. although the community boards are only advisory, they are not toothless. an active board -- and board 3 is an active board -- can successfully lobby the agency against particular establishments.  ms. stetzer does not think her board's effort to deny heathers its license was off the mark. ''there's a difference between a bar on second avenue and a bar on a small, narrow side street,'' she said. ''those side streets were always intended to be residential, but for various reasons they ended up with storefronts, and most of that is now grandfathered. it was an original misuse of the space.''  asked about the stated artistic intentions of heathers, ms. militano smiled. ''you'll have to forgive my skepticism,'' she said, ''but a third of the people who come before me say they're trying to create something cultural, in addition to being open until 4 a.m., serving all sorts of alcohol, you know.''  ms. stetzer added: ''loud music is loud music, and i think the main issue at heathers is loud music. maybe heathers patrons don't go out on the street and start screaming and yelling, but the loud music does not allow people in that building to sleep.''  ms. militano said she is not ''anti-bar,'' however, and ms. stetzer said, ''we wouldn't like it if there were no bars around.''  'we are more or less ignored'  frank hartin, a retired publisher of academic books, is a slender man with an endearing smile. he has been living directly above what is today heathers for 35 years, 16 of those with his partner, wai-shing lee.  the two men say noise from the bar has been an unprecedented, frequent irritant. he and his partner voiced their displeasure regularly both to ms. millstone and to the employee working the door outside. ''i get so upset i yell at them sometimes,'' mr. lee said.  but the two men's frequent trips downstairs have since stopped, on the advice of the cabaret unit, and their only recourse is calling 311. in response, police officers and agents from the department of environmental protection regularly go to the men's apartment to take stock of the noise.  the city agency follows a complex formula to determine excessive noise, one that takes into account ambient noise levels, but mr. hartin has not been impressed by its workings. referring to the fact that no violations have been issued to heathers from the couple's complaints, he said, ''so the floor shaking and being unable to think isn't sufficient grounds for a violation from their perspective.''  the log that mr. hartin maintains of his quest for quiet from heathers is, at points, a touching mix of hopeful insights and heartfelt frustrations. in one entry, for instance, mr. hartin related part of a phone conversation with a member of the cabaret unit: ''asked if we spent $1,100 for a decibel meter, and we got readings in excess of code, if he would send someone over to take official readings. he suggested a new floor and a rug would be a better use of the money.''  mr. hartin and mr. lee bought the sound meter anyway, which they now use to determine when to make a complaint call.  one monday evening in early fall, mr. hartin conducted a demonstration in the apartment. ''it's not a very loud night, but it will give you some idea of a typically bad situation,'' he said.  the floor of his apartment is baseboard, and the exposed lengths of plywood are painted blue. ms. millstone has argued that it is unfair to make her put more money into soundproofing until mr. hartin or his landlord makes some effort to put in a new floor.  ''where would we go?'' mr. lee asked in response to the suggestion.  on one wall of the apartment, there is a sharper image weather station indicating moon cycles, temperature, humidity and atmospheric pressure. but the reading that most interests the two men is the one on their sound meter.  the meter was teetering around 50 decibels, with the music from heathers sounding more like a murmur than anything else. that makes sense, for casual conversation generally measures upward of 60 decibels. and yet the drone was constant. while mr. hartin was almost apologetic about the absence of deafening noise, mr. lee seemed jittery.  despite all their efforts, the two men feel frustrated. ''we are more or less ignored,'' mr. hartin said. they sound much like ms. millstone.  detective jaime hernandez, who is in charge of community affairs for the ninth precinct, said that noise-related issues are particularly problematic and that new laws and regulations are no cure-all. communication, he maintained, is the key thing.  ''will you be able to correct the situation 100 percent?'' he asked. ''no. but if you have communication, you can understand the frustration.''  neighbors at odds  at 1 a.m. on a saturday in october, amber ibarreche, a heathers employee, was stationed outside the door, checking ids and asking patrons to keep their voices down.  david sagadi, 30, was on his way home from a party in brooklyn. he has lived on the block for 10 years and doesn't think heathers should be here. ''once upon a time it was very residential here,'' he said. ''it's a quiet street except for this doorway.''  dwayne gross, a 25-year resident of 13th street who was walking his dog, said he had had serious concerns about the bar at first, especially as he lives only two doors away. but he said ms. millstone had done her part to address the concerns of the community.  ''heather is a standup person,'' he said. ''she's met us more than halfway; in fact, she's done more than any bar owner i've ever seen. most of them won't give you the time of day.''  like ms. millstone and mr. hartin, the inhabitants of 13th street seem divided over heathers.  nevertheless, the participants in this long-running problem forge on.  in that vein, ms. millstone, mr. hartin and mr. lee attended a meeting of the ninth precinct community council on dec. 19 -- more than a year after ms. millstone opened her doors. mr. hartin spoke of new windows and a new interior wall that the landlord has installed, but he is very unsure if they will improve matters. for her part, ms. millstone spoke of a recent visit to the bar and the apartment by an audio engineer, and promised to send a copy of the report to the police.  on the advice of the cabaret unit, ms. millstone has installed ropes to contain her patrons when they go outside to smoke. characteristically, she has used the opportunity to create some pointed artisanship.  ''i hate the pretension of ropes,'' she said, ''so i figured if i was going to do something it had to be relevant to the bar.''  ms. millstone asked ms. ibarreche, who is also a textile artist, to do the job. the ropes she fashioned are made of antique nautical twine, and wrapped in an array of delicate, multitextured fabrics.  ''i keep trying,'' ms. millstone said. ''i poured everything i had into this place.''  