habitats/chelsea; three generations, all on the same block   from her bedroom window in chelsea, virginia manning, 8, can monitor the six elderly koi that live in her backyard pond. while aquaculture is new to her family, virginia is the third generation to live on this block of west 19th street. her mother, sarah edwards, grew up in a town house a few doors down, where virginia's grandmother still lives. her father, paul manning, grew up on long island, but his parents once lived in chelsea, too.  ms. edwards and mr. manning, now both 42, met in chelsea in 1988. ms. edwards was hanging out in man ray, a legendary eighth avenue restaurant that figured large in the once-rough neighborhood's first wave of gentrification, long before american apparel and jamba juice colonized eighth avenue. back then, marijuana was sold in fake delis whose display windows were lined with jumbo-size decoy jars of pickles and mayonnaise, and the primary business of the nearby meatpacking district was still flesh, both human and bovine.  man ray, with its belle époque entryway and long bar, was a gentle haven on a louche, down-at-the-heels eighth avenue. the bartender, who was a casual friend of ms. edwards, introduced her to his cousin mr. manning, who lived nearby in london terrace. they hit it off.  within a year, they were touring europe with ms. edwards's parents and her aunt. her mother, jane greenwood, is a noted costume designer, and her late father, ben edwards, created memorable sets for such broadway shows as richard burton's ''hamlet,'' ''a few good men'' and ''death of salesman,'' starring dustin hoffman.  it was a cultured tour.  ''i was the driver,'' mr. manning said recently while sitting on a worn couch in the couple's ground-floor living room, which has high ceilings and a fireplace. ''being new yorkers, none of them drove.''  ms. edwards said, ''my aunt had driven a jeep or something in world war ii.''  the trip revolved around an endless debate: take the slow back-country roads that passed through interesting villages, or get on a highway that actually went from point a to point b. mostly, they meandered.  ''we spent a lot of time in little places discussing architecture and enjoying the food,'' said mr. manning, who clearly relished the experience.  he must have been a good chauffeur, because ms. edwards moved into his apartment soon after they returned to new york. they were married in 1995.  in 1998, they bought an apartment on west 29th street that no one else wanted, perhaps because it was half underground and painted a particularly repellent shade of tropical green.  soon after they closed on the place, one of ms. edwards's old neighbors, john slagle, called with an offer: he and his wife, joann, wanted to sell their four-story 21-by-50-foot town house, just down the block from ms. edwards's mother, for $1.9 million. after spending their adult lives in manhattan, the slagles planned to retire to a ranch in oregon to raise miniature ponies. ms. edwards and mr. manning said, ''thanks, but we can't afford it.''  instead, they worked on getting the green out of their new apartment.  ms. edwards grew up with a tremendous sense of style. her mother and father had turned her childhood town house into a beautiful, bright place filled with architectural details that her father collected on the streets, the refuse from the ''modern'' gut jobs that were so common in the 1970s.  by this time, ms. edwards was also a costume designer, for movies, and mr. manning, who is now the marketing director for springer publishing, in soho, shared her interests in remaking the interior of their new apartment. but soon after they had finished renovating the place, the slagles called again. ''how about $1.2 million for the house?'' they said.  it was the year 2000, and $1.2 million seemed reasonable, but not the bargain made clear by hindsight. the house was in bad shape, with plywood flooring, ancient mechanicals and no period details except for the staircase. ''probably, my father picked up some of this house's details years ago,'' ms. edwards said.  and it had no certificate of occupancy, meaning that no bank would give them a mortgage.  no problem, said the slagles, who offered to hold the mortgage and defer monthly payments for the first year, to give the young couple the money to fix up the rental units, file for a certificate of occupancy and get a loan. mr. slagle ''wanted us to live there,'' ms. edwards said. ''he had very sentimental feelings about the house, and i'd grown up down the block.''  ms. edwards and mr. manning quickly discovered that their tasteful, if minor, renovation, along with the rising real estate market, had doubled the value of the 29th street apartment in less than two years. so they sold it and borrowed money, including loans from both sets of parents, and spent all of their savings, for the $400,000 down payment and for money to renovate the house. mr. slagle was known on the block for helping anyone in need.  ''suddenly, we owned the house of a legendary neighbor,'' mr. manning said.  ''once my mother locked herself out of her house,'' ms. edwards said. ''so he got his giant extension ladder and climbed up through a third-floor window that was open and came down and opened the door. that's how he was. we had a lot to live up to, and i'm afraid we haven't.''  the couple still receive christmas cards each year with photos of the slagles' miniature ponies in green pastures.  ms. edwards and mr. manning spent $350,000 for a gut renovation of the top two floors.  on sept. 10, 2001, they were all set to put them on the market and to go to a bank for a mortgage. the next morning, mr. manning was in his office, then in the rounded apex of the flatiron building, when the first plane hit the world trade center. he climbed to the roof and watched as the second plane hit.  ms. edwards was at home, preparing to take virginia to her first day of preschool. they assumed they wouldn't be able to rent their apartments and might lose their house. but within a month, a canadian family forced from their home near ground zero moved in. they felt safe and protected in the solid old town house.  it took two months to rent the second apartment. and the mortgage went through.  ms. edwards and mr. manning had always planned to renovate their own duplex. but years have passed, and the ground floor is still covered with despised yellow tiles. as virginia points out, the chandelier hanging above the hans wegner chairs and the flea-market coffee table in the living room needs repairing. and there's still a plywood floor under the sea-grass carpet on the vast, featureless parlor floor where the family sleeps.  but not for long. the couple have hired an architect, and workmen are ready to start the job. in march they will move two doors down, to ms. edwards's childhood brownstone, to sit out a gut renovation of their apartment with her mother.  ''we're going to try to put back some of the things that were taken out, where it's practical and pleasing,'' ms. edwards said.  looking around the living room, virginia asked, ''can we have monkey bars hanging from the ceiling?''  her mother hesitated.  ''maybe in your bedroom,'' she said.  another magical childhood in chelsea was in the making.  habitats | chelsea  