paid notice: deaths   vanole, david   vanole--david. dave, warming milk for coffee and your culinary expertise, especially last sunday's unforgettable pasta. we never did find what we were looking for on the net. we will always cherish your generosity of spirit and gregariousness. to our dearest kerry, we send you all our blessings, we love you so much. ab and all the frosts of 175 $(6$)vanole--david charles, passed away suddenly and tragically on january 15th, 2007, at the age of 43. he was with his wife, kerry tatlock, at the time; the pair were in salt lake city, ut, on a ski trip with her family. born in redondo beach, ca, on february 6, 1963, dave grew up in manhattan beach, ca. his professional career, as a longtime player and coach at the highest levels of soccer in the united states, was extraordinary. as a u.s. national team goalkeeper, he started all three games for the u.s. at the 1988 olympics in seoul, south korea, and was a member of the u.s. team that competed in the 1990 fifa world cup in italy. as a coach, dave represented his country again at the 2000 olympics in sydney, serving as goalkeeper coach for the silver - medal - winning u.s. women's national team. he most recently served as an assistant coach of the new england revolution of major league soccer, a position he also held with the washington freedom in the wusa. a vastly accomplished pioneer in american soccer, dave was profoundly proud of his special role in developing some of the top goalkeepers in the country, including ucla, major league soccer and u.s. national team players. while dave will always be celebrated for his achievements on the field, his wife, family and friends will warmly remember him as a man of immense passion and unwavering loyalty, with a huge capacity for love. dave and kerry, a loving and fun-loving couple for five years, were married in july, 2005. the two lived most recently in new york city, where dave cooked marvelous, love-filled meals and shared his humor and affection with everyone he touched. in addition to his adoring wife, dave is survived by his mother, merelyn vanole; brother, michael vanole (and wife suzi); sisters, jenny adamo (and husband bob parucha) and nicole vanole (and husband mark otoole); five nieces; six nephews; and many more in the vanole and tatlock families who loved him dearly. his much-adored father, raymond vanole, passed away in october, 2006. a funeral service for dave will be held in new york city on january 20th at all souls church at 6:00 pm, with a visitation at frank e. campbell funeral home from 2:00 pm to 4:00 pm. dave will be interred in new marlborough, ma, a place very special to both kerry and dave. a second memorial service will be held in manhattan beach on january 28th at the manhattan beach community church at 1:00 p.m. in lieu of flowers, the family wishes you to consider making a donation to the u.s. soccer foundation in the memory of david charles vanole. we will miss him deeply and love him forever.  