what's wrong with cinderella?   i am wholly sympathetic to peggy orenstein's concerns about the effect of the princess culture on her young daughter (dec. 24). but doesn't she see that the real meaning behind her child's anxious query (''do you like ariel?'') is ''do you like/approve of/accept me?'' a 3-year-old knows only that she likes the character very much and wants her mother to like what she likes. i wish orenstein would simply give, in response, an unqualified yes.  karen gover  bennington, vt.  when peggy orenstein wrote ''maybe i'm still surfing a washed-out second wave of feminism in a third-wave world,'' i wanted to say to her: ''no, you're not! you're right.'' i was delighted by her article. it's sad that feminists have to throw in apologies.  zoë lavatelli  brooklyn  perhaps the desire in girls to dress up as princesses can be viewed in a more positive light. parents might talk about how princess diana demonstrated compassion and leadership by holding the hands of the aids patients she visited in hospitals, thereby assuaging fears and encouraging the world not to treat them as pariahs.  or why not let girls enjoy wearing lovely colorful dresses and thereby cultivate a love of theater and artistic expression?  cynthia fox  los angeles  one of my favorite childhood books was frances hodgson burnett's ''little princess,'' which has been made into several films. the protagonist, sara, learns that it is inner nobility that matters, not privilege, and that as poor as you may be, you can always help someone else in need. lessons worth learning for both genders of all ages.  elizabeth m. bristol  wrentham, mass.  on halloween night, i don't see many children dressed up as lawyers, administrators or politicians, probably because it's boring to play a real grown-up. i do see a variety of superheroes and princesses simply because wearing a costume is pure fun. actually, little boys have it tougher. when a little girl wants to dress up as spider-man, it's no big deal. when a little boy enjoys the thrill of twirling in circles in a pink, sparkly frock, it's frowned upon.  cara putzrath  charlotte n.c.  as the father of a princess-obsessed 6-year-old girl, i wonder why peggy orenstein is so worried. specifically, where in the merchandise does orenstein derive passivity and helplessness? the princess world is marked by wealth and luxury -- a fantasy shared by many adults of both genders -- but i fail to see how one can extrapolate helplessness from wealth. my son, who is 3, enjoys the fantasy as much as his sister does. why doesn't orenstein write about the much stronger social taboos that prevent him from engaging in this relatively harmless play, even at this very young age?  edward koral  new york  as a psychologist and the father of a 17-month-old girl, i'm concerned for my daughter and this entire generation of girls.  the toy marketers may say that i'm an alarmist, but the emergence of compelling neurological research (e.g., brain malleability and mirror neurons) on the effects of early experiences on the attitudes and behavior of children suggests that, for example, pretending to be a princess may be more than just imaginary play. add to this the ubiquity and intensity of popular culture and its overwhelmingly unhealthy messages to girls related to beauty and thinness, and i would say that there is considerable cause to be alarmed.  jim taylor  san francisco  as a 22-year-old engineer, i am just beginning my life in the corporate world. it is apparent, however, even from my entry-level standing, that until women can recognize and revel in our gender and all that it implies, we will never be universally treated with the same respect in the workplace as men are. while playing princess may lead to ''a preoccupation with body and beauty,'' it may very well be the key to unlocking the feminist identity in the 21st century.  rebecca frimenko  northville, mich.  i was delighted by the pink and pretty princess phase and was disappointed when my two granddaughters dropped cinderella, ariel and the rest as too babyish, which happened rapidly, once they hit 7. ariel has given way to animated pets wagging their tails on a computer screen.  i liked it much better when my granddaughters were involved in imaginative play as powerful princesses. there's a reason that fairy tales are still with us.  pamela malone  leonia, n.j.  there is something amusing about little girls playing princess, dress-up and make believe. when grown women do it, however, it can be a bit unsettling. yet every weekend, in towns and cities all across america, that's exactly what modern brides do.  helga hayse  san mateo, calif.  it is my experience that children learn more from example than from commercial marketing. orenstein herself is obviously well read, thoughtful, accomplished, hardworking, serious-minded and capable. why would her daughter turn out any different -- no matter how much pink tulle is in her wardrobe?  joanne g. murphy  skokie. ill.  