how long can the hotel industry stay in high gear?   the hotel industry has made a stellar comeback since bottoming out about five years ago, with occupancy and room rates rising sharply nationwide. analysts expect another strong year in 2007, though they caution that the opening of hotels planned when the industry began its expansion may cool off the market.  ''what we've had the past three years were really exceptional levels of growth that we haven't seen since the early 1980s,'' said bjorn hanson, a principal at pricewaterhousecoopers, which tracks the hotel industry.  ''this year we may not see the increasing pricing power that we had in 2006, but it's still a very impressive forecast,'' mr. hanson said. he predicted that revenue earned per hotel room would increase 5.9 percent this year, compared with about 8 percent annually from 2004 through 2006.  revenue gains have been driven largely by rising room rates, which reached a national average of $97.35 a night from january to november 2006, up 7 percent from $90.95 in the comparable period of 2005, according to the most recent data from pricewaterhousecoopers. in manhattan, the average room rate climbed to $256.21 a night, also through november 2006, up 12.9 percent from $226.84 in the same period in 2005.  consumer demand for hotels should stay robust in 2007, analysts say, as long as the economy and corporate profits remain strong. a weak dollar is also helping to attract foreign travelers, while prompting more americans to travel domestically instead of abroad, they added.  but rising room rates may not be helping some luxury hotels. ''high pricing has caused some trading down,'' mr. hanson said, noting that, nationwide, some of the less expensive upscale brands like courtyard by marriott have managed to attract more guests. ''it isn't that the luxury segments lost business,'' he said. ''but due to large rate increases, they just didn't gain some of the business anticipated.''  some hotel analysts said they feared that pricing in new york city, in particular, where room rates soared almost 30 percent in 2005 and 2006, may begin to drive away some customers.  ''when you talk to meeting planners and business travel coordinators, there really is a perception out there that new york has gotten to be, in some cases, prohibitively expensive,'' said john a. fox, a senior vice president at pkf consulting, which specializes in hotels.  the lodging industry in new york city, though, has been remarkably resilient since 2001, when the market was weakened by the dot-com bust and the terrorist attacks of sept. 11. some hotels went out of business, while others converted to residential condominiums, taking an estimated 4,000 rooms off the market and leading to the run-up in room prices.  at the same time, high prices for land and surging construction costs have thwarted hotel development, making existing hotels more valuable, analysts added.  as a result, the pace of hotel sales has risen sharply. ''in 2002, i could count on one hand how many hotel sales there were in manhattan,'' said dan fasulo, director of market analysis for real capital analytics, which follows the commercial real estate market.  last year, 19 hotels changed hands, representing about $2.9 billion in sales volume and more than 4,800 units, mr. fasulo said.  istithmar hotels, which is controlled by the royal family of dubai, was the largest buyer of commercial real estate in manhattan last year, with $2.1 billion worth of acquisitions, according to real capital analytics. the transactions included the purchase of the 270-room w new york union square for $285 million and a 73 percent interest in the 248-room mandarin oriental, new york, said istithmar, which put the mandarin's value at $340 million.  nolan hecht, director of the hospitality transactions group at cushman & wakefield, the commercial real estate brokerage firm, said the fast pace of sales should continue in 2007.  ''i expect even manhattan hotel owners, who were typically long-term generational holders, to be tempted by the current valuations, which make it an overwhelmingly compelling time to liquidate,'' he said.  an estimated 3,500 hotel rooms are proposed for development in 2007 in new york city, about two-thirds of them in manhattan, which has a total of about 65,000, mr. fox said.  dean schwanke, a senior vice president at the urban land institute, said that conversions into condominiums had significantly reduced the number of full-service hotels, leaving the sector ripe for developers. ''there will be more full-service development planned for prime locations in 2007,'' he said.  the hotels scheduled to open this year in new york city are relatively small, mr. hanson said, the largest being the 282-room plaza, which will reopen after being shut in 2005 to convert much of the structure into condos. though the city is seeking a developer to build a hotel for the jacob k. javits convention center, it is not anticipated to open until 2010; it would have about 1,500 rooms.  some analysts say there may be overbuilding of limited-service and condo-hotels in some parts of the country. but small, independent properties called boutique hotels, which offer specially designed rooms and upscale amenities, remain popular in major cities that attract international travelers, noted daniel h. lesser, a senior managing director with the hospitality group at cb richard ellis, the commercial real estate brokerage firm. ''they've become very much an accepted hotel product that travelers feel comfortable with,'' he said.  the hotel 373 fifth avenue, at 35th street in manhattan, is a boutique property that is opening this month. the hotel, with 70 rooms and a coveted main entrance on fifth avenue, will be managed by the magna hospitality group and was created by sam chang, a property developer who has been looking to create midmarket, budget and limited-service hotels in the city.  with free wireless internet, ipod docking stations and flat-screen televisions, the hotel aims to attract professionals, said peter bode, the director of sales. rooms are priced at $189 to $299 a night.  ''we thought there was strong potential for a midmarket, nonbranded boutique hotel in that neighborhood,'' mr. bode said.  already open in manhattan is the pod hotel, a 347-room property developed by bd hotels, the boutique specialist. the hotel, a redesign of the former pickwick arms at 230 east 51st street between second and third avenues, is larger than most boutiques but shares many of their features. it is aiming to lure travelers ages 20 to 35 with rates starting at $89 a night. there are bunk beds and shared baths for some units, as well as ipod docking stations, free wireless internet and flat-screen tvs.  new hotel brands, many created to attract young guests, have been proliferating, mr. hanson said. about two dozen hotel brands have been proposed for the united states in the last two years, including hyatt place, introduced by the hyatt corporation, and element, owned by starwood hotels and resorts worldwide.  ''there are so many of these start-up brands that there will be some consolidation,'' he said. ''the good news is that these brands are being introduced at a time when there's accelerating construction.''  square feet: checking in  