paid notice: deaths   goldberg, eli m.   goldberg--eli m. the membership and board of governors of the boca rio golf club, boca raton, florida announce with deep regret and sorrow the passing of our dear friend and esteemed member eli goldberg and extend our sincerest condolences to his wife grace and their family. david c. bubes, president boca rio golf club, inc.  $(6$)goldberg--eli m. we mourn the loss of our longtime dear friend, eli. our sincerest sympathy to his wife grace, and their sons donald, bart and andrew, and the entire family. dani, jack, helene and larry  $(6$)goldberg--eli. the officers and members of old oaks country club mourn the passing of dear friend and long time fellow member, eli goldberg. our heartfelt sympathy is extended to his wife grace and their family. allen j. ross, president  $(6$)goldberg--eli malcom, age 93, at home in boca raton, florida, january 20, 2007. a loving and devoted husband for 62 years to his wife grace. a dedicated father to three sons, donald, bart, and andrew, and three daughters-in-law, tracy, myra, and karen. a devoted grandfather to lane, kara, hanna, jesse, daniel, benjamin, and zara. he was a graduate of cornell university college of arts and sciences and cornell law school. after serving in the u.s. army during world war ii as a master sergeant to the counter intelligence corps, he joined his father's real estate business in brooklyn, new york. with his family, he built, owned, and managed residential and business properties. he remained active in the real estate business until age 90. he maintained that his success was due to the enjoyment he received from his endeavors. eli participated in the building of two synagogues, one in brooklyn and later the jewish community center in harrison, new york, where he lived for many years. he was a generous contributor to many charities, supporting the arts and sciences, hospitals and environmental causes. for 25 years, eli served as chairman of the harrison zoning board of appeals. services will be tuesday, january 22, 10:30am at the jewish community center of harrison. interment will be at sharon gardens cemetery immediately following services. a memorial service will be scheduled in boca raton, florida. a memorial fund has been established in memory of eli m. goldberg at the center for international environmental law, 1367 connecticut ave. nw, suite 300, washington d.c. 20036.  