court no longer divided: conservatives in triumph   supreme conflict  the inside story of the struggle for control of the united states supreme court  by jan crawford greenburg  illustrated. 340 pages. the penguin press. $27.95.  even as more commentators on both the left and the right are using the adjective ''incompetent'' to describe the administration of george w. bush, historians like douglas brinkley, sean wilentz and eric foner have begun to argue that mr. bush is in contention for the title of worst president in history, citing reasons like the metastasizing war in iraq, a ballooning deficit, the mishandling of hurricane katrina and a widening credibility gap.  yet in a lively new book on the supreme court, the abc news correspondent jan crawford greenberg argues that in one area president bush has succeeded where his father, as well as ronald reagan and richard m. nixon, did not, achieving a longtime conservative goal: he has moved the supreme court decisively to the right and shaped its direction for the next three to four decades.  in appointing chief justice john roberts and justice samuel alito to the court, ms. greenburg writes, the president gave justices antonin scalia and clarence thomas solid conservative support, placing on the bench two ''collegial and savvy'' allies who ''can help keep moderate'' justice anthony kennedy (now the key swing vote) ''in check.''  ''george w. bush and his team of lawyers,'' she concludes, ''will be shaping the direction of american law and culture long after many of them are dead.''  ms. greenburg's book draws on interviews with nine current and former supreme court justices, scores of their law clerks, high-ranking white house and justice department officials from four administrations, and contemporaneous documents, including the papers of justices thurgood marshall and harry a. blackmun. the volume sets out to give the reader a portrait of the court as it has evolved over the last few decades, while tracing the conservative movement's efforts to reverse what it saw as the excesses of the warren court, which in addressing various hot-button social issues (concerning race, religion, privacy and criminal procedure) had, in conservatives' view, overstepped its constitutionally defined bounds.  ''supreme conflict'' gives us a fascinating look at dynamics within the court, showing how personalities and ideology can affect alliances and debates. and it uses colorful details to flesh out the by now well-known story of mr. bush's efforts to fill the seats vacated by the retiring sandra day o'connor and the death of chief justice william h. rehnquist.  there is little real hard news in the volume, however, and it falls short in its discussion of the issues at stake with the new supreme court. ms. greenburg reviews the abortion debate and the status of roe v. wade, but she skims, glancingly, over the equally if not more important issue of executive power, which, given the efforts of the current administration to enhance presidential prerogatives, is likely to come up repeatedly in cases dealing with mr. bush's war-making powers, congressional oversight and detainees' rights.  the crucial swing vote role played by justice kennedy in the new court (like that played by justice o'connor before her retirement) is acutely dissected in these pages, but the records and judicial philosophies of chief justice roberts and justice alito -- along with the impact they are likely to have on cases coming before the court -- are not analyzed in depth.  what was frustrating to conservatives in the past was the fact that many republican nominees to the rehnquist court did not end up voting in a consistently conservative manner: ''president ford appointed john paul stevens, a maverick whose vote became solidly liberal after his first decade on the court,'' ms. greenburg writes. ''reagan tapped swing justices o'connor and kennedy. george h. w. bush selected david souter, one of the court's most predictably liberal members.''  justices o'connor and kennedy tended to be pragmatists; unlike justices scalia and thomas, they did not possess an overarching judicial philosophy. ms. greenburg suggests, in addition, that their evolution from more predictably conservative positions to a more moderate stance might have had as much to do with internal court dynamics as anything else.  she argues, for instance, that the arrival of the brash and doctrinaire justice thomas resulted, curiously enough, in a shift ''that would ultimately prevent conservatives from undoing the liberal legacy of the warren court under rehnquist's leadership.''  by the end of justice thomas's first year, she notes, ''o'connor and souter -- and to a lesser extent kennedy -- had moved left.'' justice o'connor in particular, ms. greenburg writes, began ''pulling away from the conservatives'' after justice thomas joined the bench; even when they were on the same side that term, ''she typically wrote a separate opinion of her own and refused to join his.''  meanwhile, justices thomas and scalia were quickly finding common ground. ms. greenburg contends that this was not a case of the rookie thomas following the lead of the veteran scalia, as some court watchers have argued, but the opposite: ''from the beginning, scalia found himself agreeing with thomas's views on the law. after thomas's very first conference, scalia changed his mind to side with him in the foucha case, and on several other occasions that term, scalia switched his vote to join thomas in dissent.''  justice thomas's contentious confirmation hearings are discussed only in passing, but considerable space in this book is devoted to the current bush administration's efforts to ensure the confirmation of chief justice roberts and justice alito, and the president's disastrous decision initially to nominate his longtime friend the white house counsel harriet miers to justice o'connor's seat.  ms. greenburg's detailed account of the miers nomination sounds themes that will be familiar to readers of other books on the bush administration by reporters like bob woodward and thomas ricks, and by insiders like paul o'neill, the former treasury secretary: a penchant on the president's part for valuing loyalty over expertise; an inability or reluctance on the part of dissenting insiders to make their views heard; and poor preparation for dealing with the fallout of the choice -- in this case, a chorus of protests from conservatives, who viewed ms. miers's lack of a paper trail with suspicion, and dismay all around at her poor showing in the walk-up to confirmation hearings.  as for the 2000 supreme court decision that effectively handed the presidency to mr. bush on the basis of an unsigned majority opinion, ms. greenburg notes that it was made under ''intense time pressure'':  ''midday on saturday, dec. 9, the court voted 5-4 to stop the recounts until it decided the issues in the case. it got briefs from both sides on sunday afternoon. it heard arguments on monday, and it announced its decision the next evening, dec. 12, which was the official deadline for certifying electoral college votes.''  in this momentous case, justice kennedy sided with chief justice rehnquist and justices scalia, thomas and o'connor to overturn the florida supreme court, ruling that there could be no further counting of florida's disputed votes.  ms. greenburg writes that in the years since the bush v. gore decision, justices stephen breyer and david souter ''have said they continue to believe they could have swayed kennedy, if they'd only had more time,'' while ''the other liberal justices never thought it was possible,'' regarding the case as effectively over on saturday.  justice kennedy, for his part, ms. greenburg says, ''scoffs at the suggestion he was on the fence.'' indeed, she quotes him saying of justice souter: ''i think with one more day, i might have persuaded him.''  as for former justice o'connor, she is quoted as saying of bush v. gore: ''i don't think what emerged in the last opinion was the court's best effort. it was operating under a very short time frame, to say the least. given more time, i think we probably would've done better.''  books of the times  