the neediest cases; fighting depression since 12, she has a tailor-made job   the pain weighs heavily on her. it always has. ''i was depressed from very, very young,'' said heather eicholz, a case manager at a social service agency on long island.  at 29, she is the closest she has ever been to happiness since receiving a diagnosis of severe depression at 12. ''content'' is how she puts it. ''if i didn't have this job,'' she said, ''i don't mean to be dramatic, but i probably would have given up.''  a year ago, ms. eicholz was hired by federation employment and guidance service, a beneficiary of the uja-federation of new york, one the seven charities supported by the new york times neediest cases fund.  as a case manager, she helps clients with mental disabilities find the resources to cope with their illness. the connection with people who understand their illnesses gives a person hope, she said.  her own demons still torment her, but they have gradually diminished, she said. she is in therapy and takes only one medication; at one point, she was taking five.  the forearm scars from cutting herself are fading with use of a steroid cream. the evenings are still difficult, ms. eicholz said, because she is alone.  ''during the day, at work, it is better,'' she said. ''i never got up for anything in my life that i actually looked forward to. you are not labeled. you are not your diagnosis.''  ''if i am identified here, if anything, it is as a good case manager,'' she said of her work environment.  for ms. eicholz, the less desirable labels ''a problem,'' ''crazy'' and ''special'' began almost at birth. her biological parents met in a psychiatric hospital on long island. her mother died shortly after ms. eicholz was born. at 13 months, she and her older sister were placed in foster care, and both were later adopted by johanna and donald eicholz of hicksville, on long island.  ''nothing made me happy or excited,'' she said of her childhood.  sent to catholic school, she defied the nuns or fell asleep in class. she was placed in special education classes until the sixth grade, and then transferred to fork lane school, a public school in hicksville.  at the age of 12, she said, she found a feeling of euphoria by cutting herself with a broken piece of glass. she was near the school playground at the time. ''it was impulsive,'' she said. ''there really is no pain associated with it. it was like, 'ahh,' and emotional release.''  a year later she tried to commit suicide by overdosing on 100 tylenol tablets, she said. her actions created a deep rift between her and her parents. following a doctor's suggestion, they sent her to high point hospital, a psychiatric institution in westchester county, where she lived for three years, starting at 14.  ''i can't describe to you what happened there,'' she said. her complaints to her parents about her life at the hospital, which closed in 1995, fell on deaf ears, ms. eicholz said. ''i was sick, so no matter what i said -- it didn't matter. they were in denial.''  at 17, she left high point and enrolled for half a year in harmony heights, a residential school for girls in oyster bay, on long island. after graduation, she moved into an apartment that she paid for through disability assistance and a small inheritance from her mother's sister. ''i could afford it then; rents weren't so high as they are now,'' she said.  after ms. eicholz turned 18, she said, she attempted suicide again. ''i was in the hospital most of the time,'' she said of the five years after leaving high point. ''when i didn't know how to deal with something, the cutting got really bad,'' she said.  on good days, she attended classes. she enrolled in various community colleges on long island but rarely finished. ''i couldn't function,'' she said. ''i didn't have the skills.''  at 24 she entered an outpatient treatment program at north shore university hospital. ''it gave me structure,'' she said. there, her skills in advocacy developed, and then she learned that there was a job available at federation employment and guidance service.  the job was developed around her interests, and it has ended a destructive cycle, ms. eicholz said. ''it was a life saver,'' she said. the $600-a-month salary enables her to afford a $210 a month subsidized one-bedroom apartment in old bethpage, on long island, $150 for car insurance, and monthly payments to her parents for her white '96 chrysler sebring.  she calls the car a godsend because it gets her to work, which she loves. but when its water pump sprang a leak last year, it was out of commission.  ''i lost it psychologically,'' ms. eicholz said. losing the freedom that the car gave her, she said, brought up feelings she experienced while she was hospitalized. ''i felt trapped and powerless,'' she said. she confided in holly beck, her work supervisor, who drew $765.05 from the neediest cases fund to have the car repaired.  ''i was relieved,'' ms. eicholz said. ''without having a financial foundation, there is always a sense of fear, like you don't know what is going to happen.''  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  previously recorded: $7,097,174.83  recorded friday: 12,260.00  total: $7,109,434.83  last year to date: $6,452,678.71  