commuter group says improvements are on the way   crowded, aging and dirty passenger cars, as well as disrepair and a parking shortage at some stations, were among the concerns cited in a report on the metro-north and shore line east lines released last week by the connecticut rail commuter council, a riders' advocacy group.  james cameron, the council's chairman, said some of the problems would not be solved until 2009, when the first of a batch of new rail cars purchased by the state are scheduled to be put into service.  ''all we can do is ask the commuters to be patient and know that help is coming down the track,'' he said. ''it just hasn't pulled into the station yet.''  judd everhart, a spokesman for the state department of transportation, which runs metro-north with the metropolitan transportation authority, said in a statement that some of the problems were being addressed.  ''we know our commuters face challenges every day, and we are doing something about it,'' he said.  in the past two years, mr. everhart said, gov. m. jodi rell and the general assembly committed more than $3 billion to transportation improvements throughout the state. ''the funding is in place and the work is under way,'' he said.  the report said the quality of service of the shore line east commuter railroad, which runs weekdays between new london and new haven and is operated by amtrak and the state transportation department, was good but that the service should be expanded to seven days a week.  the report did, however, praise metro-north for a 97 percent on-time rate last year.  the annual report, which is mandated by the legislation that created the commuter council in 1985, is available at trainweb.org/ct.  arena and jai alai fronton meeting the wrecking ball  during their heydays in the 1970s and '80s, they were filled to the rafters with thousands of cheering spectators. but last week, only the sound of demolition equipment and walls coming down could be heard at the new haven coliseum and milford jai alai.  the coliseum was scheduled for implosion on jan. 20. the demolition of the fronton, or jai alai court, began in earnest last week and was scheduled to last until the spring.  the coliseum, which opened in 1972 and closed in 2002, was known for its rock concerts and for being the home of the new haven nighthawks, an american hockey league team that is defunct.  the city said the long wharf theater would move to the four-acre property being vacated by the coliseum. it said the site would include an expansion of the nearby knights of columbus headquarters, as well as retail space and housing.  mayor john destefano jr. of new haven said the coliseum had outlived it usefulness. ''it was once state of the art in the marketplace, and was the only venue in the marketplace, but economic models change,'' he said.  mayor james l. richetelli jr. of milford said the fronton, which from 1977 to 2001 featured parimutuel betting on jai alai, a speedy handball-like game, had put the city ''on the map.'' in just six months in 1988, it had revenues of $100 million.  ''in the early years, people came from all over and filled up our restaurants and hotels,'' he said. ''it's going to be strange to not see it there anymore.''  mr. richetelli said that in november, the city sold the 25-acre jai alai property to starwood ceruzzi, a development company, for $14 million, after having bought it from the owners for $12.6 million in 2004. he said the company planned to build a lowe's home improvement store, a hotel and other retail space there.  