hong kong tries to stop its mainlander baby boom   the plaintive cries of newborns never stop in the special care infant ward at hong kong's queen elizabeth hospital -- a ward designed for 30 babies but that has had as many as 60 at a time in recent weeks.  the crowding is not a result of a baby boom among hong kong women, who have the world's lowest birthrate. instead, the rows of bassinets are full because of an influx of mainland chinese women who go to great lengths to make sure that their babies are born in hong kong.  the hong kong government wants to discourage them. starting feb. 1, pregnant women from the mainland will have to pay $5,000 for their hospital care before they are even allowed to enter hong kong, which has been a semiautonomous chinese territory since britain returned it in 1997.  under rules the government announced tuesday evening, immigration officers will be instructed to turn back any mainlander who appears to be at least seven months pregnant and has not paid.  the policy is expected to produce tearful showdowns at border points, and is already provoking an acrimonious debate in hong kong over what it means to be a citizen of this cosmopolitan metropolis on the south china sea.  just as many women from mexico struggle to make sure their babies are born in the united states and are entitled to american citizenship, thousands of women from the mainland come to hong kong to give birth because it entitles their babies to permanent residency here. the benefits include a free education and subsidized health care as part of hong kong's british-inspired welfare policies. hong kong residents pay as little as $12.80 to give birth at a hospital because of extensive government subsidies.  the issue has divided the democracy movement here. some, like martin lee, the founding chairman of the democratic party, agree with the city's beijing-appointed leaders that hong kong needs more citizens because of its low birthrate -- 0.9 per woman of child-bearing age, far below the replacement rate of 2.1. if the babies grow up and come live here, hong kong will have young people to care for an aging population. by having babies here, the mainland women ''do what we cannot do ourselves,'' mr. lee said.  but others in the democracy movement, like dr. kwok ka-ki, a surgeon who represents the medical profession in the legislature, say permanent residency should be restricted to babies born to hong kong parents.  ''how could we stand the impact if huge numbers of mainland women come here to have babies?'' he asked.  the number of babies born in hong kong to mainland mothers surged to 15,000 last year from several hundred a year in the late 1990s. before the new restrictions were adopted, the number was poised to rise even more, as the year of the pig, which chinese tradition holds to be an auspicious time for adding to a family, begins on feb. 4 or feb. 18, depending on which chinese tradition is followed.  every fifth year of the pig, falling once every 60 years, is considered especially auspicious and is known as a year of the golden pig. the coming year is a year of the golden pig, and is expected to produce an increase in births because marriage and birth statistics across china continue to show clear influences from such traditional beliefs, despite strong efforts by the chinese communist party to dismiss them as superstitions.  having a baby in hong kong, a city of 6.9 million people, can also help a family evade the mainland's one-child policy, although enforcement of that policy has been less stringent in recent years. most of the women giving birth here return to the mainland initially to raise their babies because the mothers do not have the right to live here. the babies frequently have hong kong fathers, because hong kong companies now employ an estimated 11 million people on the mainland and send tens of thousands of hong kong citizens, mostly men, to manage them.  after marrying a hong kong man, a mainland woman can wait as long as seven years for the legal right to live here.  beijing officials made it much easier in 2003 for mainlanders to visit hong kong, in a bid to help hong kong's struggling economy recover from sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) and thereby reduce pressures in hong kong for more democratic local rule.  greater access has produced a tourism boom and throngs at shopping malls, but it has also made it much easier for pregnant women from the mainland to reach here.  queen elizabeth hospital is on kowloon peninsula close to the train station where mainland chinese arrive. it has been receiving a steady flow of women, many of whom show up in labor and with minimal medical records, making it hard to provide proper care.  ''we have to be very cautious, very careful, because they've got complications as well'' in some cases, said dr. cecilia cheon, a consulting obstetrician at the hospital.  the special care infant ward handles babies born with jaundice and other problems not severe enough to require that they be placed in intensive care. the ward was so busy on wednesday that the regular nurses were joined by retired pediatric nurses who had been called in to help give the babies bottles, burp them and change their diapers.  dr. terence lao, an obstetrician at queen mary hospital on hong kong island, said the unexpected arrival of women in labor with few health records posed several risks. the women may be infected with influenza, asymptomatic tuberculosis or even h.i.v., the virus that causes aids.  ''even if we are suspecting something, we cannot get the tests back in time,'' dr. lao said.  it is also harder to treat a baby at birth for possible health problems if no ultrasound tests have been done in advance to determine the health of the fetus.  dr. anthony hedley, a former chairman of the department of community medicine at hong kong university and a frequent critic of government health policies, said that discouraging pregnant women from the mainland from traveling to hong kong was a prudent health measure. ''it's not good for mothers or infants to be shuttling long distances,'' he said.  but dr. kwok said that the new rules might prompt mainland women to enter the territory before their pregnancies show, and then to overstay their visas to give birth here.  beijing officials have been quiet on hong kong's new restrictions. mainland leaders seldom comment publicly on issues involving hong kong, to avoid being accused of interfering with the city's autonomy, but they wield enormous influence on a wide range of issues.  the new policy has attracted its share of jokes. a cartoon in the south china morning post on wednesday showed a large-bellied woman walking past two immigration officers.  ''you're letting her in?'' one of the officers asked.  the other replied, ''apparently it's only heroin, which is a customs problem.''  