citigroup reports good quarterly results   citigroup reported fourth-quarter results yesterday that were good. the only problem was that its competitors have done so much better.  citigroup's operating profit for the quarter rose 3.2 percent, led by a solid trading performance, improvement in its consumer business and big gains from its alternative investment unit.  but last year was particularly rough for the bank. for all of 2006, earnings fell 12 percent, to $21.5 billion. citigroup shares gained nearly 15 percent for the year, though not until a big year-end rally.  ''it is no fun to score in the last two minutes of the game,'' citigroup's chairman and chief executive, charles o. prince iii, said yesterday on a lengthy conference call with analysts and investors. ''it is better than not scoring, but it is nerve-racking.''  mr. prince is under pressure from investors to rein in expenses and begin to show results soon. he has set out a long-term strategy that calls for integrating the bank's sprawling businesses and placing a greater emphasis on international and internal growth. compared with many of its competitors, it must make up significant ground.  ''we're engaged in a very extensive, very transparent, multiyear effort,'' mr. prince said, sounding somewhat exhausted. ''it's not easy. it's not fast, and it's certainly not glamorous.''  citigroup's trading performance was fairly robust, but paled in comparison to the blowout fourth-quarters posted by some peers. citigroup's $2.75 billion in fixed-income trading revenue was up 32 percent from last year and equity trading revenue of $900 million was up 17 percent from last year. jpmorgan chase showed a 77 percent increase in the fourth quarter from its fixed income and almost doubled its equity trading revenue. merrill lynch and goldman sachs reported similarly large gains.  citigroup's expenses, meanwhile, remain high. yesterday, the company said operating expenses were up 23 percent in the fourth quarter, while revenue grew 15 percent.  and a big tax benefit is about to disappear. if all the one-time tax benefits that will be gone next year were taken away in the fourth quarter, profits from all of the bank's consumer businesses were down from the third quarter.  there are also signs that credit quality is worsening. mr. prince noted a ''slight weakness'' in auto loans and second mortgages in the united states. internationally, there are signs of potentially greater deterioration. in mexico, a sharp increase in bad loans led to bigger losses and caused citigroup to set aside an additional $111 million pretax in loss reserves.  ''i would emphasize that we are planning on headwinds from credit in 2007,'' mr. prince said.  over all for the fourth-quarter, citigroup's net income fell 26 percent from the quarter a year earlier, when it recorded a huge one-time gain from the sale of its asset management unit to legg mason. the bank was also hurt in the fourth quarter by an after-tax charge of $415 million related to the recent announcement that it would significantly cut back its consumer finance operations in japan.  net income from continuing operations rose to $5.13 billion, or $1.03 a share, from $4.97 billion, or 98 cents a share in the quarter a year ago. revenue rose 15 percent, to $23.8 billion.  citigroup shares closed yesterday at 54.50, up 11 cents, but the stock has long lagged its peers.  still, mr. prince said the company delivered on its financial targets last year -- a remark that some analysts said suggested less about the bank's performance and more about a low bar. he once again emphasized robert a. druskin's new role as chief operating officer and expense-control czar. and he has tweaked the strategy, cutting back some investment spending and ramping up the bank's engine for small acquisitions, a move that could pay off faster but may sacrifice longer-term returns.  but delivering results will take time.  ''it would be really terrific if rome were built in a day,'' citigroup's chief financial officer, sallie l. krawcheck, said.  there were some bright spots in yesterday's results. citigroup's consumer business in the united states showed modest improvement, though credit quality has remained unusually high. and net interest margins, which make up roughly half of citigroup's revenue, appear to be stabilizing after months of sharp declines.  that should improve the quality of earnings, a research analyst with sanford c. bernstein, howard k. mason, said.  ''i am happy to see there is some relief in sight,'' mr. mason said. ''if earnings quality improves, nobody will talk about that the c.e.o. is a lawyer and the c.f.o. is an analyst.''  ''you just will have a different story'' that is focused on citigroup's growth, he said.  