critics' choice: new cds   caetano veloso  ''cê'' (nonesuch)  caetano veloso's songs tend to assume a presidential height and distance. his voice remains lithe and relaxed, and his records have become armored in well-rested civility. implicitly his music teaches forgiveness.  but in ''cê,'' even the first track's hammering, compulsive notes turn over his own stereotype. you hear snare drums, electric guitar and bass, playing an abrupt two-beat rhythm with a staccato three-note pattern, and mr. veloso softly launches the first passive-aggressive shot. ''você nem vai me reconhecer/quando eu passar por você,'' he sings; ''de cara alegre e cruel.'' (''you won't recognize me/even when i go right by you/a happy and cruel look on my face.'')  here mr. veloso, now 64, takes on the petty end of the emotional spectrum, in front of a post-punk electric power-trio, produced by his son moreno. recently the elder mr. veloso has been making more playful records in between his more official-sounding ones, and at first, ''cê,'' with its unvarnished sound, seems to identify that way. (in the tradition of indie-rock records, there's no studio echo, and sometimes you can hear amplifier buzz.)  but he's still singing with his usual soft, focused concentration, and in the rough textures and gaping silences of the band are strong melodies that point back to his simpler records from the mid-'70s, like ''qualquer coisa'' and ''jóia.'' embedded in it too are some of mr. veloso's best lyrics of the last 20 years.  a few lines bring lush poeticisms, ''leafy fruit-flowers'' and ''the memory of the white of a page.'' but most often these songs are funky and honest and directly sexual, full of retirement-age male earthiness.  it's a record full of dream-visions, self-effacements and reappearing images. ''musa híbrida'' (''hybrid muse'') imagines a fevered cross-breeding between alligator and panther. in a song about mr. veloso's friend, the boisterous poet waly salomão, who died in 2003, a life is described as a ''desenho'' (drawing). in ''não me arrependo'' the same word is applied to a relationship. and here, tears, the romantic singer's favorite handy metaphor, are replaced with other body fluids: mucus, menstrual blood, mother's milk and semen.  ''i'm not jealous of sagacity or of intuition,'' he sings in ''homem'' (''man''). ''i only envy longevity and multiple orgasms.''  ben ratliff  