the news from little rock   the race beat  the press, the civil rights struggle, and the awakening of a nation.  by gene roberts and  hank klibanoff.  illustrated. 518 pp.  alfred a. knopf. $30.  historians of the civil rights era have long recognized the impact of the press on the character and pace of the movement. from william bradford huie's graphic 1955 interview with the unrepentant killers of emmett till to the televised images of bull connor's attack dogs snapping at young demonstrators in the streets of birmingham to the eyewitness accounts of the beatings of voting rights marchers in selma, ala., the power of the pen and the camera has been memorable. until now, however, no one has offered an in-depth analysis of how and why the news media came to play such an important role in the struggle for racial justice.  in ''the race beat,'' the veteran journalists gene roberts and hank klibanoff painstakingly trace the evolution of civil rights press coverage in the south from the publication of ''an american dilemma,'' by gunnar myrdal, in 1944 to the assassination of the rev. dr. martin luther king jr. in 1968. myrdal, an economist and a swede, was no journalist. but he was probably the first observer, the authors say, to argue that ''the future of race relations ... rested largely in the hands of the american press.'' the best antidote to racial prejudice and discrimination, myrdal believed, was the dissemination of accurate information. ''there is no doubt,'' he wrote, ''that a great majority of white people in america would be prepared to give the negro a substantially better deal if they knew the facts.''  at the time, as roberts and klibanoff point out, ''the black press was at the center of a developing negro protest in the united states. but if the protest were to succeed, the mainstream press -- the white press -- would have to discover racial discrimination and write about it so candidly and so repeatedly that white americans outside the south could no longer look the other way. then they would see segregation, white supremacy and black disfranchisement as being at odds with the american conscience ... and demand change.''  roberts, a former managing editor of the new york times, and klibanoff, the managing editor for news at the atlanta journal-constitution, demonstrate how this hopeful equation became a reality in the two decades after world war ii. the mainstream press was slow to grasp the significance of the civil rights story; as late as 1955, the new york times reporter john popham, who had been covering the south since 1947, ''remained the only correspondent assigned to the region for a national newspaper.'' but with the landmark supreme court decisions and the racial convulsions of the mid-1950s, the press could no longer ignore what was happening in places like montgomery and little rock. and neither could the american public. in the post-brown era, the escalating struggle between civil rights activists and die-hard segregationists became the nation's most gripping domestic news story, though, as the authors note, coverage was frequently consigned to the inside pages of newspapers preoccupied with electoral politics and the international drama of the cold war.  ''the race beat'' is very much an insider's account. roberts and klibanoff are sensitive to the details and challenges of journalistic practice: the complex relationship between editorial and news divisions; the politics of newsroom assignments; the strengths and weaknesses of competing wire services; the placement and longevity of news stories; the impact of libel laws and the legal oversight of newspapers; the role of management and financial constraints; the differences among print, television and radio coverage; and the significance of having correspondents on the scene. having worked on both sides of the mason-dixon line, each man is also keenly aware of the difficulty of achieving fairness and avoiding advocacy in an emotionally charged setting laden with stereotypes. the result is a richly textured and balanced narrative that reveals the strengths and weaknesses of the news media, as well as the personal and contingent factors -- the subtle negotiations, missed opportunities and sometimes heroic efforts -- that influenced the on-the-ground coverage of the movement and its opponents.  no brief review can do justice to the varied cast of characters that populated the race beat during the 1950s and '60s. but readers should pay particular attention to harry ashmore, the liberal arkansas editor who gained national attention during the 1957 little rock crisis; to the black journalists moses newson and simeon booker, who provided pioneering coverage of the emmett till trial for black newspaper and magazine readers and later risked their lives traveling with the freedom riders in 1961; and to claude sitton, the georgia-born journalist who served as the new york times's chief southern correspondent from 1958 to 1964. with considerable justification, the authors characterize sitton as one of the unsung heroes of the civil rights movement. ''nobody in the news business,'' they insist, ''would have as much impact as he would -- on the reporting of the civil rights movement, on the federal government's response or on the movement itself.''  while the book's emphasis is on the national media, roberts and klibanoff also survey the regional press, providing incisive portraits of black editors like emory jackson of birmingham, moderate and liberal dissenters like hodding carter of mississippi , and die-hard segregationists like james jackson kilpatrick of virginia and thomas waring of south carolina. their stories, and the fateful choices of a not-so-distant past, are worth pondering in an imperfect democracy still grappling with both the burdens of race and the responsibilities of a free press.  raymond arsenault, the author of ''freedom riders: 1961 and the struggle for racial justice,'' is currently a visiting professor of history at the university of chicago.  