arts, briefly   probation and fines for paris hilton  paris hilton pleaded no contest yesterday to a charge of alcohol-related reckless driving and was placed on 36 months' probation and ordered to pay fines and penalties of about $1,500, the associated press reported. ms. hilton, 25, right, did not appear in court in los angeles, where her plea was entered by her lawyers, howard weitzman and shawn chapman holley, according to the city attorney's office. the charge was a reduction of the original charge, driving under the influence. judge michael sauer ordered ms. hilton to attend an alcohol rehabilitation program and imposed other conditions. he offered to let her reduce her probation to 24 months by completing 40 hours of community service, but no immediate decision was made on that choice. ms. hilton's press representative, elliot mintz, confirmed the plea without further comment. ms. hilton was arrested on sept. 7 after she was said to have been weaving along a hollywood street in her mercedes-benz. the police said she appeared intoxicated and failed a field sobriety test.  coachella lineup  a reunited rage against the machine, as well as bjork and the red hot chili peppers, will be headliners at the 2007 coachella valley music and arts festival, scheduled for april 27 to 29 in indio, calif., billboard reported. other participants will include a reunited crowded house, the arcade fire, sonic youth, the roots, willie nelson, interpol, manu chao and ghostface killah.  furor at australian fest  organizers of australia's biggest outdoor rock concert touched off a furor yesterday involving the prime minister and war veterans when they barred the country's flag from the sold-out event on thursday, reuters reported. ken west, a producer of the big day out concert in sydney, spoke against a background of ethnic violence between croats and serbs outside the australian open tennis tournament in melbourne last week and flag-draped race rioters on sydney beaches in 2005 when he said: ''the australian flag was being used as gang colors. it was racism disguised as patriotism, and i'm not going to tolerate it.'' but prime minister john howard said, ''the event organizers should not ram their peculiar political views down the throats of young australians who are only interested in a good day out.'' the concert web site, www.bigdayout.com, said the flag had not been banned outright, although the security staff was ''discouraging its use.'' jet, a headline band at the concert, which has been advanced by a day to avoid nationalist fervor associated with australia day on friday, plans to take the stage with a black-and-white version of the red, white and blue flag.  edinburgh fringe director to leave after 8 years  the director of the edinburgh festival fringe, paul gudgin, intends to leave after eight years, the bbc reported. mr. gudgin said, ''it's been a great privilege to run the world's largest arts festival for the past eight years, but it's time for me to move on.'' last year's 60th anniversary festival, regarded as the most successful ever, sold 1.5 million tickets to more than 1,800 shows. mr. gudgin, who said he would remain until this year's program is ready in june, said he intended to produce a variety of projects in britain and abroad. noting a ''climate of growing competition'' from other international festivals, he called upon edinburgh and scotland to increase support for the edinburgh event and protect its future.  keira knightley sues over article on anorexia  keira knightley is suing the daily mail in britain for suggesting that she lied about having an eating disorder, the bbc reported. ms. knightley, 21, a star of the ''pirates of the caribbean'' movies, maintained that an article in the newspaper implied that she was dishonest in denying such a problem. the article, about a teenage girl who died of anorexia, discussed ms. knightley's weight and was accompanied by a photograph of her on a beach. in a statement from her lawyers, she said she would also challenge the suggestion that she set a bad example and thus bears responsibility for the girl's death.  new record deal for babyshambles  not all news about the british indie rock band babyshambles concerns the drug problems of its frontman, pete doherty. thanks to the success of its ep ''the blinding'' (regal), the band has entered into a long-term deal with the parlophone label, the bbc reported. parlophone has cultivated successful british rock acts, including coldplay and radiohead. ''we see babyshambles very much as continuing this tradition,'' said miles leonard, managing director of parlophone. ''they have a great reputation for crafting some of the most exciting music around today, and in peter doherty they have one of the best songwriters of his generation.''  guy ritchie to direct crime drama for abc  the british filmmaker guy ritchie will be the director and executive producer of ''suspects,'' a crime drama pilot for abc. reuters reported. the show tells the story of each suspect in a crime until the identity of the actual criminal is revealed. mr. ritchie's films as writer and director include ''lock, stock and two smoking barrels'' (1998), ''snatch'' (2000) and ''swept away,'' a 2002 flop that starred his wife, madonna.  