tighter passport rules for u.s. citizens start tuesday   a united states citizen flying home today from a ski jaunt in canada, a beach break in mexico or a honeymoon in jamaica can flash a driver's license or a birth certificate at airport customs officials and walk on through.  tomorrow, those documents will no longer work.  starting then, united states citizens, including children, returning to this country by air from any country in the western hemisphere will have to present a passport.  in another change, citizens of canada and bermuda traveling to the united states by air will also have to show passports to enter the country. previously, they too could use driver's licenses and birth documents.  united states officials, parrying complaints from canada and caribbean nations, said the measure was mandated by a 2004 law in which congress adopted many proposals of the sept. 11 commission. the purpose is to reduce the types of documents travelers can use to enter the united states, simplifying the job of inspectors looking for fake or invalid ones.  more than 8,000 styles of birth certificates are issued by agencies in the united states, according to maura harty, assistant secretary of state for consular affairs. ''no inspector could ever possibly master all of those,'' ms. harty said.  the united states passports now being issued can be read by scanners in airport customs booths and instantly verified in most cases through a federal database.  the new measure applies only to air travelers. officials in the department of homeland security said they expected to roll out the same restrictions for passengers arriving by land and sea by jan. 1, 2008.  until recently, only 27 percent of eligible americans had passports. the new requirements set off a rush, with a record 12.1 million passports issued last year, ms. harty said. despite that rush, she said, the normal time of six weeks or less to process a new passport has not increased.  customs will also accept merchant marine cards and nexus air cards, which are issued to citizens and legal immigrants in the united states and canada who are frequent travelers and have passed a background check. active duty military personnel are exempt.  canadian travelers are most miffed by the change. randy williams, president of the tourism industry association of canada, said confusion about when the new restrictions would go into effect had cost canada $1.6 billion in lost american tourist dollars since 2005.  canadian tourism representatives did not object to the passport requirement, mr. williams said. but he said publicity from washington explaining the new measures was insufficient and late. although the new requirements had been in the works since 2004, the bush administration announced the start date only two months ago, on nov. 22.  ''all our lives, canada and the united states have enjoyed freedom of travel across a trusting border,'' mr. williams said. ''now adding these new costs and bureaucracy to that invisible line will change the psyche. that freedom will become a little more restricted -- in some regards, a victory for terrorism.''  in canada, passport offices have received 21,000 applications a day in recent weeks, and people have waited in line for up to four hours, said francine charbonneau, a spokeswoman for the passport agency.  mexican air travelers have long been required to present passports and visas to enter the united states. mexican tourism officials said their deeper concern was about washington's plans to require passports next year from all returning americans. in a statement, mexico said that that ''could discourage the movement of tens of millions of visitors who live in the border areas.''  in bermuda and the caribbean, many hotels have offered to reimburse fees for new passports, said peter odle, president of the caribbean hotel association.  homeland security officials said 94 percent of the united states citizens who returned to this country last week by air had documents that met the new requirements. customs officials said they would have extra staff on duty this week and would not turn away united states citizens.  ''the goal is to solicit compliance,'' said kelly klundt, a customs spokeswoman. ''the goal is not to strand people.''  