canadian to remain on u.s. terrorist watch list   despite a canadian inquiry that cleared a syrian-born canadian citizen of any terrorist ties, the bush administration has formally refused a canadian government request that it remove the man, maher arar, from the terrorist watch list, saying that the united states has secret information justifying his inclusion.  on monday, the justice department released a letter affirming the mr. arar's listing sent last week by attorney general alberto r. gonzales and michael chertoff, the homeland security secretary, to the canadian minister of public safety, stockwell day.  in the letter, dated jan. 16, mr. gonzales and mr. chertoff said their departments and american intelligence agencies ''have re-examined the materials in the possession of the united states regarding mr. arar.  ''based on this re-examination,'' he added, ''we remain of the view that the continued watch listing of mr. arar is appropriate.''  after the letter was sent, mr. day met last week with mr. chertoff and mr. gonzales and reviewed the american dossier on mr. arar in its entirety, but still disagreed with the american decision, canadian and american officials said.  for human rights advocates, mr. arar became a symbol of the united states' counterterrorism policies gone drastically awry, when he was detained in new york in 2002 while trying to change planes and then sent to syria. he was imprisoned in syria for more than a year and beaten repeatedly with a heavy metal cable before the syrian authorities released him in october 2003.  a two-year investigation by a canadian government commission concluded in september that mr. arar had no terrorist ties and that the canadian authorities had passed misleading information about him to the united states before he was sent to syria. the disclosures led to the resignation of the head of the royal canadian mounted police and a formal protest by the canadian government to the bush administration over mr. arar's treatment.  the bush administration refused to provide documents or witnesses to canada's arar commission, and it has never admitted to any mistakes in its handling of mr. arar.  at a hearing last week, senator patrick j. leahy, a vermont democrat who is the new democratic chairman of the senate judiciary committee, angrily pressed mr. gonzales about the case. in a statement on monday, senator leahy said he was ''puzzled'' by the decision to keep mr. arar on the watch list.  ''this abhorrent practice stains america's reputation as a defender and protector of human rights, and i hope this administration will renounce it at long last,'' senator leahy said. mr. gonzales has agreed to brief mr. leahy and senator arlen specter of pennsylvania, the top republican on the committee, on the case.  spokesmen for mr. gonzales and mr. chertoff declined monday to discuss the case, noting that a federal lawsuit filed by mr. arar against the united states government and dismissed last year is still on appeal.  an attorney for mr. arar, maria c. lahood, said the recent exchange provided more support for a statement last month by the canadian prime minister, stephen harper, that ''we simply have a u.s. government that won't admit it's wrong.''  