news summary   international a2-7  iraqi government drafts law to share oil revenue  a cabinet-level committee has produced a draft law governing iraq's oil fields that would distribute all revenue through the federal government and grant baghdad wide powers in exploration, development and awarding contracts.  a1  senator rebukes iran policy  senator john d. rockefeller iv, the new chairman of the senate intelligence committee, criticized the bush administration's stance toward iran, saying that efforts to portray it as a growing threat are reminiscent of rhetoric about iraq before the american invasion. a1  call for u.n. activities audit  ban ki-moon, the new secretary general, called for outside examination of all united nations activities after a report that the united nations development program in north korea was making unaccountable payments to the government and the staff there.  a3  armenian editor slain in turkey  a prominent newspaper editor, columnist and voice for turkey's ethnic armenians who was prosecuted for challenging the official turkish version of the 1915 armenian genocide, was shot dead in central istanbul.  a3  palestinian revenue released  israel transferred $100 million in palestinian tax revenue to the office of the palestinian authority president, mahmoud abbas, and also suspended the establishment of a settlement in the west bank. a5  climate panel to give warning  the intergovernmental panel on climate change is closing in on its strongest statement yet linking emissions from burning fossil fuels to rising global temperatures, scientists involved in the process said. a7  national a8-9; 12  ney gets 2 1/2 years in lobbying scandal  former representative bob ney, the first member of congress to plead guilty in the jack abramoff lobbying scandal, was sentenced to two and a half years in prison, longer than had been requested by the justice department.  a8  court revisits campaign law  the supreme court stepped back into the debate over campaign finance regulation, announcing an expedited review of a ruling last month that substantially narrowed the application of a major provision of the mccain-feingold law.  a9  governor pushes health plan  gov. edward g. rendell of pennsylvania is trying to rally support for his plan to extend health insurance coverage to the state's 760,000 uninsured adults, cut billions of dollars in heath care costs and ban smoking in restaurants, bars and workplaces.  a9  street brawl is investigated  investigators are expected to travel to new haven, conn., to interview victims of a new year's day street fight in san francisco that left several yale students injured and the san francisco police once again fending off criticism.  a9  education  loan dispute is resolved  the bush administration reached a settlement with a student loan company that will allow the lender to keep $278 million in disputed subsidy payments that the inspector general of the federal education department had concluded were improper, the department announced.  a8  beliefs  a12  new york/region b1-5  nonprofits develop plans to attract wealthy asians  the divide between the growing number of wealthy chinese-americans and the newest, poorest chinese immigrants in new york city has led nonprofit agencies to develop new methods of attracting wealthy asian donors. community-based nonprofits say that rich chinese-americans are more likely to donate to cultural institutions than to the poor.  a1  21 parishes to close  the roman catholic archdiocese of new york issued a final list of 21 parishes that will close as part of a sweeping reorganization process that began several years ago and distressed thousands of parishioners who feared for the future of their churches.  a1  5 found dead in house  a family of five was found slain in their house in a working-class section of dutchess county after firefighters responded to a blaze that gutted the home, the authorities said. b1  business day c1-9  dollar remains weak  the dollar has lost ground against many of the world's major currencies, including the euro, the british pound and the canadian dollar, but the nation's trade imbalance with the world has continued to rise.  a1  eli lilly drug investigated  stepping up government investigations into eli lilly's marketing of its bestselling drug zyprexa, state prosecutors in illinois and vermont have demanded that the company turn over information about the way it promoted the medication.  c1  business digest c2  obituaries c10  denny doherty  a founding member of the band the mamas and the papas, he was 66. c10  editorial a10-11  editorials: china's muscle flex in space; reform, finally, in the senate; a product of the u.n. system; verlyn klinkenborg on the prefix ''post-.''  columns: maureen dowd, stacy schiff.  bridge b17  crossword b15  tv listings b18  weather d8  