a no vote on senate raises just might count   it is a washington ritual. almost every year a lawmaker proposes withholding the automatic annual cost-of-living pay increase from members of congress in the name of fiscal responsibility and populist reform.  some members vote for it, but the proposal usually fails. and even the reformers get their raise.  the senate, at least, may be raising the price of such public displays of self-sacrifice. in the rush to pass a major ethics bill on jan. 18, the senate approved a provision that would deny the pay increase to any individual member who voted against it, even if it passed.  last year, a senator would have lost $3,100 out of a salary of $165,200. (the senate has delayed taking a pay increase this year until after it finishes debating whether to increase the federal minimum wage for the first time in nearly 10 years.)  the penalty for opposing the raise is the work of senator james m. inhofe, republican of oklahoma, who called votes against the increase ''the greatest single hypocrisy every year.''  ''all the press releases hit the home state,'' he said in a speech last year introducing the idea. ''and then, of course, it is defeated, and they end up taking the increase anyway.''  the idea is a rare attempt to punish lawmakers financially on the basis of how they vote. could the senate, for example, cut a member's pay for a vote to increase the deficit? for one against a new minimum wage?  ''it is a precedent that could lead to a slippery slope,'' said kenneth a. gross, an expert on political law. but, he acknowledged, lawmakers voting against a raise ''would have to put their money where their mouth is.''  the democratic and republican senate leaders incorporated the measure into their bipartisan ethics proposal, and the senate passed it by a vote of 96 to 2 without further discussion.  but in an interview this week a spokesman for the senate rules committee suggested that a house and senate conference might revisit the provision before it became law.  