state panel selects 3 likely comptrollers   setting up a potential showdown with assembly speaker sheldon silver, a panel charged with picking the next state comptroller went against mr. silver's wishes in naming three finalists on thursday, none of them members of the state legislature.  mr. silver effectively controls the selection of the comptroller if the assembly democrats he leads stay unified. he said earlier in the week that he wanted a fellow assembly member to get the job -- and would not necessarily be bound by the panel's choices.  two of the three finalists, howard s. weitzman and martha e. stark, are top finance officials in government. mr. weitzman is the comptroller of nassau county, and ms. stark is the commissioner of the new york city department of finance.  the third finalist is william j. mulrow, an investment banker who ran for comptroller in 2002 and who is close to gov. eliot spitzer.  the panel resulted from an agreement between mr. silver and governor spitzer, who had originally sought a fiscal expert for comptroller but later softened that stance, saying he would be open to a lawmaker. but the panel's choices -- and mr. silver's desire that a lawmaker get the job -- could put the governor in a delicate position.the panelists, the former state comptrollers h. carl mccall and edward v. regan and the former new york city comptroller harrison j. goldin, made their decision after meeting in new york city on thursday. their decision followed hearings on tuesday and wednesday in albany where all the candidates were interviewed before a committee of state senators and assembly members.  in a joint statement, the three former comptrollers said they ''were impressed with the thoughtfulness of all the candidates'' but that after ''careful consideration of all the candidates and a review of their backgrounds, experience and credentials, we have concluded that messrs. mulrow and weitzman and ms. stark are all qualified to be state comptroller.''  in an interview mr. regan said: ''there were only three that had the qualifications that had been set out. it could have been two, it could have been four. the governor's instructions were pretty clear, and that's why i signed on. he said up to five, high-quality, nonpartisan. we interpreted that as management experience and financial literacy.''  asked why none of the assembly members who had applied made the cut, mr. regan said that each had brought significant credentials to the table but that none had enough managerial experience. ''they'd never managed anything big,'' mr. regan said. ''we looked for people that could walk into the comptroller's office and start running it on the first day.''  at least some of the candidates did not agree. ''i heard more than three qualified people over the last several days, both members and nonmembers,'' said richard l. brodsky, a westchester democrat who was among the five assembly members bidding for the post.  in a statement issued on thursday, mr. silver said: ''the agreement between the parties involved in developing this process was that five candidates would be recommended to the legislature for their consideration. unfortunately, the panel's decision did not conform to this agreement and the charge given to them. we will review this matter to determine how we will proceed with governor spitzer, senator bruno, and the members of the legislature shortly.''  a spokeswoman for mr. spitzer said the governor intended to review the finalists, but would not comment further.  under state law, mr. hevesi's replacement must be chosen through a majority vote of the combined assembly and senate. but under the deal he struck with mr. spitzer and the senate majority leader, joseph l. bruno, the panel was charged with recommending up to five finalists, according to a press release put out by the governor at the time. a spokesman for mr. silver said that it had been the speaker's understanding that the panel would select no fewer than five candidates.  the legislature was to choose from among the finalists. the decision to select only three finalists, none of them an assembly member, seems likely to provoke mr. silver.  mr. regan said that he had spoken with mr. silver before announcing the candidates, and that the speaker had raised the issue of the panel recommending only three finalists instead of five. ''the word 'five' became a metaphor for, he had promised his conference that there would be an assemblyman there,'' mr. regan said. ''that's not the problem. the problem was, who had the goods for the comptroller's office?''  but there may be other problems, too. in the interview published yesterday, mr. silver, asked what he would do if the panel picked only one finalist, responded: ''they can give me whatever they want. we don't have to listen to them, either.''  a spokesman for mr. bruno declined to say whether the majority leader would back such a course.  ''the joint committees, along with the three former comptrollers, did an exhaustive review,'' said the spokesman, john e. mcardle. ''we appreciate the work that they did, and now it's up to the legislature to review their recommendations and determine the appropriate course that we should take.''  at least one person, however, was thrilled by yesterday's news.  ''i feel terrific,'' said mr. weitzman, one of the three picked. ''i feel great, and i feel honored to be selected by three such experienced people.''  