woman killed by husband provoked family, son says   the son of an upper east side landlord accused of killing his wife in 2005 by stabbing her more than 40 times testified on behalf of his father yesterday, telling the story of a marriage that unraveled into madness.  for most of his life, the son, marcus odierno, 25, told a jury, his was a fairly happy family. the odiernos vacationed in florida and the caribbean and welcomed relatives and friends to their town house on east 84th street for christmas and thanksgiving.  but in 1997, things changed, he said. his parents stopped inviting anyone over. his mother ordered one of his friends out of the house because she found his cologne too strong, mr. odierno said, and began browbeating her family.  ''my mother did not want anybody in the house anymore,'' he said in state supreme court in manhattan.  as the first defense witness, mr. odierno said that it was his father, ben odierno, 72, who was being abused, and his mother, christine odierno, 57, who was the abuser -- not the other way around, as the prosecution has argued.  in many ways, it was a portrait of an ordinary marriage, with fights over household chores. but the conflicts somehow veered into violence.  he said that in the fall of 1997, his mother kicked his father out of their bed, forcing him to sleep in a twin bed in the children's room. the bed had been vacated by marcus's older brother, stephan, then 18, who had moved to a nearby apartment when he went to college. while ben odierno shopped and cooked, mrs. odierno called him a slob and a lazy bum, their son said, and frequently taunted him, saying, ''piggy, piggy, oink, oink.''  marcus odierno said his mother began acting as if she were being abused, even though she was not. he said she would slam into him, stephan or their father and yell: ''get your hands off me! don't touch me! you're hurting me!'' then, he said, she would open the glass doors to the solarium ''and scream these accusations out into the backyard,'' for the neighbors to hear.  in the last year of her life, he said, mrs. odierno would hold a knife to her own throat and ask her husband and sons, ''what are you going to do, are you going to slit my throat?''  jack litman, ben odierno's defense lawyer, asked, ''do you remember what knife she used?''  ''sure,'' marcus odierno said. ''she used a sharp salad knife.''  mr. litman contends that on april 24, 2005, mrs. odierno turned that knife against her husband, stabbing him. he has said that his client reacted by grabbing another knife and stabbing his wife in self-defense. mrs. odierno ended up dead, stabbed in the heart.  prosecutors say that ben odierno killed his wife in a rage because she had given him separation papers, and then stabbed himself in the abdomen.  marcus odierno's former girlfriend allegra lugo also testified yesterday, saying she had seen mrs. odierno yell that she was being abused when she was not.  marcus odierno said that while he and his father slept, his mother would come into their room and wake them by rummaging through the closet or turning off the air-conditioning. in the mornings, he said, she would lock herself in the bathroom for hours, refusing to get out when he needed to get ready for school.  marcus odierno said that his mother, who had never cursed around him before, became more and more foul-mouthed in the last year of her life, and accused her husband of cheating on her.  in the months before his wife's death, ben odierno lost about 50 pounds, but remained ''docile'' despite his wife's abuse, their son said.  when the jury was out of the room, mr. litman and his fellow counsel, todd terry, told the judge, justice gregory carro, that marcus odierno had begun to suspect that his father had alzheimer's disease.  in another conference with the judge, the prosecutor, kerry o'connell, said mrs. odierno had begun shunning her husband and sons not because she was mentally ill, but because she loathed them.  under cross-examination, marcus odierno said he had been kicked out of high school for bad grades, and conceded that he was living on money provided by his father.  ''would it be fair to say that your days were spent doing whatever leisure activities you wanted to do?'' ms. o'connell asked him.  ''pretty much,'' he said.  was it true, ms. o'connell asked, that his mother managed the family's real estate business, keeping the books, paying the taxes and dealing with city agencies? it was, he said.  ms. o'connell asked whether his mother had also given him money.  ''my mother refused to give me money,'' he said.  correction:  february 3, 2007, saturday  an article last saturday about the murder trial of ben odierno, a manhattan landlord accused of killing his wife, christine, referred incorrectly to her injuries and to a defense witness, allegra lugo. according to prosecutors, mrs. odierno had more than 40 injuries on her body, including scrapes, cuts, bruises and stab wounds; she was not stabbed more than 40 times. ms. lugo is a former girlfriend of the odiernos' son stephan -- not of his brother, marcus. the article also misstated a point made by a prosecutor, kerry o'connell. she said that mr. odierno and his sons loathed mrs. odierno, not the other way around.  