arts, briefly   greece seeks cancellation of christie's auction  the greek culture minister called on christie's in london yesterday to cancel the sale of a greek royal collection today and tomorrow until that auction house proves that the artworks were legally exported, reuters reported. ''their exact origin and how they came to christie's for auction has not been made public,'' the minister, george voulgarakis, told reporters in athens. ''that is why i have asked to have them removed from auction until all is made clear. those participating in the auction should know we will exercise our legal rights.'' in a statement, christie's expressed surprise, saying that the greek government was ''well aware'' of the sale, announced on nov. 30, and that mr. voulgarakis had told the greek parliament on jan. 3 that the export ''was allowed.'' christie's said that the sale would proceed as planned. involved are about 850 paintings and silver and fabergé items from the summer palace of king george i, who ruled from 1863 to 1913. the seller has not been identified.  a 'big brother' review  officials of channel 4 in britain ordered a review of its show ''celebrity big brother'' after thousands of complaints that one contestant, the indian actress shilpa shetty, above, had been subjected to racist slurs and epithets, the bbc reported. luke johnson, the channel 4 chairman, said its board had expressed ''profound regret'' for any offense while expressing the belief that the uproar had touched off an important debate. the board spent several hours discussing the matter on monday. mr. johnson said that channel 4's board members were ''committed to ensuring that the channel continues to fulfill its remit on important social issues.'' he added that the board, on completion of the review, ''would seek to identify any lessons that can be learned for the future.'' trevor phillips, chairman of the commission for equality and human rights, expressed disappointment that the board had not admitted error. ''what i had hoped was that the channel 4 board would at least acknowledge that what we witnessed was racial bullying.''  an actor makes amends  isaiah washington, the ''grey's anatomy'' actor who is under fire for using a gay slur about a co-star and who has been chastised by abc, the network that broadcasts the show, met on monday with gay-rights groups and agreed to help educate the public about the destructiveness of such language, the associated press reported. ''he seemed very sincere in his interest in working with us,'' said kevin jennings, executive director of the gay, lesbian and straight education network. ''i think this is a very good first step toward him showing he really wants to do something. we take him at his word.''  zeffirelli hospitalized  franco zeffirelli, the 83-year-old italian film and opera director, was in good condition at a rome hospital after being admitted with an irregular heartbeat, the associated press reported. ''he's doing well,'' luciano zeffirelli, his son, said. franco zeffirelli, left, who is undergoing medical tests at san giovanni hospital after being admitted late monday, received an academy award nomination for his 1968 film of ''romeo and juliet.'' he recently directed a production of verdi's ''aida'' that opened the 2006-07 season at la scala opera house in milan.  bond bound for china  the producers of ''casino royale,'' the first james bond film approved by china's censors, predicted that their film would smash mainland records for the biggest debut by a foreign film, agence france-presse said. ''this is going to be the largest premiere for a foreign film in china, with over 1,000 screens showing the film,'' li chow, the sony pictures general manager in china, said of the film's opening on monday. the film will be shown unedited, ms. chow added. the 20 previous bond movies never made it to big screens in china, but have built up a following through pirated dvds. china allows 20 foreign films to be shown in theaters every year, about 15 of which are american.  new shows for hbo  lily tomlin and gabriel byrne have signed on for separate hbo series. ms. tomlin, below, will play a wealthy dallas matriarch in ''12 miles of bad road,'' an hourlong comedy series, the associated press reported. the producers are the husband-and-wife team of harry thomason and linda bloodworth-thomason, who made ''designing women'' and ''evening shade.'' hbo also said on monday that it ordered a half-hour drama, starring mr. byrne, called ''in treatment.'' this series is based on ''in therapy,'' which runs five nights a week in israel; each episode focuses on the therapist's sessions with one or two patients. hbo has ordered 40 episodes of the show, which mark wahlberg, the executive producer of ''entourage,'' will produce.  