paid notice: deaths   okoronkwo, kanu   okoronkwo--kanu, died peacefully, in the company of family members on saturday, january 20, 2007, at new hyde park, ny. the first son of ogwu okoronkwo chukueke and ada oji ihudiya okoronkwo, kanu okoronkwo was born in uzuakoli, abia state in igboland, nigeria. he grew up in uzuakoli and attended the prestigious secondary school methodist college, from which he graduated in the late1940's. it was at methodist college that he cultivated his life-long love of science, classical music and the visual arts. it was also there that his pioneering spirit was nurtured, a spirit that would lead him to the united states after graduation. kanu okoronkwo graduated from syracuse university in 1953 with a b.sc. in electrical engineering. after graduation, he received further technical training at rca, and thereafter was employed by cbs television in new york city. during his time in new york, he met and courted sylvia johnson, to whom he was married in 1959. following nigeria's independence from great britain in 1960, he returned to nigeria with his wife, and became the first nigerian appointed as general manager of telecommunications for eastern nigeria. during this period his three children, chinyere, kanu, and ifeoma were born. following the biafran war, he returned to new york, and became a director of network planning at new york telephone company, from which he retired in 1992 after nearly twentyfive years of service. kanu okoronkwo is survived by mrs. sylvia okoronkwo; children chinyere okoronkwo, esq., kanu david okoronkwo, esq., ifeoma o. aitkenhead, md.; grandchildren anastasia williams, katherine uche aitkenhead, sophie oluchi aitkenhead, lauren ezinne aitkenhead, daniel okezie chukueke okoronkwo; four brothers obiefula okoronkwo, eze okoronkwo, chibuisi okoronkwo, mark okoronkwo; eight sisters ezenwanyi idima, ugboaku fordjur, helen okoronkwo, nnennaya ogbonnaya, nmanma madukwe, nnennaya igbokwe, chinwemma okoronkwo, uzunma jiala; and numerous nieces, nephews, cousins (with a sibling like relationship) and a host of friends. mr. okoronkwo was 79 years of age. funeral service will be held at frank e. campbell the funeral chapel 1076 madison avenue at 81st street friday, january 26, 2007 at 1:30 pm.  