trinidad and tobago   just off the tip of venezuela, trinidad and tobago is a small dual-island nation where three distinctive musical sounds -- steel pan drum, calypso and soca -- evolved. calypso, a lilting style of afro-caribbean music, developed as a means of communication between african slaves. soca is a modern form of calypso with an up-tempo beat. half a century ago, trinidadian percussionists invented pan by hammering out the ends of discarded oil drums. today, visitors will find musicians practicing at so-called panyards throughout port of spain, the capital, especially in the weeks leading up to the island's winter carnival, which begins just after christmas and runs into february.  highlights of the celebration, which takes place in trinidad, include panorama, an annual steel pan drum competition to be held on feb. 17 this year; kings and queens costume competition (feb. 18), in which leaders of each masquerade band don elaborate costumes that can reach up to 30 feet in height and weigh as much as 200 pounds; and the final two days of carnival bacchanal (feb. 19 and 20).  tobago will host its third annual jazz festival the last week in april. this year, elton john and gladys knight are among the stars scheduled to perform.  a word of caution: incidents of violent crime, including armed robberies of tourists, have been on the rise on both islands. the united states embassy advises that when making reservations at private accommodations, visitors ensure that 24-hour security is provided. the government of trinidad and tobago has stepped up police patrols in tourist areas to deter crime.  where to stay -- during carnival, hotel rates range from $300 to $500 a night at the courtyard by marriott (888-236-2427, www.marriott.com), hilton trinidad & conference center (800-445-8667, www.hilton.com) and coblentz inn (868-621-0541, www.coblentzinn.com).  the 10 point caribbean escapes plan: for clubgoers michelle higgins, a staff reporter for the travel section, writes the practical traveler column.  