knicks face another loss as heat's stars return   the miami heat defeated the knicks handily monday without shaquille o'neal and dwyane wade. on friday, the teams will meet again, but this time it may be the knicks who are short-handed.  guard stephon marbury, who missed wednesday's game against the phoenix suns with a knee injury, said thursday that he was fit to play. but coach isiah thomas said that center eddy curry, the knicks' leading scorer, was questionable. curry, who strained his left calf muscle during the second half wednesday, did not practice thursday.  one knicks player whose status was not ambiguous was jared jeffries, an ineffective starter who played 9 minutes 14 seconds in the past two games. jeffries, a forward, received a vote of confidence from thomas, who did not discuss potential lineups other than to say that jeffries would start against the heat.  ''he's definitely got to play a little better than what he's playing,'' thomas said. ''we'll stick with him, and hopefully he'll come out of it. and if not, we have some guys on the bench that are eager to play.''  the knicks (18-26) will have their hands full even if curry and marbury are healthy and jeffries produces. the heat defeated them monday in miami, 101-83, without o'neal and wade, its two best players. if the knicks lose, they will fall to a season-worst nine games below .500.  o'neal and wade returned wednesday as the heat (19-23) lost to the indiana pacers in overtime, 96-94. wade was coming off a sprained ankle, and o'neal had missed the previous 35 games while recovering from knee surgery. o'neal, who came off the bench and played 14 minutes against the pacers, will presumably play more against the knicks.  asked how effective he thought o'neal would be friday, thomas pointed to the doorway leading to the trainer's room. ''when he stands in that door, he takes up the whole door,'' thomas said. ''and when he stands in front of somebody, you can't see them. he's a big man, and that's the shaq effect. it has nothing to do with points and rebounds.''  defense might not be curry's specialty, but he seems to be the natural matchup against o'neal. if curry is unable to play, it is not clear how thomas will respond.  ''it would be a huge loss, but we'll get by,'' thomas said.  channing frye would probably join jeffries at forward. thomas could go with a big frontcourt by inserting the seldom-used jerome james or kelvin cato at center. or he could use a smaller frontcourt and have the 6-foot-9 david lee defend o'neal. lee would surrender four inches to o'neal, but he is bulkier than frye or jeffries. the 6-7 malik rose, who sometimes guarded o'neal when he played for the san antonio spurs, is another option.  the knicks may simply rotate several players on o'neal, spreading their fouls. they may try to wear him down on offense, too.  ''he's coming off an injury, so hopefully we can get out and push the ball in transition and make him run up and down the court,'' jeffries said.  jeffries missed 26 of the knicks' first 30 games because of injury or suspension. he came to the knicks in the off-season with a reputation as a defensive stopper. but his play this season has been as unsightly as his jump shot.  after practice thursday, jeffries said he needed to play with more confidence, an observation he has made before.  ''whenever i play well, coaches play me,'' jeffries said.  he added, referring to thomas: ''so i haven't played well, and really right now he has no reason to play me. i put myself in this position.''  a return to form by jeffries will be needed, especially if curry is unavailable. curry, who has started all 44 games and has been the focal point of the knicks' offense, had his way inside against the suns before feeling tightness in his calf during the third quarter. he was injured when he planted his left foot in the opening minutes of the fourth quarter. curry, who left the game for good, was listed as questionable for friday.  ''it's kind of hard to gauge it, being i didn't practice,'' said curry, who initially feared the injury might cost him 15 to 20 games. ''it's kind of painful right now when i step. try to loosen it up and see what happens.''  marbury, who was listed as probable, seemed more certain of his status, though thomas said he would be evaluated again friday. if healthy, marbury would probably join quentin richardson in the backcourt. marbury has been playing with pain in his left knee since dec. 15.  ''i worked out a little bit, did some running,'' marbury said. ''i felt pretty good.'' he added: ''yes, i'm playing tomorrow.''  basketball  