emi merging record labels and ousting capitol's president   emi group, the flagging british music conglomerate, reorganized its american unit yesterday by merging the operations of its two main record labels and ousting the president of capitol records, the bigger of the two.  the moves were the most notable so far in a worldwide revamping that started two weeks ago, when emi, which releases music from acts including coldplay and norah jones, forced out the global chief of its music division.  in the united states, the world's biggest music market, the cutback is expected to represent the effective end of capitol as a stand-alone label, though emi will continue to occupy its offices, a famed cylindrical tower that opened its doors in hollywood in 1956.  emi said that jason flom, who has been chairman of the company's virgin records label, based in new york, since october 2005, would have an expanded role as chairman of the combined united states unit, to be called the capitol music group.  andrew slater, a former talent manager who had been the capitol label's president since 2001, was let go. mr. slater began a new five-year contract months ago and is expected to receive a payout that could exceed $15 million, people briefed on the company's strategy said.  the reorganization was announced by eric nicoli, emi's chief executive, who has taken direct control of the company's music unit since the ouster of the former global chief, alain levy, two weeks ago. the moves by mr. nicoli are seen as an effort to revive the company, which has suffered through a series of profit warnings and failed attempts to merge with a competitor, the warner music group.  emi, which is based in london, accounts for roughly 9 percent of american sales. it had no albums among the 10 best sellers last year, and has long ranked last in the united states among the major music companies. mr. nicoli's revamping makes it the only one of the four biggest companies to scale back its operations to one main label in the united states, where sales are on a steep decline.  the moves were regarded as a stark acknowledgment of the music giant's failure to develop talent, and a more powerful presence, in the american market after more than a decade of misfires.  under mr. levy, emi made the costly decision to move the virgin label from beverly hills, calif., to new york, where it failed to generate hits for several years. it is too soon to say how the label will fare under mr. flom, rivals say, but since he took charge in 2005, the label has not had a big hit and has had disappointing sales from one of its stars, janet jackson.  capitol has also struggled to find lasting successes, though its share of new-release sales has risen to 3.5 percent, from 1.9 percent in 2002, mr. slater's first full year at the reins, according to nielsen soundscan data. it gained billboard's no. 4 spot this week with the debut cd of a british singer, corinne bailey rae, who is a nominee for several grammy awards next month.  emi sold the label's office tower last year for $50 million to a commercial real estate developer, although it said at the time that it had entered into a long-term lease to continue its operations there for ''many years to come.''  