boom! and an impersonation requires no punch line   frank caliendo, a short comic impressionist with a giant head and cherubic face (his descriptions), stood in his dressing room at cbs's ''late show with david letterman'' studying his lines and waiting to become john madden.  soon, a makeup artist would lay on his fake nose and red eyebrows (which he uses for his donald trump imitation) and a hair stylist would plant a white wig on his head (size 7 7/8). caliendo, 33, was dressed in standard madden fashion: half-tucked white shirt, undone red tie, dark blazer, khaki pants and well-worn, untied sneakers in need of a good cleaning.  on a tv monitor, he could see the taping begin with a reading of the guest list. ''john madden is here,'' the announcer said.  not frank caliendo. john madden, with no hint that it wasn't.  ''isn't it insane?'' caliendo said, and a small smile creased his face.  caliendo's madden impression is a study in vocal nonsense, a career-maker in the realm of rich little's johnny carson, david frye's richard nixon, will jordan's ed sullivan and vaughn meader's john f. kennedy.  it is a silly take on the sportscaster and former oakland raiders coach, which first found an audience on fox's ''mad tv'' (his madden popcorn maker infomercial is a youtube favorite). in 2003, his madden became part of caliendo's crew of characters on his weekly ''fox nfl sunday'' sketches, which regularly lampoon that show's stars, particularly terry bradshaw.  the impression is filled with football references that are subjected to feats of bizarre verbal circumlocution, telestrations written into thin air and husky sounds that let him fill a silence or improve a line.  ''i get more laughs with those sounds,'' he said in an interview a few hours before he arrived at the letterman offices. ''he does it a little, but i amp it. a live audience'' -- here, he utters the absurd sound -- ''and boom! they laugh. you don't even need a punch line.''  he said he wished that madden liked the impression, but he has heard that he does not, and regretted an early bit on the fox pregame show in which he parodied madden as a glutton who fell on his back at one point, flapped his arms and announced, ''i'm doing philly cheese-steak angels.''  ''i don't dislike john madden,'' he said. ''but what i do isn't john madden. he wouldn't do these things. he wouldn't do most comedy. but my mistake early on was that nobody knew me, and people asked, 'what's he doing?' ''  he added, ''if years ago, he lied and said he liked it, i'd tell my producer i couldn't do something because john might not like it.''  sandy montag, madden's agent, declined to comment.  caliendo cannot fully describe how he discovered his madden. it has been done rarely, if at all, by impressionists, whose sports voices have leaned toward howard cosell, muhammad ali and harry caray.  ''it's something guttural in the back of my throat, and it relates to my ted koppel,'' he said. ''you just bring it down further in the throat, and it's john madden. it's kind of glottal. like the epiglottis.''  he said his al pacino resides nearby his chris berman (which he is not confident in yet), but when he tried to lampoon bill parcells, ''i looked like madden but i sounded like pacino.''  nearly a decade ago, a comedian friend, phil tag, challenged him.  ''do madden,'' tag told him.  ''i said, 'what's that going to get me?' '' caliendo recalled.  fame. and requests to play madden in voice-overs and to appear at corporate events as the sportscaster. he has resisted the urge to drag his madden dress-up kit (or send it by fedex, as he did to the letterman offices) to those events because ''everybody'd wonder why one of the seven dwarfs was doing madden.''  he said he is 5 feet 7, ''but i think i'm shrinking.''  caliendo once added jowls and bags under his eyes to become madden, but he has trimmed the makeup back. his face is elastic enough to convey his characters -- which include george w. bush, al michaels, jay leno, al pacino, jimmy johnson, jack nicholson, and letterman and his bandleader, paul shaffer -- on what he dubbed the ''pizza slice'' of his face: his nose, eyes, mouth and chin. ''it's all right here,'' he said, as he scrunched his face and smirked to look like president bush, and traced the triangle of his face.  for his fifth appearance on letterman in the past 13 months, he was asked to write his responses to various super bowl-related questions. he fretted that the script he wrote late tuesday night and faxed in would work, and whether letterman would stick to its framework or send him into panic.  ''god, i hope this works,'' he said, as amy johnston applied the madden nose (and blow dried it). ''it seemed hilarious when i wrote it with my 2 1/2-year-old sitting with me. but now, what was i thinking?''  soon after, he walked slowly onto the stage inside the chilly ed sullivan theater. for seven minutes, he and letterman, an easy audience, bantered about the super bowl. he was full of silly sounds and near-senselessness. he plucked a chicken leg from his jacket pocket, chewed on it, then replaced it in the same pocket.  ''the rap has always been,'' letterman said, ''that maybe peyton manning couldn't win the big game, but by god he won the big game against the patriots to get into the super bowl.''  caliendo, veering just slightly from his script, said: ''i think he won a big game. the super bowl is the big game. there's a big difference between the big game and a big game. nobody goes, 'hey, i want to see an incredible hulk,' they go, 'i want to see the incredible hulk. i mean a incredible hulk'' -- cue the guttural tones --''it's not as incredible dave.''  asked about the colts-bears matchup, he added, ''you look at it, in the wild, a bear would always beat a colt.''  ''you think so?'' letterman said.  ''i'm pretty sure of that,'' caliendo said. ''like paper getting eaten by scissors. i mean, how does rock get beaten by paper, dave? that's like a colt beating a bear in the wild. in the game it might happen, but not in the wild. but one of those teams has a chance of winning that game.''  pro football  