mayor projects huge surplus fed by boom in real estate   with new york city's treasury flush with unexpected revenue from an extraordinary surge in the real estate market, mayor michael r. bloomberg projected yesterday that the city would have a $3.9 billion surplus to carry over into its $57.1 billion budget next fiscal year, allowing him to cut taxes and set aside money for future expenses.  the city's flush financial state was buoyed by a forecast yesterday showing tax revenues for the current fiscal year coming in $2 billion higher than was predicted just two months ago.  the good news has defied widespread predictions of a downturn in the local economy, and is a startling reversal of mr. bloomberg's first two years in office, when, faced with the city's gravest fiscal crisis since the '70s, he raised taxes and cut spending.  since 2005, tax revenues have been cascading in at surprisingly high levels, a phenomenon reflected in the quarterly financial plan updates the mayor is required to present. in addition to the projected surplus of $3.9 billion for the fiscal year ending june 30, the plan forecasts a $1.4 billion surplus next year; both sums will be rolled over into the following years.  in a city hall news conference, the mayor attributed the exceptionally large surpluses to a boom in property transfer taxes, including mortgage recording taxes, which can generate millions of dollars when large properties change hands. all told, the city expects to collect $2.9 billion in such taxes this year, compared with $902 million in the fiscal year mr. bloomberg took office.  the mayor warned that the city had become ''very dependent'' on the transfer taxes, and that the revenues from property sales could drop sharply once the market cools. ''when that starts to slow down, that's not going to be great for us,'' he said.  in the new budget, the sixth of his administration, mr. bloomberg has relaxed somewhat the fiscal discipline he demonstrated a year ago, when he insisted on using most of a near-record surplus to set up a health trust fund for retirees, pay off debts, and finance some capital projects without having to borrow.  mr. bloomberg said the spending plan reflected a responsible balance between prudence and generosity. he announced last week a one-year, $750 million cut in property taxes, and $250 million in other tax cuts. yesterday, he announced that he would set aside, out of next year's budget, $1.4 billion to reduce future deficits and $500 million toward a trust fund for the health benefits of city retirees. the mayor has already put $2 billion into the trust fund, which was created last year.  ''the people of new york city have every reason to be happy,'' the mayor said, before quickly adding, ''the ways to be happy long term, however, is to not go out and spend everything you have on one night of food and a few drinks.''  the mayor went through a litany of statistics showing the economy's remarkable recovery from the decline after the 9/11 attack. mr. bloomberg took office less than four months after the attack.  the city's population is estimated to be at an all-time high of 8.2 million. wages have grown every year since 2002. wall street bonuses hit a record level, $25.1 billion, last year, lifting income tax receipts and fueling the city's service sector. tourism is booming, as are hotel occupancy and room rates. vacancy rates in office buildings are near historic lows, driving commercial rents up.  and yet, the mayor warned that the city, which has so far seemed insulated from the national economic slowdown, cannot escape it. he cited projections showing home sales, which peaked in 2005, continuing to slide until 2009. he predicted that job growth would start to weaken this year, and wall street profits next year.  assuming the one-year property tax cut is extended -- which the mayor warned might not be feasible -- the city would have deficits of $2.6 billion in the 2009 fiscal year and $3.7 billion in the 2010 fiscal year, when the mayor is to complete his term.  perhaps the greatest long-term threat to the city's fiscal health is the relentless growth in the largely uncontrollable cost of pensions, health care for city employees and retirees, the medicaid insurance program for the poor and interest on municipal debt. ''the fact remains that we still spend more than we take in,'' the mayor said. ''we have to some day grow our way out of that problem.''  some fiscal conservatives have urged the mayor to be more aggressive in taking on public-sector unions to rein in the budget. the mayor recently reached contract agreements with the united federation of teachers and with the largest union of city workers, district council 37 of the american federation of state, county and municipal employees. those contracts are a major reason controllable expenses -- essentially, the cost of employees and contractors -- are rising about 7 percent this fiscal year, to $18.9 billion from $17.7 billion.  the mayor reiterated yesterday his call for albany to stop making pensions of city workers more generous against the city's wishes. he also expressed support for a fifth pension tier, which would mean less generous retirement benefits for future city workers. the unions would be certain to resist such a move, and it is not clear how much the mayor intends to push the idea.  diana fortuna, president of the citizens budget commission, a business-backed research organization that advocates fiscal restraint, said she would give the new budget plan a ''moderately strong grade,'' and called mr. bloomberg more prudent than many of his predecessors.  ''the continuous surprise is that the city's economy is continuing to pour money into the city's budget,'' she said. ''these are unusual times when the challenge is not to balance the budget but to decide where to put the money.''  although ms. fortuna called for making the property tax cut permanent, she criticized the mayor for not devoting more of the surpluses to paying down long-term debt. ''we're still carrying debt for the $2 billion we borrowed after 9/11 to balance the budget,'' she said. ''now that we're doing better, couldn't we pay off these debts?''  ronnie lowenstein, director of the city's independent budget office, said the strength of the real estate market and wall street profits has endured far longer than anyone expected. ''it's unusual to be in a situation where the city is so flush with cash that it's looking ahead to transfer billions of dollars not just to next year, but the year after as well,'' she said.  she warned that the transfer taxes are at ''a level that, even a year ago, we would have considered unsustainable.''  in another sign that he has become less restrained, the mayor announced this week that he would incorporate into future budgets roughly $62 million in programs that he has traditionally proposed cutting and which are typically later restored by the city council in the final budget adopted in june. ''we're obviously very gratified,'' the city council speaker, christine c. quinn, said yesterday.  as he is required to do every other year, the mayor presented a preliminary 10-year capital plan yesterday. the $77.3 billion plan covers the 2008 to 2017 fiscal years. more than one-third, or $28.4 billion, will be spent on building or renovating schools. the plan also includes $52 million to shore up fragile retaining walls around the city, $44 million for an overhaul of the new york aquarium at coney island and $40 million for electronic voting machines.  