an open job opens a rift in albany   it took less than a month for gov. eliot spitzer to find himself on the precipice of an all-out political war with the man he replaced as the top democrat in new york state government, assembly speaker sheldon silver.  the flashpoint is the highly fraught selection of a new state comptroller to replace alan g. hevesi, who resigned in disgrace last year. mr. silver has made it abundantly clear that he wants a member of the assembly to get the job, while mr. spitzer has said that he would like to see it go to an independent candidate with financial experience.  but not a single assemblyman made the cut when a panel of former comptrollers submitted a list of comptroller candidates to the legislature on thursday evening. that left mr. silver fuming, and suggesting that he might pick his own candidate anyway, as some restless democratic lawmakers urged him to stand up to the new governor.  mr. spitzer, though, said on friday that he expected mr. silver and the legislature to live by the agreement they made, and pick a comptroller from the list they received.  ''the committee has reported out three names of eminently qualified individuals, and the process will run its course, and we'll now wait for the legislature to pick among them -- among the three, and that's as it should be,'' mr. spitzer said.  mr. silver spent friday mulling his options and trying to cool down members of the assembly, who are furious at what they perceive as a slight. some of mr. spitzer's deputies are reaching out to the assembly to take its temperature -- trying to see how much political capital the administration used up on the comptroller fight the week before it releases its first budget proposal.  mr. silver is in a particularly sensitive position. if he accepts a candidate from outside the assembly for comptroller, he risks incurring the wrath of the members of his conference, whose support he needs to remain speaker. but if he reneges on the deal he publicly made with governor spitzer, he could find himself in an all-out war with the governor's office fresh off mr. spitzer's landslide victory.  ''i think we're at war, but i'm not sure,'' said one assembly democrat, who was granted anonymity to describe the private machinations in the assembly. ''this is a clash of the titans, and i don't know how this plays out.''  many democrats in albany originally thought that the speaker had outfoxed the rookie governor earlier this month when the two men agreed on a process for picking the comptroller. their deal called for having three former comptrollers screen the potential choices and then forward a list of qualified candidates to the legislature for a vote. at least one of the former comptrollers' preferred candidates was likely to be an assemblyman, the thinking went.  in the end, though, the newbie governor had the last laugh, as the panel forwarded the names of three candidates from outside the assembly: william j. mulrow, an investment banker who ran for comptroller in 2002 and who is close to mr. spitzer; martha e. stark, the new york city finance commissioner; and howard s. weitzman, the nassau county comptroller. members of the panel said in interviews that they had not been lobbied or pressured by the governor, but someone who had spoken with one of the panel members said he had a strong impression that the panel had been in contact with mr. spitzer at one point.  the rift threatens to poison perhaps the most closely watched relationship in albany. after a great deal of speculation that mr. spitzer might support a coup against mr. silver -- the way his predecessor, george e. pataki, took out the senate republican majority leader when he was elected governor -- the two men seemed to forge a good relationship and went out of their way to praise each other.  the spat over the next comptroller could threaten to end the honeymoon. at the heart of the battle between mr. spitzer and mr. silver -- both lawyers with a tendency to view government through a lawyerly prism and speak in legalese -- is a dispute about the terms of the deal they made.  mr. spitzer said all along that the panel could recommend ''up to five'' candidates, but mr. silver is now claiming that the agreement was for the panel to recommend five candidates, and that by offering only three the former comptrollers ''did not conform'' to the agreement.  in announcing the agreement on the selection process on jan. 9, mr. spitzer said that the ''screening panel will then report out up to five names of individuals whom they deem to be qualified to be comptroller of the state of new york.'' mr. silver, who shared the stage with him, looked on approvingly. their news release said that the panel would select ''up to five comptroller candidates.''  but assembly officials now note that a second reference in the news release says that ''the legislature will select among the five candidates,'' and that a hearing notice put out by the legislature says the panel ''will submit five candidates to the legislature.''  some rank-and-file members of the assembly are doubly angry, because the state constitution gives the legislature the right to select the replacement for a comptroller who resigns, and gives no role to the governor. because assembly democrats control the biggest bloc of votes, the choice would have effectively been theirs. now they are grousing that mr. silver should not have ceded so much control to mr. spitzer.  ''as of this moment, the members are freaking out, and shelly is in a very tight spot,'' said another assembly democrat who was granted anonymity to describe the private conversations of lawmakers. ''they are saying, 'if we're not going to stand up for something that is clearly the province of the legislature, when will we stand up?' ''  several assemblymen vying for the post said on friday that they remained in the running.  news analysis  