touching a nerve: carter at brandeis   to the editor:  in ''at brandeis, carter responds to critics'' (news article, jan. 24), about former president jimmy carter's visit to brandeis university, you report that he said ''this is the first time that i've ever been called a liar  and an anti-semite,'' referring to the reaction to his book ''palestine: peace not apartheid.''  but this is neither the first time mr. carter faced the charge of anti-semitism nor the first time that he turned to brandeis to bail him out.  when mr. carter ran for the democratic presidential nomination in 1976, he sought help from another georgian, the former brandeis president morris b. abram. mr. carter asked him for help in disposing of a virulent rumor among jews that mr. carter was anti-semitic.  the rumor was strong enough to seriously threaten mr. carter's run for the nomination. mr. abram wrote an op-ed article in the new york times in an attempt to squelch the rumor. it worked, and jews openly supported jimmy carter for the nomination.  so jimmy carter has looked to brandeis university twice to bury the charge of anti-semitism -- once on tuesday, and once 30 years ago.  robert greenberg  newton centre, mass.  jan. 24, 2007  the writer is a professor of philosophy at brandeis.  to the editor:  i was disturbed by your report about the carter speech at brandeis on tuesday. jimmy carter made clear that he had been hurt by the names he had been called since his controversial book appeared, but he did so in the context of emphasizing, in contrast, the respectful audience he found at brandeis.  for those of us in the audience, it was inspiring to witness the openness and impressive civility of a group of upward of a thousand students, each of whom cares deeply about these issues and who, as mr. carter himself emphasized, represent the future.  robin feuer miller  waltham, mass., jan. 24, 2007  the writer is a professor of humanities, russian and comparative literature at brandeis.  to the editor:  jimmy carter just proved that one can challenge israel and speak out for the oppressed because one dares care about a whole nation of people who have been wrongly evicted from full and equal rights in the land of their birth.  any variation of ''free palestine'' is simply a plea for real justice and a lasting peace, as is the reminder that the palestinian refugees have always had the inalienable, legal and sacred right to return to their original homes and lands.  anne selden annab  mechanicsburg, pa., jan. 25, 2007  to the editor:  jimmy carter's new book is paved with good intentions. the word ''apartheid'' in its title was only meant to be ''provocative.'' he ''did not mean to equate zionism with racism.''  a sentence that condones palestinian terrorism was ''worded in a completely improper and stupid way.'' he said he had not meant to suggest that israeli treatment of the palestinians is worse than the rwandan genocide.  mr. carter is correct in one respect: the palestinian people suffer ''cruel oppression,'' but he is wrong as to its source. palestinians are oppressed mainly by their own corrupt terrorist leaders.  samuel h. bahn  new york, jan. 24, 2007  