pushing back at bullying   this past november, the greenwich high school principal, alan j. capasso, greeted an early morning assembly of more than 800 freshmen about to begin a mandatory anti-bias, antibullying program called ''names can really hurt us.'' he told them, ''this is the most important day of your school year.''  in greenwich, where diverse doesn't begin to describe the pan-cultural buzz animating the school's hangar-size cafeteria, ''names,'' as the program is known, is cool -- as in ''hey, you doing 'names' this year? it rocks.'' after five years, ''names'' day is assured a place on the school calendar, along with homecoming, sat prep and the prom.  farther north at new milford high school, jonathan henion, a senior, stood before a ''names'' assembly of sophomores to share a story he insisted was no big deal, except that it suggested how one small action could make a difference:  ''i was standing in the rotunda with friends of mine, about 30 kids. i noticed this small girl walking by. she had on a big backpack filled with heavy books, and she fell. i just stood there watching and thought to myself, 'what a loser.' she just lay there trying to get up. the girl's face kept getting redder and redder listening to the relentless taunting by my friends. something clicked. i walked over and lifted her up, picked up her books and brushed the dirt off her arms.''  jonathan's little moment was greeted with huge applause; he looked surprised. new milford's principal, greg p. shugrue, sharing pizza with jonathan and other student panelists afterward, told them: ''this is the best school atmosphere i've ever worked in. and it's because of the commitment to this program.''  ''names,'' which requires two months of preparation and training by students and staff members, is not a program that any participant or observer can easily forget. there is straight talk. there are tears, hugs, high-fives, laughs, applause and some astonishing apologies.  ''i went to observe it at weston high school in 2000,'' said carol sutton, a social studies teacher and the catalyst for bringing ''names'' to greenwich. ''what i saw was astounding. i was impressed by the student panelists and the kids who got up in the open-mike segment. i was amazed. i came back and said, 'let's get it done.' ''  over the last 11 years, some 65,600 connecticut high school students have participated in ''names,'' which is sponsored and supervised by the connecticut office of the anti-defamation league. guided by teachers, trained student volunteers and league facilitators, students talk with the unflinching candor of children about topics most adults would prefer to avoid: gossip, rumor, physical harassment, racism, homophobia, depression, eating disorders, self-mutilation, drinking, drugs, suicide -- the full range of bullying behavior and its consequences.  some students who spoke in small group and open-mike discussions are quoted here, but to protect their privacy, neither they nor their schools are identified.  marji lipshez-shapiro, the anti-defamation league's connecticut regional director of education, who created the program in 1995, said that she first sensed the testimonial power of students' voices when she was dean of residential life at connecticut college in the mid-1980s. teenagers do talk freely to this engaging educator who moves easily among them. as one boy, a senior, put it, ''marji's da bomb.''  ms. lipshez-shapiro said: ''kids are the ones who really know what's going on. when i walk through a cafeteria and i watch the social interaction, i realize what it takes to survive that, before you even get to academics.  ''a lot of kids hurt,'' she said. ''in a forum like this, they can hear their own voices, they can make a difference. like 'wow, my little story is going to impact people.' ''  in group discussions and in an open-mike session, the stories spool out. often, just speaking them aloud is an act of courage. witness the overweight girl reciting the names she has been called, the former stutterer who rehearsed for a month to articulate her agonies, the boy rolling up his sleeves to reveal arms crisscrossed with scars from self-inflicted cuts. a popular teacher described the day he heard his gay son sobbing in his room, then found his schoolbooks scrawled with vicious antigay slurs.  on ''names'' day, nobody minces words:  ''so, um, i've got a.d.h.d., i was finally diagnosed. at least i don't think i'm a freak anymore. i'm on medication now and working really hard. people remember me the way i was, but i'm not like that anymore. i'm not. i'm just asking -- give me a second chance, o.k.? just come up and say, hi. please.''  and from another student:  ''my sister is autistic. you see her in the hallway but you don't know her. she's the sweetest, most wonderful person. but no one will talk to her to find out. why does she have to hear the words retard and spaz? why does she have to come home crying every day?''  in a darkened school auditorium, ms. lipshez-shapiro's eyes welled up when a boy explained how he had to ask his best friends to stop calling him d. j. ''some of them didn't even get it, that d.j. was short for dirty jew,'' he said. ''they apologized. they really didn't understand how it hurt.'' it is rare that anti-semitism comes up in ''names,'' but ms. lipshez-shapiro explained why an organization devoted to combating that ancient transgression got into the bully business. ''at a.d.l., we look at the consequences of being different, at prejudices and stereotyping and discrimination,'' she said. ''the main reason people are bullied is because they're different or perceived to be. our programs are really anti-bias more than anti-bully. our goal is to teach empathy to perpetrators. a lot of times they have no idea of the power of what they're doing.''  few educators would argue against the need for a positive form of intervention. in 2001, the national institute of child health and human development identified school bullying as a growing public health problem. its commissioned study found that 29 percent of the nearly 16,000 american students surveyed said that they had experienced bullying, either as a target, offender or both.  ''names'' is one of many anti-bullying programs being deployed across the nation by concerned ptas, school boards, community theater groups and even by the girl scouts of america. twenty-nine states, including connecticut and new jersey, have enacted legislation against bullying, intimidation or harassment and 11 others are in the process, according to the national conference of state legislatures. and new york has passed an education law that requires school districts to devise strategies to deal with violence as part of a school safety plan.  ''wherever we take the program, we've found that the issues raised are basically the same,'' said a league facilitator, sandra vonniessen-applebee. though school bullies have been around longer than chalkboards, their playground and their reach have expanded in the information age. young, media-saturated lives traverse an electronic landscape, peopled with elite ''survivor'' and ''american idol'' winners and an ever-growing pool of reality show losers. there are bully-centric teenage and kiddie flicks (''mean girls,'' ''ant bully''). teenage chick lit series (''gossip girl,'' ''the clique'') are bristling with hissy, sarcastic vipers wrapped in juicy couture. and there is bully, a video game that depicts the adolescent atrocities facing the new student in a fictional boarding school.  ''it is a pervasive media message that being mean is cool, with put-downs and the like,'' ms. lipshez-shapiro, said, noting that cyber-bullying, which invokes rumor and insults via the popular social-networking sites facebook and myspace, has become a huge concern.  ''i was online and i saw that someone posted something really lame about the spanish kids taking over the best tables in the cafeteria. it was a lot of mean garbage about illegals. and i thought, well, the kids that did it are just jerks. then i thought no, you can't just do nothing, that's not right. these things get bigger and out of control. so i showed it to the guidance office, and they dealt with it.''  it was a ''bingo!'' moment for the anti-defamation league facilitators who heard this comment at a meeting of student panelists.  ''yes! now that's becoming an ally,'' said william h. foster iii, the charismatic facilitator who emcees ''names'' days with warmth, wit and a touch of bernie mac. ms. lipshez-shapiro added: ''we want to empower the targets so that they feel yes, i can develop tools to fight back and say stop. and we want to teach bystanders to become allies. that's the ultimate goal.''  can bully education work? a pioneering 1988 study done in norway by dan olweus, a social researcher, found that the incidence of bullying in norwegian schools fell by 50 percent or more in the two years after an anti-bullying campaign; truancy, theft and vandalism also dropped markedly.  a follow-up survey of the ''names'' program in san diego in 2000 found that 60 percent of students said that after the session they would be less likely to call someone a name; nearly half reported positive changes in other students' behavior.  ''you probably have seen me around, and you might think i'm just some weird loner. i'm in foster care; this is like my fifth or sixth school, and when you're all going home to your parents, my sister and i are going to a group home. it's hard to keep starting over, so sometimes i don't even dare to try. but if you see somebody alone all the time, just remember, they're not necessarily freaky. there's a story there -- a life. and they could probably use a friend.''  what price, such poignant social education? the scheduling logistics and expense of a ''names'' program can be daunting to already-stretched budgets. the anti-defamation league pays $1,000 of an average $5,000 cost, which entails everything from hiring substitutes for participating teachers to audio-visual aids. but school systems across the tristate area are also mindful of a rise in costly bully-related litigation.  in toms river, n.j., a seven-year-old case reached the new jersey supreme court last november. connecticut, which recently strengthened its anti-bullying law, has seen a spate of suits in greenwich, berlin and stonington.  ''maybe i do like emo music. and you can see by my long hair and my clothes that i look kind of different than other guys. but i like the way me and my friends look -- some crazy, dark, baggy clothes and stuff but it's us, it's harmless. then i find this note in my locker: emo bitch! who gets off on doing that sort of thing? why?''  trying to change the hearts and minds of bullies can be a risky business. not all schools opt for the open-mike segment of ''names,'' when audience members line up to speak their minds, though it is very popular with students. league facilitators are at the speakers' elbows, ready to intervene should matters get too emotional. guidance counselors are on hand for especially fragile speakers.  but in the sessions witnessed by a reporter, it was fellow students, with cheers, group hugs and tissues, who provided the most enveloping and accepting reinforcement. even those who apologized, among them teary, self-confessed mean girls, were embraced.  ''i'm still on the fence about the open-mike part,'' said mr. shugrue, the new milford principal, recalling an incident at another school when a student used the forum to mock the proceedings. league facilitators say they have never encountered this and that owing to the strict confidentiality policies for ''names,'' there have been no complaints from parents.  ''the first year, i got some calls from parents asking, 'what is this race program you're doing?' '' recalled kris kaczkak, health education chairwoman at new milford. ''but now that parents know what it is, we get great support. our teachers volunteer anywhere from 6 to 50 hours each of their time. and i have 150 student volunteers for 50 places.''  if forgiveness and grace are shining ideals of ''names,'' both are met in lorella praeli, a lively, chestnut-maned senior who delivered a bravura closing address at new milford's ''names'' day.  afterward, in between accepting hugs and congratulations, she talked about her experiences as a bullying target before ''names'' helped her defuse the problems:  ''i have a right prosthetic leg; i lost my leg in a car accident when i was 2 1/2. so all my life i've heard rude remarks about it. and i'm from peru. i moved here about six years ago. so i've faced racism. i've had the words spoken to my face, behind my back and online. you know, pegleg. spic. border hopper.''  lorella, who has spoken at many other league-sponsored anti-bias events, plans a career in advocacy, perhaps beginning with a law degree. despite what she has endured, she said she refused to describe herself as a victim, preferring to focus on her conversion from a bystander.  ''i wasn't the person who stopped someone from using a word that they shouldn't have,'' she said. ''i thought, oh, it's o.k. after the program i began to recognize that it wasn't. i feel that this program has changed the school. it's not the same as my sophomore year.''  right after her speech, one student asked her how she expected ''names'' to change a whole class, 400 students. lorella answered: ''i told her you don't need to change the whole class. go for one person first.''  carrie malcolm, now 24 and a reformed bully, said that ''names'' changed the course of her life, though too late for her victim. as a middle school honor student, leader and volunteer, ms. malcolm had a secret life as the tormenter, along with six friends, of a quiet girl named erin. ''she was an outcast,'' ms. malcolm said, ''and i was the ringleader of making her life miserable.  ''i remember chasing erin down the hallway and into a classroom, singing some awful song that i had made up about her. she was cornered against the blackboard, crying. and i wouldn't stop screaming this song. then i just walked away and enjoyed the rest of my afternoon.''  hoping to get away from the group, erin chose to go to a different area high school. in 1997, she was killed in a car accident on the way to class. ''we made the last few years of her short life utter hell,'' said ms. malcolm, who, with ms. lipshez-shapiro's encouragement and guidance, told her story on ''names'' day as a sophomore at her regional high school in durham, a year after erin's death. at ms. malcolm's invitation, erin's mother and grandmother were in the audience. hers was a powerful, self-lacerating speech. and she says she cannot let the matter rest.  she has chosen a career in public service, tutoring underserved urban students in new haven as the executive director of the nonprofit center for teaching, learning and child development. and she has spoken at more than 25 anti-defamation league-sponsored bullying programs for students, teachers and parents. ''i really want to get to parents,'' she said. ''my story exemplifies what middle school bullying is like, that nobody really feels they need to do anything about it. parents seem to ignore it and think it was a regular part of growing up. i stress that it doesn't have to be that way. and i'll do it over and over in front of parents, administrators and teachers, people that have the power to change it.''  another ''names'' open-mike session was coming to a close. the final speaker, a rangy boy in a hoodie sweatshirt, had been pacing nervously.  ''ah  yo. i just want to say i'm up here talking for me and my friends. you all know us, right? yeah. i've probably picked on most of you. and if any of us made fun of you, i'm here to tell you we're sorry. it wasn't cool. we're really sorry. peace.''  to take steps  the following web sites provide information on bullying, mediation and resolution:  from the united states department of health and human services:  www.stopbullyingnow.hrsa.gov  from the centers for disease control and prevention:  www.bam.gov  from the anti-defamation league, using children's literature to address bullying:  www.adl.org/education/curriculum--connections/winter--2005/  from about.com, resources for parents of children being bullied and for those who bully:  www.parentingteens.about.com/od/bullying  from youth crime watch of america:  www.ycwa.org  