insurer to pay 640 claims from katrina   in a move that is expected to jump-start rebuilding along the mississippi gulf coast, state farm insurance said yesterday that it had reached an agreement with state officials to pay hundreds of millions of dollars to owners of homes along the coast that were wrecked by hurricane katrina.  the agreement settles lawsuits filed by 640 homeowners and allows thousands of others to reopen damage claims that state farm previously closed. insurance executives said they expected the outlines of the deal to be adopted by other carriers.  the agreement does not apply to new orleans, where the failure of the levees left much of the city underwater for days. lawyers and insurers say no similar settlement talks are in progress there.  for state farm, the nation's largest home insurer and the biggest in mississippi, the settlement allows for ''a just, speedy and efficient resolution,'' as a spokesman, phil supple, put it.  it would also remove a major public relations headache. while state farm and the other insurers may have had some strong legal arguments, they have been widely perceived as insensitive. in many cases, residents whose houses were reduced to concrete slab foundations received just a few thousand dollars in payments. some received nothing.  under the settlement, 300 homeowners who lost everything will receive their full insurance coverage. mississippi officials said 1,000 others would receive at least half, with the opportunity to negotiate for more.  ''a lot of people on the coast are going to see money in their pockets sooner, rather than have to go through a long, drawn-out process of court proceedings,'' mississippi's insurance commissioner, george dale, said yesterday.  the core of the dispute was whether the damage to the houses was caused by high winds or surging floodwaters as hurricane katrina swept across the coast on aug. 29, 2005. the insurers said their policies covered only wind damage. but in many cases, they also refused to pay for damage caused by a combination of wind and water.  the settlement does not affect the terms of coverage in the insurers' policies, but some insurance experts said they expected that the carriers would ultimately rewrite their policies to specifically bar coverage of damage from storm surges.  in the settlement talks, which began last fall, state farm insisted that the mississippi attorney general, jim hood, drop a criminal investigation of the company's handling of storm damage claims. it also demanded that he abandon a civil suit against it and other insurers.  the final sticking point in the agreement had been over the framing of a few sentences that would end the criminal investigation. mr. hood convened a grand jury last week that began hearing evidence.  the two sides reached agreement in a meeting yesterday afternoon in jackson, the state capital. then lawyers for state farm and richard f. scruggs, who represents hundreds of storm victims and played a major role in drafting the settlement, flew to gulfport on the coast, to seek the endorsement of judge l. t. senter jr., the federal district judge overseeing most of the insurance disputes.  judge senter had suggested that he would like to see a global settlement, and some participants in the talks said the first money could begin to flow to storm victims as early as next week.  under the agreement, state farm will pay an initial $130 million and perhaps several hundred million more by the end of the year, depending on how many policyholders requested that their claims be reopened. about 35,000 homeowners along mississippi's 70-mile-long coast are eligible. among the homeowners who will benefit from the settlement are senator trent lott and representative gene taylor, both of whom lost their homes in the storm and were denied payment by state farm.  since hurricane katrina struck, the insurance companies have paid $5.3 billion for damage to more than 330,000 homes in mississippi and $10.3 billion for nearly a million homes in louisiana.  they have raised rates sharply because, they say, the risk of severe storms has increased. they have also refused to renew many policies in vulnerable areas. the settlement disclosed yesterday is expected to have minimum effect on the cost of coverage.  state farm got a vivid picture of the hostility toward it in the first jury trial a little more than a week ago. judge senter abruptly declared that state farm had failed to prove its case and the jury quickly came back with a decision requiring the company to pay $2.5 million in punitive damages to a couple in biloxi who lost everything in the storm. the judge also awarded the couple the full value of their insurance policy: $223,000. state farm had maintained that it owed them nothing.  randy j. maniloff, a lawyer at white & williams in philadelphia who represents insurance companies, said yesterday that it was clear that the bad publicity had been a big factor in state farm's decision to settle. ''they spent 80 years building up a brand,'' he said, ''and the adverse publicity from these lawsuits has been clearly doing damage to the brand. it just flies in the face of their portrayal of themselves as good neighbors.''  indeed, according to people close to the talks, it was state farm that first suggested a settlement in a telephone call early last fall to mr. scruggs, the lawyer.  mr. scruggs, who came to prominence by filing lawsuits against the tobacco industry, reached an agreement in principle with state farm two weeks ago.  but mr. hood, the state attorney general, and mr. dale, the insurance commissioner, expressed reservations. both officials said they wanted to make sure that homeowners got the best possible deal. mr. dale, though, said it was also important that any agreement not be overly burdensome for the insurance companies.  mr. scruggs, whose home in pascagoula was destroyed along with those of many neighbors, said that resolving the coverage dispute had been ''the most personal and most difficult'' work in his 30-year career. he has not settled with his own insurer. but for his work on the settlement, he will share as much as $46 million with lawyers from half a dozen firms -- to be paid by state farm on top of its payments to homeowners.  in the agreement, state farm said it would pay $80 million to settle the 640 lawsuits and to reopen, at the request of homeowners, up to 35,000 other claims. the insurance company agreed to pay at least $50 million more on the previously closed claims.  participants in the talks estimated that state farm could pay a further $250 million to $600 million, depending on how many people reopened claims. for the 300 homes that were swept away, state farm agreed to pay the full insured value. those homes were insured for $69,700 to $2.34 million. the owners of the 340 other homes, with varying degrees of damage, are to receive an average of $124,400.  in the review of closed claims, homeowners may accept a new offer from state farm or insist on binding arbitration in hopes of receiving more money. storm victims are also free to ignore the settlement and file separate lawsuits against state farm. but few are expected to do so.  