paid notice: deaths   schachtel, dr. maurice   schachtel--dr. maurice. died on january 25, 2007, in rancho mirage, ca. born may 24, 1913, in london, england, the family emigrated to the us aboard the ill-fated lusitania. the family settled in buffalo, where he spent his childhood. an exceptional student, he attended medical school at john hopkins and graduated shortly after his 20th birthday. the family later settled in new york where dr. schachtel practiced medicine in a career spanning more than 70 years. he maintained a private practice in midtown manhattan for 60 years and was affiliated with mt. sinai hospital for more than 50 years. retiring shortly before his 93rd birthday, he has been currently residing in rancho mirage with his son daniel and daughter-in-law sari, and his three grandchildren, jonathan, elliot and julia. he now joins his mother jane and father bernard, as well as siblings irving, shirley and rosalyn, in repose in the family mausoleum at westchester hill cemetery, wife elizabeth and siblings hyman, john, and anita rest elsewhere. services friday, 11:30am, february 2nd, at ''the riverside'' 76th street and amsterdam avenue.  schachtel--dr. maurice died on january 25, 2007 in rancho mirage, ca. born may 24, 1913 in london, england, the family emigrated to the us aboard the ill-fated lusitania. the family settled in buffalo, where he spent his childhood. an exceptional student, he attended medical school at johns hopkins and graduated shortly after his 20th birthday. the family later settled in new york where dr. schachtel practiced medicine in a career spanning more than 70 years. he maintained a private practice in midtown manhattan for 60 years and was affiliated with mt. sinai hospital for more than 50 years. retiring shortly before his 93rd birthday, he has been currently residing in rancho mirage with his son daniel and daughter-in-law sari, and his three grandchildren, jonathan, elliot and julia. he now joins his mother jane and father bernard, as well as siblings irving, shirley and rosalyn, in repose in the family mausoleum at westchester hills cemetery, wife elizabeth and siblings hyman, john, and anita rest elsewhere. services friday 11:30 am february 2nd at ''the riverside'' 76th street and amsterdam avenue.  