112 points a game at 90 m.p.h.   playing in perpetual fast-forward, the phoenix suns have become the blur that cannot be beat.  they are this decade's incarnation of the los angeles lakers' showtime, averaging a crowd-pleasing, league-high 111.9 points per game, connecting on more 3-pointers than any team in the league and leaving opponents breathless while they have extended their winning streak to a league-best 14 games.  but the suns insist that the team speed that powers such gaudy statistics is somewhat deceiving. every day is not a joy ride with the top down. there is work -- and even defense -- involved.  just ask the driver, point guard steve nash.  ''to get out and run is fun for us because it's something we take for granted a little because it's a chore for us,'' nash said tuesday morning before he led the suns to a 41-20 first-quarter lead that turned into a 127-105 rout of the washington wizards at verizon center. ''we can't take a night off; we have to run every single night.''  for those teams who say they want to play up-tempo, nash offered a caveat.  ''i think people who wish for a running system don't realize you got to run every play every night, and that can take its toll on you,'' he said.  still, nash turns 33 in two weeks and shows no visible signs of slowing down. in his third season with phoenix, nash is already a front-runner to win his third straight most valuable player award, something only wilt chamberlain, bill russell and larry bird have accomplished.  he had 27 points and 14 assists tuesday night in a game that was supposed to feature a shootout between the top scoring teams from west and east but that turned into another suns clinic. phoenix shot 69.6 percent from the floor in the first quarter and avenged a dec. 22 loss.  ''that is as good as it gets,'' nash said as his team finished with 35 team assists and shot 13 of 33 from 3-point range.  the suns (33-8) come into madison square garden on wednesday, having won 30 of their past 32 games since nov. 19, the other loss to the dallas mavericks (35-8), the only team in the n.b.a. with a better mark than the suns'.  phoenix began the season 1-5, its slow start coinciding with amare stoudemire's recovery from knee surgery, but gained momentum with its first winning streak of 15 games.  the 6-foot-10 stoudemire has been a catalyst in the team's recent streak.  ''our fortunes have hinged on that more than anything,'' suns coach mike d'antoni said before the game.  after missing all but three games last season, stoudemire has regained his form and confidence while becoming more aggressive on defense. in doing so, he has made the suns that much more threatening.  ''everyone looks at it offensively,'' nash said of stoudemire's impact. indeed, stoudemire led the suns in scoring in the four games leading up to the matchup with the wizards, averaging 28 points, 8.8 rebounds and 35.5 minutes per game.  but nash said it is stoudemire's ''willingness to be a great teammate, his willingness to defend and buy into our concepts'' that is making a difference.  with a chemistry that is as lighthearted in practice as it is intense and fluid on the court, the quick and cohesive suns offer a stark contrast to everything new york represents.  ''they all have a very fast connection, call it d.s.l., whether it's speed to the rim, or speed to a cut,'' the suns assistant coach marc iavaroni said. ''they understand each other's speed. a lot of passes wouldn't be thrown on other teams that steve nash makes.''  the suns' team speed is not that of an all-out foot race, but a conscious blending of different types of quickness, extending from power forward boris diaw all the way to guard raja bell.  ''we have two of the fastest guys in the league in marion and l. b.,'' d'antoni said of shawn marion and the sixth man, guard leandro barbosa.  ''amare, he's probably the fastest five and most powerful on the move. steve is an energizer bunny and raja, too,'' d'antoni added. ''they're not extra fast but going and going and going. and that makes us tough to handle. and boris, he hides his speed. he has the best vertical jump on the team.''  actually, the suns do not lead the league in fast-break points -- the golden state warriors do, with 888 points through 42 games, according to the elias sports bureau. the denver nuggets were second with 736 points through 38 games and the suns were third with 730 in 40 games. but of those three, only the suns have a record that gets everyone's attention.  ''that's the type of basketball i like, up and down, no rules to the game, you need that once in a while,'' the wizards' gilbert arenas said before the game. ''when you see them on tv, you want to watch them, you want to watch nash dribble around and see what passes he can make.''  d'antoni knows that his team must improve on defense. even as the suns' point differential (9.3) is best in the league. ''we're better than what most people think,'' he said.  in response to nash's claim that playing this hard, this fast, for so long takes its toll on the players, d'antoni disagreed.  ''it might just take its toll worse if you walk and they beat the heck out of you,'' he said. ''if you're playing a half-court set and you're running through picks and big guys are barreling down on you and you keep the floor not spaced, to me that's worse than not running. you run marathons when you're 60 years old; you can run.''  but the question still remains for this fast and furious suns team: with all their speed, can they reach the finish line? can they win a championship? they made it as far as the western conference finals in the past two postseasons, but got no further. last spring, they defeated the los angeles lakers and clippers in the first two rounds before falling in six games to the mavericks.  ''we've already proved that running can be a successful way to play in this league,'' nash said. ''as for a championship caliber, we still have to prove it, but we have every confidence now that we can do that.''  nash leads by example and in the box score, providing a greater sense of urgency in his 11th season.  ''this is a great opportunity,'' nash said. ''i want us to have a lot of fun, but i want to make the most of it.''  pro basketball  