'get organized now' month? maybe in the red states   donald keyser, the asia expert and former senior state department official, was finally sentenced to prison this week. among other things, mr. keyser confessed to keeping more than 3,000 sensitive documents -- 3,559 to be exact, ranging from the classified to the top secret -- in his basement. his wife had pointed this out to him. i'm going to go out on a limb here: in the history of the world, no one has ever been happy to be told to clean up his room.  did you already know that it was get organized now month? so the national association of professional organizers has decided, gamely drawing up our to-do list for us. it includes clearing the clutter from under the bed and adopting the ''less is more'' motto at home. today's tip: ''empty your under-the-sink bathroom cabinets and clean them out.'' personally, i have unwavering faith in 20-year-old shoe polish. as for ''less is more,'' it's un-american.  it's not easy to square our materialistic mess with our efficiency-obsessed, purell-possessed, hold everything-enabled, outlook-ordered times. help, however, is on the way. from the lineup of counterintuitive volumes that prove that everything bad is actually good for you, even if it makes frenchwomen fat, comes ''a perfect mess.'' in its pages david h. freedman, a journalist, and eric abrahamson, a columbia business school professor, argue that ''moderately disorganized people, institutions and systems frequently turn out to be more efficient, more resilient, more creative and in general more effective than highly organized ones.''  passions run high on this one, as nearly 80 percent of us report from the home front. or ask the citizens of bradford, pa., which, according to the book, fired its police chief because of his messy desk.  mr. abrahamson and mr. freedman bundle together bach's improvisatory genius, joyce's magic and alexander fleming's moldy lab to prove their point. theirs is the only volume i know that attempts to make sense both of governor (no fixed schedule) schwarzenegger and albert (random molecular activity) einstein, that equates procrastinating with ''prioritizing,'' and that worries less about dust bunnies of mammoth size than hobgoblins of little minds. by extension, mr. abrahamson and mr. freedman offer the real reason why martha stewart went to jail. on page 219 they flat-out declare that ''mess and disorder can be beautiful.'' this is the kind of ammunition you're always looking for but never have, especially when there are 3,559 classified documents lying in your basement. it was time to call mitch.  mitch cross-indexes his dvds, alphabetizes his spices and has introduced the dewey decimal system into his home. on mr. abrahamson's scale -- you have to admire anyone who can classify disorder -- mitch is either an ''order terrorist'' or an ''order pervert.'' neither is what i called him when we shared an apartment.  what did he make of the fact that apple had gone to all that trouble to put categorizing features on the ipod, only to discover that the shuffle function was the hit? did he know that messier offices correlate with higher education and higher pay? that jaywalking saves lives? more pedestrians die in crosswalks than outside them, which finally explains the population of law-abiding canada.  mitch was unimpressed by the anecdotal evidence. also unapologetic. ''we all have our thresholds,'' he granted. it is very hard to argue with a man whose computer cables are sorted by type. the shuffle function only reminds him to edit his playlists more precisely, to avoid the clunkers. he does not jaywalk. yesterday he had rolled his quarters and taken them to the bank.  he perked up only when i mentioned ''the secret lives of liberals and conservatives,'' the work of a group of psychologists including dana r. carney of harvard and john t. jost of new york university. it seems that order, too, has a political orientation. if f.d.r.'s notoriously messy white house was not the tip-off, then this week's revelation that senator chuck schumer is a highly unmotivated bed-maker -- is there an oscar madison of the u.s. senate? -- should have done the trick.  you guessed it: liberals turn out to be messier than conservatives. they have more clutter, more documents, more books, more maps. conservatives not only embrace more order, but they buy more organizational tools and cleaning supplies.  we may never learn why donald keyser did what he did, at home or abroad. but after three illustrious decades in the foreign service, he should have known better than to take a liberal approach to basement storage. partisanship doesn't pay.  guest columnist stacy schiff is the author, most recently, of ''a great improvisation: franklin, france and the birth of america.'' she is a guest columnist.  