public hospitals fret over changes in medicaid rules   new york city's public hospitals and clinics would lose billions of dollars over the next few years under changes president bush proposes to make to medicaid -- far more than his plan would cost other parts of the country, according to local and state officials.  under medicaid, the health plan for the poor, public hospitals can sometimes collect higher payments than private hospitals do for comparable services. last week, the bush administration proposed a regulation that would largely do away with that advantage.  the new york state department of health and new york city's health and hospitals corporation, the agency that runs the city's public hospital system, estimate that the new rule would cost the corporation $350 million a year, or 7 percent of its annual budget. the cut, officials said, would be felt most in outpatient services, where the system handles five million visits each year.  ''we would have to do a wholesale dismantling of our ambulatory care system and scale down our emergency departments,'' said alan d. aviles, president of the health and hospitals corporation.  both that rule change and a separate proposal put forward by the president to cover more uninsured people by diverting medicaid funds have met with serious opposition in congress. but the administration may be able to make the rule change without congressional approval.  last night, in his state of the union address, president bush outlined his plan to cover some of the 47 million uninsured people in the united states, through ''affordable choices grants'' to states.  ''these grants would give our nation's governors more money and more flexibility to give private health insurance to those most in need,'' mr. bush said.  to help pay for that effort, federal officials said the president's budget would allow states to redirect money out of a medicaid program, which currently pays billions of dollars to hospitals that care for a disproportionately high share of patients who are uninsured. most often, these are public hospitals.  states could use the money to cover the uninsured, but it is not clear how much money could be redirected, nor how individual states would respond. administration officials argue that covering more people will diminish the need for government to compensate hospitals for indigent care. but critics say many poor people would remain uninsured under the president's plan.  daniel sisto, president of the healthcare association of new york state, a hospital industry group, said, ''you cannot rip away the safety net serving society today on the belief that a vision, a new system, will suddenly appear.''  the proposed changes would hit especially hard at the health and hospitals corporation, the nation's largest state or local health care system, with 11 hospitals and scores of clinics. about 60 percent of its $5 billion annual budget comes from medicaid -- more than the medicaid payments to all hospitals combined in some states. about 30 percent of its patients are uninsured.  the medicaid rule change announced last week is similar to provisions that the bush administration has proposed in past years' budget talks, which congress declined to adopt. but a medicaid regulation can be made without congressional approval. state and hospital officials say such a policy would probably be challenged in court, and senator charles e. schumer of new york said that congress might pass a law to block it.  the centers for medicare and medicaid services, the federal agency that oversees the program, estimates that the new rule would save about $760 million a year. but officials say there has been no detailed, state-by-state calculation, so the number could change.  each state sets the rates its medicaid program pays hospitals and other providers, and for each dollar spent, it gets matching money from the federal government.  a longstanding medicaid rule allows state and local governments that own or run hospitals and clinics to receive more money for medicaid services, beyond what the standard medicaid rates pay, and draw a federal match on those additional dollars, too. while many public hospitals do not get such supplemental payments from their local government sponsors, new york city contributes hundreds of millions of dollars each year to its hospitals.  in a statement released with the proposed regulation, the administration said that the public hospitals often use the extra payments ''to subsidize health care operations that are unrelated to medicaid.''  deborah bachrach, new york state's medicaid director, said that using the money to strengthen ''safety net'' hospitals that deliver medicaid benefits is legitimate, even if some of those benefits go to uninsured patients and others outside medicaid. and in practice, she said, it is impossible to separate the two. ''it's fine to say medicaid dollars for medicaid patients, but in reality it's never that simple,'' she said.  the administration statement also alleged outright cheating of the system. ''we have identified numerous instances in which health care providers did not retain the full amount of their medicaid payments but were required to refund or return a portion of the payments received'' to the state or local governments, it said. in other words, the supplemental payments made by the state or local governments were a ruse, intended to draw federal matching funds, with the local money eventually being diverted to unrelated uses.  several lawmakers and hospital industry officials disputed the notion that such abuses are common. rather, they said, the administration wants to pare services to the poorest of the poor. ''if it was for-profit hospitals in texas, they wouldn't be doing it,'' mr. schumer said.  nationwide, the supplemental medicaid payments total more than $3 billion a year, most of it federal money, according to the national association of public hospitals. but the proposed rule would make it much harder to collect that money from washington, in several ways.  medicaid imposes an upper limit on its payments to each hospital -- for all services combined, not patient by patient -- and the new rule would lower that cap.  some public hospitals in new york turn a small profit on medicaid inpatient services, and absorb a large loss on medicaid for outpatients, and report an overall medicaid loss. that would no longer be allowed under the new rule, which would apply caps to inpatient and outpatient care, and would forbid any profit.  