news summary   international a3-10  poor attendance hinders efforts of iraqi parliament  nearly every session of iraq's parliament since november has been adjourned because of low attendance, prompting some officials to fear that members are losing confidence in the country's fragile democracy.  a1  lt. gen. david h. petraeus, president bush's new choice as the top commander in iraq, told congress that the new military strategy to secure baghdad can work and that he has asked that the additional troops the administration promised be deployed as quickly as possible.  a9  sectarian clashes snarl beirut  thousands of supporters of the iranian-backed hezbollah, which is seeking to bring down the pro-western government, clashed with government supporters in beirut, bringing the city to a stand-still and raising fears that the political crisis might lead to open sectarian conflict.  a6  israeli leader faces indictment  the attorney general of israel plans to indict president moshe katsav on charges of rape and other sexual offenses, the justice ministry announced, in what would be the most serious criminal case involving a senior israeli official.  a3  ethiopians leaving somalia  the ethiopian troops who helped install somalia's fledgling government in mogadishu, its capital, began to pull out, officials from each country said. many somalis say they now fear that a power vacuum will form and that the country will slip back into lawlessness.  a8  national a11-19  in addressing the nation, bush highlights iraq plans  president bush tried to resuscitate his ailing presidency using his state of the union address to present a modest agenda of energy and health care proposals while warning an assertive congress against undercutting his new iraq strategy.  a1  libby's defense sets stage  the chief defense lawyer for i. lewis libby jr. set the stage for a nasty bout of finger-pointing in the bush administration, asserting that the vice president's former chief of staff had been made a scapegoat to protect the president's political adviser, karl rove.  a1  hard winter hurts calf season  calving season on the high plains will be harder and more costly than any year in at least a decade, ranchers and agricultural officials say. the biggest concern now becomes the lingering persistence of snow.  a1  carter defends his book  in his first public speech about his controversial book, ''palestine: peace not apartheid,'' former president jimmy carter told an audience at brandeis university that he stood by the book and its title and apologized for an ''improper and stupid'' sentence in the book.  a11  8 arrested in killing officer  eight men, including seven alleged members of the radical black liberation army, were arrested on charges of murdering a police officer in san francisco in 1971 and waging a violent five-battle war against the police and federal authorities.  a11  new york/region b1-10  bush plan could cost city hospitals billions  new york city's public hospitals and clinics would lose billions of dollars under changes president bush proposes to make to medicaid -- far more than his plan would cost other parts of the country, according to local and state officials.  a1  nursery school traffic jam  chauffered luxury sport utility vehicles line up outside the 92nd street y to drop off their little passengers at the y's nursery school. now the school's director is insisting that the drivers wait somewhere else, citing safety concerns. b1  man freed by dna evidence  roy brown, who spent 15 years behind bars for a murder in cayuga county, n.y., was released from prison after forensic tests showed that dna from the crime scene matched another man's.  b5  neediest cases  b4  business day c1-13  state farm settles lawsuits  in a move that is expected to jump-start rebuilding along mississippi's gulf coast, state farm said that it had reached an agreement with state officials to pay hundreds of millions of dollars to homeowners along the coast hit by hurricane katrina.  a1  business digest c2  obituaries c13-14  e. howard hunt  a cold warrior for the central intelligence agency who joined the nixon white house and bungled the break-in at the watergate that brought the president down, he was 88.  c13  editorial a20-21  editorials: the state of the union; a healthy, well-regulated wall street; return of the drug company payoffs.  columns: thomas l. friedman, maureen dowd.  crossword e12  weather a18  tv listings e13  