seeking equity, school chief outlines a financing plan   schools chancellor joel i. klein yesterday laid out the first specifics of his ambitious plan to change the school financing system so that schools of similar sizes and demographics get roughly the same amount of city money per student.  in a briefing at the education department headquarters, mr. klein said that many high-poverty schools, with 75 percent or more students eligible for free or reduced-price lunch, were likely to experience changes over the next several years -- with 330 such schools likely to get a greater share of city money and 323 potentially in line for less.  similarly, 130 schools where fewer than half of the students are impoverished face a reduced share of city money, he said, and 129 such schools may get a bigger portion.  ''i think it's important to the city that we can say that we are being equitable, we are being transparent and we are treating kids who are in a similar situation the same,'' mr. klein said.  he said there was no pattern as to which schools would gain or lose in the new system, and did not discuss individual schools or neighborhoods that would be affected.  the new plan, announced by mayor michael r. bloomberg in his state of the city address, will allocate money to schools by assigning different weights to categories of students based on factors like grade level, academic ability, poverty level and english language proficiency.  while the weights are intended to provide additional money for the neediest students, mr. klein said the city eventually would provide extra money for the highest achievers, too.  currently, school budgets are not so directly tied to student characteristics, and the chancellor said that in some cases, the difference in city allocations to nearly identical schools was as much as $2,000 per student.  the mayor's announcement had immediately raised anxieties in some wealthier neighborhoods, where higher-paid veteran teachers have tended to cluster in better-performing schools. the city now covers these salaries, providing schools with a fixed number of teachers regardless of how much they are paid.  seeking to allay fears that such higher-paid teachers would be redistributed to lower-performing schools, mr. klein said yesterday that the city would impose changes gradually, and would buffer schools with high payrolls against sharp cuts. he also said the city would hold a series of hearings within the next month to get public feedback before final decisions were made on the specific dollar weights for different types of students.  but even as mr. klein sought to show that he was moving prudently, a leading expert on the city's school budget sharply rebuked his plans.  the expert, noreen connell, who leads the educational priorities panel, a nonprofit group, said that the changes would initially make the budget system more complicated, and would be harmful long term by making it overly expensive for schools to retain veteran teachers.  while the new plan would provide money to schools and require principals to cover payroll and other expenses, ms. connell said in an interview that she preferred a system that seeks to calculate a school's staffing needs and then provides the dollars to meet them.  ''the funding proposals,'' she wrote in commentary posted on the group's web site, ''have the potential to do lasting damage for decades to come.''  in the interview, ms. connell also said the chancellor did not have time to carry out the plan before the end of mr. bloomberg's term in 2009. ''they won't be around to suffer the consequences,'' she said.  robert gordon, the education department's managing director for resource allocation, who is designing the new system, said it would maximize the amount of control that principals have over their budgets, allowing them ''to retain their most experienced teachers if that is what they want to do.''  and he said the chancellor's phase-in plan would shield schools from abrupt change. ''we are committed to stability,'' he said. ''at the same time, moving forward, school leaders can and should begin to manage accurate budgets just as businesses and families do.'' he added, ''what the critics want is budgets that lock in inequities forever.''  at his briefing, mr. klein said the new system would deny educators an excuse for failing to lift student achievement. ''one of the things i hear from principals is, 'well, how can you hold me to the same standards as others, when the funding allocations are not equitable, are not transparent and they are not fair?' '' mr. klein said.  at the heart of the chancellor's effort is a desire to simplify an enormously complex budgeting process in which schools receive money through dozens of different formulas. the chancellor's plans would deal only with city tax dollars, which make up about 45 percent of the system's overall budget, and unrestricted state money, which brings the total dollars involved to about two-thirds of individual schools' budgets.  the remaining one-third of the budget is provided by the state and federal governments, but that money is earmarked for specific programs.  the actual amount of any increases or cuts will depend heavily on this year's state budget. the state court of appeals, ruling last year in a lawsuit over education financing, ordered albany to provide at least $2 billion more per year to the city's schools. gov. eliot spitzer has said that he will comply and perhaps provide even more money when he releases his budget proposal next week.  in the chancellor's view, school budget decisions historically were made arbitrarily by superintendents often influenced by politics or patronage. but some school system veterans argue that some of what the chancellor views as inequity instead reflects well-reasoned policy decisions that were made under previous administrations.  for example, mr. klein's office acknowledged yesterday that among the schools that now seem to have unfairly large budgets are struggling schools that were part of a special chancellor's district, created by former chancellor rudy crew in an effort to turn around some of the system's most troubled campuses. those schools received a large influx of resources, including higher pay for teachers.  indeed, the teachers' union president, randi weingarten, invoked the chancellor's district yesterday in criticizing mr. klein's plan.  ''we have always embraced and fought for the idea of putting more money into high-needs schools, such as with the old chancellor's district,'' she said, adding, ''the chancellor's plan will hurt kids and educators alike because it will destabilize good schools and give principals a disincentive to hire experienced teachers simply because they cost more.''  