smokers welcome: try this at home   winter does strange things to grill lovers cooped up in city kitchens. they start daydreaming about smoldering hardwood.  chefs around town seem to have that same impulse. lately they have been smoking everything in reach -- onions, tomatoes, chicken, fish, maple syrup. some invest in professional indoor smokers, but the majority do what a home cook can easily do, rig a roasting pan with aluminum foil or use inexpensive gear like camerons stovetop smokers.  after a 20-minute smoke and then a flash in a hot pan, chicken thighs taste like they are straight off the grill, but smokier, juicier and -- depending on how you get your smoke -- more interesting.  and the technique fills kitchens not with smoke, but with a cozy aroma, like potpourri, with pavlovian effects.  makeshift or manufactured, stovetop smokers work the same way. sprinkle wood chips, either the finely shaved ones camerons packages or another brand, on the bottom of the pan, top them with a drip tray or foil that doesn't quite reach the edge of the pan, and a rack to hold food. set the pan over medium low heat, slide the smoker shut or cover it with foil. if wisps of smoke seep out, use more foil.  smoking, and smokehouses, originated as a means of food preservation, but cooks worldwide have figured out how to impart hints of wood and spice to food in their own homes. chinese cookbooks often explain how to convert woks into smokers. there's an indian method called dhungar, which involves setting tiny bowls of smoldering charcoal within covered casseroles of cooked food.  pichet ong has used a similar method to smoke cream and flour at spice market, and now makes spice-scented beeswax candles to smoke desserts tableside at his coming restaurant, p*ong.  stovetop smoking actually cooks food, rather than just flavoring it. (flavoring is the point of cold-smoking, in which ingredients are placed in smoke-filled chambers away from heat.) in a stovetop smoker, lean meats like the ones i'm inclined to wrap in bacon or baste in butter become far more complex without additional fat. and smoke offsets the intensity of richer meats and seafood, like pork shoulder and bluefish.  foods smoked on the stove develop a intensely flavorful patina. wondering what was in this delicious soot, i called camerons headquarters, in colorado springs. anne malone, who founded the company with her husband in 1983 and runs it with five employees, answered the phone. ''that's steam that's been colored by wood smoke,'' she said. is it safe? she said a drip tray prevents fat from dripping onto burning embers, which would create more hazardous smoke.  smoking doesn't generate the levels of carcinogenic chemicals that ''are concentrated when there are fats and higher temperatures,'' said barry swanson, professor of food science and nutrition at washington state university. other research has found that levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, a hazardous component of smoke, are minimal if wood smolders (as it does in stovetop smoking), and doesn't flame.  this is encouraging because smoking is fun. after enjoying a memorable brined, tea-and-spice-smoked chicken at the restaurant lantern, in chapel hill, n.c., i smoked my way through my pantry, tossing star anise, cinnamon, rice and sugar in with the tea.  earl grey imparted a lip-tingling, bergamot tang to chicken thighs, but lapsang souchong was overpowering. lantern's chef and owner, andrea reusing, uses jasmine tea, which is milder and floral.  the technique inspires experimentation. after buying half a dozen kinds of wood chips (available at cameronssmoker.com or any of the many kitchenware stores that sell the smokers) i learned that hickory works best with pork, alder with salmon, and fruit woods with mild fish.  matt weingarten, chef de cuisine at savoy in soho, brines then smokes sturgeon with juniper branches and berries. eben copple, chef at jovia, smokes cauliflower with rosemary stems, which imparts a piney flavor.  ethan kostbar, chef at rose water in brooklyn, smokes so much -- chocolate for the ice cream, limes for a shrimp sauce, parsnips with venison -- that he's devoting a five-course dinner to the technique tomorrow.  these new approaches get smoke in places you least expect to find it, but they are just as trusty with traditional recipes.  one frigid january afternoon, elizabeth karmel, author of the book ''taming the flame'' (wiley, 2005), had half-a-dozen stovetop smokers going at the institute of culinary education in manhattan as she prepared to teach a class on southern barbecue.  one smoker was tented with foil instead of the usual metal lid. when she peeled the foil back, it revealed as burnished a pork shoulder as i've seen sweating on grates of old-school smoke pits. into the oven it went, to finish its trip toward succulent pulled pork. (most of the rest of the smokers harbored catfish, which she brines with budweiser and whips into a fluffy southern cousin to whitefish salad.)  when i made her pork recipe at home, my husband declared our days of shipping up southern barbecue over. and now we wouldn't have to spend sweltering summer afternoons huddled over our kettle grill, hydrating ourselves with ice-cold beer in dizzying clouds of smoke, i added.  ''nah,'' he said. ''i wouldn't go that far.''  north carolina-style pulled pork  adapted from elizabeth karmel  time: 5 to 6 hours  for the pork:  3 tablespoons hickory-wood shavings  16- to 9-pound bone-in pork shoulder or boston butt  salt and freshly ground black pepper  for the sauce:  2 cups cider vinegar  1 tablespoon salt  1 tablespoon ground white pepper  1/2 teaspoon ground black pepper  1/2 to 1 tablespoon red pepper flakes  2 tablespoons white sugar  1/4 cup brown sugar  1/2 cup ketchup.  1. place hickory chips in center of smoker or roasting pan and top with drip tray and rack. massage pork all over with a lot of salt and pepper. place on rack, skin-side up. cover with two long pieces of heavy-duty foil that have been folded together tightly at long seams. crimp foil around edges of smoker, leaving enough space between pork and foil so smoke can circulate. turn heat to medium and smoke for 30 to 45 minutes, depending on size and your taste. shut off heat and rest, covered, for 5 minutes.  2. while pork is smoking, preheat oven to 300 degrees. whisk together sauce ingredients in a large bowl, season to taste and refrigerate.  3. remove foil from smoker and transfer rack and pork to a sheet pan. place in oven. cook for 40 minutes per pound (about 4 to 5 hours), until a meat thermometer inserted into the middle of the roast registers 190 degrees. remove pork and rest until cool enough to handle, about 20 minutes. while still warm, pull meat away from bones. discard skin, fat and bones, and reserve crispy browned bits of fat and crust. working quickly on a large cutting board, shred chunks of meat, pulling it with forks or fingers into long strands. add reserved crispy bits and chop meat roughly. transfer to a serving bowl, season with 1/2 to 3/4 cup sauce, and mix well.  yield: 6 to 8 servings.  smoked catfish salad  adapted from elizabeth karmel  time: about 30 minutes  2 teaspoons hickory- or alder-wood shavings  3 pounds catfish fillets  1 8-ounce block cream cheese  1/2 to 3/4 cup sour cream  2 large shallots, finely minced  2 tablespoons capers in liquid  1 teaspoon caper juice  1 teaspoon granulated garlic  5 shakes tabasco  6 grinds freshly ground pepper, or more to taste  salt, to taste.  1. place wood shavings in center of smoker; top with drip pan and rack. add catfish, leaving enough room between fillets so smoke can circulate. place on stove over medium heat and smoke for 20 to 25 minutes. shut off heat and let rest, covered, for 5 minutes. catfish should be fully cooked and bronzed, with crisp edges.  2. while fillets are still warm, break them into pieces in a large bowl. add remaining ingredients and mix well. taste for seasoning, adding more sour cream if too dry. serve immediately or refrigerate and serve cool.  yield: at least 5 appetizer portions.  note: recipe is for large smoker, but can be halved for a smaller smoker.  tea-smoked chicken thighs with pomegranate glaze  time: about 30 minutes  2 small oranges or tangerines  2 heaping teaspoons loose leaf tea (both earl grey and jasmine work well)  4 to 6 star anise pods  1 cinnamon stick (optional)  2 to 2 1/2 pounds skin-on chicken thighs  freshly ground black pepper and salt, to taste  1/4 cup hoisin sauce  1 1/2 tablespoons pomegranate molasses  sriracha chili sauce, to taste  2 tablespoons canola oil.  1. zest one orange and peel other; set zest and peels aside. cut oranges in half and squeeze juice through wire mesh strainer into a bowl. reserve juice.  2. scatter orange peels, tea, star anise and cinnamon around center of bottom of smoker. cover with drip tray and wire rack. arrange thighs on rack and season generously with pepper and salt. place on stove over medium heat and after first wisp of smoke appears, cover tightly with lid. smoke for 20 to 25 minutes. shut off heat and rest for 5 minutes with lid on.  3. while chicken is smoking, combine zest, hoisin, pomegranate molasses and sriracha in a small bowl. add about half reserved juice, more if sauce is too thick. set glaze aside.  4. pour oil in a nonstick or well-seasoned cast-iron pan over medium high heat. when hot, add chicken, and cook about three minutes per side. reduce heat to medium low, brush both sides of chicken with glaze, and cook for another few minutes until crisp. serve immediately, with extra sauce on the side.  yield: 4 entrée portions.  