finding a famous pair's intensity and sensitivity   four men, their backs to the audience, stand in a line upstage at the beginning of george balanchine's ''agon.'' then they turn, and stravinsky's bright fanfare of trumpets heralds the start of the ballet that, in balanchine's words, used history as ''the takeoff point.''  stravinsky used a french baroque dance manual as the basis for his score; balanchine deployed the academic vocabulary of classical ballet. and yet dance history was changed by ''agon,'' with its angular, tensile movements that perfectly matched the composer's astringent forays into 12-tone technique.  audiences must have been hardly able to register visually the compressed, unconventional movement when the ballet had its premiere in 1957; even today the choreography, with its unexpected transitions and acrobatic tension, can surprise, and in the best performances always does.  one of those performances came from an almost all-new cast at the new york city ballet on thursday night, when ''agon'' was danced with a uniformly spiky intensity and a sensitivity to the rhythmic interplay between the music and the movement. andrew veyette gave a lovely sinuousness to his ''sarabande'' solo, and ellen bar was coolly seductive in her ''bransle gay'' solo and the subsequent pas de trois, balancing unworriedly in arabesque as her two partners switched sides.  but it was maria kowroski, more familiar with her part, who electrified the whole work in the pas de deux that is at its heart. with her long, hyper-flexible limbs, ms. kowroski can sometimes look unanchored in space, but here every movement was diamond sharp and dazzling. sébastien marcovici, making his debut, partnered with subtlety and skill.  another explosive performance came at the end of the evening, from sterling hyltin, new to her role in ''symphony in three movements,'' and just as riveting. ms. hyltin came flying onto the stage with huge, traveling jumps -- balanchine's jazzy knees-together surprise opener to another major stravinsky score -- and she often looked as if she might rocket offstage. in a good way.  amar ramasar, new to the cryptic yet poignant central pas de deux, worked well with jennie somogyi -- curiously sluggish in her solo sections -- and nicely conveyed the wit and humor within the ballet's jagged, lighting-bolt aesthetic.  also on the all-stravinsky-balanchine program was ''monumentum pro gesualdo'' and ''movements for piano and orchestra,'' both authoritatively headed by charles askegard and rebecca krohn; and ''duo concertant,'' in which nikolaj hubbe, partnering yvonne borree, was a spirited delight.  the orchestra, conducted by fayçal karoui, occasionally sounded patchy, but gave ''symphony in three movements'' a fine, propulsive performance.  the new york city ballet performs through feb. 25 at the new york state theater, lincoln center; (212) 870-5570, nycballet.org. ''stravinsky and balanchine: an eternal partnership'' will be performed again tomorrow.  dance review  