in two tongues, trying to close a learning gap   the 3-year-olds sat in a circle on a bright, multicolored rug as their teacher, jessie fujanesi, passed around a shoebox and asked each child to choose an item and describe it.  ''it's a little shoe,'' one girl said. ''it's white.''  ''un cubierto,'' a boy said, after fishing a plastic fork out of the box. ''es blanco.''  soon they were counting to 10, then singing the alphabet song. the little school here looks like any other nursery program, with the requisite ''circle time,'' stories, crafts, snacks and music (except spanish and english are used in lessons on alternate days). something larger, however, is going on in this classroom. its administrators describe it as nothing less than social justice. the nursery school is an attempt to close what administrators here say is a significant achievement gap among preschool children.  as 5-year-olds enter kindergarten, the effects of poverty are already evident, both in language development and in parental involvement, said zoila tazi, principal of pre-school education for the ossining union free school district.  ''poor children have on average many fewer words than middle-class children,'' ms. tazi said. ''quite literally there's an impoverishment of words. by the time they get to kindergarten, it will already be about catch-up.''  ms. tazi said she was disturbed to find kindergartners arriving at school not even knowing their colors. several years ago, the district decided that the only way to tackle the problem was to intervene early. they started a family literacy program called first steps, a comprehensive approach to reach out to parents, particularly immigrants living in poverty, and help them foster an atmosphere at home that is conducive to learning.  the message to parents is consistent: read, read and read to your child, and talk, talk and talk to your child. the literacy program is based on the belief that parents are a child's first and most influential teachers, and the more they teach, the stronger the attachment. mothers and fathers are shown how to make reading more enriching -- stopping at a word the child may not know to discuss it, pointing to pictures, talking about what may happen next -- the kinds of things that may seem to come naturally if you were read to often as a young child, but which are really learned skills.  parents are encouraged to speak their native language at home. not only is it easier to teach english to a child who has a strong foundation in another language, experts say, but parents who speak fluently also tend to be closer to their children.  something that was critical from the outset was the tone and philosophy of the program, ms. tazi said. first steps is billed as a remediation program, not as enrichment. the district tries to reach families as soon as a baby is born. a nurse will visit the home, and a family specialist will work with parents in their homes. addressing health and family issues early is an important component of addressing the academic achievement gap, because, ms. tazi said, ''you can't separate out the emotional from the cognitive from the physical,'' especially in the early years.  first steps not only includes the little school, but also offers so many classes that it needs a monthly calendar. there is a series of ''mommy/daddy and me'' events, and for children, there are library trips, classes in art, music, dance, writing and cooking, and math and science clubs. there is adult literacy, with a focus on teaching parents the language skills they need to help their children with homework and participate in activities like teacher conferences and back to school nights. there are also parenting workshops.  the program is a partnership between private foundations and the ossining school district. programs for children younger than prekindergarten are financed privately. the little school serves 75 children ''in need,'' predominantly those living in poverty, but also children who have illness in their family or other stressful home situations. the idea behind the dual language approach is that the hispanic children tend to be poorest and need a solid foundation in their first language, but that other children will benefit from the dual language approach as well.  on mondays, parents accompany their children to the little school. on a recent visit, everyone read ''the little red hen.'' in a crafts activity, children glued white styrofoam bits onto black paper. just when the children were getting restless, it was music time. even the song taught words. the children were told to move like elephants, then birds, then monkeys, then snakes. it looked like fun. but to ms. tazi it looked like something else.  ''we think this school has an awful lot of capacity to make a difference,'' she said. ''for us, this is a moral imperative.''  correction:  february 4, 2007, sunday  because of an editing error, a column last sunday about first steps, a family literacy program in ossining, misstated its philosophy. first steps is billed as an enrichment program, not a remediation program.  