at the perjury trial for libby, hints of intrigue and betrayal   the assertion by lawyers for i. lewis libby jr. that white house aides had sacrificed him to protect karl rove, the senior political adviser, appears to be based primarily on mr. libby's own sense that the administration had failed to defend him adequately as the c.i.a. leak case unfolded.  but there is little known evidence to buttress the suggestion by mr. libby's defense team in his obstruction and perjury trial that unnamed white house officials were deliberately setting mr. libby up to be a scapegoat.  mr. libby's lawyers said in an opening statement on tuesday that he felt so abandoned by the white house as the leak investigation intensified in the fall of 2003 that he appealed to his boss, vice president dick cheney. mr. cheney subsequently wrote, according to the defense's opening statement: ''not going to protect one staffer + sacrifice the guy who was asked to stick his neck in the meatgrinder because of the incompetence of others.''  the defense team's statements set off a debate across washington about whether they were part of a legal gambit to divert attention from the underlying charge that mr. libby lied to f.b.i. agents and the grand jury or whether his lawyers had evidence of an effort within the white house to focus the blame on mr. libby.  even if the assertion is shown to be true, it is not clear how it would help refute the charges that mr. libby had perjured himself.  mr. libby's lawyers have so far offered few details about how he might have been set up as a fall guy for mr. rove. white house aides said little about the alleged rift on wednesday, indicating they were prepared to grant their former colleague wide latitude to present an aggressive defense -- even if it meant letting stand unanswered a story of intrigue and disloyalty involving president bush's and mr. cheney's most trusted aides.  the accusations of scapegoating came as a surprise. in the past, white house aides have portrayed mr. libby and mr. rove as colleagues who moved in different orbits, but whose paths crossed collegially on various pieces of white house business, including the effort to defend a flawed statement in mr. bush's state of the union speech in 2003 that iraq had sought nuclear fuel in africa.  but mr. libby may have had reason to feel singled out. he was the only white house official known to have been authorized to seek out reporters in the summer of 2003 in an effort to explain an intelligence report that the administration had used to make a case that iraq was interested in acquiring uranium ore for its suspected nuclear program, according to documents in the case.  mr. cheney approved of mr. libby's confidential meetings with reporters, according to the prosecution. the vice president had also spoken to mr. bush, who authorized the declassification of parts of a national intelligence estimate on iraq to provide mr. libby with more information to discuss with the journalists, the legal papers said.  there may have been other reasons mr. libby felt the white house was turning against him. under questioning from reporters, scott mcclellan, the white house spokesman, said on sept. 29, 2003, that mr. rove had no involvement in the leak of the identity of an intelligence officer, valerie wilson. but it took nearly a week before mr. mcclellan made a similar defense of mr. libby.  in each instance, mr. mcclellan's statements, which he said at the time were based upon conversations with mr. rove and mr. libby, proved to be inaccurate; mr. libby and mr. rove had spoken to reporters about ms. wilson, who had worked undercover.  while mr. libby felt he was being left to fend for himself, there is little public evidence so far to support his lawyers' suggestion that mr. libby was the victim of a deliberate effort to shift the blame to mr. libby to protect mr. rove, who by the fall of 2003 was masterminding mr. bush's reelection campaign.  the issue of whether there was a conspiracy at the white house either to reveal ms. wilson's identity or to cover up for the white house officials who engaged in such a plot was a central focus of the grand jury inquiry conducted by patrick j. ftizgerald, the prosecutor. mr. fitzgerald did not charge anyone with participating in a conspiracy and has never suggested that there is any evidence that one existed.  mr. fitzgerald spent many months exploring the issue, investigating one newspaper report of a broad conspiracy that later proved to be inaccurate, according to lawyers with clients in the case. those lawyers said mr. fitzgerald questioned their clients, often in minute detail, about what they had done or said about the case. associates of mr. rove, speaking on condition of anonymity, dismissed the idea that there was a cabal against mr. libby.  but the defense can marshal an argument that mr. libby was initially left out in the cold as the white house began mounting a defense of mr. rove, a review of white house comments on the leak inquiry shows.  on sept. 29, 2003, as the leak inquiry was picking up steam and reporters were pressing to learn mr. rove's role, mr. mcclellan said mr. rove had told him he was not involved in the leak. he called the accusations of mr. rove's involvement ''ridiculous.''  asked about mr. libby in that afternoon's press briefing, mr. mcclellan initially appeared noncommittal, saying, ''if someone did something like this, it needs to be looked at by the department of justice.'' later in the briefing mr. mcclellan said, ''i've made it clear that there's been nothing, absolutely nothing, brought to our attention to suggest any white house involvement, and that includes the vice president's office, as well.''  but a government filing in the spring suggested that mr. libby was dissatisfied with mr. mcclellan's handling of the questions about his involvement. the filing showed that mr. libby had drafted a handwritten list of talking points for mr. mcclellan that read: ''people have made too much of the difference in how i described karl and libby. i've talked to libby. i said it was ridiculous about karl, and it is ridiculous about libby.''  mr. mcclellan indicated at the time his comments defending mr. libby had come from a conversation.  former white house officials said they were surprised to hear of any rift between mr. rove and mr. libby. ''one of their strengths was that they worked together,'' said lawrence b. wilkerson, a former state department official who has become a critic of how the administration had handled iraq. ''they didn't show any ankle -- it was always a team effort.''  several former officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that mr. rove and mr. libby had several areas of intersection. mr. libby also held the rank of a presidential adviser, and he stood in for mr. cheney frequently on domestic and foreign policy meetings. both men had a hand in the marketing, and later, the defense, of the iraq strategy. but they approached it from different angles. mr. libby was deeply involved in developing and assessing intelligence about iraq and using it to build the case for the war, and then defending that case as it began to unravel. mr. rove built a re-election strategy for mr. bush that relied heavily on his prosecution of the war against terrorism and the iraq invasion.  both men had their own contacts among journalists. mr. rove dealt mostly with political reporters, including the conservative columnist robert novak, who first disclosed ms. wilson's identity. mr. libby tended to speak with reporters who focused on national security matters, including judith miller, then of the new york times.  mr. fitzgerald has also introduced a new player into the mix, ari fleischer, mr. mcclellan's predecessor as white house press secretary. mr. fleischer, mr. fitzgerald said in court on tuesday, had been informed by mr. libby about ms. wilson's identity as the wife of joseph c. wilson, the former diplomat whose criticism of pre-war intelligence about iraq had set off the case. mr. fleischer had later discussed ms. wilson with reporters including david gregory of nbc news, according to the account.  theodore v. wells jr., mr. libby's lawyer, has argued that mr. fleischer's testimony came after an immunity deal and that he had no notes about the lunch he reportedly had with mr. libby. but that argument fits what appears to be a general strategy by mr. wells to show a confusing situation where loyalties, and memories, are questionable.  