pretzels and beer, a perfect duo, bring harmony to onion soup   dark brown, rich with a hint of sweetness. altbier fits that description. so does onion soup. and the two can certainly be in harmony.  during the tasting eric asimov hinted that he would like a pretzel recipe for these ales, so i decided to make pretzel dumplings with cheese to serve in the soup instead of the usual toasted french bread covered with cheese.  it turned out to be a fine package. while tasting the ales, i thought their malty, toasted, spicy flavors, with bitterness that sometimes suggested buckwheat and burnt caramel, would go with other soups, like lentil, and with pungent washed-rind cheeses.  the onion soup i made followed a fairly classic recipe, though i deglazed the onions with some ale for another synergistic touch. there is ale in the dumplings, too. the recipe for those was based, to some degree, on my formula for matzo balls, which i make with sparkling water. ale's fizz was a fine substitute. with this combination of ingredients, mustard was a natural seasoning.  the dumplings are best when cooked just before serving so that they can be fished, still hot, from their water bath and plopped into the soup without delay. but they can be drained, held, then reheated by steaming if that is more convenient. you can even steam them over the reheating soup.  the main trick to the soup is not to rush browning the onions. they take time to turn a uniform deep gold. i like what happens when the hot soup is set aside so that the thyme can infuse: there's a rounder touch of herbaceousness. besides, soups like this are always better when reheated. a splash of lemon juice enlivens the flavor.  onion soup with pretzel-cheese dumplings  time: 11/2 hours, plus 1 hour's infusing  3 tablespoons unsalted butter  3 pounds onions, sliced thin  1 tablespoon sugar  12 ounces dark ale, preferably altbier  6 cups chicken or beef stock  1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice  salt and black pepper  4 branches fresh thyme  2 cups packaged pretzel nuggets  1 1/2 cups grated gruyère cheese, more for serving  2 large eggs  1 tablespoon whole-grain mustard.  1. melt butter in a 4-quart saucepan. add onions and sugar and cook over medium heat, stirring frequently, until onions are golden, about 40 minutes. add 1 cup ale and stir, scraping pot to release caramelized particles. add stock. simmer 30 minutes. add lemon juice and season with salt and pepper. add thyme and set aside one hour or longer to infuse.  2. pulse pretzels in a food processor or place in a plastic bag and crush with a rolling pin to make coarse crumbs. mix in a bowl with cheese. lightly beat eggs, whisk in mustard and remaining ale and stir this mixture into pretzel crumbs and cheese. form mixture into 18 dumplings about the size of ping-pong balls, place on a platter and cover until ready to cook.  3. about 20 minutes before serving, fill a 3-quart saucepan halfway with water and bring to a boil. drop dumplings into water and simmer gently 15 minutes. while dumplings simmer, remove thyme from soup. reheat soup.  4. ladle soup into bowls. use a slotted spoon to transfer 3 to 4 dumplings to each bowl. serve, with additional grated cheese on the side.  yield: 4 to 6 servings.  pairings  