redesigned toyota pickup to cost more than rivals' trucks   toyota is putting its reputation as a premium automaker to a test by pricing its redesigned pickup, the tundra, several thousand dollars higher than comparable trucks made by general motors and ford.  sticker prices for the bigger and brawnier 2007 tundra, which goes on sale in mid-february, will begin at $22,290 for the most basic model and go as high as $41,850. the chevrolet silverado, which also was revamped for 2007, has a base price of $17,860, while ford's f-series, the segment's longtime leader, starts at $18,275.  of the six full-size pickups available in the united states, only the nissan titan has a higher starting price, and none has a high-end price greater than the tundra's. last year's tundra ranged in price from $16,155 to $33,575.  jesse toprak, an analyst with edmunds.com, a web site that offers car-buying advice, said the toyota pickup cost about $1,100 more than the most popular version of the chevrolet silverado, which was introduced late last year.  ''toyota is confident in their new product. they know their brand strength will probably carry the price point,'' mr. toprak said. ''they hope that people who buy this truck will not need a good deal or a high incentive -- they'll buy the vehicle on its merits.''  ''perhaps that's a little bit arrogant,'' he went on, ''but it's been kind of their continuing strategy.''  comparing prices for similarly equipped pickup trucks is difficult, because manufacturers offer multiple cab sizes, bed lengths, engine sizes and suspensions.  there are 31 versions of the tundra and dozens more of the silverado.  the risk for toyota will be if consumers conclude it is too expensive after comparison shopping on the internet. ''they may be out of the consideration sets of some consumers, simply because it has the highest price,'' mr. toprak said.  toyota considers the new tundra, built in san antonio as well as princeton, ind., to be the most important vehicle it has ever sold in the united states. it expects to sell about 200,000 trucks a year, primarily to owners of other toyota vehicles who purchased pickups from g.m., ford and chrysler.  automakers sold about 2.3 million big pickup trucks in the united states last year. sales of the f-series dropped 11.7 percent in 2006, which ford attributed to a spike in gasoline prices and a slowdown in the housing market, which caused contractors to delay purchasing new trucks.  to counter the shift toward more fuel-efficient vehicles, detroit's automakers have been offering discounts of several thousand dollars on their pickups, making the price gap between the new tundra and a truck like the f-series even larger.  a g.m. spokesman, john m. mcdonald, said the automaker was confident that the silverado, which was named the north american truck of the year at this month's detroit auto show, would have little trouble competing against the tundra, regardless of the price toyota sets.  ''it speaks to the fact that american automakers can produce a truck that has the best quality and sell it at a price that is as good as or better than the competition,'' mr. mcdonald said.  