big bank stops effort to change law limiting growth   bank of america's chairman and chief executive, kenneth d. lewis, said yesterday that the company was backing away from a quiet lobbying effort to change a federal law that could prevent it from making major acquisitions.  just weeks after agreeing to initiate discussions with lawmakers to raise the possibility of lifting the 10 percent federal deposit cap, kenneth d. lewis said that he had told bank representatives to ''back off'' from those plans.  ''i thought we had gotten out there a little too far in terms of our level of aggressiveness, and it sent the wrong signals,'' mr. lewis said in an interview yesterday. about two weeks ago, he made the decision to halt the political effort, he said.  bank of america, which has about $693.5 billion, or just over 9 percent of the nation's deposits, had argued in a position paper that the law restricting a bank to no more than 10 percent of the nation's deposits is ''antiquated, conceptually flawed'' and anticompetitive.  while american banks are prevented from increasing their deposit base through acquisitions that might push them over the federal threshold, foreign banks face no similar restrictions. the bank also argues that the law is unnecessary because of antitrust laws, state regulations and market forces.  but as the only bank near the 10 percent limit, bank of america has found itself with virtually no allies. jpmorgan chase, the next largest deposit holder, could acquire all but the five biggest banks and still remain under the federal cap. wachovia, wells fargo and citigroup, the next banks in line, have potentially even more room and time.  smaller community banks, meanwhile, have vowed to fight any move to lift the cap.  a wells fargo spokesman said the bank also opposed lifting the cap, preferring to stick to its internal growth strategy that does not come close to hitting the limit. jpmorgan declined to comment, while wachovia and citigroup said they had no position on the subject.  on capitol hill, the proposed change has met with a lukewarm reception. representative barney frank, the massachusetts democrat who heads the house financial services committee, has suggested that lifting the cap may be part of some sort of ''grand compromise'' between wall street and main street interests. there does not appear to be much enthusiasm, but other lawmakers have not dismissed the idea out of hand.  bank of america's backpedaling is either the recognition of a rare misstep or a shrewd calculation for mr. lewis, who is known for his deliberate approach to corporate strategy.  on the one hand, reports of the plans were a reminder of the bank's bigger ambitions, leading to speculation that it was setting the stage to engage in a major deal. on the other, it may be a way of taking the temperature of a new democratic-controlled congress while planting the idea in people's minds. typically, it takes years to pass legislation to repeal banking laws like those governing interstate banking.  ''they are testing the waters and seeing what is out there,'' said brian gardner, a policy analyst with keefe, bruyette & woods. with several democratic lawmakers representing areas like new york that have strong banking ties, the perception that democrats are less open to the idea of raising the cap may be wrong, he said. ''it makes a lot of sense to probe and see how far the democrats are willing to go.''  bank of america's plans may also underscore the challenge it faces in sustaining its robust growth.  yesterday, bank of america said fourth-quarter earnings rose 47 percent.  much of that growth, however, was from the recognition of unusually large gains on its equity investments as well as new profits from the recently acquired mbna.  many of the biggest costs have been flushed out. and without the investment gains, internal growth appears to have stopped or slowed.  over all, the bank earned $5.26 billion, or $1.16 a share, from a restated $3.57 billion, or 88 cents, in the quarter a year ago. fourth-quarter profits for its global consumer and small- business operations rose 44 percent, to $2.53 billion, with the additional boost from mbna. its corporate and investment banking earnings rose 23 percent, to $1.57 billion, at a time when much bigger wall street investment bankers -- with more commodities and international exposure -- posted huge gains in the quarter. profits at bank of america's wealth management and investment businesses declined 1 percent.  the american economy, meanwhile, may be slowing. a downturn in the credit cycle is on the horizon if not already here.  ''you know the headwinds will mute earnings growth; you also know that our businesses will perform quite well,'' said joe price, bank of america's chief financial officer, in his first conference call with analysts and investors since succeeding alvaro de molina at the start of this year. ''the biggest question for us is the health of the american economy, and we think we are in pretty good shape.''  some wall street analysts suggest bank of america is at a strategic crossroads, balancing internal growth with bigger ambitions. one path that is unlikely to be taken, at least for now, is a major acquisition.  the federal deposit cap severely limits bank of america's ability to buy a big bank in the united states. and on the conference call, mr. lewis seemed to rule out making a major european deal.  ''i think a european acquisition will cause us to pause; that's not what we are thinking about,'' mr. lewis said.  