where the kids are: in their own rock band   when you've been called forrest fire gray since you were in diapers, it may be hard not to become a rock star.  his birth certificate actually reads forrest dylan gray, but the floppy-haired 14-year-old has always been known as forrest fire, says his mother, kathleen russo. (his father was the late monologist and actor spalding gray.) and even before he reached ninth grade, forrest had begun making a name for himself in rock 'n' roll.  too busy being bored, a punk-leaning six-boy band that owes a major debt to the vines and the '90s grunge movement and a minor one to forrest's noise-tolerant sag harbor neighbors, has not wasted a second finding the spotlight since forming last february.  even before they became high school students in september at the ross school in east hampton and the pierson high school in sag harbor, the group's members -- the lead guitarist, forrest; the singer, peter landi, 14; the drummer, dave horn, 15; the rhythm guitarist, george hoglund, 14; the bassist, tucker ruiz, 14; and the keyboardist, owen preata, 14 -- had spent afternoons developing their raw, hard-hitting sound in forrest's basement.  by summer, with the help of ms. russo's boyfriend, david olson, who manages them as well as his own brooklyn band, a.d.d. nation, they had won a live music competition in suffolk county and were pounding out original songs for hundreds of the hamptons' well-heeled at beach night in sag harbor, an annual outdoor concert.  and by november, with only a few local performances under their belts, they pulled off a feat few boys their age are apt to duplicate. too busy being bored beat out 40-odd groups entered into a battle of the bands called ''the next big thing'' at the knitting factory in manhattan.  the momentum from that victory has generated a league of local fans, some as young as 5. they were in evidence in hand-designed tbbb t-shirts, mostly jumping up and down as if they were on invisible pogo sticks, at an energetic, claustrophobia-inducing concert at the stephen talkhouse here recently.  it has also caused the boys to become more serious about the band than the adults in their lives might like.  ''he's already told me he's not going to college,'' ms. russo, who has a warm manner and an easy smile, said before the stephen talkhouse performance. ''he said they'd all go sometime, but this is what they're really passionate about.''  at the ross school, the teachers just don't understand, forrest said in a telephone interview. ''i don't think they really know how good we're doing,'' he said. ''they think it's going to be something like a hobby for us.''  ms. russo sees it as ''art therapy,'' she said. ''and the way i look at it, there's no better therapy. he picked up the guitar at 11, after his father died. he'd never tell you this himself, but he wrote 'letter by letter' for his father.''  that song, an angst-filled bit of hard rock that came second in too busy being bored's recent set and inspired a sing-along by several in the audience, is also on the band's myspace page (http://profile.myspace.com/2bbb).  spalding gray, best known for writing and performing the monologue ''swimming to cambodia,'' which was made into a film in 1987, committed suicide. his body was found in the east river in 2004.  not surprisingly for a 14-year-old, forrest was not very talkative on the subject of his father -- or on most other topics. his passion for rock was the exception.  ''all we want to do is play music,'' he said. ''i've always wanted to be in a band. this is the most important thing in our lives.''  