rough (but silly) justice and striking (also silly) moves   when the judge in a murder case pronounces a defendant not guilty, i doubt that confetti streams from the ceiling. i also suspect that the prosecutor is rarely a foul-tempered teenager who carries a whip and curtsies when she presents compelling evidence. but if trials were as entertaining in the real world as in phoenix wright ace attorney justice for all, it might be worth jury duty just see it all firsthand.  phoenix wright is the spiky-haired defense lawyer previously seen in phoenix wright: ace attorney. in this sequel from capcom for nintendo ds, most of the rest of the cast also returns, including phoenix's psychic sidekick, maya, and the glum detective dick gumshoe.  with their help, phoenix seeks out evidence to exonerate clients facing seemingly incontrovertible testimony. this testimony comes from odd characters, including a ventriloquist who is continually insulted and pummeled by his dummy, a clown who uses makeup that is ''sensitive enough for a baby, strong enough for a mime'' and a security guard who wears an astronaut suit and carries a toy ray gun that she fires whenever she is annoyed.  the prosecutor for most of the cases is an 18-year-old legal prodigy who derides phoenix with remarks like ''only a foolish-looking fool could be fooled by such a foolish fool's foolish dream.''  the game is divided into two parts: investigative segments in which you gather clues, and courtroom sequences where you must exploit inconsistencies in a witness's testimony using deductive reasoning.  if a witness swears your client was standing over the body with a knife, you must review the evidence in the court record for proof that the witness must have been looking the other way, or the knife was actually a carrot, or your client could not possibly have been seen wearing that particular pair of shoes.  find the right evidence and phoenix will shout ''hold it!,'' the jury will murmur in shock and the witness will cry out ''arrrgh!'' present the wrong evidence and phoenix will stammer out a confused objection, after which the judge will penalize him; earn enough penalties and your client will wind up on death row.  winning is made more difficult by a legal system in which disproving every shred of evidence is not enough; you must get the murderer to confess on the stand. fortunately for phoenix, it seems every killer will make a public confession in a courtroom if you just show that missing shoelace or torn photograph that proves that only one person could have committed the crime.  justice is a terrific game, but it suffers in comparison with the previous one. this time around the plot twists aren't quite as unexpected (you usually know who the real killer is fairly early on), and some of the puzzles in the last case are rather unreasonable. and while the previous game gave the player some cute toys, like a fingerprint kit and a liquid that revealed blood stains, there is little of that in the sequel. but as in the first game, justice has gripping stories, clever, logical puzzles and laugh-out-loud dialogue.  while justice is a meal of intricate stories and complex puzzles, warioware: smooth moves is like a bowl of popcorn, small flavorful pieces mindlessly consumed.  like all the games in the warioware series, smooth moves gives the players a simple, often peculiar task to perform in a few seconds, and then another and another and another. on screen you are given a command -- ''jump'' or ''hula'' or ''grind'' -- then you see an interactive cartoon and must figure out what to do and do it as quickly as possible.  the warioware games are notable for bringing the same basic gameplay to different platforms. on the nintendo gamecube, you would have to push buttons at the right time. on the ds, also from nintendo, you would slide the stylus across the screen or blow into the microphone.  developed by intelligent systems for the wii, the new nintendo system, smooth moves uses its motion-sensitive controller to great effect. you roast meat over a fire by slowly turning the wii over, or answer a phone by putting the remote on a table and picking it up at the right moment, or jump rope by standing with the wii on your head and actually jumping.  outside of the new control mechanism, smooth moves is just like all the other warioware games, with simple, colorful graphics, flashy music and tasks like controlling a marionette. like the rest of the series, the game is broken up into a series of levels, each introduced by a long, painfully dull cartoon that the player cannot skip. (the game's developers simply cannot figure out that while they are talented at making dozens of five-second games, they are poor at storytelling.)  smooth moves does everything with the wii controller one can think of. throughout the game, the player is taught various methods to hold the controller, including the waiter, in which you hold it on the flat of your palm, and the tug of war, in which you hold it with both hands; before each challenge you are shown the proper hold to use.  each new grip is introduced with an amusing description; for the umbrella, in which you point the controller upward, you are told the pose ''channels the quiet dignity of a circus clown in the midst of a thunderstorm.''  smooth moves is tremendously entertaining but not particularly difficult; often you simply have to shake or turn the controller a little, although there are a handful of tasks i never could manage to do right.  each level ends with one big final challenge, but unlike previous games, smooth moves makes most of these challenges quite easy. so getting through all the levels is quick work; it took me about five hours to play through every challenge and try out all the minigames, which include stacking falling boxes and bouncing a ping-pong ball that has to break through various barriers.  it is still fun to try improving your skills by replaying challenges, but for me the game is a one-day rental, although i would say it is something every person who owns the wii needs to see.  the final challenge of the concluding level is the best thing in the game, an amazing sequence in which you are one of four dancing figures and must synchronize your movements with theirs. this one actually makes you get up and dance, and is so much fun that after playing it i immediately went to the section of the game where you can replay any challenge and played an expanded version.  it's so entertaining that i wish the game's developers would simply try and turn that one sequence into a game of its own. that's something even a lawyer like phoenix wright wouldn't object to.  phoenix wright: ace attorney  justice for all  developed and published by capcom for nintendo ds; for ages 13 and up; $29.99.  warioware: smooth moves  developed by intelligent systems and published by nintendo for the wii; for ages 10 and up; $49.99.  game theory e-mail: herold@nytimes.com  