in pittsburgh, a music director to replace three conductors   two seasons ago the pittsburgh symphony orchestra announced it was moving in a ''bold new direction'' by hiring three conductors, rather than following the lone music director model that dominates american orchestras.  so much for audacious experiments.  the orchestra said yesterday that it had appointed manfred honeck, an austrian conductor, as its music director, starting in september 2008. mr. honeck made his debut with the symphony in may and has conducted five concerts; the pittsburgh musicians and newspaper critics warmly embraced him during the brief courtship. he is fresh off a six-year stint as music director of the swedish radio symphony orchestra.  in september 2004 the pittsburgh symphony said it was responding to the desires of its audiences and players by appointing sir andrew davis as artistic adviser, and yan pascal tortelier and marek janowski as regular guests. mr. davis recently said he would not renew his contract.  in a telephone interview lawrence tamburri, the orchestra's president, declined to call the experiment a failure. rather, he said, the orchestra benefited greatly from the troika.  ''we learned a lot from that process,'' he said. ''we had three excellent conductors conducting strong repertoire for them.'' ticket sales, particularly subscriptions, are up, he said, but ''it became clear over time that both the audiences and the orchestra needed central leadership.''  underlying the three-headed approach was the orchestra's difficulty in finding a conductor of international stature willing to spend the time in pittsburgh cultivating donors, making public appearances and handling administrative matters. such activities are part of the job description for american music directors, but europeans are not used to the fund-raising tasks.  mr. honeck, 48, began his career as a violinist in the vienna philharmonic. by the time he takes over, he will also be music director of the staatsoper stuttgart and principal guest conductor of the czech philharmonic orchestra. mr. tamburri said mr. honeck had committed himself to extra-musical tasks like fund-raising and serving as the orchestra's public face.  ''he's going to be a music director in the full sense of a music director in america,'' mr. tamburri said. the contract calls for him to conduct 8 weeks the first season, and 10 weeks each of the next two.  mr. honeck, speaking from pittsburgh, embraced the role.  ''i regard this position as the fullest thing of what a music director means,'' he said. ''i know this conflict between the european thinking about music and the american thinking. it's so important to do everything that helps the orchestra.  ''i'm absolutely responsible for the quality of the orchestra,'' he continued. ''if the quality is very high, the people will long for more. fund-raising is of course a part of the music director's life here in the united states. it is for me clear that i have to do it.''  mr. honeck said he had been seduced by the pittsburgh musicians' high level of playing. he also cited their ''inner strength, and this will to play very, very good, and to go 100 percent with the conductor.''  as for repertory, mr. honeck said he would concentrate on the music of his heritage, the viennese tradition -- mahler, mozart, brahms and bruckner -- as well as contemporary works. ''it's very important that we do this, that we help people to understand our time,'' he said.  mr. honeck's brother rainer is a concertmaster of the self-governing vienna philharmonic, which has another solution to the music director problem: it has none. only guests.  