feeling healthy and ready, webb takes aim at the mile   in 2001, alan webb broke the high school indoor and outdoor records for the mile and became the first prep runner to run a sub-four-minute mile indoors. then came six years of occasional fast times interrupted by too few good races and too many injuries and illnesses.  as webb saw it, it was six years of going hardly anywhere.  there were teases. in 2005 in oslo, he ran a mile in 3 minutes 48.92 seconds, fast by any standard. last year, at stanford, he ran 10,000 meters in 27:34.72, the fastest debut by an american. but he felt his potential was untapped.  ''i'm a miler,'' webb said. ''the last few years, i've tried other stuff, like distances and cross-country. now it's time to see where i am in the mile.''  he was glowing after his 3:56.70 mile last saturday at the armory in upper manhattan, his fastest indoors. tonight, over the even-faster 200-meter track at the reggie lewis center, he will run the mile in the boston indoor games against chris lukezic, gabe jennings and rob myers of the united states; kevin sullivan and nate brannen of canada; ivan heshko of ukraine; and elkanah angwenyi of kenya.  ''i'd like to keep improving,'' webb said. ''i think with the competition in boston, i'll probably have to run at least what i did last week or faster.  ''i am very happy with my condition. last year, i was in very, very good shape in the late spring and early summer, but i tweaked my hamstring and got a little bit sick, a little bit tired, and things didn't really work out in the summer. but that training did not go away, and i am reaping the benefits of the training i've done the last few years.''  he said one objective was to train exactly enough.  ''i feel like a lot of times, you have to walk that line between doing too much and doing too little,'' he said. ''you really have to toe it as close as you can.  ''sometimes you do too much. last year was a pretty good example of that.''  webb is 24, 5 feet 9 inches and 140 pounds. he comes from reston, va., and, after one year at the university of michigan, he returned home to resume training with scott raczko, his coach from the start.  webb opened his season with a 3:59.34 mile in fairfax, va. ahead are the mile in boston tonight and the wanamaker mile in the millrose games at madison square garden next friday. after that may be the tyson invitational on feb. 10 in fayetteville, ark., and the national indoor championships feb. 23-25 in boston.  he is especially looking forward to millrose, the blue-ribbon meet indoors.  ''what makes millrose great,'' webb said, ''is running in madison square garden and running in front of a crowd of 10,000 or 15,000 people and running against the best guys in the world. just being in a race with bernard lagat and craig mottram, that could be the olympic 1,500-meter final. it's that kind of level.  ''i wouldn't go in if i didn't think that i could compete. spectators only want to see me if i'm running well. they don't want to see me get ninth or something.''  track and field  