artistic revival takes root amid relics of copper mines   this is the city that copper built, in the mountains atop the continental divide.  when the copper played out, though, most of the people left. a city of more than 80,000 people at the turn of the 20th century, butte now has about 35,000 residents. the dwindling population has left many historic buildings in the heart of uptown butte empty or greatly underused.  now community leaders hope the lure of cheap square footage in the 19th- and early 20th-century structures will transform the decaying former mining-company town into a refuge for artists, whose creativity will spark reclamation.  ''art brings hope,'' said glenn bodish, the executive director of the butte silver bow arts foundation. ''everybody went to work for the company, and followed the company's rules, and when they left people lost their jobs and were knocked over.'' the city makes up part of one of the largest national historic landmarks in the country based on the number of buildings. but for decades many structures were abandoned for back taxes. many sat empty with broken windows, or fell prey to arsonists or wrecking balls. that is changing. artists understand craftsmanship, mr. bodish said, and can find beauty in the neglected buildings.  ''i love the history,'' said steven nordgren, a restoration graphic designer from detroit who moved here last year in large measure because of the architecture.  ''everybody is doing decal arts these days,'' mr. nordgren said. ''but i love working with the lost arts, the historic applications of glue-chip glass, applied gold leaf, plaster restoration, stenciling and trompe l'oeil in churches and theaters.''  the arts renaissance here began in a chateau-style home built in 1898 by charles clark, the son of william clark, one of the copper kings who built the bustling metropolis over veins of copper beneath what was called the richest hill on earth. the home is now a museum.  five years ago, the butte silver bow arts foundation bought a burned-out coffee shop, the blue venus, in an old building next to venus alley, the mining town's largest red-light district. the coffee shop has been renamed venus rising, a metaphor for the arts community that has started to rise from the ruins of butte. there are nine employees, and an art gallery in the back. an artist-in-residence works in a studio upstairs. the foundation is now partly financed through this and other small business operations.  for a dollar, the foundation just bought the old y.m.c.a., a classic 1917 building, and opened 18 studios, already fully occupied, and an art-supply store.  ''it's cool that there are enough artists to fill up this building,'' said patricia briggs, a fantasy writer who returned to butte after leaving, and now has a studio in the y.m.c.a.  while some artists have been recruited, others have shown up on their own. john richen, a sculptor from california, got off interstate 90 for a rest stop and fell in love with the town. he recently remodeled two historic buildings, turning one into a coffee shop and the one next door into a restaurant.  dawn and john wexo, who are both writers and sculptors, are moving their bronze foundry from buffalo, wyo., to butte. they hope to locate in a hoist house called mountain con, a large building where machinery once lowered miners in elevators into the tunnels.  longtime butte artists say the renaissance has been invigorating.  ''it's exciting,'' said toni seccomb, a sculptor and member of main stope gallery, an artists' cooperative that takes its name from the timber that holds up a mine. ''there are more artists around, and the creativity feeds on it. butte is also still affordable, and the rest of montana isn't.''  and there is hope for a kind of artistic reparation. an art collection amassed by william clark, the copper tycoon, is in the clark wing that he financed at the corcoran gallery of art in washington. the arts foundation would like to bring it to butte, at least on temporary loan, after the gymnasium at the y.m.c.a. is converted into a gallery to be called the museum of fine arts butte.  ''for mr. clark to amass his collection cost butte economic, cultural and environmental devastation,'' mr. bodish said. ''butte has been sacrificed for america. bringing part of this collection back temporarily is a gesture of their understanding how important butte was in american history. it closes the loop.''  butte demands a lot from the artists, and others, who move here. temperatures plummeted to 33 degrees below zero this month, not uncommon here in the rockies. in 1989, the city set a record wind-chill temperature of 91 below.  ''you spend time inside,'' said donna croitz, a sculptor who moved here from dallas in 2005 and has a studio at the y.m.c.a. ''and i keep pictures of beaches on the wall.''  butte journal  