murdoch said to join tribune bid   yet another media mogul has reportedly entered the fray for the tribune company -- rupert murdoch and his news corporation, whose holdings include fox news and the new york post.  mr. murdoch's goal, according to an associate, is to gain a stake in newsday, the long island newspaper in melville that is owned by tribune, so that he can combine its back-office functions with those of the post as a way to save costs.  the post, although gaining circulation and now the nation's fifth-largest daily, still loses money.  media reports last night said that mr. murdoch had already placed a bid, partnering with the chandler family, which is tribune's largest shareholder. but other indications were that mr. murdoch was of two minds about getting involved, in part because newsday is still recovering from a scandal in which executives had inflated circulation figures.  tribune has already sharply cut costs at newsday, which has lost about a third of its employees over the last few years.  still, any expression of interest by mr. murdoch could quickly turn the lagging auction for tribune into a higher-stakes game.  tribune executives met over the weekend to consider their options, with three bids on the table: from the chandlers; from two los angeles billionaires, eli broad and ronald w. burkle; and from the carlyle group, a private equity firm interested in the television properties. waiting in the wings is david geffen, a los angeles mogul, who has expressed interest in the los angeles times.  the company has said that it wants to sell itself as a whole, but the interest expressed by wealthy individuals and companies may change its mind. tribune said on saturday that it might consider acting alone to achieve its goal, which is to increase shareholder value. complaints last year by the chandlers about the sagging share price put the company auction in motion.  the chandlers are mainly interested in the company's 11 newspapers, which include the los angeles times, the baltimore sun and the hartford courant, in addition to newsday, and would sell off its 23 television stations.  mr. murdoch's vast television holdings could complicate any bid by him for the entire tribune company, given various federal rules regarding the audience reach of an owner in any single market.  the financial times, which first reported yesterday that mr. murdoch had joined the chandler family, said that he would probably take a minority stake in a consortium owning the tribune's newspapers, rather than try to buy control of newsday.  newsday, which competes with the post, has a weekday circulation of about 410,000; the post's is about 704,000.  a special committee of tribune's directors said last weekend that it was weighing transactions involving third parties but was also considering steps that the company might take on its own. the company has given itself a deadline of the end of march to make a decision, and people close to the process said it could take weeks to resolve.  mr. murdoch's potential ownership of newsday has long been the subject of speculation.  alfonse d'amato, the former republican senator from new york and a long island native, wrote in a column in newsday in november: ''already the owner of the vigorous new york post, murdoch could bring decades of newspaper experience to bear, together with the ability to create a joint operating agreement between the two papers. no other local business consortium would be able to create that kind of savings while offering advertisers the combined reach of the new york post and newsday in this very competitive but lucrative market.''  correction:  january 31, 2007, wednesday  an article in business day last wednesday about the possibility of rupert murdoch joining the chandler family's bid for the tribune company misstated the source of a comment by alfonse d'amato, the former republican senator from new york, about the merits of such a move by mr. murdoch. mr. d'amato's comment was from a column in the long island business news, not newsday.  