if beauty is only skin deep, look really, really hard   rhinos don't enjoy the household privileges of dinos and hippos. they make no claims of cuteness. they don't smile broadly on mugs, t-shirts and the bedsheets of toddlers; they don't pervade the work of sandra boynton. surely it can't be that rhinos are the scariest of the three: nearly all of those big beasts can get ugly, and none would make good pets.  but there's something especially uncanny about the rhinoceros that ill suits it for kitsch. for one, the rhino is not extinct -- though it seems hard to believe that such a lumbering, earthbound monster could coexist with space exploration and iphones. this four-ton creature with the ringed, sorrowful eyes and the noli me tangere horn seems instead like something that might have been drawn by a fantasist cartographer trying to impress his european patrons in the 17th century. it's hard even to believe in the rhinoceros.  and yet tomorrow's episode of the ''nature'' series, ''rhinoceros,'' offers proof. black rhinos, white rhinos, rhinos in what looks like bolted-on armor. there are five species of rhinos, in fact, and the program introduces all of them in a conscientious, if not quite adoring, manner.  rhinos have roamed the earth for millions of years. sure, humans have dealt them a setback -- as we are inclined to do -- but they're making a comeback, aided by concerned naturalists who are willing to do things like haul them in nets attached to helicopters and give the massive females injections of rhino sperm.  all this manipulation is done in the name of promoting reproduction and protecting the rhinos from poachers who (we're told) kill them for their horns. rhino horn, the program further explains, has historically been coveted by men in yemen, who make dagger handles from them, and chinese doctors, who grind them for medicine. the documentary clearly frowns on these uses of rhinoceros horns, and labors to show that the horns are no more medicinal than human fingernails. but it doesn't do much to dispel the idea that the dagger handles look cool, especially when they are studded with jewels.  the ''nature'' series always comes with a built-in melodrama. it's typically a big, international conservation foundation versus a bunch of small-minded opportunists, like poachers or hunters, who hurt the natural world in the name of superstition or sport. this is a tolerable pretext for watching panda bears or wild horses, but sometimes you feel as if you're missing something.  in this case i would have liked to see the poachers: how did they catch, trap and kill the big rhinos? how did they remove the horns? what was the market for the horns like? what do they do now that the animals are protected?  in the meantime, it's not as if the good scientists of ''nature'' leave the horns alone. raj amin, an ecologist at the zoological society of london, studies horn samples to determine the diets, and thus the origins, of rhinos. more dramatically, rhinos reintroduced to wild habitats are fitted with microchips so they can be traced. the chips are put deep in the horn, which has to be cut down first. but the ''nature'' voice-over assures viewers, incongruously, that the horn will grow back.  nature  rhinoceros  on most pbs stations tomorrow night (check local listings).  nigel marven and rob harvey, producers; fred kaufman, series executive producer; william grant, executive in charge. produced by image impact and thirteen/wnet new york.  television review  