knicks avoid rout, but not another loss   a cruel sort of familiarity came over the knicks last night, as they stared at the wrong end of a lopsided score and watched another star player limp away. a few more games like this could destroy their morale, if not their season.  the injured star was center eddy curry, who has become the knicks' most irreplaceable player. he strained his left calf muscle early in the fourth quarter, just as the phoenix suns surged to a 17-point lead at madison square garden. the knicks avoided the rout, losing, 112-107, but they could not avoid another night of furrowed brows and deep sighs.  stephon marbury was already out, resting a sore knee that knocked him out of monday night's blowout loss in miami. marbury said he planned to be back tomorrow when the heat go to the garden, but now it is curry whose status is up in the air.  the knicks offered no official prognosis, and coach isiah thomas said, ''i don't know what his situation will be.''  the most optimistic voice belonged to curry, who predicted he would be fine for tomorrow's showdown with shaquille o'neal. but curry said he could not be sure until he sees how the calf responds overnight. a similar injury cost curry five games last season, but he said this one was not as severe.  ''definitely not as bad,'' curry said. ''i'm not expecting to miss any time, but you don't really know with these type of things.''  according to curry, the team doctors believe the injury is ''fairly significant, but they think there's a good chance i'll play friday.''  the suns (34-8) won their 15th straight game, tying a franchise record they set earlier this season. amare stoudemire led the way, scoring 26 of his 30 points in the second half. steve nash, who is sprinting toward a possible third straight most valuable player award, had 22 points and 14 assists.  the knicks (18-26) fell eight games below .500, matching their low point of the season. after briefly making a run at the atlantic division lead, the knicks have lost five of seven games and are three and a half games behind toronto.  still, the knicks nearly survived marbury's absence last night. they cannot afford to lose curry, their leading scorer and the focal point of their offensive system. no one on the roster can do what he does.  ''i don't even want to think about it,'' jamal crawford said of losing curry.  curry was barreling toward a career game, scoring 21 points in the first half and overpowering stoudemire.  ''he's a load,'' suns coach mike d'antoni said.  curry said the calf began to feel tight when he started the third quarter. it was evident in his play. curry picked up two quick fouls guarding stoudemire and stopped attacking on offense. the training staff had curry put a sleeve over the calf to keep it loose.  ''i kind of knew when it started to tighten up that if i push off on it too fast that it'd be a problem,'' curry said. ''so i kind of had to gauge myself out there and pick my spots.''  but 1 minute 20 seconds into the fourth quarter, curry caught a pass on the right block and spun aggressively toward the basket for a layup. he came down with a wince and could not run back up the court. he limped to the sideline and later retreated to the locker room.  ''it's just in my nature to get the ball and try to score,'' curry said. ''it just kind of gave out on me.''  the knicks trailed by 87-70 when curry left. crawford, as he so often has, seized the moment. he scored 23 points in the fourth quarter, and along with david lee, nearly rallied the knicks to the comeback.  crawford hit two free throws with 41.5 seconds left to cut the deficit to 6 points, then hit two more to make it a 5-point game with 25.6 seconds left. but the knicks ran out of time, and nash made three of four free throws to close out the victory.  crawford, starting in place of marbury, had 29 points and 11 assists and played all 48 minutes. curry finished with 25 points in 31 minutes. lee had 17 points and 14 rebounds off the bench. nate robinson, who played most of the second half next to crawford, also had 17 points but shot 5 of 19 from the field.  quentin richardson, a former sun and the knicks' best shooter, missed all five of his shots and went scoreless in 24 minutes.  phoenix pulled away by hitting seven 3-pointers in the second half (after making just two in the first half) and by getting to the foul line. they made 22 of 31 free throws in the second half. without curry, the knicks' inside game dried up.  marbury watched the game in a suit and tie, but before tip-off he said he was ''definitely playing friday'' when the heat -- with o'neal and dwyane wade back in the lineup -- visits the garden. miami routed the knicks by 18 points monday.  the knicks have weathered the absence of several players already, and thomas said they could survive curry's as well.  ''it'd be tough, but we'll manage,'' he said. ''we'll find a way to make it work.''  rebounds  stephon marbury's troublesome left knee felt good enough to run yesterday but not ready for jumping and cutting. he said that another 48 hours of rest would be enough and that he had no doubt about playing tomorrow night. marbury said the knee will not be pain free when he returns, but it will be much better than it was when he was forced to sit out the second half of monday's loss at miami. ''these two days are going to be huge for me,'' marbury said. ''it's just like more stiff than hurting. the pain part is gone, as far as the way how it felt when i initially did it.'' marbury said he had already adjusted his game to compensate for the knee, which he originally injured dec. 15. ''i'm playing smarter,'' he said. ''i wasn't going to the basket like how i did four or five years ago.''  for the second straight game, jared jeffries opened the second half on the bench. he was replaced by nate robinson and did not return until the final 25.6 seconds of the fourth quarter. jeffries has been ineffective lately and was booed by fans several times last night. ''we depend on him to bring energy,'' isiah thomas said before the game. ''it won't necessarily show up on the stat sheet, but he's got to find a way to affect the game with his energy.''  basketball  