bush revives some past proposals and offers a new initiative on health insurance   president bush delivered a domestic agenda to congressional democrats on tuesday that was, in large part, modest and a reiteration of past proposals. where he did break ground -- on health care -- his initiative was quickly dismissed by leading democrats and seemed unlikely to form the basis of bipartisan action.  there were some notable omissions in mr. bush's speech. he did not offer a new proposal for dealing with the long-term financial problems in medicare and social security, although he again identified those entitlement programs as a challenge that must be confronted. nor did he make the grand gesture that might have spurred congressional democrats into the bipartisan talks on entitlements that administration officials insist they want.  mr. bush renewed his call for an overhaul of immigration laws, considered one of his best chances to accomplish something big in the current congress. but in general, his domestic agenda reflected the political constraints of a conservative second-term president facing a newly empowered democratic-led congress.  aside from energy, the major focus of mr. bush's domestic proposals was an effort to expand access to affordable health insurance, by creating a new tax benefit for those buying insurance on their own rather than through their employer. the new benefit would be part of a sweeping change in the tax code under which employer-provided health insurance, which is how more than half of americans get their coverage, would be treated as taxable income. for decades, those benefits have been exempt from income and payroll taxes.  in effect, the president is proposing a new standard deduction for health insurance -- $15,000 for families and $7,500 for individuals. that would mean lower taxes for more than 100 million americans with employer-provided coverage worth less than the standard deduction, mr. bush said. but it would raise taxes for about 30 million people with more expensive plans, unless they switched to less costly alternatives, white house officials said.  mr. bush said the tax proposal was an effort to ''level the playing field'' between americans buying insurance on their own and those who get it through their employers. ''for the millions of other americans who have no health insurance at all, this deduction would help put a basic private health insurance plan within their reach,'' he said. ''changing the tax code is a vital and necessary step to making health care affordable for more americans.''  democrats, labor unions and some consumer advocates said the proposal would shake the foundations of the nation's health insurance system, still largely built around the workplace.  congressional democrats described the plan as a middle-class tax increase that would penalize people with good health benefits. they praised the new focus on health care, but said the bush proposal was more likely to yield partisan debate than a search for consensus.  ''it's difficult to imagine a proposal like this making it through the house or the senate,'' said a spokesman for senator harry reid of nevada, the democratic leader.  representative charles b. rangel, democrat of new york and chairman of the ways and means committee, said, ''i cannot conceive of this as an olive branch, as an attempt to get something done.''  representative pete stark, democrat of california and chairman of the ways and means subcommittee on health, said his panel would not consider mr. bush's proposal.  prospects were less grim for immigration legislation. mr. bush renewed his push for a law that would toughen border security, grant legal status to the nation's illegal immigrants and create a temporary worker program to ensure a steady flow of foreign workers to businesses.  the proposal, which would also toughen criminal and financial penalties for employers who hire illegal immigrants, has a much stronger chance of passage in a democratic-led congress this year than it did when republicans were in control, lawmakers of both parties say.  leading democrats in the senate, who have consulted with mr. bush in recent weeks, expect to introduce legislation next month. house democrats expect to follow.  but passage is far from assured. the a.f.l-c.i.o, which is expected to have more leverage in this congress, is determined to scuttle the temporary worker program, saying it threatens to replace american workers with foreigners. administration officials emphasized on tuesday that the program would have to be ''truly temporary,'' which left some advocates for immigrants concerned that mr. bush might oppose a path to permanent residency or citizenship for temporary workers.  and some moderate democrats, along with conservative republicans, strongly oppose proposals that would legalize illegal immigrants, saying they amount to an amnesty for lawbreakers.  still, critics and proponents of the legislation alike agree that this year offers mr. bush his best opportunity to build a bipartisan consensus on the issue. his focus on the need for immigrants to assimilate -- by learning english and integrating more deeply into american society -- may be intended to help ease concerns among some of his republican supporters and some moderate democrats.  mr. bush also returned to the signature bipartisan accomplishment of his first term, the no child left behind legislation that requires schools to demonstrate yearly progress in students' achievements. he urged congress to renew the law.  