producer's big picture on the small screen   john shannon is watching.  shannon, for decades one of hockey's greatest producers at the cbc's ''hockey night in canada,'' is no longer in a truck looking at a wall full of screens, determining how cameras should frame face-offs and power plays, or deciding when to drop in features to personalize a player.  he is no longer directly nurturing announcers for the canadian broadcasting corporation, as he did with john davidson, who took his lessons to msg as the rangers' analyst and is now the president of the st. louis blues. still, two minor league announcers from laredo, tex., and toledo, ohio, send shannon tapes regularly for him to evaluate.  shannon's job, as the senior vice president for broadcasting of the national hockey league, is to improve the productions of all the games in the united states and canada and on local and national networks, including tonight's all-star game in dallas, which will be on versus.  ''we want consistency,'' he said in an interview last week. ''we want to raise the bar and do certain things that let us give existing fans, and new ones, something to latch onto.''  his mission is to make better hockey television that will generate more viewers in the ratings-challenged sport (at least south of canada). ''my every toe and finger is crossed, but it's a long process,'' he said.  perhaps more than anything, shannon wants hockey crews to answer the question he always urged davidson to respond to: why?  why did that play occur the way it did?  ''don't give me time and score,'' he said. ''tell me why.''  so he is watching. and grading.  shannon and his staff have evaluated more than half this season's games, looking at 13 elements -- from camera work and audio, to storytelling and analysis, to promotion and the quality of their openings.  in one composite report card of several games on one regional sports network -- shannon blacked out the team and channel -- the camera work was praised, but ''missed opportunities'' to tell stories were cited and the analyst got worse, not better, after a promising start.  and the analyst and play-by-play announcer were said to be rattling off game action rather than demonstrating a ''free-flowing style.''  the report questioned the value of a twice-used segment, in which a former n.h.l. tough guy broke down fights from earlier games.  ''it is worth discussing whether or not the segment is something the n.h.l. wants a broadcast partner putting on the air,'' the report said.  as shannon flipped to several games one night last week, he monitored how producers used one of his innovations: 20-second segments added after each period's three commercial breaks to deploy any of the dozens of player features produced by the league, to tell stories or to provide context to a significant play that occurred before the break.  he was pleased to see a scouting report by the panthers' video coordinator during the carolina-florida game, a feature on lightning defenseman luke richardson in the toronto-tampa bay broadcast and an isolated replay of jaromir jagr in the rangers-devils game.  he questioned a couple of choices, only because they were different than he would have made. ''not wrong, just different,'' he said.  mitch rubenstein, who produces panthers games for fsn florida and national games for versus, said the nine narrative openings ''make it fun to be involved in hockey because you've got opportunities you didn't have.''  rubenstein and joe whelan, who produces rangers games for msg, said shannon's involvement has not felt intrusive.  ''i hope that nobody feels like they're being unfairly watched,'' whelan said. ''john wears it on his sleeve. he's direct, but he's fair and he encourages feedback. i don't know why anyone would fear john.''  shannon, 50, grew up in oliver, british columbia (population 4,359 in 2000). he could not skate, so he did not play hockey. he listened to jim robson call ''hockey night's'' west coast games; he loved the rangers, while loathing the maple leafs and the canadiens. he wanted to call hockey but eventually got a job with ''hockey night'' and quickly became a producer.  ''they said i had good organizational talents,'' he said. but he also had something else. ''i have an innate ability to understand hockey. my eyesight isn't better than yours. i don't see the puck better than you. but i understand the flow.''  that flow is determined largely by the work of the person at the main camera, which accounts for about 70 percent of the live part of a telecast. some do the job better than others, but a premium has not been placed on training camera operators to understand the game well enough to anticipate what will happen so they can follow the action with an astute eye.  shannon has initiated game-camera seminars that are run by a veteran of the job, al mountford, who produced a training dvd in which he narrated what he was doing with the camera during a broadcast.  ''al moves the camera almost in figure eights,'' shannon said.  mountford offers advice like ''no moves need to be radical'' and ''the puck doesn't always have to be in the frame, just the nuance of it.'' he adds: ''many times, the body language of the players will take you to the puck.''  shannon has also begun a campaign to persuade teams whose arena game cameras are situated too high, or too far back, to move to a better position.  ''if we invest in tv and camera positioning, we'll sell the games to people who will want to buy tickets,'' he said.  another innovation initiated by shannon was providing producers and announcers immediate entrée to talk to league officials on the phone, or online, about disputed on-ice calls. he also distributes a weekly newsletter that features production updates, ideas for stories and rule book quizzes.  shannon's game plan bears the mark of a practical optimist, a hockey lifer who knows there are more viewers out there -- if tv improved.  ''the whole thing, 'oh, if you could get people to a hockey game they'd become fans,' i'm not so convinced of,'' he said. ''if we do a good job of tv, they'll come to the tv. there are far more eyeballs to get to watch.''  hockey  