inside art   a familiar rembrandt at a formidable price  a rembrandt portrait of the apostle st. james the greater, his hands clasped in prayer, sold at sotheby's yesterday for $25.8 million. the winning bid was taken by takako nagasawa, a sotheby's representative in asia, who was acting on behalf of a client identified by sotheby's only as a ''non-american old-master painting collector.''  the 1661 painting was sold by the nonprofit shippy foundation, established by heirs of the collector stephen carlton clark, a son of a founder of the singer sewing machine company, who died in 1960. the clark family had owned the painting since 1955.  ''st. james the greater'' is a familiar image to rembrandt scholars and collectors. two years ago it was exhibited at the national gallery of art in washington in a show of rembrandt's late religious portraits. it had been on loan to the museum of fine arts, boston, since 1991. in march it was for sale at the european fine art fair in maastricht, the netherlands, where the salander o'reilly galleries of new york offered it for $41 million.  at the right price -- and recently cleaned by martin bijl, the former chief conservator for the rijksmuseum in amsterdam, who is now an independent conservator -- the painting drew two serious bidders yesterday.  its price was just one of many high figures reached in a successful morning sale that brought in $96.9 million, well above the $82.4 million estimate. (final prices include sotheby's commission: 20 percent of the first $500,000 and 12 percent of the rest. the estimates do not reflect the commissions.) sotheby's has predicted that the two-session sale, which continues today, will break the old-master painting record of $104.7 million, set at sotheby's london sale in july 2002.  ''we have such a rational market, old-master paintings must look appealing to collectors,'' said george wachter, director of sotheby's old-master paintings department worldwide, referring to recent high prices in the overheated contemporary art market. many of the serious bidders yesterday, he said, were new to old masters, but familiar clients at sotheby's.  the sale included a second rembrandt, ''portrait of a young woman with a black cap.'' for decades the amsterdam-based rembrandt research project did not consider this 1632 oval painting to be a rembrandt. but recently, after careful scientific testing and analysis, ernst van der wetering, who leads the project, changed the attribution and pronounced it a genuine rembrandt.  the painting, of a woman with a plump face and a delicate pearl necklace, sold to an anonymous telephone bidder for $9 million; its high estimate had been $4 million.  a far different portrait in the sale was the one of robert shore milnes, the eldest son of john milnes, an english cotton manufacturer. painted by joseph wright of derby in 1771-72, the work made $7.2 million, a record price for the artist at auction and nearly five times its high estimate of $1.5 million.  jean-luc baroni, a london dealer, took the winning bid. reached by telephone after the sale, he said that he bought the painting, which depicts milnes wearing the uniform of the royal horse guards and standing at the foot of a pair of twin oak trees, on behalf of an american collector who wished to remain anonymous.  morgan director to retire  after serving 20 years and overseeing two building projects and two major capital campaign drives, charles e. pierce jr. announced yesterday that he would retire as director of the morgan library & museum at the end of this year.  the news comes less than a year after the morgan opened its highly praised $106 million expansion and renovation, designed by the italian architect renzo piano.  ''it's important to trust your instincts, and the time just felt right,'' said mr. pierce, 65, who broke the news to the morgan's board at a meeting yesterday. ''i brought the institution to a new place, and now a new person with youth and energy should take it to the next phase.''  the morgan was a sleepy place when mr. pierce became director in 1987; it had an endowment of $30 million and about 100,000 visitors a year. its endowment has grown to $150 million and this year about 250,000 people are expected to visit, the most in its 83-year history.  while the expansion doubled the museum's exhibition space, mr. pierce also helped its collections grow, adding the archives of the paris review and those of the pierre matisse gallery, a gift from the pierre matisse foundation.  other donations during mr. pierce's tenure have included the promised gift of almost 400 master works on paper from the museum's longtime trustee eugene v. thaw and his wife, clare.  ''charlie's done a wonderful job,'' said s. parker gilbert, president of the morgan's board.  ''he came wanting to be at the library, but had no idea of the complexities he would face,'' adding that mr. pierce was only the morgan's fourth director.  richard menschel, the board's vice president, will oversee a search committee to find a new director.  when asked about the future, mr. pierce said, ''i'd like to say i'm planning to write a sequel to 'war and peace,' but actually i have no specific plans.''  he intends to leave at the end of 2007, he added, but ''if they find the right person before then, i might step down earlier.''  inside art  