park, he said   it was only a matter of time before someone was able to spot the test driver deep within me. o.k., test parker: i was asked if i would do a road test of the self-parking device on the new lexus ls 460 l. although i like to think that i was being perceived as a laconic man with steel nerves and steady hands, i suspect that the invitation had something to do with my authorship of ''tepper isn't going out,'' which is considered by most scholars to have been the first parking novel. it might even have had something to do with the fact that in 1964 i was the founding co-editor of beautiful spot: a magazine of parking, which i've seen referred to as a one-issue publication even though we prefer to say that the second issue hasn't come out yet. (we've had some production difficulties.)  if i were asked to name my talent -- talent, that is, in the way the miss america pageant uses the word talent, as in ''miss west virginia will now do her talent'' -- i would say ''parallel parking.'' for the second issue of beautiful spot: a magazine of parking, i've been preparing an article on how i came up with the term ''slicing the bread'' to describe maneuvering into a spot that leaves only the width of a bread slice between your bumpers and the bumpers of the cars ahead of and behind you. in a later issue, i intend to discuss ''breaking the matzo'' -- getting into a spot so small that a matzo would crack if you tried to place it between the relevant bumpers. just for the record, the last time i broke a matzo was may 1994, on riverside drive, between 83rd and 84th; unfortunately, there were no witnesses.  so i didn't actually need what lexus calls an advanced parking guidance system to help me park. on the other hand, even though i consider myself pretty good at washing pots and pans, i wouldn't hesitate to hand that chore over to an advanced scullery system. so i told the lexus man to bring the car around to my house. i said that i'd stand on the sidewalk nearby, say ''park!'' in a commanding tone, and watch the lexus ls 460 l do its stuff. he told me that wasn't how the advanced parking guidance system worked. i told him to bring the lexus ls 460 l around to my house anyway: i had already alerted the neighbors.  the first thing the lexus man did was to ask whether i wanted a massage. i looked at him for a few moments, hoping to ascertain if he was trying to get fresh. test drivers face that sort of thing all the time. then he explained that the executive seating package (something similar to what i used to refer to as the back seat) included a shiatsu massage function. i had a massage. then i got behind the wheel and we set out to find a beautiful spot.  well, not exactly a beautiful spot. a spot that is worthy of that name -- a truly satisfying spot, a spot good enough to spin yarns about in bars where parkers gather -- requires some skill to get into. the advanced parking guidance system works only if the spot is six and a half feet longer than the car -- the sort of spot, in other words, that the average manhattan parker comes upon about once every 14 or 15 years. the only parker who might need help from a guidance system to get into such a spot is a parker who is driving himself home from rotator cuff surgery. for lexus to offer a self-parking system for a spot that size is the equivalent of some high-end kitchen-equipment manufacturer offering a self-carving system that only works on meatloaf.  still, i can report that for the meatloaf parker, the advanced parking guidance system does work, assuming you have the time to fiddle with the screen long enough to make sure that the little yellow flag is where it's supposed to be and the box representing the spot is correctly positioned. as you ease up gradually on the brake, the wheel turns on its own to make one reverse swoop into the spot. watching the wheel turn by itself is a bit like watching a player piano, except in traffic.  ''but can it find a spot?'' i asked the lexus man. the lexus man said the advanced parking guidance system cannot find a spot. that stands to reason. after all, it's the first self-parking system -- the equivalent of a cellphone so primitive that its only function is to make and receive phone calls.  as the competition heats up, improvements are inevitable. i can see nissan coming out with a screen on its infinitis that shows the open spaces in a three- or four-block area, with spots near fire plugs or in front of driveways automatically blanked out. then mercedes answers with a system capable of finding spots that are what people who deal with new york alternate-side parking regulations call ''good for tomorrow.''  then lexus fights back. the new lexis ls 560 or 660 is announced with an advertisement that says, ''our guarantee: you can be the first on your block to break the matzo.''  op-ed contributor calvin trillin is the author, most recently, of ''about alice.''  