4th major hub for air traffic moves ahead   the plan to create a fourth major airport that could relieve crowding and delays in the metropolitan region will take a leap forward today, officials of the port authority of new york and new jersey said yesterday.  the port authority plans to acquire a 93-year lease on stewart international airport, a sleepy and underused airport 60 miles north of new york city, for $78.5 million and begin expanding it starting in the fall, said anthony r. coscia, the agency's chairman.  with the expected approval of the agency's board today, the acquisition could help solve a problem that has bedeviled aviation officials for almost 50 years: where to send some of the travelers and cargo that are starting to overwhelm kennedy international, la guardia and newark liberty international airports.  ''the region clearly needs additional capacity for air travel,'' mr. coscia said. ''it's undeniable. this is intended to remedy exactly that problem.''  the agency has already budgeted $150 million for improvements to stewart that could include additional parking and the construction of an international passenger terminal, he said.  a converted air force base whose commercial use has never met its potential, stewart is bigger than newark's airport, with 2,400 acres and a 11,818-foot runway. two low-fare airlines, jetblue airways and airtran airways, began offering flights recently from stewart, in new windsor, n.y. three other carriers operate limited service from there.  passenger traffic at stewart increased 33 percent last month, compared with december 2005, and it could triple this year to about 900,000 passengers, said tanya vanasse, general manager for marketing at stewart. although stewart is a small cousin to the region's three main airports, which together handled more than 100 million passengers last year, that is expected to change.  mr. coscia said that by drawing more of the travelers who live north and west of new york city, stewart could serve more than three million passengers a year within five or six years. most of that traffic would be diverted from the three big airports, he said, which had been projected to reach capacity by 2020 without considering any expansion at stewart.  some of the cargo that arrives at those other airports and some of the private aircraft that now clog the short runways at teterboro airport in northern new jersey could also go to stewart, mr. coscia said.  the plan to acquire stewart reflects a significant shift in port authority politics. the pataki administration was unenthusiastic about the plan, despite mr. coscia's persistent push to take control of stewart and link it to new york city's crowded transportation system.  but now the plan has the support of gov. eliot spitzer, as well as new jersey's governor, jon s. corzine, said anthony e. shorris, whom mr. spitzer appointed to be executive director of the port authority.  ''we're viewing this as a major milestone,'' mr. shorris said. ''my sense is when you have very strong support from two governors on this -- now, two governors on this -- you'll see a concerted effort to make it happen.''  making it happen will require legislative change in trenton because the port authority's bi-state charter limits its operations to a zone that extends 25 miles in all directions from the statue of liberty. in 1967, lawmakers in albany passed a bill allowing the authority to have one airport outside that zone in each state. but new jersey never passed its own version of that legislation.  richard j. codey, the president of the new jersey state senate, said that getting matching legislation to governor corzine's desk should not be a problem.  ''i'd have no problem sponsoring it,'' mr. codey said. ''i would think there should be a majority of support for it because it's time. we just don't have any more room at newark or teterboro.''  mr. spitzer signaled a break in the impasse this month in his state of the state speech in albany.  in a statement released yesterday, mr. spitzer said: ''we will continue to make major investments at j.f.k., newark and la guardia, but eventually we are simply going to run out of room. stewart international airport will provide much-needed relief for our three major airports, greatly reduce delays and help us prepare for inevitable population and passenger growth.''  before stewart was settled on, several alternatives in the region were studied, including long island islip macarthur airport and westchester county airport.  the current leaseholder at stewart, national express group, a british company, put the lease up for sale last year. national express, which paid $35 million for the lease from the new york state department of transportation in 2000, wanted to sell it by the end of 2006.  but without the support of the pataki administration, mr. coscia could not seal a deal and feared that the agency might miss a rare chance. port authority officials managed to persuade national express to wait on the sale by offering a higher price than did other bidders that investment bankers had lined up.  ''we felt the need to take advantage of this opportunity,'' mr. coscia said. the agency had an advantage over other potential buyers, he said, in that ''when we invest money we don't have to get a return in the same 12 months.''  he said the port authority probably could break even on the proposed lease purchase without making any changes in operations at stewart.  there remains opposition to the plan. maureen radl, a resident of cragsmoor a chairwoman of ulsterites fight overflight noise, a group opposed to a major expansion of stewart, said most elected officials now support the port authority plan but many nearby residents did not.  ''we're especially concerned about its development as a cargo hub,'' ms. radl said, adding that cargo planes are generally older and noisier than passenger jets and frequently take off and land at night and early in the morning.  