costs increase for building n.f.l. stadium   nothing seems to come cheap these days, particularly new athletic stadiums.  the cost of the football stadium to be built in the meadowlands for the giants and the jets is expected to reach $1.4 billion, about $100 million more than previous estimates, and about 75 percent more than the $800 million first projected in 2005 when the giants were the only team involved.  alice mcgillion, a spokeswoman for the new meadowlands stadium corporation, which represents the teams' owners, said yesterday that increases in the costs of materials and other construction were the reason for the higher price tag.  ''it's just the cost of building and estimates go up as you get closer to building,'' ms. mcgillion said, noting that the 82,000-seat stadium was being privately financed.  sports industry experts said cost estimates typically rise because the prices of materials increase as construction progresses.  ''these projects just don't become cheaper,'' said david carter, a professor of sports business at the university of southern california. ''when you're trying to put together the gold-standard stadium, it's no surprise the price goes up.''  in december, the national football league said it would lend $300 million to the giants and the jets to finance the construction of the stadium in the sports complex in east rutherford, n.j. the teams will use money from the sale of club seats to repay the 15-year loan.  groundbreaking for the open-air stadium is expected this spring or summer, and the stadium is expected to open in time for the 2010 season.  the teams have said they would pay $35 million to upgrade the roads and other infrastructure around the stadium in return for being able to sell the naming rights, which could be very valuable, and keep the proceeds. last week, the british bank barclays agreed to pay nearly $400 million over 20 years to have its name on a new basketball arena in brooklyn planned for the new jersey nets, who would be leaving the meadowlands.  the giants and the jets also said yesterday that they had chosen the american subsidiary of skanska ab, a swedish company, to design and build the stadium. the contract is worth nearly $1 billion.  