mcdonald's says latest results are strongest in 30 years   in the four years since mcdonald's began a program to reinvent itself, the world's largest restaurant chain has introduced several menu items, like chicken wraps, premium coffee, apple slices and asian salads.  but ralph alvarez, mcdonald's president and chief operating officer, said the success of the turnaround had less to do with the new menu options than the company's effort to improve existing restaurants by focusing on things like cleaner lobbies, fresher food and the greetings from servers.  ''it is basic blocking and tackling,'' mr. alvarez said. ''we're running better restaurants.''  yesterday, mcdonald's announced what it called its strongest results in 30 years. revenue in the fourth quarter was $5.63 billion, an 11 percent increase over the period a year earlier, and earnings were $1 a share (though 39 cents of that was related to the spinoff of chipotle mexican grill), up from 48 cents in the period a year earlier. the 61 cents a share from continuing operations was a 30 percent increase from the period a year earlier. the $1.2 billion in income was up from $608.5 million a year ago.  mcdonald's has been on a tear that began in 2003 and has continued nearly unabated, aided by a dollar menu of favorites like a double cheeseburger and new items like chicken wraps and premium salads. during that time, the company's shares have rebounded to $45, from $12 in march 2003.  the trick now for mcdonald's is to find a way to sustain its growth as rivals seek to steal customers, particularly from profitable areas like breakfast.  one analyst compared mcdonald's situation to the new england patriots, the professional football team that won three super bowls in four years.  ''once you start winning super bowls, people start expecting it,'' said jack russo, an analyst with a. g. edwards & sons. ''it does get harder. the bar gets raised.''  shares of mcdonald's fell 69 cents, to close at $44.16.  to maintain the momentum, mcdonald's will spend $1.9 billion this year to revitalize its existing restaurants and to open 800 new restaurants worldwide while closing about 400.  mcdonald's is working on a new system that would speed purchases, expanding its hours at many restaurants and testing a variety of new items, including specialty coffee drinks.  ''coffee can be a great driver of frequency,'' said david palmer, an analyst at ubs investment research, who said some customers stopped at starbucks five days a week. ''we're excited about mcdonald's position in breakfast.''  mcdonald's is also trying to sell about 2,300 company-owned restaurants in lower-margin, more volatile markets like latin america as part of its goal of owning fewer than 30 percent of its restaurants in each market.  ''to turn them around would take a lot of energy,'' said mr. palmer, who added that mcdonald's was better off selling those restaurants to licensees and using the proceeds to buy back stock or invest in higher return markets like the united states, spain or russia. ''let somebody else do it.''  richard adams, a former mcdonald's franchise owner who is now a franchise consultant, said two factors that are often overlooked in mcdonald's turnaround are the economy and the unseasonably warm weather.  ''you can't go to mcdonald's if you can't leave the house,'' he said, adding, ''when we are at full employment and everyone is working, there are more people buying hamburgers or stopping by for breakfast on their way to work.''  mr. alvarez said the restaurant chain had remodeled up to 6,000 of its 14,000 restaurants in the united states, and had improved its equipment and training of employees to ensure speedy service, hot meals and friendly service. while he said the new menu items do not account for a large percentage of sales, they have kept customers interested in coming back.  