ono's driver complained about stress on recording   yoko ono's chauffeur was so stressed by his job that eight of his teeth fell out because he was grinding them at night, according to court papers filed by his lawyer.  the chauffeur, koral karsan, 50, complained about his teeth in a taped conversation with ms. ono's lawyer, jonas herbsman, which the prosecution turned over to mr. karsan's lawyer, robert gottlieb, in advance of a bail hearing yesterday.  mr. karsan has been charged with trying to extort $2 million from ms. ono, and prosecutors said he threatened to kill her if she did not comply.  but in court papers, submitted as part of a bail application for mr. karsan, mr. gottlieb said the accusation that mr. karsan had people waiting to kill ms. ono was ''just plain false.''  on the recording, mr. gottlieb said that mr. karsan can be heard saying that there are ''a lot of people out there who want to get'' ms. ono.  the chauffeur then went on to describe those people as ''my psychiatrist, my dentist, my lawyer,'' mr. gottlieb said. mr. karsan added, according to his lawyer, that ''they're all beatles fans and they hate her. so they all want to use me.''  commenting on this part of the tape, mr. gottlieb said in his papers, ''we respectfully submit that this should come as no shock to anyone who is at all familiar with yoko ono and the beatles.''  mr. gottlieb added that the tape showed that the demand for money was not extortion, but a demand for compensation for pain and suffering.  prosecutors have described this tape as one of their most important pieces of evidence -- along with a letter from mr. karsan to ms. ono -- in the extortion case against mr. karsan.  but mr. gottlieb said that the only reference to killing came when ms. ono's lawyer asked for the name of mr. karsan's lawyer, and mr. karsan refused, saying that his legal team was ''ready to kill yoko.''  to which ms. ono's lawyer asked if he was speaking metaphorically. mr. karsan, a turkish immigrant, replied, ''no, no, no, no metaphorically, i'm telling it literally.'' by this, mr. gottlieb said, mr. karsan clearly meant that his lawyers ''would literally kill her in court.''  barbara thompson, a spokeswoman for the manhattan district attorney, declined comment last night on mr. gottlieb's account of the tape.  mr. gottlieb quoted from the tape in a letter to justice daniel p. fitzgerald of state supreme court in manhattan, in an effort to have his client released on bail.  in a brief hearing yesterday, justice fitzgerald declined to set bail because of the risk that mr. karsan would flee to turkey. he said that after listening to the tape, he saw ''no substantial change in the material facts,'' that is, the demand for $2 million and the threat to release confidential information about ms. ono.  but he agreed to mr. gottlieb's request for a speedy trial, setting a tentative trial date of feb. 12.  