clijsters and sharapova are out of sorts, but in the semifinals   the champion on the way out beat the champion on the way back, and now kim clijsters will face maria sharapova in the semifinals of the australian open.  clijsters, who has said that this will be her final australian open, struggled mightily to control her power for stretches of the first and second sets against the three-time champion martina hingis. but in the end, clijsters's weight of shot and hingis's lightweight second serve made the difference, as clijsters broke open a tight match by sweeping the final four games to win, 3-6, 6-4, 6-3.  ''this could have been my last one here; i'm glad i get to play another one,'' said the fourth-seeded clijsters, who plans to retire from competitive tennis at the end of this season despite being only 23 years old.  clijsters holds a 4-2 edge over the top-seeded sharapova, but she lost both of their matches last year in straight sets on hard courts. neither woman was near her best on this gorgeous, sometimes windy afternoon. clijsters finished with 62 unforced errors to 47 winners against hingis, who returned to the sport last year after a three-year break from the game.  as the flubbed returns and double faults piled up for sharapova against anna chakvetadze, sharapova's coaches, yuri sharapov and michael joyce, were visibly suffering in the front row.  sharapov's gesticulations resulted in a warning for illegal coaching midway through the second set as his daughter served at 3-3, 0-30. sharapov kept his arms folded across his chest for much of the uneven tennis that remained.  sharapova's 7-6 (5), 7-5 victory required 2 hours 14 minutes -- 11 minutes more than clijsters's three-set victory -- as the 12th-seeded chakvetadze kept alternating the sublime (her two-handed backhand) and the ridiculous (a second serve that bounced well before hitting the net in the final set).  ''sometimes i feel i don't know if she knows what she's doing,'' sharapova said. ''she definitely has a lot of variety. if she wants to step in, she has a lot of power behind her strokes. but over all, at the end of the day, it's just about who took the chances a little more.''  that has been sharapova's trademark throughout her career, and it does indeed take preternatural self-confidence to keep taking huge cuts at returns when the results have generally been unsatisfactory.  ''she is stronger,'' said chakvetadze, a fast-rising blond muscovite who, at 19, is the same age as sharapova. ''she's a great fighter. i think she deserves this win.''  but even sharapova conceded that she will probably have to raise her level if she is to break through to her first australian open final. she has come close the last two years, losing to serena williams in the 2005 semifinals despite holding three match points and then losing to justine henin-hardenne last year in the same round in a three-set match.  both williams and henin-hardenne went on to win the title. williams is still in contention here despite being unseeded. she will face nicole vaidisova, a 17-year-old czech, in thursday's semifinal in the bottom half of the draw.  henin-hardenne withdrew from the tournament for personal reasons. on wednesday, a posting on her web site confirmed that she and her husband of five years, pierre-yves hardenne, were separating.  ''these last weeks have not been easy for me or my entourage,'' she wrote. the web site's name has already been changed from heninhardenne.be to justine-henin.be.  it has been an unusual tournament from the start for sharapova, who was two points from defeat against the underpowered camille pin of france in the first round as temperatures soared well above 100 degrees on court and left sharapova sluggish and disoriented. even without being in top form, she has recovered well enough not to drop another set.  yet she needed more than two hours to beat vera zvonareva, 7-5, 6-4, in a night match on monday in the fourth round. both zvonareva and chakvetadze play terrific defense and are capable of handling sharapova's power from the baseline.  ''you know, it's tough to be aggressive because maria, she's hitting the ball so hard,'' chakvetadze said. ''especially in the warm-up, i thought she would kill me.''  but once the rallies began in earnest, chakvetadze held her own. when sharapova double-faulted to lose her serve and fall behind, 2-4, it appeared that chakvetadze might do more than that.  but chakvetadze responded to success by double-faulting herself to lose her serve in the next game, only to have sharapova do the same again to lose hers.  so it went into the tie breaker, with neither player winning a point on serve until sharapova managed it at 4-4. on the next point, chakvetadze glided forward to hit a short forehand and guided it wide.  the set would soon be over, and chakvetadze's forehand would prove to be vulnerable shot throughout the rest of the match. it did not help her cause that she waited until after the first set to receive treatment for a strained right shoulder.  ''i definitely should have called the trainer earlier,'' she said.  sharapova received treatment on court for a blister on her left foot in the second set after taking a 4-3 lead in the game in which she received the coaching warning. sharapov gestured as if he were hitting a forehand from the stands as she fell behind in the game.  the coaching issue is a sensitive one with sharapova. ''i asked the umpire if it was in between those two points, because between those two points, i didn't see anything or even look at him,'' she said.  sharapov was not the only father/coach in an agitated mood on wednesday. chakvetadze's father/coach, djambuli, also did little to disguise his mood swings in a different section of the stands.  ''it's normal,'' sharapova said. ''i've been with my dad every single day, and i'm sure anna has, as well. they're both animated. both want you to win, and they're really excited for the opportunities you have.''  tennis  