paid notice: deaths   goldberg, lisa   goldberg--lisa. a steady hand, a generous spirit, and a guiding light-the covenant foundation board and staff mourn her loss. our world will be diminished by her absence. with deepest sympathy to her family. susan crown, president harlene appelman, executive director  goldberg--lisa. the jewish theological seminary mourns the loss of lisa goldberg. as president of the charles h. revson foundation, her innovative leadership and commitment to academic excellence brought immeasurable support to jts, including doctoral fellowships at the graduate school. her stellar leadership was instrumental in many groundbreaking projects, and her creative energy will be missed. we extend our condolences to the entire family. arnold eisen, chancellor-elect gershon kekst, board chairman  goldberg--lisa e. we have lost too soon our beloved friend. thank you, lisa, for your kindness, brilliance, and love. we are with you forever john, katie, jed and danielle. rachel altstein and rabbi andy bachman  goldberg--lisa e. congregation beth elohim mourns the tragic passing of an esteemed friend and supporter. lisa's brilliance and friendship will inspire us in our sacred work of building community in brooklyn. andy bachman, rabbi jules hirsh, president  goldberg--lisa. the sudden end of lisa's life has broken our hearts. at the revson foundation this media pioneer used the power of film to bring about social change. brilliant and beautiful, she was full of love and compassion and inspired ideas. she opened our minds and our hearts and now we open our arms to hug her family, the center of her incredible life. from all her friends at the meserve-kunhardt foundation.  goldberg--lisa. the rudin family and rudin management company express their deepest condolences on the passing of beloved friend, lisa goldberg (sexton). our thoughts and prayers are with john, his family and the new york university community.  goldberg--lisa. the charles h. revson fellowship program at columbia university mourns the loss of lisa goldberg, president of the charles h. revson foundation and long time supporter of the fellowship. lisa was a wonderful resource to the program staff, fellows, and alumni throughout the program's tenure at columbia. her unwavering dedication to the fellowship and deep understanding of the city and civic leadership insured that the fellowship remains an integral part of columbia and the broader city. current fellows, alumni, and program staff extend their deepest condolences to her family and colleagues. sudhir venkatesh, director.  goldberg--lisa. the directors, officers, faculty and students of the schechter institute of jewish studies in jerusalem are deeply saddened by the tragic death of lisa goldberg. her commitment to jewish education and to israel has been a source of strength and will be an enduring memorial to a woman of uncommon intelligence, curiosity, and wisdom. we extend our heartfelt sympathy to her husband and her children. robert s. rifkind chairman of the board dr. david golinkin president  goldberg--lisa e. taken swiftly by a massive cerebral hemorrhage suffered sunday evening, she died monday, january 22. every day of her life she lit the world with her intelligence, grace, generous spirit and concern for others. she was the lynchpin of her beloved family, which she nurtured and shaped with rare wisdom and inexhaustible love. as a leader in the world of philanthropy, ultimately serving as the president and ceo of the charles h. revson foundation, she was second to none as a force for understanding, progress and the common good. from her creativity, to her conceptualizing and supporting breakthrough documentaries, to her dedication to ending discrimination and empowering the poor, to her commitment to dialogue across race and religion, to her dedication to jewish heritage, lisa was, for all she touched, simultaneously leader, role model, dear friend and counselor. even as we, her family, long for her continued physical presence, we vow to carry her and her love with us forever. born may 1, 1952, in brookline, massachusetts, she graduated with honors from both radcliffe college (1973) and harvard law school (1979). after law school, she worked in the carter white house for the president's commission on an agenda for the 1980s, a prescient 12 volume exploration of the trends which have dominated the ensuing decades. in 1982, she became a program officer at the revson foundation, where over a 25 year career she built alliances with americas major foundations to produce some of the most effective initiatives of the period. she is survived by a cherished husband, john sexton, president of new york university; a treasured daughter and son, katie sexton and jed sexton; a beloved daughter-in-law, danielle decrette; three wonderful granddaughters, julia (five), ava (two) and nathalie (two); a sister, donna eskind and her husband jeff, of nashville and their three children, david, matthew and sara; and a brother, philip, presently the united states ambassador to bolivia. a memorial service will be held in late february. this week, the family will receive friends at 37 washington square west on wednesday and thursday, january 24 and 25, between 3:00pm and 5:00pm and between 7:00pm and 9:00pm; and on friday, january 26, between 2:00pm and 4:00pm. the family asks that in lieu of flowers contributions be made to the lisa goldberg fellowship fund at nyu's wagner school of public service. checks can be sent care of dean ellen schall.  goldberg--lisa. the trustees, staff and volunteers of the educational broadcasting corporation (ebc), licensee of thirteen/wnet and wliw new york, mourn the tragic loss of our long time friend and supporter lisa goldberg. a remarkable woman whose intelligence, compassion and quiet grace informed her every action, lisa brought a practical and deeply humanitarian vision to her many undertakings, and her very presence could fill a room with a sense of hope and possibility. for more than two decades at the charles revson foundation, first as program officer and final as president, she contributed her rare wisdom to a long series of philanthropic efforts that have benefited millions of people. the entire public television community will be forever grateful for her generous assistance in bringing to life such landmark projects as bill moyer's genesis: a living conversation, henry hampton's eyes on the prize, and the innovative heritage interactive. we extend our deepest sympathies to her husband, john sexton, their children, katherine lodgen sexton and jed sexton, as well as to lisa's sister and brother, and the rest of her extended family. her soul infused the world around her and there it will live on. james s. tisch chairman william f. baker chief executive  goldberg--lisa e. the yeshiva university family extends profound condolences to our esteemed colleague john sexton, president of new york university, and to his family on the loss of his beloved wife lisa goldberg. we also send our heartfelt condolences to the entire nyu community and goldberg and sexton families. richard m. joel, president yeshiva university  