nato allies wary of sending more troops to afghanistan   america's european allies on friday remained noncommittal about sending additional troops to afghanistan, even as the bush administration sought to inject new energy into the nato mission against the taliban by offering more american soldiers and money.  officially, the language at a nato meeting here on friday reflected resolve and commitment toward afghanistan. nato ''is stepping up its game in afghanistan on all fronts,'' said jaap de hoop scheffer, the alliance's secretary general. ''the fact that you saw so many people from the international community sitting around the table is a strong message itself.''  but beyond the sound bites, the realities that have troubled the nato mission in afghanistan since the 26-member trans-atlantic alliance took command last year remained on display. france and germany continued to limit their combat role; both countries have refused to deploy troops in the south of the country, where taliban forces are strongest. germany's parliament has yet to approve a proposal to send six tornado reconnaissance jets to the south.  meanwhile, prime minister romano prodi of italy is battling allies in his own government who oppose the afghan mission and want the government to set a deadline for withdrawing the country's 1,800 troops. while mr. prodi's government passed a measure on friday to renew financing for italy's troops in afghanistan, it did so without the support of all of mr. prodi's coalition partners, and italian officials said it was unlikely that mr. prodi could rally support for any increase in troops.  the united states sought to lead by example, as secretary of state condoleezza rice, who called for the brussels meeting in the hope of spurring more action from the europeans, told the assembled ministers that president bush would ask congress for $10.6 billion in additional financial assistance for afghanistan.  bush administration officials said on thursday that the pentagon would extend the afghan tours of 3,200 american soldiers. ms. rice added that beyond the extension of the tours, defense secretary robert m. gates would further expand the number of american troops, ''partly through extra forces.''  ''every one of us must take a hard look at what more we can do to help the afghan people,'' ms. rice said, according to a state department statement. ''we need additional forces on the ground -- ready to fight. and we need to provide greater support for the development of afghan institutions, especially its security forces.''  american officials say that taliban fighters are mounting increasingly brazen cross-border attacks from pakistan and that they are preparing to resume attacks in the spring, as they have done every year since the american invasion deposed the taliban in 2001.  ''if there is to be a 'spring offensive,' it must be our offensive,'' she said. ''it must be a political campaign, an economic campaign, a diplomatic campaign, and, yes, a military campaign.''  but that military campaign remains about 15 percent short of what american and nato commanders say they need on the ground to fight the taliban.  the 3,200 american troops whose departure has been delayed would bring the american force level in afghanistan to around 24,000. about half of those are part of the nato mission in afghanistan, while the other half are engaged in american-led counterterrorism operations. about 20,000 soldiers from other nato countries are also deployed in afghanistan.  britain has the second-largest contingent of soldiers in afghanistan, with 6,000 troops.  nato said friday that an alliance airstrike destroyed a taliban command post in southern afghanistan, killing a man suspected of being a senior militant leader. also on friday, a suicide bomber blew himself up outside the offices of an aid group in helmand province, wounding a policeman and two others.  american and nato officials are now pinning their hopes for troop increases on a meeting of nato defense ministers in seville, spain, next month. mr. de hoop scheffer, the nato secretary general, said he was ''relatively optimistic'' that more troops would be forthcoming.  ''everybody understands that it's vital that we achieve our goals this year,'' said richard a. boucher, the assistant secretary of state for south and central asian affairs.  afghan lawmaker is killed  by the new york times  kabul, afghanistan, jan. 26 -- an afghan lawmaker was shot to death on friday while he was walking from his home to a mosque for friday prayer, officials said.  the lawmaker, maulvi mohammad islam mohammadi, 67, was from the northern province of samangan. the reason for the killing was unclear, and no one immediately claimed responsibility, but there were fears among legislators that the attack might have been politically motivated.  according to election law, when a member of parliament dies the candidate who had the next-highest vote tally becomes the successor.  ''it is a danger signal for the afghan members of parliament if the political competition causes the terror'' for lawmakers, said fawzia kofi, the deputy speaker of parliament.  