jamaica   for years, golf was scarce in the caribbean, where strict development rules and lack of fresh water posed major challenges. but thanks in part to a new breed of salt-tolerant turf grass, known as paspalum, golf courses have been springing up on many islands in recent years. anguilla got its first golf course in november. barbados, which has a total of seven courses, played host to the world golf championships for the first time last month. and the dominican republic, with a new jack nicklaus-designed course, punta espada, and half a dozen other courses planned, is quickly gaining notice among golfers as a hotspot to tee-off.  but for many avid golfers, the island of choice remains jamaica. while it may be better known for reggae, jamaica also has 12 golf courses, with a range in difficulty to suit every level of player. most courses are in and around resort centers, making it easy to play a round at one course in the morning and hit a different set of links in the afternoon. montego bay, a resort city on the north coast of the island, has three notable courses -- half moon golf club, a robert trent jones sr.-designed course; white witch, owned by ritz-carlton; and cinnamon hill, at the rose hall resort & country club -- all within a 10-minute drive of one another.  green fees in jamaica range from $23 for the nine-hole manchester golf club in mandeville, the oldest golf course in the caribbean, to $200 at the white witch. caddies are mandatory at most courses and will cost $14 to $45 more.  where to stay -- later this year, the half moon resort, in the rose hall area of montego bay, is scheduled to open a $4 million spa. rooms start at $355 a night; (866-648-6951, www.halfmoon.com). at the ritz-carlton golf & spa resort, montego bay, ocean-view rooms begin at $459 a night through march; (800-241-3333, www.ritzcarlton.com). rose hall resort & country club has rooms from $149 a night; (866-831-1313, wwwrosehallresort.com).  the 10 point caribbean escapes plan: for golfers michelle higgins, a staff reporter for the travel section, writes the practical traveler column.  