once a poor student, coach is now a stickler for academics   not long ago, a freshman was kicked off the manhattanville college men's basketball team because of poor grades. now he is the head coach.  ''i never went to class -- never,'' pat scanlon, the 25-year-old coach, said of the first semester of his freshman year.  ''academics had always been the source of such problems for me,'' he said, ''and this was the worst.''  and now his players are paying for it. practices frequently start at 5:45 a.m. scanlon and his assistants have been known to peek into classroom windows to count their players, or even call them on their cellphones if he thinks they are dozing off during class.  scanlon does this because he is intent on helping his players avoid the academic problems he encountered. and he knows that improvement is possible.  scanlon pulled off an academic turnaround, earning an award for academic distinction by his senior year, by which time he was back in good standing on the basketball team. within a few years, at age 23, he was named head coach, replacing the former knicks player dean meminger.  scanlon managed to revive his academic standing, he said, with the help of a few others, including his coach, ian curtin; a history professor, lawson bowling; and his girlfriend at the time, stefanie tropea, who is now his fiancée.  when scanlon's poor grades forced him off the team, curtin, now the athletic director at st. joseph's college of maine, said he saw potential in scanlon and allowed him to remain tethered to the team. he watched practices and sat on the bench in street clothes during games.  ''i thought if he had to do xyz to do what he loved, he would,'' curtin said.  around that time, scanlon received a letter from a professor he hardly knew. one of the classes scanlon often skipped was bowling's history class. bowling said he was impressed by a paper scanlon wrote for the class, and he wrote scanlon a letter explaining that if he could ever manage to harness his academic potential, he would go from washout to accomplished student.  ''it is really the old saw about how a work ethic can be applied across the board,'' bowling said.  then there was tropea, the academically inclined girlfriend.  ''one day i was in class, writing and writing,'' tropea said. ''i looked next to me where pat was and there wasn't one word written. this is a history class, text-based. i said to him, 'oh, i'll have to borrow your notes.' ''  then she issued a challenge. ''i said, 'i bet you can't get a higher grade than me on the next test.' ''  he did not, but he came close. and he was on his way to becoming an a student with a spot on the dean's list.  now he is using his story as a real-life example for his athletes. manhattanville is 12-4 this season and has received votes in a division iii top-25 poll.  ''i tried everything, from bribery to extortion,'' don scanlon jr. said about how he responded to his son's academic missteps.  but in the end, he said, ''you have to love them; you don't have to understand them.''  college basketball  