about those fears of wall street's decline   a lot of smart people have spent a lot of time talking to a lot of important people about whether the financial services sector is becoming less competitive.  the resounding view from corporate america, and now eliot spitzer, the enforcer turned laissez-faire governor, is that new york risks losing its pre-eminence if the sarbanes-oxley act is not amended and litigation not curtailed. (this is an interesting about-face by mr. spitzer, who not long ago was a prosecutor blazing through wall street's boardrooms and ridiculing regulators for not cracking down enough.)  two reports, one conducted by mckinsey for mayor michael r. bloomberg and senator charles e. schumer and another conducted by a committee of academics and business executives, drew many of the same conclusions. companies small and large find section 404 of sarbanes-oxley, the one about certifying a company's internal controls, unwieldy. litigation is excessive. our immigration policies are neanderthal.  some of these claims make sense. others do not. for starters, there is a fixation on data showing that initial public offerings are gravitating to london and china. this data seemed problematic: smaller companies are listing in london because there is a market there that boasts of having virtually no regulation, a benchmark the united states should not lower itself to meet.  and larger companies, especially russian and chinese ones, are increasingly staying home or going to london to raise capital, which can be attributed to factors like london's being in a better time zone.  more important, the main reason companies are listing in their home markets is that globalization is not a lofty theory but has truly produced more competitive global markets. that means more companies will choose not to trek halfway around the world to raise money -- especially when fees in london are half that of the united states.  but if you are mr. schumer or mr. bloomberg, there are reasons to be alarmed.  as i.p.o.'s move, so does trading: where the company lists will dictate where there will be more liquidity, more hedging and more over-the-counter derivatives in the market where the underlying stock exists.  this is a boon for banks like goldman sachs and ubs, who will profit on underwriting companies from china to mars. but the banker doing that deal will hail from china and his bonus will help inflate chinese real estate, art and restaurant prices, not new york's. and as more companies list there, more institutions will seek to do business there -- hedge funds, for example -- generating more business for the shanghai office and fewer taxes for new york.  when asked to defend keeping fat-cat bonuses for bankers in new york, mr. bloomberg was matter of fact: ''i just hope the bonus is earned in new york city.''  the flight to new markets is real. in 2006, the new york exchanges raised $46.6 billion; hong kong raised $47.1 billion; and london, $55.2 billion, according to dealogic. over time, the pattern looks worse: new york raised 54 percent less than it did in 2000; london raised 303 percent more and hong kong, 225 percent more.  this is bad news for the new york exchanges. historically, the mega-i.p.o.'s would have either listed in new york or at least had a dual listing in new york. but when the industrial and commercial bank of china went public in 2006, raising $22 billion, it opted against a united states listing because of sarbanes-oxley, according to people involved in the i.p.o. discussions.  but there is undue panic when it comes to the flight of smaller companies. the alternative investment market in london has virtually no requirements to go public. a minimum amount of shares do not have to be in public hands; the company does not have to have any trading record; there is no minimum market capitalization limit; and the exchange does not vet any admission documents. your child's lemonade stand would probably have a shot at being listed.  the only requirement is that the company has a ''nominated adviser,'' or a nomad -- a broker who brings the company to market who is charged with regulating that company. yes, you read that correctly: companies are regulated by the brokers being paid to bring those companies to market.  after a few high-profile blowups, the london stock exchange has been reviewing how it oversees nomads and is now preparing -- you guessed it -- to increase regulation. soon nomads will have their own rule book, they will face inspections from the london stock exchange, and in a move with echoes of sarbanes-oxley, they will have to attest in writing that the company is ''suitable'' to be listed on aim.  like london's, all markets can always be improved. and the united states markets are in need of improving. there is near-unanimous agreement that section 404 has had dire unintended consequences. global investment banks could lower the high i.p.o. fees they charge in the united states. the federal government could fix immigration issues so that people can flow more easily into and out of new york.  but new york will also have to accept that it will be a leader among global financial centers rather than the leader. and while it is natural that new york politicians strive to keep taxes and jobs at home, not even the newly enlightened mr. spitzer can buck globalization.  insider  