a contrarian view: save less and still retire with enough   could it be possible that you are saving too much for your retirement?  such an idea would fly in the face of almost every exhortation to a nation of spendthrifts that saving more is an imperative. after all, even as people are living longer, corporate pension plans and social security can no longer be relied on to ease most americans through their retirement years. fidelity, the nation's largest provider of workplace retirement savings plans, says the average 401(k) account balance is only $62,000.  beyond that, the national savings rate -- the difference between after-tax income and expenditures -- is actually negative, government statistics show.  nevertheless, a small band of economists from universities, research institutions and the government are clearly expressing the blasphemy that many americans could be saving less than they are being told to by the financial services industry -- and spending more -- while they are younger. the negative savings rate, they say, is wildly distorted.  according to them, the financial industry, with its ostensibly objective online calculators, overstates how much money someone will need in retirement. some, in fact, contend that financial firms have a pointed interest in persuading people to save much more than they need because the companies earn fees on managing that money.  the more realistic amount could be as little as half the typical recommendation made by fidelity, vanguard or any number of other financial institutions.  for a middle-income couple, that could mean trading $400,000 in retirement money for about $3,000 a year more during prime working years to spend on education or home improvement. ''for a middle-class household, that's a lot of money,'' said laurence j. kotlikoff, a boston university economics professor, who is on the forefront of this research into spending and savings, and is selling his own retirement calculator.  andrew behla is a case in point of someone who is not saving enough. mr. behla, a los angeles graphic designer and consultant, is at age 38 just starting to think about retirement. he and his wife, michele krolik, a payroll manager, together have just $70,000 squirreled away for their old age.  ''i think we will have to save a lot more,'' he said, a point on which the economists and the financial planning industry would agree. even so, the couple recently bought a house and put extra money they had into improving it, figuring that over their lifetimes it will add handily to their net worth.  but other people like beverly alexander, 49, an energy consultant in marin county, calif., might be able to slow down. her financial planner has her retirement finances mapped out to age 105 (her parents are still alive in their 90s), a plan that gives ms. alexander, a former utility executive, the freedom to quit her corporate job and live on her consulting income.  ''one reason i could retire,'' she said, ''was that i saved and i always lived below my means.''  the findings of the economists are being met as most challenges to orthodoxy are: with stony silence or extreme umbrage.  ''i count myself as deeply skeptical,'' said christopher jones, the chief investment officer at financial engines, a financial planning software company.  the big financial services companies refused to comment on the research but they did say that their use of simple rules of thumb keeps the process of retirement planning less complicated, and thus, less daunting.  john rother, policy director with aarp, says the economists are ''not doing anyone a service because of the tremendous amount of effort it takes to get people to save.''  nevertheless, the loose confederation of well-regarded economists, who have not been working in concert, say their research points to the startling conclusion that many americans are saving too much, not too little. indeed, their studies of the savings and spending habits of the generation born between 1931 and 1941 revealed that at least 80 percent had accumulated more than enough wealth for retirement. while they have not studied the baby boom generation as closely, they believe that the greater wealth of that generation should also leave those retirees secure.  a study last october by another group of economists, including two working for the federal reserve board, found 88 percent of retirees age 51 and older had adequate wealth.  ''even the most casual reading of the popular press will have you convinced that americans are heading like lemmings over a cliff,'' said john karl scholz, an economics professor at the university of wisconsin at madison. ''going into this, i had no idea that we'd find any results anything like this.''  the argument between the sides is similar to the classic debate between the hardworking ants and lazy grasshoppers of aesop's fable. the financial planning industry says saving, even too much, provides a safety net and peace of mind, and possibly a gift to heirs at the end.  the economists answer that people would get more out of their money by using it when they are younger. ''there is risk in saving too much,'' mr. kotlikoff said. ''you could end up squandering your youth rather than your money.''  mr. scholz said he and his co-authors of a study, ''are americans saving 'optimally' for retirement?'' found oversaving across all economic and education levels and most ethnic or racial groups as well. (it found that hispanics tended to save less.) those who were not saving enough were usually missing their target by only a small amount.  the one exception to this optimism involves people who enter retirement single, either because their spouse died early, they divorced, or they never married. the studies found this group did not save enough.  ''if they are worried about end-of-life medical expenses or they don't mind leaving money to their heirs,'' mr. scholz said, ''then oversaving is fine.'' the dispute revolves around how financial planners determine how much a person should save. that amount will vary depending on age, income and assets. to simplify the calculations, computer programs resort to rules of thumb.  the starting point for most retirement plans is the so-called replacement rate. it says an american needs an annual income in retirement equal to 75 percent to 86 percent of what he or she earned in the final year of employment. someone making $100,000 would typically plan for about $85,000 a year in retirement.  coupling that with a second industry rule of thumb that says retirees should spend no more than about 4 percent of their assets each year to make them last, a typical couple with that level of income should enter retirement with at least $2.1 million in assets, including 401(k)s, i.r.a.'s, stocks and bonds, real estate, cash value life insurance, pensions and social security benefits.  not so, says mr. kotlikoff. it may be simple, but he argues it is more important to look at how people spend their income while working to determine how much they will need when retired.  mr. kotlikoff's calculations showed that fidelity's online calculators typically set the target of assets needed to cover spending in retirement 36.4 percent too high. vanguard's was 53.1 percent too high. a calculator offered by tiaa-cref, one of the largest managers of retirement savings, was 78 higher than his calculation.  fidelity's retirement quick check calculator says that a 50-year-old person making $100,000 a year with $700,000 stashed in retirement accounts, saving $15,000 a year, would still fall short of the $2.8 million goal that would provide the necessary monthly retirement income of $7,408 that it sets. its calculations do not include social security payments.  fidelity actually recommends saving about $1,000 a month more. it also encourages this person to save more even when more than enough has been saved. it recommends putting away up to $9,749 a month on top of the $15,000 a year already being saved, an impossibility since that would more than consume the person's entire gross income.  mr. kotlikoff's esplanner software, taking real estate holdings and life insurance into account, says the person could cut back on savings by $10,000 a year and still have enough for a monthly income of $6,000 at retirement, the amount his calculations deems adequate to live on given prior consumption patterns.  mr. kotlikoff is trying to sell his software, called esplanner, to large employers as well as to the financial services industry. he has made no major sales so far. it is also available to individuals at www.esplanner.com for $150.  the financial planning industry prefers to characterize itself as cautious. william ebsworth, chief investment officer of fidelity investments' strategic advisers division, which runs retirement programs, said, ''we take a very conservative approach,'' preferring to err on the side of having money left over at death rather than risk running out before then.  ''we believe in the research we've done and that others have done that americans aren't saving enough,'' he said.  your money  correction:  january 31, 2007, wednesday  the front-page your money column on saturday, about the possibility that people might be saving too much for retirement, misstated the parameters of a calculator from fidelity investments that helps consumers determine their future financial needs. social security payments are included -- not excluded -- in fidelity's calculations.  