donors gather to help lebanon's government   after 50 days of syrian- and iranian-backed protests that culminated in tuesday's daylong standoff in beirut, secretary of state condoleezza rice and officials from more than 30 other countries are gathering here to see if they can inject enough money into the lebanese government to prop up the pro-western prime minister, fouad siniora.  ms. rice, demonstrating the level of concern about the deteriorating situation, said wednesday that the united states would provide close to $1 billion in aid.  in many ways, the donor conference here on thursday will serve as a snapshot of the larger proxy war between the united states -- joined by its sunni arab allies and europe -- and iran and syria. lebanon, like iraq, is a battleground in that war, and mr. siniora, a sunni muslim, is fighting for his political survival.  the paris conference is considered central to the survival of his government. lebanon is badly hobbled after the monthlong war between israel and hezbollah last summer, with hezbollah trying to use the war to strengthen its political role, and reconstruction efforts have been burdened by the country's $41 billion in public debt.  on tuesday, opposition groups bent on toppling mr. siniora's cabinet essentially shut down the country with protests in beirut.  the protests, initiated by hezbollah to press its claims, were the latest trial for mr. siniora, whose government has survived thus far, lebanon analysts say, not just because about half of the country supports him, but also because he has strong international support, including from europe, america and the sunni arab countries.  ''very clearly, syria and iran don't want to see this work,'' said david schenker, a senior fellow in arab politics at the washington institute for near east policy, referring to the donor conference. ''if the siniora administration walks away from paris with sufficient funds, it will return to lebanon vindicated and strengthened, proving that it can effectively govern and pursue key initiatives without hezbollah.''  some middle east experts say that lebanon needs at least $5 billion in aid to cover reconstruction and debt payments. but even if mr. siniora were able to raise that much, he would face political problems back at home.  his government has been under siege for two months now, as he has fought to establish a tribunal that may implicate syria in the killing of a former lebanese prime minister, rafik hariri, an outspoken critic of syria.  syria occupied lebanon for 30 years until being forced to withdraw its troops after the assassination. the united states has accused syria and iran of trying to bring down the siniora government to wreck plans for an international tribunal to try suspects in mr. hariri's killing.  the paris conference is supposed to focus on ways to stimulate the lebanese economy, improve living conditions for the people and lower the country's debt over five years.  just how much money it will take to prop up mr. siniora is in question. on wednesday, the european commission was the first to announce that it would pledge 400 million euros, or $519 million, at the conference, bringing to 500 million euros, or $649 million, its overall reconstruction money for lebanon over the next five years. president jacques chirac of france, who met with mr. siniora in paris on wednesday, followed with a pledge of a 500-million-euro loan to lebanon, which a spokesman for mr. chirac said would be extended on ''highly preferential terms.''  ms. rice told reporters aboard her flight that the united states, whose contribution will be watched closely, would provide an additional $770 million in grants, including $220 million for the lebanese armed forces and additional money for the police and peacekeeping. the grants also will include $250 million in cash transfers directly to the government, which will be tied to certain benchmarks that the siniora government would be required to meet through economic reform programs. a donor conference for lebanon that was held in stockholm last year after the israel-hezbollah war brought in $940 million in aid, including about $230 million from the united states.  ''you will find that the united states will be very supportive of lebanon at this conference,'' c. david welch, assistant secretary of state for near east affairs, told reporters in paris. ''of course, you all know the importance of our political voice; now we are going to put some money behind that.''  how much saudi arabia and other sunni arab countries come up with will also be of interest, analysts say. saudi arabia and qatar, in particular, have been giving money in hopes of influencing lebanon, as a counterweight to iran and syria, which have long given huge amounts to hezbollah and other lebanese groups, particularly in the south, where support for hezbollah is the strongest.  on tuesday, mr. chirac tried to play down the impression that donors at the conference were trying to impose their will on the lebanese people by propping up mr. siniora. ''i have no preferences among the lebanese people,'' mr. chirac said. ''i respect all the lebanese people, but i advise them to obey the general rules of democracy, that is, to wait for normal elections to take place, in order, if that's the case, to change the government.''  