murder victims moved to long island for safety of suburbs   in the 18 years since jaspal and geeta singh arrived in new york from india, they prospered, had two sons and managed to join the wave of south asians leaving behind new york city's immigrant neighborhoods for more comfortable swaths of central nassau county.  after moving from staten island to queens, where their sons attended grammar school, the family moved last year to this upscale long island suburb, for its safety and its schools, friends said.  but when the two boys, now in middle school, returned home on tuesday afternoon, they found their parents slain, their father on the ground floor and their mother in a second-floor bedroom.  the news shocked family and friends, who called the couple loving and peaceful and without any known enemies.  nassau county police officials said on wednesday that the couple apparently died of gunshot wounds and that their deaths did not seem to be a murder-suicide. the police provided no other details.  detective lt. kevin smith, a spokesman for the county police, called the deaths ''two homicides,'' but did not give any motive or mention any leads or suspects, nor say whether there were signs of forced entry. he said there had been no reports of domestic quarrels at the home.  mr. singh, 46, and his wife, 38, bought the two-story house on doone drive, in a maze of sleepy streets just south of the long island expressway, close enough to the little india section of hicksville, on south broadway, but away from its bustle. yesterday, the block was flooded with homicide detectives, crime scene vans and a mobile command center. an officer from the canine squad led a german shepherd through the yards and around a drainage ditch and nearby sewers.  a letter carrier, david abbey, estimated that he delivered mail to the house around noon on tuesday and did not notice anything suspicious  that afternoon, the singhs' sons, josh, 13, and ankur, 12, returned home from the harry b. thompson middle school and rang their doorbell. when their mother did not answer, as she normally did, they entered with a key and found their parents dead. ankur ran across the street and asked a neighbor to call the police.  neighbors said that mrs. singh took care of the boys full time and that mr. singh managed a furniture store in lower manhattan and was the co-owner of a gas station on long island.  ofira bronfeld, who owns economy foam and futons in manhattan, said mr. singh was the store's manager. she called him ''a very, very fine man.''  ''they were very devoted parents and they moved out to long island to be safer, but there's nowhere safe anymore,'' she said. ''may god help those children. the pain for them is just unbearable.''  