aruba   finding the perfect island to satisfy everyone on a family vacation can be quite a challenge. the kids are tired of the beach by noon and need something else to do. dad wants to golf all morning and lie on the beach all afternoon. and mom just wants to retreat to the spa. plus, any place that requires changing planes is too much of a hassle, and if you or your spouse want any chance of watching the sunset in peace, a resort without a babysitting program is out of the question.  consider aruba, 15 miles off the coast of venezuela. it takes less than five hours to fly there nonstop from new york. many major airlines offer direct flights from the united states, with some advance fares running as low as $129 each way not including taxes or fees. regular rates are in the $400 range.  families will find a wide variety of kid-friendly accommodations with activities ranging from windsurfing to snorkeling to scavenger hunts. there is no shortage of chain hotels, ranging from the holiday inn to the hyatt regency, each offering its own kids program. and, yes, many of them also have elaborate spas.  beyond the resorts, the island has dozens of quirky attractions that appeal to a kid's curiosity, including a butterfly farm, a donkey sanctuary and ''snuba'' tours, which involve a breathing apparatus that allows kids as young as 8 to descend to a depth of 20 feet with the aid of an instructor. and for grown-ups, there are dozens of casinos and nightclubs.  still not convinced? because united states customs and immigration agents are stationed at aruba's airport, american travelers can clear customs before they leave the island, eliminating long lines -- and children's whining -- back home.  where to stay -- the all-inclusive tamarijn aruba is popular with families who don't like hidden costs. rates start at $454 a night now through march for up to two adults and two children in one room. meals and snacks at seven dining spots and many activities are included (800 554-2008, www.tamarijnaruba.com). prices start at $235 a night at the holiday inn sunspree resort aruba, from jan. 27 to march 2 (800-465-4329, www.aruba.sunspreeresorts.com). rates start at $449 a night at the aruba marriott resort & stellaris casino through mid-april (800-223-6388, www.arubamarriott.com).  the 10 point caribbean escapes plan: for families michelle higgins, a staff reporter for the travel section, writes the practical traveler column.  