five arrested in new jersey in illegal sales of painkillers   five people have been arrested on charges that they ran a drug ring that had sold more than $20 million worth of painkillers, or one million pills, law enforcement officials in new jersey announced on friday.  attorney general stuart rabner, flanked by state police and federal drug enforcement agency officials, said at a news conference that the scheme had been operating for more than a year, and that it had sold 20,000 to 30,000 oxycontin and percocet pills per week, mostly through distributors based in the bronx. mr. rabner also said the drugs found their way to people seeking a heroin substitute in new york, pennsylvania, connecticut and massachusetts.  oxycontin, a narcotic pain reliever similar to morphine, has become a popular street drug in recent years. in perhaps the most celebrated case, rush limbaugh, the conservative talk-radio host, settled a prescription drug fraud charge against him last spring after an inquiry into whether he illegally obtained oxycontin from more than one doctor.  in the new jersey case, the authorities said that mohmed hassanain, 41, ran the operation out of his business, lyons avenue auto sales in newark.  but the operation had a suburban sheen to it as well, according to officials. mr. hassanain ran some of the business out of his house in west orange, just a couple of blocks from the essex county country club.  he employed a doctor from livingston, mario comesanas, 51, who wrote 300 fraudulent prescriptions a week in exchange for $30,000 cash each week, the authorities said. they contend that mr. hassanain's cousin, ahmed felix aly, a pharmacist who lives in union township, would then fill the prescriptions at his business, rgn pharmacy, in newark.  mr. rabner and gerard p. mcaleer, special agent in charge of the d.e.a.'s new jersey division, described the operation as significant when compared with other pharmaceutical rings in the state.  new jersey officials acknowledged that a statewide tracking system meant to monitor possible abuses did not provide investigators with the initial lead; rather, a member of the general public did. asked whether that system needed to be improved, mr. rabner said, ''as with all investigations, we learn a great deal about how people operate'' and added that state officials planned to ''follow up on those lessons.''  the five people accused of being members of the drug ring were arrested late thursday in a sweep of 10 places in new jersey. the authorities found several guns, including a .357 magnum, and at dr. comesanas's home was several hundred thousand dollars in cash, they said. mr. hassanain, meanwhile, had $10,000 in his sleeve when he was arrested, they said.  mr. hassanain and mr. comesanas pleaded not guilty to the charges friday afternoon in essex county superior court in newark. mr. hassanain was being held in $1.5 million bail and mr. comesanas in $1 million. judge michael j. nelson ordered that both men surrender their passports and scheduled a bail hearing for wednesday.  lawyers for both men said they had just received copies of the complaint and declined to comment.  