52 mayors unite in washington to curb illegal firearms   mayors from some of the nation's largest cities gathered on tuesday to urge congress to crack down on the trade of illegal firearms. but the mayors' efforts, led by michael r. bloomberg of new york and thomas m. menino of boston, generated a small protest by advocates for gun owners and dealers.  at a daylong conference here, the coalition, known as mayors against illegal guns, vowed to press for federal legislation to give cities greater access to trace data, which law enforcement authorities can use to determine the origin of guns involved in crimes. a trace tracks the weapon's sales history, from manufacturer to distributor to retailer to buyer.  an appropriations provision passed each year since 2003 has banned the federal bureau of alcohol, tobacco, firearms and explosives from releasing gun-trace data, except to police officials and prosecutors investigating or prosecuting a crime. the provision prevents the data from being used in civil lawsuits against gun dealers or manufacturers.  with congress now under the control of democrats, who are generally more favorable to gun control, the provision may be rescinded this year. to advance that goal, along with other measures to stem the flow of illegal guns, the mayors announced the creation of a bipartisan task force of four house members concerned about illegal guns.  the conference was the biggest event so far in an effort that began last april with a meeting of 15 mayors at gracie mansion in manhattan. the coalition has grown to more than 120 mayors. among the 52 who attended were the mayors of newark, buffalo, los angeles, chicago, philadelphia, baltimore, washington, milwaukee, seattle, denver, atlanta, miami, minneapolis and st. louis.  ''illegal guns are a national problem that demands a national response,'' mr. menino said in opening remarks, adding, ''we are only as strong as each of our members.''  the two democrats on the task force are representative charles b. rangel of new york, the new chairman of the ways and means committee, and representative john conyers jr. of michigan, the new chairman of the judiciary committee. the republicans are representatives peter t. king of new york and mark steven kirk of illinois.  there were signs of opposition to the mayors' efforts. the new york sun reported last week that jared d. fuhriman of idaho falls, idaho, became the first mayor to withdraw from the coalition, saying he thought its proposals were going too far.  as the conference proceeded at the cannon house office building, four gun-rights groups held a news conference at the capital hilton downtown to denounce mr. bloomberg, whom they called ''the manhattan gun grabber.''  they questioned the propriety and legality of the bloomberg administration's use of private investigators to conduct undercover sting operations. the operations have documented so-called straw purchases, in which proxies sign the paperwork on behalf of buyers who would not be eligible to buy a gun or pass required background checks. such operations have been the basis for civil lawsuits by the city against dealers.  ''this is the kind of slapdash, keystone kop behavior that the mayor has been engaging in, and indeed by sending non-law-enforcement people to do these attempted sting operations, he is violating the law,'' said larry pratt, executive director of the gun owners of america.  another gun-rights group, the virginia citizens defense league, announced that two virginia dealers that have been sued by the city, bob moates sports shop and old dominion gun and tackle, would hold a bloomberg gun giveaway in protest. for every $100 spent, customers will be entered in a drawing to win a firearm worth $1,000.  at the conference, mr. bloomberg maintained that the coalition respected the second amendment and was not trying to curb gun rights. ''that's ideological nonsense, and we've just got to move past it,'' he said of the arguments raised by critics. ''respecting the rights of gun owners while cracking down on illegal guns are completely compatible goals.''  ray schoenke, the president of the american hunters and shooters association, a small gun-rights group that describes itself as an alternative to the national rifle association, addressed the mayors and said that he thought many of their ideas were reasonable.  ''it is time to begin rebuilding respect for our hunting and shooting heritage, which for the last 30 years has been tarnished by gun-rights extremists,'' mr. schoenke said.  at the conference, the mayors of los angeles, chicago and milwaukee gave presentations on their cities' efforts to combat gun violence.  