eloquent tongues but anguished irish hearts   quite a few languages are spoken in brian friel's play ''translations.'' there is a fair amount of latin and greek. gaelic makes frequent appearances. and english is of course the play's official lingua franca.  but you can leave your berlitzes and your dead-language primers at home. a basic fluency in the workings of the human heart is all that's necessary to absorb the beauties of mr. friel's tender, sad and funny play about the difficulty of finding a home in the world, a person to share it with, and a name to call it by.  ''translations'' has already had two major new york productions: off broadway in 1981 and on broadway in 1995. neither made much of a splash (it racked up just 25 performances in the more recent run), but ''translations'' is anything but a splashy play. a quiet ensemble drama set in rural ireland in 1833, it explores the troubled lives of a handful of characters struggling to adjust to the shifting dynamics of the world around them, which is undergoing quiet but radical change as the hard fist of british regulation seeks to impose itself on local tradition. item no. 1 on britain's agenda is mapping the island and translating the gaelic place names into proper english, a process that has complicated political and cultural overtones for the irish people that resonate to this day.  mr. friel's touch is delicate, his narrative artful but oblique, his lyrical voice steeped in the lusty idioms of rural ireland. and then there's the greek and latin, intoned with joyous relish by men who like to chase it with a spot of hard liquor. ''translations'' is, in short, the kind of play whose merits are likely to be lost in translation when exposed to the bright spotlight of broadway.  and yet here it is on broadway again, where it opened last night at the biltmore theater, courtesy of the manhattan theater club (which also produced the off broadway production) and the mccarter theater center in princeton, n.j. on this occasion it has wisely been entrusted to garry hynes, the brilliant irish director known for her work with the fiery young playwright martin mcdonagh and the cycle of plays by j. m. synge seen at the lincoln center festival last summer. ms. hynes has in turn wisely entrusted mr. friel's challenging play to a stageful of little-known but hugely talented actors, creating an ensemble of an extraordinarily high caliber and consistency. in their hands -- on their tongues, i should say -- ''translations'' is nothing short of glorious.  mind you, the play trades in a subtle glory, the kind that steals upon you furtively and without the help of advance pr. last season a revival of mr. friel's ''faith healer'' opened on broadway with rather more éclat, thanks to the high-profile presence of ralph fiennes in the title role. ms. hynes's cast boasts no stars of that renown, indeed no stars of the renown of mr. fiennes's estimable co-star, new york's beloved cherry jones. nor does it involve the kind of tour de force monologues of which ''faith healer'' is composed, long, heart-searing speeches in which the characters seem to shed their skins paragraph by paragraph, until their souls stand naked and exposed before us.  but this news may come as a relief to those who found ''faith healer'' a tough sit. ''translations'' is ultimately as emotionally resonant as that play is -- and possibly just as heart-rending -- but its rich cast of colorful characters, its more pointed humor and its layered narrative make it more accessible. and nobody talks for more than two minutes at a time, which is the blink of an eye for an irishman onstage.  why should they? all too often the words they speak cannot be understood by their listeners, even when their lives depend on them. in ''translations'' mr. friel celebrates the sweet music of human speech, but the play also explores the seriocomic truth that language divides as easily as it unites, and sometimes fumbles and stalls just when we need it to soar. greek or latin, english or gaelic, it is the only tool we have to forge emotional bonds, diffuse social conflict and translate inner passions into the practices of daily living. but how paltry it can seem as a medium of expression for all that fills our searching souls!  its eloquence and its limits are most movingly illustrated at the climax of the first act, when love comes upon two of the play's central characters with the speed of a runaway horse. the irish dairymaid maire (susan lynch) has long been betrothed to a local, but she yearns to escape the stultifying culture of ballybeg (the fictional town where many of mr. friel's plays are set, here also known in gaelic as baile-beag). maire has recently announced a bold plan to move to america, but her eye has been caught by lieutenant yolland (chandler williams), the british soldier with no fixed place in the world who feels strangely at home among the wary but friendly locals. he has fallen in love with the land, the people and, poignantly, the language it is his job to make obsolete.  he speaks scarcely a word of gaelic, and her english is limited to a few phrases and a useless bit of nonsense, courtesy of aunt mary: ''in norfolk we besport ourselves around the maypole.'' as they each trot out their stray bits of each other's language, mr. williams and ms. lynch -- who both give enchanting performances -- make palpably clear the anguish and frustration of being unable to find even rough words to communicate inchoate feelings. as funny as it is touching, this beautifully played scene exposes the truth and the lie in the cliché that lovers need no common language to lay bare their hearts.  but almost everything in this production plays beautifully. the boozy give and take between hugh (niall buggy), the schoolmaster who runs the humble rural schoolroom where the play takes place, and his prized old pupil jimmy jack (dermot crowley), is wonderfully funny, as they tease each other with etymological tests.  the mixture of tension and affection between hugh's sons is intimated with subtle force. manus (david costabile), an ardent nationalist, takes over the teaching chores when hugh has taken a nip too much, at least until his heart is broken and he comes to feel an exile in his beloved home. owen (alan cox) ran away to dublin and has returned to ballybeg as the hired assistant to the british soldiers in their mission, which he believes can help advance the cause of the locals, if they can be made to see it. (now if only he could get his employers to call him by his right name, and not by the anglicized rowan.)  mr. friel's characters are too complexly drawn -- and in this production played -- to line up neatly for or against the advent of a new language that may bring economic benefits but will speed the erosion of an entire culture. hugh, that lover of dead tongues, makes the eloquent observation that words ''are not immortal,'' and ''a civilization can be imprisoned in a linguistic contour which no longer matches the landscape of  fact.'' the mournful corollary mr. friel's play gently illuminates: people are far more mortal than the words they use, and a changing civilization may leave them adrift and alone.  you don't have to search hard for lamentable contemporary resonance in ''translations.'' the attempt to impose a new civilization on a subjugated country by force looms as the background for the smaller personal dramas that take up much of the casually drawn narrative. and the plot turns on the disappearance of a soldier, possibly a casualty of irish resentment of the occupying force.  but the quiet urgency of ms. hynes's production derives more from the limning of the small strains tugging at the tight fabric of a community of individuals, each bedeviled by a private struggle. the ensemble is rounded out by michael fitzgerald as the impish young doalty, who bridles more than most at the presence of the british; geraldine hughes as the feisty bridget; graeme malcolm as the stern, condescending redcoat captain lancey; and morgan hallett as sarah, a disturbed young woman who has trouble communicating at all, and can barely say her name.  ms. hynes's production also benefits from evocative work from some of her regular collaborators, the set and costume designer francis o'connor and the lighting designer davy cunningham. mr. cunningham's painterly lighting is particularly integral to the nuanced contouring of the production. as the narrative darkens in the last act, the triangle of light that formed a bright spot in the dimness of the barn is shut out, as hope for a promising end to almost everyone's trouble begins to dim.  a despondent and tipsy jimmy jack and hugh are alone in the dusk when maire enters and asks, ''master, what does the english word 'always' mean?''  he gives her the answer in latin, but adds: ''it's not a word i'd start with. it's a silly word, girl.''  in fact, in the darkening gloom of the barn, in the final moments of mr. friel's haunting but hugely rewarding play, it sounds like the saddest word in the english language. or any language.  translations  by brian friel; directed by garry hynes; sets and costumes by francis o'connor; lighting by davy cunningham; sound by john leonard; original music, sam jackson; production stage manager, richard costabile; production manager, ryan mcmahon; general manager, florie seery; producing artistic director for the mccarter theater center, mara isaacs; director of production, david york. presented by the manhattan theater club, lynne meadow, artistic director, and barry grove, executive producer; and the mccarter theater center, emily mann, artistic director, and jeffrey woodward, managing director. at the biltmore theater, 261 west 47th street; (212) 239-6200. running time: 2 hours 15 minutes.  with: niall buggy (hugh), david costabile (manus), alan cox (owen), dermot crowley (jimmy jack), michael fitzgerald (doalty), morgan hallett (sarah), geraldine hughes (bridget), susan lynch (maire), graeme malcolm (captain lancey) and chandler williams (lieutenant yolland).  theater review  