return of the drug company payoffs   two excessively lenient court decisions have allowed the manufacturers of brand-name drugs to resume the underhanded practice of paying generic competitors to keep their drugs off the market. it is a costly legal loophole that needs to be plugged by congressional legislation.  the problem arises when a generic manufacturer tries to take its drug to market before the patent on a brand-name drug has expired by arguing that its product does not infringe upon the patent or that the patent is invalid. huge sums of money are at stake, especially with blockbuster drugs whose annual sales can exceed a billion dollars.  rather than risk it all, a brand-name manufacturer may choose to pay its generic competitor substantial compensation to drop its challenge and delay marketing its drug. both companies make out handsomely. the big losers are consumers and the public and private insurers that must continue to pay monopoly prices for the brand-name drugs.  the federal trade commission, which has been waging a valiant fight, succeeded for several years in eliminating such settlements. but two appeals court decisions in 2005 held that they are a legitimate way to resolve patent disputes. and sure enough, the f.t.c. reported last week that -- after a five-year hiatus -- brand-name companies made 3 such do-not-compete settlements in fiscal year 2005 and 14 more last year.  the pharmaceutical industry contends that the settlements are a reasonable way to resolve disputes and that they often result in bringing generic drugs to market before a patent has expired, albeit not as soon as the generic company wanted. the industry argues that regulators and the courts should judge such settlements on a case-by-case basis.  our own hunch is that the better approach for congress to take as it moves toward corrective legislation would be a ''bright line'' prohibition against making any payments to delay introduction of a generic drug. that would set a clear standard and enhance the likelihood that consumers would get a chance to benefit from real competition in the pharmaceutical market.  editorial  