when money talks, do voters lose?   to the editor:  re ''death knell may be near for public election funds'' (front page, jan. 23), about candidates' decisions to forgo public financing in presidential elections:  public financing for federal elections was intended to reduce the role of money, not voters. candidates who abandon that system are repudiating the principle of ''one person one vote'' in favor of ''one dollar one vote.''  if we have come to the point where the presidency goes to the highest bidder, like a prized antique, it isn't just public financing for elections for which the ''death knell'' is near. democracy itself will be on its last legs.  eric b. lipps  staten island, jan. 23, 2007  to the editor:  in your article about public campaign financing, charles e. m. kolb, president of the committee for economic development, says, ''it may take a collapse of the system in order to build it back up.''  but when the chairman of the federal election commission says presidential candidates must raise $100 million nearly a year before an election in order to be a contender, the system already has collapsed and transformed our government from democracy to plutocracy.  we've never really had public financing of any federal elections -- merely public supplements to elections controlled by private money. piecemeal reforms have failed to reverse the justified cynicism of citizens toward elections.  it's time to make our most important public processes serve citizens by demanding full public campaign financing and amending the constitution to negate the supreme court's absurd doctrine that buying political influence is protected ''free speech.''  jeff milchen  director, reclaimdemocracy.org  bozeman, mont., jan. 24, 2007  to the editor:  the best hope for the public campaign financing is that leading presidential candidates pledge to upgrade the antiquated system if elected and then walk away, fast, from the current model, which is incapable of producing the 2008 winner.  a redesigned system should dramatically expand the leverage of small-dollar donors within the system and substantially increase the amount of public money available to qualified presidential candidates.  under full public financing, known as ''clean elections,'' the gathered power of ordinary citizens puts candidates who give up large private donations on a level playing field with opponents financed by deep-pocketed individuals and interests.  with the biggest corruption scandal to hit washington since watergate still in the news, it is vital that we end our dependence on vested-interest financing.  nick nyhart  president and c.e.o.  public campaign  washington, jan. 23, 2007  to the editor:  mitch mcconnell, the senate republican leader, argues that the low percentage of taxpayers using the $3 checkoff on their federal tax forms demonstrates disapproval of public financing. this is misleading.  in 2006, greenberg quinlan rosner research conducted a poll, commissioned by the brennan center for justice at new york university, where i am counsel, to test the reasons taxpayers did or did not check off the election fund box. two-thirds of those polled lacked basic knowledge about the fund.  many taxpayers were born after it was established post-watergate, and the last major public education effort on the fund was in 1993. unsurprisingly, taxpayers who lack familiarity with the fund are less inclined to participate.  the fund can be revived through legislative fixes that make it better suited to current election conditions and by a public education campaign about its purpose.  ciara torres-spelliscy  new york, jan. 23, 2007  to the editor:  we should make all election campaign financing illegal, have the government purchase equal tv time for all declared candidates, and broadcast each candidate describing his or her ideas for solutions and priorities.  let's start using logic and intelligence for decision making. let's start hearing about ideas that are real and new.  the present system of media purchase with special-interest dollars shuts out many of the most qualified and most ethical candidates.  of the people, by the people, for the people -- anyone remember that?  susan moore  la marque, tex., jan. 23, 2007  