change comes, gradually, to the san francisco opera   significant changes are happening in america's opera landscape as new directors take over some of the country's major companies. but in a field in which artists are booked several years in advance, it takes a while for season programs to reflect those changes.  this week david gockley, who became general director of the san francisco opera in january 2006, announced what amounts to his first season. not quite all of the 2007-8 season is his: he has inherited the opening production, ''samson and delilah'' (with olga borodina), and david pountney's zurich staging of verdi's ''macbeth'' (with thomas hampson). but he has at least instigated the other nine productions, although most are co-productions with other companies.  one highlight is already widely known: the world premiere of philip glass's ''appomattox'' in october, upholding mr. gockley's reputation as a champion of contemporary american opera that he established during his more than 30 years in houston. (new works by stewart wallace and mark adamo are reportedly planned for future seasons.)  but the season is more conservative (or crowd-pleasing) than his reputation might indicate. it does include a ''rake's progress'' with the fine william burden, which arrives in november/december in an international co-production by robert lepage -- once avant-garde, now embraced by everyone from cirque du soleil (''kÀ'') to the metropolitan opera (where he is working on the new ''ring'' for 2010). and rachel portman's ''little prince,'' in the production that francesca zambello designed for its 2003 houston world premiere, will come to the west coast in a joint presentation with cal performances at berkeley.  but these hardly signal a future of cutting-edge modernity. in his repertory and casting choices mr. gockley is signaling that if he is taking a new road, it's broad and well paved, with lots of other traffic.  mr. gockley said his program indicated ''a balance that goes from core musical values to international-quality casting to fresh productions and directors who are going to get us once again fascinated with these great works, but who i don't think are going to go in a direction that is going to be contrary to their essence.''  some of those directions are already familiar to east coast audiences, or will be by the time they appear in the west, like mary zimmerman's ''lucia di lammermoor'' (with natalie dessay and giuseppe filianoti), which will open the metropolitan opera's 2007-8 season before traveling to san francisco in june. similarly, ms. zambello's ''rheingold'' in june will kick off a new ''ring'' cycle that already opened at the washington opera in march 2006.  all new, by contrast, is a graham vick production of ''tannhäuser'' (with peter seiffert) in september. puccini's ''rondine'' (with angela gheorghiu) and maurice sendak's production of ''the magic flute'' will round out the season.  mr. gockley promises new announcements to come, particularly with regard to electronic media.  ''we're nipping at the heels of the met,'' he said.  music  