on the aegean, stone and steel surrender to the breeze   in 2002, when murat and sedef ozturk first visited a small plot of land 1,500 feet above the aegean sea in this ancient village, where aristotle lived for a time in the fourth century b.c., they were overwhelmed by the view. standing behind a stone wall at the edge of the property, the couple looked out on an endless expanse of water, the shadowy outline of the island of lesbos, and a hilly, rocky terrain dotted with pine, olive and cypress trees. to seaward, not a single house could be seen.  below, shepherds in wool jackets and baggy trousers climbed the steep roads with a scattering of sheep and goats. the air smelled of burning olive wood from stone ovens in the village houses. the lone break in the silence was the muezzin's call to prayer.  although it was a cloudy day, ''the sunbeams were coming through,'' said ms. ozturk, 43. ''all my tensions went away.''  four hours later they bought the land.  ''we looked at each other and said, 'this is the place for us to build,' '' recalled mr. ozturk, 46, who owns a textiles company with his wife in istanbul.  when it came to the design and construction of the house they decided to erect on the one-third-acre lot, they were equally decisive. that weekend they had been entertained by their friend selman bilal at his nearby house. they were struck by the airiness of the place, a contemporary two-story stone and glass structure with large windows that let the wind blow through.  the ozturks hired han tumertekin, the istanbul architect who designed mr. bilal's house, known as the b2 house, for which mr. tumertekin received an aga khan award for architecture in 2004. they asked him to build them a similar stone and glass house that maximized the view and was easy to maintain.  the rectangular shape of the house is based on the barnlike design of local olive oil factories, ms. ozturk said. ''murat and i love old factories,'' she said. ''we even measured one and gave han the measurements, depth and height.'' (the proportions were adjusted and scaled down in deference to the neighbors' views.)  unlike mr. bilal, who is divorced and uses his house as a quiet retreat, the ozturks wanted a country house for themselves, their two young sons and lots of friends. ''it's communal here,'' said ms. ozturk, whose warm, expansive personality is amplified by a long, wild mane of curly hair. ''we are always with friends here.''  the literal and emotional center of the house is the open kitchen-living area. it has a central fireplace with sliding glass panels on both sides, where the family and their guests can perch on low woven-reed baskets or curl up on an orange rug from ikea. elsewhere, the simple floor plan reflects the couple's desire for an uncluttered life. the children's bedrooms and guest rooms are on the east end of the house, and the master suite and the patio room, entirely open on one side to the sea view, are on the west.  except for a guest bathroom, all rooms face the sea. in the summer, ms. ozturk said, ''we sleep with the doors open and have chaise longues out front.''  open is the operative word. mr. tumertekin designed the steel-frame house -- which he named the sm house, for the owners' initials -- with floor-to-ceiling windows in the front and back and on both ends, 39 in all. each two-panel window opens like a pair of french doors. with the windows open the house fills with breezes and gives the illusion of near-total transparency, since the sole supports are slender steel columns and narrow walls of stone.  in assos, houses are traditionally made of stone or wood and have small windows. for the sm house, mr. tumertekin reversed the ratio of stone to glass and used stone with a deft, light hand.  nowhere is this more apparent than on the roof of the patio room. rocks are loosely scattered on a steel mesh frame, and shafts of sunlight pour through the crevices, dappling the ground. it is everyone's favorite room, and even on a winter day, with the temperature in the low 50s, mr. ozturk sat on the patio reading the morning papers.  later, standing on the terrace that runs the length of the house, he noted that all the stone in the house was mined in assos. ''every two or three villages has their own stone quarry,'' he said, ''and they cannot take stones from one village and sell to another.'' (a local contractor was hired to build the house, and local artisans did the stonework; the cost of the house was $300,000, and the land $60,000.)  for the furnishings ms. ozturk mixed local objects, modern european high design, inexpensive items from ikea and antiques like a 19th-century vertical roll-top oak desk to create a surprisingly warm interior that blends the rural with the urban.  to the left of the stove is a walnut vitrine. on the kitchen counter, which doubles as a dining table, was a pot of magenta cyclamen in an olive wood bucket. the counter itself is poured concrete, but a sheet of iroko, an african wood, wraps half its length. the patinated wood, often used for beams, has nicks in it, giving the counter a rugged, textured feel.  the ozturks live casually in assos. they read books or play cards or backgammon. in the summer they swim in the afternoon, and on fridays go to open-air markets in the village. and they listen to the call of the muezzin, who not only calls people to prayer, but also is the town crier.  ''if the animal doctor comes the muezzin will announce it for you to bring your animals for injections,'' mr. ozturk said. ''and he will announce if someone has died, and when the burial will take place.''  on a recent weekend, the couple had their younger son, mehmet, 11, with them, along with two friends. at lunchtime, the family and their guests ate a meal of yogurt and fresh, crusty, paper-thin bread speckled with minced leeks, parsley, dill and crumbled goat cheese. mr. ozturk looked at the sea, the view he saw on his first day here.  ''we make a plan of today, '' he said, ''according to the wind, or to our mood.''  