a year after her olympic fall, winning is jacobellis's revenge   competitors cannot keep pace with her on the snowboardcross course, but shaking questions about her famous fall at the winter olympics has been more vexing for lindsey jacobellis.  since winning a silver medal at last year's olympics, jacobellis, a 21-year-old from vermont, has re-established herself as the dominant athlete in her sport's young history. and jacobellis is again favored to win the snowboardcross final saturday afternoon here at the winter x games. qualifying for the event begins friday.  she was scheduled to compete thursday night in the women's snowboard superpipe final, but during practice, she fell and sustained a concussion. she pulled out of that event, but is still expected to compete friday and saturday in the snowboardcross. she was not a medal favorite in the superpipe, but competes just for fun.  having fun for jacobellis has been complicated this year by the ghost of her tumble last year at the winter games in turin, italy.  ''i'm just kind of over it,'' jacobellis said during a telephone interview last week from beaver creek, colo., where she won a jeep king of the mountain event.  she added, ''i'm probably going to hear all of this hoo-ha for the next four years until the next olympics.''  all three medalists in the superpipe final on thursday were olympians in the halfpipe in 2006. torah bright, 20, of australia was fifth at turin, but won gold at the x games with a series of technical tricks.  it was already jan. 26 in australia, which is australia day, the nation's most important public holiday. bright called her mother right before her race.  bright said: ''my mom said, 'go do it, it's australia day.' that, for sure, was the best contest run i've done.''  the aspen native gretchen bleiler, 25, the silver medalist at turin, won silver here, and elena hight, 17, of south lake tahoe, calif., won the bronze. hight finished sixth at turin.  snowboardcross -- a downhill racing discipline in which four or more competitors simultaneously speed through a course of banked turns, jumps, gaps, berms and other obstacles -- was a new event at the 2006 olympics, and jacobellis, who had a comfortable lead, appeared to be cruising to its first gold medal.  but on the course's second-last jump, she celebrated early by doing what is known as a method air -- she grabbed her board's heel edge and tweaked it 75 degrees.  it was a mistake.  she landed awkwardly, caught an edge and spun on her back. as she scampered to her feet, tanja frieden of switzerland zipped past her en route to the gold medal. a stunned jacobellis settled for silver.  the incident, which can be viewed on youtube, became a big story at the winter olympics. it was shown endlessly on television and analyzed in newspaper editorials. the verdict was unanimous, and jacobellis was condemned: if jacobellis had not showboated, she would have won.  at first jacobellis said her stylish grab was an attempt to stabilize in the air, but she later acknowledged she was just trying to have fun.  last week she called it an unconscious act. ''it was just kind of a fluke thing that happened,'' she said.  she is plainly tired of the subject and would rather allow her accomplishments to speak for themselves. since winning the 2002 snowboardcross world junior championship, jacobellis has been dominant.  she was undefeated in world cup competition during the 2003-4 season, and has won seven of nine world cup events she has entered since 2004. she has not lost in the last three x games in which she competed, from 2003 to 2005. two weeks ago in arona, switzerland, she avenged her olympic loss to frieden during the semifinals of the world championships and went on to win her second straight world championship.  ''just to have someone beat me is very rare,'' jacobellis said, revealing an intense competitor lurking behind a mask of tight blond curls, pale blue eyes and a toothpaste-commercial smile.  peter foley, her coach on the u.s. snowboard team, said the incident at the olympics was hard for her.  ''it's not the way she wanted it to happen, especially being as competitive as she is,'' foley said. ''straight up, she's supercompetitive. when somebody is next to her, she will do anything to pass her.''  jacobellis has also received unconditional support from her teammates on the u.s. snowboard team.  ''we all fall down,'' said nate holland, a snowboardcross rider who is also competing at the x games. ''we all make mistakes. and i think if she had it do again, i think she would have done the method, but she just would have landed it, and there wouldn't have been any question about it.  ''we still to this day throw tricks over the last jump. hopefully, i'll have enough space here at the x games and i'll pull a method over the kicker and ride through and show the media the other side of that trick.''  jacobellis, and those close to her, will tell anyone who asks about her blunder -- and eventually they always do -- how she has since landed on her feet.  ''i still got a silver out of it,'' she said. ''it was pretty amazing.''  extreme sports  