blackstone raises ante in battle for equity office   the biggest leveraged buyout ever got bigger yesterday.  the blackstone group, a private equity firm, increased its bid for equity office properties to $54 a share. equity office is the nation's largest office landlord, with nearly 600 buildings across the country.  the new offer represents an 11 percent premium over the price that equity office and blackstone had agreed on in november when they announced the deal. with the assumption of $15.3 billion in debt, the deal would have a value of $38.3 billion, equity office said in yesterday's announcement.  in exchange for raising its bid, blackstone got equity office to increase the breakup fee -- the amount it would receive if its bid failed -- to $500 million, from $200 million.  last week, a group of real estate investors led by vornado realty trust made an informal bid of $52 a share in cash and stock for equity office, a real estate investment trust founded by the chicago real estate magnate samuel zell. equity office has since allowed the vornado team access to its books and has set a deadline of next wednesday for a formal offer.  a spokeswoman for vornado, a reit with a diversified portfolio that includes office buildings, retail space and showrooms, said yesterday that the company would respond to the latest offer ''at the appropriate time.''  shares of equity office rose 8 cents, to $54.90, and vornado shares rose $1.11, to $125.76.  blackstone, controlled by stephen a. schwarzman, bought interests in more than $28 billion worth of real estate from 2001 to 2006, 38 percent more than next largest buyer, according dan fasulo, director of market analysis for real capital analytics, a new york investment firm.  blackstone says its offer has advantages over the vornado bid aside from price. it is all cash, and could be completed three days after a vote by equity office shareholders, set for feb. 5. if vornado prevailed, a deal might need approval of its shareholders, analysts said.  ''our offer is now materially superior on price, timing, form of consideration and certainty,'' said john ford, a blackstone spokesman.  kathy shanley, a corporate bond analyst, for gimme credit, an independent research company in chicago, said the new offer had shifted the odds in blackstone's favor. ''they have all their financing locked up, they could close quicker, and there's a lot less uncertainty,'' she said.  but, she added: ''vornado has said they don't anticipate any problems, and they have some heavy hitters on their side. at some level, it all depends on who blinks first.''  barry vinocur, the editor of reit wrap, a daily newsletter about real estate investment trusts, said vornado and its partners in the deal, the starwood capital group and walton street capital, two real estate investment funds, were almost certain to raise their bid.  vornado has said that if its bid is successful, it will retain the equity office buildings on the east and west coasts, including the verizon building at 42nd street and the avenue of the americas in the red-hot midtown manhattan market.  starwood -- whose chief executive, barry s. sternlicht, founded the starwood hotel and resorts chain -- and walton street capital would take equity office buildings in markets like miami, san jose and seattle, where real estate values are expected to rise in the next couple of years. neil g. bluhm, the president of jmb realty, a chicago development company, is a co-founder of walton street.  mr. vinocur said mr. zell and his investment bankers had done a ''masterful'' job of steering the acquisition process by setting the breakup fee low enough so that other bidders would enter the contest.  ''this is chess at its highest level,'' he said.  