spare times: jan. 26-feb. 1; the three little pigs   how do you like your ham? if the answer is sugar-cured and country-flavored, then manhattan children's theater's latest production should appeal to your tastes. although not a revisionist ''three little pigs'' (the wolf is still bad), this musical adaptation has a sweet premise -- that celebrating differences is better than fighting over them -- and its rousing rockabilly tunes and lyrics, by kyle c. norris, keep the sentiments from becoming saccharine. the book, by sarah norris (this is a married couple; she also wrote some of the lyrics), sets the tale in the south, where the pigs live with mama, a sow of ample girth (katie knipp, with the help of strategically placed pillows). but her offspring -- patty (julie mozdy), patterson (mike mitchell jr.) and pat (stephen mcfarland), above from left -- are little in every sense, and get into fistfights when they're teased. mama suggests that they enter the local talent contest as the three little pigs, showing pride in their smallness. the trio really can sing (no ''american idol''-style stumbling here), and young audiences should enjoy their ode to food, which includes warm words for bacon: veggie bacon, that is. big bad wolf (chris will), who combines johnny cash's fondness for black with a james dean swagger, is already something of a country star, with his own agent, rae coon (molly roberson). bad, as he's called, can't resist the idea of tricking the pig family into becoming his dinner. traditionalists who long to hear the refrain of ''not by the hair on my chinny chin chin'' will have their wishes satisfied at this point, when the pigs, deceived into thinking mama has skipped town over their squabbling, build private houses. ably directed by bruce merrill, the production offers amusing slapstick and an opportunity for young theatergoers to help give bad a taste of his own medicine. with all the practice they get from blowing out birthday candles, children should have no trouble huffing and puffing a gale-force wind. (saturdays and sundays at noon and 2 p.m., through feb. 25, with an additional show on feb. 19 at 1 p.m., 52 white street, near church street, tribeca, 212-352-3101; $15.)  laurel graeber  