what's on tonight   9 p.m. (hallmark) troy -- (2004). pump me up: brad pitt (left) flexes his muscles as the warrior achilles in this action-heavy historical drama from wolfgang petersen, adapted by david benioff from ''the iliad'' by homer and other sources, about the assault on troy by greek forces. the glossy cast includes orlando bloom as paris, diane kruger as helen, brendan gleeson as menelaus, eric bana as hector, brian cox as agamemnon, sean bean as odysseus and peter o'toole as priam.  5 p.m. (a&e) clean this house -- two slovenly families face off against each other in a 24-hour clean-up, with the show's host, molly pesce, deciding whose job is spic-and-span, and whose doesn't quite gleam. the winning family gets a year's worth of maid service.  7 p.m. (speed) lucas oil on the edge -- careful on those turns! teams compete in rockford, ill., in figure-8 train racing, in which two cars are chained together -- the front one with the engine and the back one with the brakes. the ''lucas oil late model dirt series,'' held in wheatland, mo., follows at 7:30.  8 p.m. (hbo) jarhead -- (2005). jake gyllenhaal plays swoff, the alter ego of anthony swofford, whose memoir about his time spent as a member of the united states marine corps inspired this drama from sam mendes about the terror and thrill of serving in the first gulf war -- not to mention the tedium and boredom. ''are we ever going to kill anyone?'' asks a young marine toward the movie's end. peter sarsgaard (above left, with mr. gyllenhaal) plays troy, a tightly wound midwesterner who becomes swoff's shooting partner and closest friend.  8 p.m. (fox) cops -- starting early: a kentucky officer must settle a lovers' quarrel between teenagers.  8 p.m. (food network) emeril live -- just in time for the big game, mr. lagasse asked viewers to send in their favorite football-party recipes. tonight, he tries out a few, including shrimp and crab croquettes, sweet bourbon baby backs, black-eyed pea casserole and italian hamburger slices.  9 p.m. (sci fi) gryphon -- a prince and a princess from opposing sides of warring kingdoms must join forces to defeat a mystical gryphon that was conjured by an evil wizard determined to control both their lands. amber benson (above) and jonathan lapaglia star in this made-for-television adventure fantasy.  10 p.m. (animal planet) rats with nigel marven -- mr. marven says he'll happily pet a spider or a worm, but rats are another thing entirely. in this special, he travels from the sewers of england to the temples of india to overcome his fear by learning as much as he can about the snaggletooth rodents.  kathryn shattuck  tonight's tv listings  