new york, condensed   in his state of the state address this month, gov. eliot spitzer's support for the consolidation of new york's multiple layers of local government -- those more than 4,200 taxing jurisdictions that cost taxpayers millions each year in duplicative services -- received relatively little notice. and yet one could argue that no reform goal is more important than the redesign of layered governing arrangements.  the current situation is truly bizarre. consider two examples. we have four types of general-purpose governments performing similar functions. every new yorker living outside new york city supports two of these; about a sixth of us, those who live in villages as i do, pay taxes to three. there are 699 school districts of varied sizes whose boundaries often cut across these general-purpose governments, complicating tax administration and driving costs sky high.  the state established counties and towns to provide essential local services in rural new york. cities and villages were chartered in response to local petition or action, in places where population concentration required more and different services. as new york's population grew and pushed out from heavily settled places in the last century, it was easiest for the state to meet the needs of former city dwellers by allowing towns and counties to increase their powers. now all general-purpose governments are able to do more or less the same things.  new york is ranked among the highest in the nation in terms of state and local property taxes per capita. clearly, reducing local costs through structural changes is essential to easing the tax burden. less clear, but just as important, changing the way local government works is essential to achieving accountability. this is because the prevailing complexity makes it nearly impossible for most residents to understand which of their overlapping local governments does what.  there are reasons, both good and bad, why new york's local government arrangements are so resistant to change. suburban and rural peoples' sense of community is bound up with their local governments. localities in new york make the rules on land use. most families' largest investment is in their home; changes may seem to put this investment at risk. in many rural areas, local government offers the best available jobs; structural changes could mean fewer of them. sustaining school district boundaries in many suburban areas also reinforces a separation among races and social classes that, regrettably, some still favor. our state is committed, at least in concept, to ''home rule.'' that's why the new york constitution makes local government consolidation much harder here than in many other states.  i have no doubt that mr. spitzer is genuinely committed to local government reform. but it is hard to see why he is proposing a commission to deal with this, especially if it is made up of the usual suspects, as most such groups are. relying upon those with a very big stake in the status quo is no route toward necessary changes.  instead, the governor should gather ideas, subject them to careful research within his office, act on the executive side where he can, and make sure that needed bills are introduced into and pushed through the legislature, while building the necessary political support to achieve change.  perhaps he could set up a boundary commission to rationalize noncontiguous local government borders. or how about a requirement that localities that fall below a certain population size periodically vote affirmatively to remain in existence? a constitutional change to make it easier to consolidate local governments or transfer functions between and among them would also help.  one very big idea is suggested by research recently completed by the state comptroller's office. in the report ''outdated municipal structures,'' the comptroller's office justifies eliminating the archaic classification of local governments into cities, towns and villages. it suggests classifying these entities according to size and function -- in other words, there would be larger urban centers, smaller urban centers, suburbs and rural governments. once this is done, new york could recodify local government law based upon this new classification scheme, and then base all the state's local government assistance on these new categories, with built-in incentives and disincentives to encourage a reduction in their number.  there is no shortage of other good ideas. even a few small steps could go a long way toward making local government more efficient, more democratic -- and less expensive.  op-ed contributor gerald benjamin, a professor of political science, is the dean of the college of liberal arts and sciences at the suny college at new paltz.  