senate approves creating a comptroller's post in new jersey   new jersey could, for the first time, have a state comptroller with broad powers to audit and conduct performance reviews of state agencies, authorities, local governments and school districts under a bill that was narrowly approved by the senate on thursday.  the creation of the comptroller as a fiscal watchdog was part of gov. jon s. corzine's legislative program, which also includes a 20 percent tax cut for most homeowners. the assembly must still act on the proposal.  the senate's approval of the comptroller, who will be appointed by the governor, came after many complained it had been watered down to exempt several government agencies from scrutiny.  the senate also passed a bill intended to established a pension plan similar to a 401(k) plan for future elected officials, in place of the defined-benefit plan that current officials have. it would also prevent lawyers, engineers and other professionals from cobbling together hefty pensions by holding several part-time government jobs.  but the bill does allow other part-time workers, like tax collectors, municipal clerks and health officers, to tack together salaries from different towns for pension credit. that provision prompted a few lawmakers to criticize the measure, although it passed easily and democrats and republicans alike applauded the move as a beginning step in a long process of pension reform.  the comptroller's post, approved 22 to 17, has been urged by the governor and some democratic legislative leaders as part of the effort to slow the increase in local property taxes.  in his recent state of the state message, the governor said that the creation of the office of comptroller would make measures aimed directly at lowering local spending more sustainable by saving money, improving government performance and taking a step toward cleaning up corruption among public officials.  the amended measure narrowly passed the senate, although most republicans and at least one democrat attacked it as a mere shadow of earlier proposals.  state senator barbara buono, a democrat from edison, withdrew her sponsorship, saying that her original proposal gave the comptroller much broader powers to audit and investigate local governments.  ''i think special interests chipped away at this bill,'' ms. buono said.  and in the assembly, which will also vote on the post, the majority leader, bonnie watson coleman, a sponsor, has already indicated unhappiness with the narrowed scope of the comptroller's powers.  nonetheless, the senate president, richard j. codey, called passage of the measure an important step in property tax reform.  mr. codey said he was confident that by the time tax measures are all approved, the state's 1.9 million property- tax payers will be receiving credits of up to 20 percent on their bills.  ''that's the filet mignon on the table of property tax reform,'' mr. codey said of the proposed tax credit, which is to be taken up on feb. 5. ''all of the other things are side dishes. i think in terms of the average person, it is the tax credit and savings that really matter.''  