love of learning: which children have it most   which children like school the most? asians and girls and the children of parents who are married, make the most money, have advanced academic degrees and live in the suburbs of the northeast.  those are also likely to be the same students who say they are most interested in their schoolwork and often work hard in school.  which are most likely to be enrolled in programs for gifted students? children of better-educated parents. if one imagined a category combining the leading factors, it would be the daughters of married couples from the suburbs in the south whose parents' income was above the poverty level.  those are some of the findings in the census bureau's analysis, ''a child's day,'' released this month. the report surveyed parents nationwide to analyze benchmarks of well-being for 73 million children under 18 from a 2003 review of income and participation in various government assistance programs.  the report also measured characteristics of students enrolled in gifted programs. among students younger than 12 enrolled in such programs, the largest group was non-hispanic white. among older students, asians were the most numerous in gifted programs.  the biggest differential was linked to their parents' level of educational achievement. the proportion of 12- to- 17-year-olds in gifted classes ranged from 10 percent of those whose parents had never completed high school to 45 percent of those whose parents had an advanced degree.  many of the differentials in the report were predictable, on the basis of other surveys, and were relatively slight. still, some stood out.  among racial and ethnic groups, non-hispanic white parents were most likely to say their children never like school, while asian parents, followed by hispanic parents, were most likely to say their children like it often. the children of parents who were separated, divorced or widowed were most likely to never like school. children whose parent worked part-time generally like school most often. those growing up in rural areas like it less often.  more parents of asian and non-hispanic white teenagers said their children had repeated a grade. the percentage who had ever been suspended -- 13.4 percent overall -- barely differed regardless of race, income and other variables.  