reality check for a generation that knows best   viewers who complain that the auditions on this season's ''american idol'' are too cruel are missing the point.  they are cruel, but there are more victims than the two young men who were so viciously ridiculed by simon cowell that they ended up as guests on the ''today'' program and ''jimmy kimmel live.'' one, jonathan jayne, who has a mild form of autism, turns out to be a video savant:  ''i think that he was just, you know, trying to make television,'' mr. jayne said of his tormentor. ''they're just actors, and they're out to make a buck and increase ratings.''  the larger cruelty of fox's ''american idol,'' its nbc look-alike ''grease: you're the one that i want,'' ''the apprentice'' and even ''armed and famous'' (erik estrada?!), is a generational snub. reality television, which was originally created as a thumb-nosing alternative for the young (''the real world''), has been co-opted by the baby boomers, who never miss a chance to assert their hegemony on popular culture.  it's not so much that they watch the shows, though many do. it's that reality television aims for younger viewers, 18 to 34, while subliminally underscoring and cementing their fealty to the relaxed-fit generation.  whether it is a firing by donald trump or a personal attack by mr. cowell, each rejection is a symbolic re-enactment of an inter-era struggle in which the bullies always come out on top.  it explains the popularity of ''grease,'' a contest for the two leads in a broadway revival of a show that first opened in new york in 1972 and became a hit film in 1978. it's a favorite high school production, so the contestants -- and younger viewers -- already know the lyrics by heart. ''grease'' is also reconstituted nostalgia for a pre-aquarian era only the oldest baby boomers tasted first hand. (the hugely popular made-for-tv disney movie ''high school musical,'' on the other hand, seems to be the next ''grease'' for generation z.)  the survival of ''the apprentice'' on nbc is surely a sign of the viewer's unconscious impulse to relive the conflict between young and refuse-to-get-old. season after season, good-looking, ambitious young people willingly abase themselves before a mercurial, aging baby boomer with odd hair and ostentatious taste. every episode contains a reminder that mr. trump is a sovereign whose favor must be recaptured time and time again.  ''you're expecting an experience where you're going to taste the trump lifestyle,'' aaron, a sweet-faced real estate manager, said mournfully after his team on ''the apprentice: los angeles'' lost a round and was banished to outdoor tents and cold-water showers. ''right now it's still dangling in front of my nose.''  senator barack obama of illinois considers himself part of the post-boomer generation. (boomers are usually defined as those born between 1946 and 1964, so mr. obama, born in 1961, is actually at the tail end of the second wave.) in his bid for the democratic nomination, mr. obama says he hopes to steer the country away from the ideological battles of vietnam and watergate, but he knows better than to challenge pop radio playlists or nostalgia programming on cable. they may not be the greatest generation, but baby boomers are the bossiest and most imposing, and they have a way of muscling their way past young upstarts and innovators. nbc quickly cut a deal with youtube, and a parody of iphone from the network's ''late night with conan o'brien'' has been viewed 1.4 million times.  baby boomers will watch ''law & order'' and ''csi,'' bankrupt social security, deplete medicare and go noisily, dementedly into gated retirement communities with their shriveled, arthritic fingers still pushing the levers of culture and clutching the remote.  revolutionaries turn reactionary once they seize control; the generation that prided itself on freedom and nonconformity keeps generations x and y walking behind it in lock step, weaned on reruns of ''m*a*s*h'' and remakes of ''charlie's angels'' and each new lunar phase of madonna. like the youngest children in a large family, the post-boom generations are living on hand-me-down pop culture, and don't seem to mind.  it's not just that the songs on ''grease'' and ''american idol'' are by the likes of toto, debbie harry or stevie wonder. ''american idol'' presents aging singers like barry manilow and rod stewart as hot, contemporary artists. they are depicted as mentors to the contestants, but they mainly leech the show's popularity to boost their album sales.  like their rivals on ''american idol,'' the three judges on ''grease'' are baby boomers. even when those shows bring in a guest judge, it is only rarely a younger artist, like the only slightly passé singer jewel. most often it's a celebrity old enough to have watched the funeral of john f. kennedy on live television, like the songwriter carole bayer sager or olivia newton-john, who played sandy in the film version of ''grease.''  the producers could just as easily recruit successful performers in their 20s to balance the bench, but they don't want to and don't have to: younger viewers identify with the supplicants begging to be tapped, not with the authority figures who determine their fate.  the few who talk back in tryouts, like ian benardo, 25, who swanned on stage and demanded to see mr. cowell's visa, are kept in for amusement, but the editing ensures that they leave the show looking nutty and even dangerous.  parents play an important role on these reality shows, a signal that there is no generation gap between boomers and their offspring; children owe their happiness and even their success to their fathers and mothers.  mr. trump has replaced seasoned executives from the boardroom with two of his children, the stone-faced ivanka and the eager-to-please donald jr., and constantly reminds them that they owe their livelihood to dad. ''these are my children, but they are not children,'' mr. trump informed his newest crop of would-be apprentices. ''they are very talented business people.''  there probably are young business executives in the world who are not related to the boss and can be held up as role models (google founders come to mind), but that may undermine mr. trump's cultivated air of infallibility. the series prefers to warn young viewers that real power lies in the hands of those born after world war ii and before the gulf of tonkin: a band of yuppies that cannot be left behind.  while filming part of an episode at the loews hotel in santa monica, calif., mr. trump made a plug not just for the hotel chain, but also for its chairman and chief executive, jonathan tisch. ''he's been my boss for 27 years; he's a great man,'' the hotel manager dutifully tells mr. trump.  mr. trump replies, ''he's a great man, and he's a great friend of mine.''  even rebellious children beg for parents' approval, and parents keep the upper hand. sarah, 19, slipped away from home in ohio to audition for ''idol'' without telling her father, and she wept so poignantly about needing his blessing that the show's host, ryan seacrest, helped her call home to break the news.  ''dad, i have something to tell you, please don't be mad at me, dad,'' she said tearfully into her cellphone.  ''who is this?'' her father replied.  baby boomers don't eat their young; they just keepthem hooked on their leftovers.  the tv watch  