days of decision in ulster   the militant irish republican gerry adams and the fire-breathing unionist preacher ian paisley have long symbolized the irreconcilable extremes of ulster politics. but over the next few days, they have the chance to lead the province into a new era of democratic self-rule.  mr. adams's opportunity comes this sunday, when he will ask his party, sinn fein, to end its long refusal to cooperate with northern ireland's reformed police service. if sinn fein accepts his advice, it will be the turn of mr. paisley and his democratic unionist party to live up to its end of the bargain and agree to form a power-sharing coalition with sinn fein -- as the top parties elected by the protestant and roman catholic communities are supposed to do under the good friday peace agreement on northern ireland.  if both sides come through, elections will be held and a coalition cabinet formed in march. if either falters, there can be no power sharing, and northern ireland will remain ruled by appointed british officials for the foreseeable future.  the good friday agreement of 1998 all but ended years of sectarian bloodshed in northern ireland. in 2005, the irish republican army took the further crucial steps of permanently renouncing political violence and destroying its weapons. but the agreement's full promise has never been met as sinn fein and the unionists have sparred over political power sharing and police reform.  the importance of police reform was clearly demonstrated this week with the release of a devastating ombudsman's report on years of police collaboration with a protestant paramilitary death squad. most, but not all, of that collaboration occurred before the present professional police service was created to replace the old protestant-dominated royal ulster constabulary.  further reforms put in place by the head of the new force make any repetition of such shocking abuses unlikely. but the best safeguard would be oversight of the police by a democratically chosen executive and legislature. that is the courageous and sensible argument mr. adams will make to sinn fein this weekend. if his view prevails, mr. paisley's time to be courageous and sensible will follow.  editorial  