gains in wireless customers help lift at&t's earnings 17%   capping a whirlwind year of merging and rebranding that has come to characterize the telecommunications business, at&t reported a 17 percent increase in quarterly profits yesterday driven by a sizable increase in wireless subscribers.  ''we closed the year strong,'' edward e. whitacre jr., chairman and chief executive of at&t, said in a conference call with analysts. ''we are headed into 2007 with excellent momentum.''  net income at at&t for the fourth quarter was $1.94 billion, or 50 cents a share, compared with $1.66 billion, or 46 cents a share, in the fourth quarter last year.  quarterly revenue at the company, based in san antonio, increased 23.1 percent, to $15.9 billion, from $12.9 billion in the previous year, mostly because of the company's acquisition of the old at&t in november 2005. the company, formerly called sbc communications, bought at&t and adopted the well-known at&t name as its own.  results for at&t yesterday largely excluded bellsouth, which the company bought for $86 billion in a deal completed in the last few days of december 2006. with the bellsouth merger, at&t became the sole owner of cingular wireless, and two weeks ago the company said it was dropping the cingular brand in favor of the at&t name. at&t previously owned 60 percent of cingular, and bellsouth owned 40 percent. the combined company now offers wireless and landline service in 22 states.  ''it was a great quarter by all the parts; sbc, at&t, cingular and bellsouth,'' said christopher larsen, an analyst at credit suisse.  in a bit of encouraging news for investors, mr. whitacre said he expected even greater savings from at&t's merger with bellsouth than previously projected. the company raised the forecast for total cost savings to about $22 billion, up from the original figure of $18 billion, although the company did not specify a time frame for those savings. at&t now anticipates savings of $800 million to $1.2 billion for the current year, compared with a previous estimate of $500 million to $800 million.  ''it was a decent quarter, without a whole lot of surprises,'' said christopher c. king, an analyst at stifel nicolaus. ''the company continues to do an excellent job of delivering what they say they will.''  excluding costs related to the merger and other items, quarterly earnings rose to 61 cents a share from 48 cents a share a year earlier. wall street analysts had forecast earnings of 59 cents a share, according to a survey by thomson financial.  shares of at&t rose 16 cents, to close at $36.79 after the release of the results, which were announced before the start of trading.  bright spots in at&t's report were its wireless and high-speed internet businesses. the wireless business is seen as the main driver of growth, with that operation adding a net 2.4 million customers for a total of nearly 61 million. wireless service revenue was up 13.1 percent, while wireless data revenue grew 68.6 percent. the company's high-speed internet business grew 23 percent.  mr. king said the wireless business was feeling intense competitive pressure from verizon, which appeared to have gained in market share during the quarter.  at&t's traditional consumer phone lines totaled 25.3 million at the end of december, down 5 percent from 26.7 million a year ago, illustrating the challenge the company faces as it adapts to the decreasing demand for wire-line phone service.  in its final quarter as an independent company, bellsouth had profit of $1.2 billion, 29 percent higher than a year earlier. revenue increased 4.6 percent, to $9.1 billion. during the quarter, bellsouth added 183,000 new high-speed internet connections, but access lines were down 6.4 percent compared with last year.  the report from at&t came a day after cingular issued a quarterly earnings report for the last time. on wednesday, cingular reported its quarterly profits more than tripled to $782 million as it added 2.4 million new subscribers. that report led at&t shares to gain almost 4 percent.  for the full year, at&t reported $7.36 billion in net income, or $1.89 a share, a 54 percent increase over the $4.79 billion, or $1.42 a share, last year. revenue was $63.1 billion, a 44 percent increase from $43.8 billion in 2005.  