bush pushes health care plan   president bush urged congress on thursday to consider his new health care proposal and indicated he was ready for a fight.  ''if people in washington are serious about dealing with the uninsured, here is a serious idea for them to consider,'' mr. bush said of his health care plan. ''they're just dismissing things because of pure politics.''  mr. bush's comments came in a discussion with local doctors, small-business owners and workers here on the second stop of a tour to promote policies he proposed during his state of the union address on tuesday night.  even before the speech, representative charles b. rangel, democrat of new york and chairman of the ways and means committee, had cast doubt on the chances of mr. bush's package of proposals, which is intended to improve access to health insurance with changes in the tax code. mr. rangel called it ''a bad policy''; other democratic leaders have since called the proposal all but ''dead on arrival.''  under the proposal, workers would be newly taxed on health care plans provided by employers that were valued above new -- and, administration officials say, generous -- standard deductions for health care benefits. individuals would in turn be able to buy insurance plans tax-free.  white house officials said they had received more positive feedback from some senate democrats, but the plan has drawn fierce resistance from the labor unions.  with record low approval ratings and most of his remaining political capital going into the defense of his new strategy for the iraq war, mr. bush has little sway over congress on his new plans, pollsters and analysts say.  but mr. bush's aides have said that they would try to build pressure on democrats by accusing them of turning their backs on his proposals before truly considering them.  ''we proposed a bold initiative,'' mr. bush said here. ''i know americans expect that the united states congress will take a look at all ideas.''  the president spoke at st. luke's hospital here, where he asked a group of workers, business owners and administrators how the current system worked against them and how the new system would help them.  martha gelencher, a small-business owner sitting with the president, said in a typically glowing exchange about the proposal that she could not imagine ''why someone would not think it would be a good thing.''  mr. bush portrayed the plan as in keeping with his philosophy that it was government's role to enable people to become the ''decision maker,'' reminiscent of his reference to himself last year as ''the decider.''  