today in business   settlement of katrina claims -- state farm insurance said it had reached an agreement with state officials to pay hundreds of millions of dollars to owners of homes along the coast that were wrecked by hurricane katrina. [page c1.]  a push for renewable fuels -- president bush, in his state of the union address, called for a huge government-mandated increase in renewable fuels -- mainly ethanol -- and tougher mileage standards for cars and light trucks. [a14.]  yahoo ends year with rebound -- yahoo closed the books on a tough year, reporting that its sales rebounded in the fourth quarter from an especially sluggish third quarter. [c2.]  gambling's new capital -- macao, in china, surpassed the las vegas strip to become the world's biggest gambling center in 2006, thanks to a massive casino investment boom and the millions of chinese visitors flooding in. [c4.]  when new drugs are denied -- many insurers are insisting that psoriasis patients try older, cheaper therapies first before approving reimbursement of a breakthrough biotech drug, frustrating some doctors and patients. [c1.]  delta's chief denies talks -- the chief executive of delta air lines, gerald grinstein, told employees that the airline was not in merger talks with northwest airlines. mr. grinstein, above, made his comments in a newsletter after reports of a possible deal between the airlines. [c6.]  move over, silicon valley -- a technology and media conference being held this week in munich provided ample evidence that silicon valley's dominance of internet-style technology innovation is waning. [c3.]  higher profit for j.& j. -- johnson & johnson said that fourth-quarter profit rose, helped by favorable taxes and growing sales of drugs and consumer products, although stent sales fell sharply. [c7.]  nymex revises expansion plans -- nymex holdings, parent company of the new york mercantile exchange and a lonely champion of open-outcry trading, is cutting its last ties to an ill-fated plan to set up a trading floor in britain. [c4.]  interest in landlord -- equity office properties, the huge commercial real-estate portfolio, is the object of a fierce bidding war involving some of the industry's most prominent figures and biggest risk takers, and its share price has soared. [c9.]  storms hurt united's revenue -- ual, the parent of united airlines, said it lost $61 million in the fourth quarter, missing wall street expectations, after a series of winter storms grounded thousands of flights. [c6.]  reaching a puzzling audience -- casual game sites have become a popular marketing spot for advertisers seeking to reach the diverse group of web users who like to solve puzzles, play word games and decipher mind benders online. advertising [c8.]  drop in profit at xerox -- the xerox corporation said that its fourth-quarter profit dropped 24 percent, pulled down by a higher revamping charge, but it still beat analysts' expectations. net income fell to $214 million, or 22 cents a share, from $282 million, or 27 cents a share, in the same period in 2005. [c14.]  reading the president's mind -- recent statements from president hugo chávez of venezuela have lurched leftward to include such things as nationalizing companies controlled by foreign investors, strengthening ties with iran and syria, and ruling by decree for the next 18 months. there are many influences on his political philosophy, which could be called chavismo. [a4.]  who's hot, who's not, in davos -- the world economic forum convenes its annual conference in davos, switzerland, with the theme ''shaping the global agenda: the shifting power equation.'' to judge by the names on the guest list -- and those not on it -- the phrase aptly reflects the turnout at this high-altitude huddle. [c1.]  oil rally helps shares rise -- shares rose moderately as crude oil surged more than $2 a barrel, setting off a rally among energy producers, and as a series of positive earnings reports helped restore investor optimism. [c11.]  online  business briefing  articles on these developments are at nytimes.com/business.  united states antitrust authorities approved the $713 million purchase of the mcdata corporation by brocade communications systems despite initial antitrust concerns over combining the data storage firms. (reuters)  william wrigley jr. company, the gum and candy maker, said that it was moving into chocolate, announcing the acquisition of an 80 percent stake in the russian premium-chocolate company a. korkunov for $300 million. (ap)  citigroup's bid to dismiss a $10 billion lawsuit has been rejected by a new jersey state court. the suit accuses citigroup of helping former managers at the italian food company parmalat commit fraud. (reuters)  