it's roundball 2, square jaw 1   meagan is the tall one -- a lanky 6 feet 1, with what she called the ''natural basketball body, the kind coaches would pick out in a hallway'' -- who passed on many a scholarship from the college sports establishment.  lauren, at 5-7, is the self-described ''family runt,'' who didn't play the game until ninth grade and was not heavily recruited by division i programs.  halfway through her junior season, meagan leads all ivy league scorers at 19 points a game. lauren, a freshman, seldom gets off the bench.  different positions, players and personalities, they remain bonded at princeton, teammates and members of a select sisterhood, daughters of a football coach named cowher.  consider it a fascinating family paradox and parable that bill cowher, the model of masculinity with his jutting jaw and his 15-year reign as the fiery leader of the pittsburgh steelers, has, for now, hung up his headset to immerse himself in a cocoon of femininity.  it's one that happens to be inhabited by women who have relished the sunday crusades, the long climb to the peak of the super bowl mountain last season, while dribbling down a path that traces all the way back to the emancipating legislation known as title ix.  ''my mother was one of the first women in north carolina to get an athletic scholarship,'' meagan cowher said.  kaye cowher, at that time kaye young, played college basketball at north carolina state alongside her twin sister, faye. following the blueprint, meagan and lauren were teammates for two years at fox chapel high school in pittsburgh before lauren played last season with the youngest sister, lindsay, now a sophomore at a private school in raleigh, n.c., where the cowhers have moved.  ''we got to see her play last weekend,'' lauren cowher said, sitting alongside meagan, after practice tuesday night. ''she's a little taller than meagan now but she can handle the ball, bring it up against the press.''  meagan, who scored a combined 66 points in her last two games before a two-week break for finals, agreed.  ''she's going to be the best of us,'' she said, though perhaps not at princeton.  ''lindsay's a free spirit, very social, and i think she'll want a bigger school,'' meagan said. ''and frankly, i don't think she would want this kind of rigorous academic work.''  meagan looked at lauren, as if she had misspoken. lauren said, ''oh, she's already said that herself,'' and they broke into laughter only sisters can share.  there goes the notion of all the cowher girls winding up a little more than an hour's drive from a certain n.f.l. team that could be in the market for a credentialed head coach if next season doesn't bring significant progress, to borrow from our basketball lexicon.  how could giants fans have resisted wondering if cowher could be talked out of quitting coaching before tom coughlin was granted what amounted to a one-year reprieve? just their luck, cowher was apparently that rare coach who meant it when he said he wanted more time at home, though lauren said he was never the career-crazed absentee dad, and always juggled his schedule to attend their high school games.  if cowher had merely been positioning himself for a change of venue, a hefty raise, he might have floated his interest in the giants' job. that's how bill belichick went from the jets to the patriots and bill parcells from the patriots to the jets. come to think of it, there's a pretty good job suddenly open in dallas.  the news media can speculate all they want; meagan cowher doesn't even consider the possibility of her father's changing his mind for next season and maybe a few after that. you say ''when'' he returns to coaching, she says ''if.'' the way she sees it, this sabbatical or retirement is about the continuing evolution of a human being who is less than four months from his 50th birthday.  ''he's become a very wise man, i feel, in this past year,'' she said.  in what regard?  ''about this decision, about where he's going in life,'' she said. ''he's really learned a lot, shared his feelings, helped us realize that whatever your profession, you can't let it become who you are, more important than everything you value.''  life can't be all about football. she chose princeton, in part, because she believed it to be the place she would be able to faster forge her own identity -- albeit one her coach, richard barron, said should come with an asterisk.  ''i've never heard her try to get attention for being bill cowher's daughter,'' he said. ''at the same time, i've never met anyone who cared more about the steelers than meg cowher.''  she was, after all, the ''little know-it-all'' in the family box guessing along with the play calls from kindergarten on. so many family sundays at the stadium and, more recently, sunday night calls from her father to replay the game.  what will life be without them?  ''it'll be interesting to see how this turns out for all of us,'' meagan said. ''i know with my dad, there's a little bit of anxiety, knowing there's this big change coming, when your whole life shifts.''  not necessarily to major earthquake proportions. there will still be basketball games to invest emotions in, still the occasional bonding weekend, like last week's family gathering for the first time in raleigh.  ''we watched the championship games,'' meagan said, while lauren nodded and added, ''that's what we do on sunday.''  sports of the times e-mail: hjaraton@nytimes.com  