garbles hamper new police radio   for more than 10 years, the metropolitan transportation authority has been working to correct a major hindrance to police work in the subway system: a radio network that keeps transit officers underground from talking with officers patrolling the streets above.  the goal was simple but potentially revolutionary: replace an antiquated radio system with a network that would make it possible, for instance, for an officer chasing a suspect down a subway stairway to radio ahead to other officers.  last october, after spending $140 million, the authority completed the installation of the system citywide.  but it has not been turned on.  that is because the police department refuses to use it, saying the new system is hobbled by widespread interference that garbles communication and creates areas where radios cannot receive properly. ''what you get is distorted audio,'' said joseph yurman, a communications engineer for new york city transit. ''you can hear it, but it sounds as if you're talking through a glass of water.''  fixing the problem may require replacing new equipment with more advanced components at a cost of up to $20 million more. if all goes well and disputes over which agency will pay for the changes can be resolved, the police say the full system could be turned on next year, some four years behind schedule.  the decades-old radio disconnect between surface and subterranean police officers is another example of the kind of communications problems that have faced public safety agencies in new york city, most famously and tragically evident on 9/11. the communication problems that day included the inability of endangered firefighters to hear police radio broadcasts warning that the north tower was about to collapse.  this time, the goal is to allow members of the same agency to communicate with each other, whether dealing with a street crime gone underground or something far more catastrophic, like an accident or terrorist attack in the subway.  fixing the interference is not the only problem. the authority's new system uses a network of underground antenna cable that was already in place in the tunnels. but the authority has discovered that 72 miles of cable -- one-fifth of the system -- was so old and deteriorated it could not adequately carry the signal.  the authority plans to replace the cable over the next several years at an additional cost of $36 million. when all of the fixes are made, the project will eventually have cost about $210 million, far more than its original budget of $115 million.  in the meantime, transit police continue to use their old radios.  ''we have no communication with the outside,'' said one veteran transit police officer who spoke on condition of anonymity. ''something can be happening to the street cops right upstairs and we don't even know.'' he said fleeing suspects knew they could take advantage of the communication gap by ducking into the subway. ''this is no secret,'' he said. ''the criminals know how it works.''  police officers patrolling the subways have long used a vhf radio system that is separate from the uhf system used by officers working aboveground. the two systems date back to the days when the transit police existed as a separate force run by the metropolitan transportation authority.  in 1995, that force merged with the city department, and the authority agreed to build a system that would carry regular city police radio signals underground.  the subway is a technically difficult environment for radio operations, and officials with both agencies said they could not have anticipated the severity of the problems. that applies in particular to the interference, which occurs when signals aboveground and below it mix as they pass through station entrances and gratings in the street, producing a buzz on radios that can range from a slight annoyance to a transmission killer.  michael hunter, president of rcc consultants, which worked on the design in its early stages, said radio networks in other subway systems also had to cope with interference, but perhaps not to the same degree. ''in new york it's a very tough problem because of the number of portals that go into the subways and the number of vents and so on,'' mr. hunter said. ''some of the newer subways don't have this problem.''  in december 1999, after years of design work, the transportation authority chose two firms, e.a. technologies and petrocelli electric, to build the system. engineering reports submitted to the authority's board say the project was expected to be completed by june 2004.  those reports also show that concerns about interference emerged as early as 2001. nonetheless, in late 2001, the authority directed manufacturers to begin producing the amplifiers.  even as the equipment was being produced, however, the authority's engineers were searching for ways to modify the system to reduce the interference. as part of that effort, they began looking at digital components that were only then being developed and had not been available when the system was designed.  in mid-2004, the police department informed the transportation authority that it would not use the radio system unless the interference was eliminated, but a year later, officials at the authority made a concerted push to get the department to see things their way.  according to project records maintained by the authority, top officials met in september 2005 with their police counterparts to urge them to begin using the radio system as is, with adjustments to come later to fix the interference.  ''based on several discussions,'' the records say, ''we got indication that n.y.p.d. will not accept the system without us addressing the t.d.i. issue,'' a reference to time domain interference, the technical term for the problem. talks continued throughout the fall and winter, according to the records, but the police department refused to budge.  the authority forged ahead with construction and by the middle of last year the installation was largely finished. in october, the authority formally declared the contract with e.a. technologies and petrocelli complete -- only there was no one to hand the long-awaited system off to.  ''i don't think anybody anticipated the extent of the interference,'' said inspector charles f. dowd, commander of the police communications division. ''as soon as we started testing, it became apparent there was a serious problem.''  while agreeing that the interference needed to be corrected, transit officials said the radio system could be put into use while a solution was developed. parts of the system in manhattan have been ready since 2004, when they were briefly activated (although apparently never used) as a backup network during the republican national convention, they said.  ''what's in place today is functional,'' mark bienstock, a new york city transit program manager, said in an interview.  in a later e-mail message, mr. bienstock declined to say how widespread the interference is. ''in general,'' he wrote, interference ''is expected at every entrance to the subway at street level. its significance or severity is subjective.''  that difference in perception has fueled a dispute in recent months over who will pay for a fix. the police department insists that under the 1995 agreement that merged the police forces, the authority agreed to cover all the costs involved in building the radio system. officials at the authority, on the other hand, say they have fulfilled their financial obligations, and they want the police to pay half the $20 million repair cost.  privately, officials at the authority accuse the police of stalling to force the authority to pay the full cost. after the police formally accept the system, they will be expected to share the expense of maintaining or upgrading it with the authority.  ''the issue is simply one of functionality,'' inspector dowd said. ''if the system isn't working in an area, the cops can't use it.''  elliot g. sander, who took over this month as executive director and chief executive of the transportation authority, said he spoke to police commissioner raymond w. kelly about the radio system on tuesday and planned to meet with him to resolve the financing issue.  while the police were intended as the radio system's primary user, it was also designed to be used by the fire department, but on a different frequency. they won't be able to talk with the police.  mr. yurman said the fire department radios were configured differently and have already used the system. francis x. gribbon, a fire department spokesman, said the department has been testing the system extensively and has concerns about some areas of tunnels and stations where signals do not reach.  fire officials had previously asked the authority to make changes to the way the system works in the underwater tunnels, and they agreed to split the cost of those changes, which is estimated at $14 million.  