it's a deal: you like me and i like me too   forget about false modesty, not to mention its nonfalse counterpart. jamie foxx came to madison square garden on monday night to celebrate his favorite singer, his favorite actor, his favorite comedian, his favorite sex symbol and his favorite storyteller, who all happen to share his name. near the end, mr. foxx morphed into ray charles -- only to thank himself for doing such a good job playing himself in ''ray.''  as you can tell, one of mr. foxx's greatest assets is his shamelessness. and he needed every bit to make it through this night -- billed as an evening of music and comedy -- more or less unscathed. he faced a big (though not quite full) crowd, armed with only a pretty good voice and a handful of rather thin, slow jams. a performer's nightmare, you might think, but not for mr. foxx, and his good humor was contagious. it's hard to stay mad at a one-track-minded crooner who announces his intention to ignore half the crowd: ''fellas, you can stick around if you want to.''  he had some help: the ''american idol'' winner fantasia delivered a short, fierce set of screaming r&b, and the stand-up comedian known as speedy did a familiar but effective routine, gleefully roasting audience members who had good seats and bad timing.  but this was essentially a one-man show, and it started with a nod to the past. before he was a crooner or ''a oscar winner'' (as he often referred to himself), mr. foxx was a comedian. so he spent his first half-hour telling stories and ridiculing celebrities, including o. j. simpson (it was gruesome) and britney spears (even more gruesome). like most successful comedians, mr. foxx knows that the delivery is usually more important than the material. recalling the r&b group jodeci, he said, ''that was back when it was a cassette''; that's not really a joke, but he hit that last word so hard that the audience chuckled anyway.  mr. foxx released a little-noticed record in 1994, but his chart-topping 2005 album, ''unpredictable'' (j records/sony bmg), felt like a debut. he has clearly been influenced by r. kelly, who excels at turning ridiculous boasts and promises (''you remind me of my jeep/i wanna ride it'') into glorious r&b songs. of course, mr. kelly has two things that mr. foxx lacks: a gorgeous voice and a first-rate catalog of hits.  if ever there was a show crying out for more guest stars, this was it. you can imagine mr. foxx as the leader of an old-fashioned variety show: bringing out some friends, singing a few songs, doing some skits and parodies. instead he began with a lackluster version of the album's hit title track (ludacris, who contributes a great verse to the album version, was sorely missed), then spent much of the rest of the night killing time. this is a guy who can get women to scream just by crooning zodiac signs -- and at one point, he did exactly that.  still, there is something satisfying about watching mr. foxx bask in his well-deserved success. and, for that matter, his less-well-deserved success too. ''love changes,'' his duet with mary j. blige, has been nominated for a grammy; the category is most unnecessary cover version of a late-80s r&b hit, or something. he sang it without her, and asked the people in the front -- ''all the good tickets!'' -- to sing along. he asked the men to stand up and sing the chorus to their women. he asked the women to stand up and sing the chorus to their men. and how can you say no to a oscar winner?  music review  