hanging pictures: an art in its own right   the higher math of hanging pictures has always escaped me. the measurements of the space on one wall and two or four or seven pictures require a kind of visual algebra that i have no aptitude for.  there are rules, i know, but i can never quite remember them -- do you line up the frames from the bottom or from the top? they should be hung at eye level, i know, but whose eye? and should they be grouped or evenly spaced? determining the correct amount of space between the pictures throws the calculations into ever greater confusion.  and then there are the structural issues of where to hang the hook. once the most you could do was knock on the wall; when the sound changed, you knew you had hit on something solid -- with any luck, a stud that could support a nail and whatever was going to hang on it. if your house happens to conform to current construction standards, the studs are generally centered 16 inches apart, which makes it easy to determine where the supports are.  but if you still don't know, there are tools to help you. there is the stud finder, an electronic device outfitted with circuitry that is capable of detecting changes in material behind the surface it passes over; run it across a wall, and it beeps when it detects a stud.  once the stud finder has located the studs in the wall, you can then use a laser level, a battery-operated device that shines a thin beam of light along the wall, eliminating the need to draw a line in pencil or otherwise mark the wall.  when it comes to the hanging itself, i had always thought traditional picture hangers to be sufficient. even more dependable, i now learn, is the hercules hook, whose breathless ads on cable tv promise that it has the muscle to hang and hold up to 150 pounds. the hook has a curved rod of reinforced steel, sharpened at one end, that can simply be twisted, pushed and turned into the wall. its curved form allows it to brace itself on the back of the wall, and it punctures the wall with surgical precision, leaving nothing but a pin-sized hole.  despite having such tools available to me, when i finally faced the labored calculus of aligning the pictures and determining their appropriate proximity, i knew i was still without the most important tool of all, which was the intuition essential for such an endeavor. i called upon my friend and neighbor myron adams to help me. he has an instinctive knowledge about such things, some innate grasp of where things belong.  when i asked him how he came by this skill, he told me that his father, an architect, knew where everything was supposed to go. ''it seemed a little totalitarian,'' he said, ''but, in fact, it was very instructive.'' and as a teenager, myron had once worked for an artist who hung her own paintings. ''she had no rules or tricks,'' he said. ''she was just a classy lady who knew how to eyeball things.'' which, it occurred to me, would be a nice way to be remembered, and i became all the more determined to get the hang of it.  what with stud finders and hercules hooks, you might think hanging pictures is a high-testosterone enterprise that requires some kind of manly heft. that was not my experience. a different kind of stamina was called for, i found. because for all the exacting tools at hand, it still remained an imprecise exercise. the calculations were made even more elusive by the fact that these were pictures of my family -- an old portrait of my great-great-grandmother frances, who gazed down at us sternly across the distance the years have conferred on her; a watercolor of my mother that captured the tentativeness of her teenage years; and pastels of my sons when they were 10, staring out of their frames with the cheerful defiance that comes so naturally to young boys.  and then there was the question of those frames. surrounding frances is a heavy gilt frame with elaborate scrollwork; the portrait has a weight that might actually justify a hercules hook, if its name didn't seem like such an affront to her 19th-century reserve. a simple wood frame is around my mother, and with the boys the frames are more casual still. but for myron, such visual inconsistency is cause for delight, just another sign of the generational disparity that makes life interesting. almost effortlessly he managed to find a place on the wall for all of the portraits.  none of the subjects ever knew each other. my mother died long before her grandsons were born, so this is as close as they will ever come to being introduced. but with help from a stud finder, a laser level, a hammer and a handful of nails, they manage to keep company now on this 8-by-12-foot patch of blue wall. my mother and her grandsons are only inches apart from each other, and frances, slightly above, presides over them, kind of classy in her own way and, for sure, eyeballing us all.  still, there are no right angles in my old house, and none of the walls are plumb, so no matter how we tried to coerce order among these pictures, the grouping still seemed a little awry. despite the arsenal of tools that promised absolute precision, nothing has quite managed to line up. at best, the portraits just kind of float contentedly in their improvisational closeness in the never-ending exercise of a family, probably any family, trying to find the order among its members.  i often step back and look at this gathering on the wall. there is no big picture, just as there are no strict rules about how a family composes itself. all of which, i suppose, is as it should be. arranging these pictures on the wall was just another reminder of how difficult it is to understand the space between us; and how it is so rarely what we imagine or hope for.  home work  