a maleficent obsession? could be more than heaven allows   ''you've got to change your brand of men.''  that's what a parole officer, griff marat (cornel wilde), tells a curvy, bottle-blond parolee, jenny marsh (patricia knight), at the start of the 1949 potboiler ''shockproof,'' and it's sound advice. unfortunately, it's also an unconscious plea for a replacement brand called griff, who's so concerned about jenny's well-being that he hires her to take care of his blind mama (esther minciotti) and considers extending her parole with an engagement ring.  griff and jenny's predicament is half film noir, half melodrama, which makes sense considering the film's pedigree. ''shockproof'' is based on a script by the sensationalist director samuel fuller (''shock corridor'') and was directed by douglas sirk, who made ''imitation of life'' and other bejeweled weepies.  between griff's magnificent obsession with reinventing jenny and jenny's affair with the slinky gambler she went to prison to protect, the picture could have been narrated by a whole team of therapists. unfortunately, such a play-by-play would have enlivened ''shockproof,'' a curiosity that's more fun to think about than to watch.  mr. sirk, a refugee from the german film industry who in the late 1940s was still finding his way in hollywood, later said he agreed to direct ''shockproof'' because it hit a favorite theme: the price of flouting taboos. but a studio-mandated, soft-suds rewrite by helen deutsch (''national velvet'') nixed mr. fuller's original ending, which had griff violently rebelling against the system that tried to keep him and jenny apart. what remains are hardboiled quips, metaphorically overripe situations (griff's blind mom sees through him, get it?) and anxious yet vague lead performances by mr. wilde and ms. knight, who were married at the time. the end product so depressed mr. sirk that he briefly returned to europe.  but while ''shockproof'' will inspire more groans than gasps, it's essential viewing for fans of mr. fuller and mr. sirk -- and that's why the two boots pioneer theater and an online film discussion group teamed up to give this critically and financially unsuccessful movie its first new york run.  the lurid setup and obsessive-loner-versus-the-system mechanics are pure samuel fuller. mr. sirk's personality is expressed in the film's affection for its screwed-up characters, in the poetic deployment of mirrors, windows and stairways, and in the low-angled wide shots of griff's house, a space that seems both nurturing and oppressive.  shockproof  opens today in manhattan.  directed by douglas sirk; written by helen deutsch and samuel fuller; director of photography, charles lawton jr.; edited by gene havlick; music by george duning; produced by ms. deutsch, earl mcevoy and s. sylvan simon; released by sony pictures repertory; originally produced by columbia pictures corporation. at the two boots pioneer theater, 155 east third street, at avenue a, east village. running time: 79 minutes. this film is not rated.  with: cornel wilde (griff marat), patricia knight (jenny marsh), john baragrey (harry wesson), esther minciotti (mrs. marat), howard st. john (sam brooks), russell collins (frederick bauer), charles bates (tommy marat) and gilbert barnett (barry).  film review  