a cap on property taxes may have a few loopholes   on paper, gov. jon s. corzine may well get what he wants from the legislature: a bill limiting annual increases in revenues from local property taxes to 4 percent.  but the proposed measure, which is most likely to be introduced in the senate on thursday by his fellow democrats, is sprinkled with an array of exemptions, adjustments and waivers to the 4 percent limit.  that part of the measure seems intended to quiet some of the grumbling among local officials that they would bear the cost of easing the burden of property taxes on homeowners, yet it also falls short of what those officials have said is needed to make the governor's plan more equitable.  ''look, we are really talking about whittling away at a portion of the tax levy for municipal services which in my town represents just 9 percent of the entire levy,'' said louise c. wilson, deputy mayor of montgomery township, adding that the rest of the tax levy goes to the local school district, which would have its own set of exemptions. ''and i know that if you start to grant so many exemptions, you're not going to have any cap.''  for one thing, some local finance officers said the provisions would not have an immediate effect because they would not be in place by july 1, the beginning of the fiscal year, and that in the long run the exemptions could jeopardize the entire effort.  last week, in a session sponsored by the league of municipalities, mr. corzine defended a 4 percent limit on annual increases in revenues from local property taxes, saying that local governments needed to find alternative sources of revenue. but by the end of the session, after several mayors complained, he warmed to the notion of allowing exemptions and waivers in some cases.  in the measure to be introduced on thursday by the senate president, richard j. codey, money set aside to cover uncollected property taxes, revenue realized from new properties on the tax rolls, a small portion of pension costs and increases in health benefits are automatically exempted.  in addition, school districts would be allowed automatic adjustments for debt service, a portion of the costs associated with increased enrollment or the opening of a new school as well as capital outlays. the school districts would also be allowed adjustments for debt service and emergencies.  the measure would also allow local governments to apply each year to the local finance board or the state commissioner of education for waivers from the 4 percent cap for extraordinary circumstances like a loss of state aid, the sudden infusion of nonrecurring revenue, one-time emergency spending for ''health, safety and the public welfare,'' and cost increases resulting from mandated spending and increases in energy costs above the cap level and in equipment leases.  the decisions of the finance board and the commissioner could not be appealed.  lou neely, the finance director of east brunswick, who is also the expert on property tax reform for the state league of municipalities, called the proposed property tax measure a grab bag.  mr. neely said that many of the exemptions made sense, although he added that they would slow any immediate benefits to taxpayers. he said the state would be flooded with waiver requests from municipalities and school districts without a mechanism to handle them. after all, he said, ''when you are hungry and somebody throws you a crumb, you grab it.''  local officials complained that the legislation did nothing to mitigate the costs of awards in binding arbitrations, which occur after municipalities and unions reach an impasse in labor negotiations. localities would be required under the bill to pay the costs associated with these awards regardless of the 4 percent cap on local property taxes.  mr. neely and other officials wanted either a state-ordered limitation on the awards, or a provision in the bill to exempt the awards from these caps. without such an exemption, he said, money would have to be diverted from other items financed from the property tax to pay for these awards. the proposed legislation admonishes arbitrators to ''consider as a primary factor in their awards'' the effect on tax levy limitations. similarly, it addresses increases in employee health costs faced by local governments, and encourages local officials to renegotiate contracts.  mr. neely said that the ''state has precluded us from reopening contracts in the past, and it is nice that they are now letting us do it.''  ''but,'' he added, ''they ought to say to arbitrators that this is a hard cap and you can't grant awards over it.''  still, most local officials conceded that the measure would be approved.  mayor gary passanante of somerdale said property taxes would not ease up any time soon, primarily because they account for about 46 percent of local budgets, more than the national average of 30 percent.  borrowing phrasing frequently used by governor corzine, mr. passanante said: ''our benchmark for accomplishing reform that is for the common good is doing something that gets us closer to the national average of 30 percent. but nothing in the governor's package does this.''  political memo  