in the east end, riesling legacy   at a tasting in 1984 at the international wine center, a wine school in manhattan, peter m. f. sichel, a seasonal south fork resident, pointed to a bottle labeled vin de l'ile blanc and said, ''try that.'' mr. sichel, then a major figure in germany's wine industry (he has since retired), has a masterly understanding of whites. i tried it, and was charmed.  a semidry riesling, it resembled a mosel wine. vin de l'ile blanc, whose name translates as white wine of the island, was made by ray blum, a grape-grower who lived in peconic and had founded peconic bay vineyards in cutchogue in 1980. it was that bottle that sparked my interest in the local industry .  mr. blum, a genial, seemingly ever-smiling man, died of cancer on jan. 10 at the age of 62. the owner of ackerly pond vineyards in peconic, he sold grapes and wine under that label and planted and maintained others' vineyards.  vin de l'ile blanc symbolizes the debt that early colleagues and their successors owe to ray blum's risk-taking.  at the outset, conventional wisdom doubted the prospects for riesling on the east end. it was as if nature and man told mr. blum, ''you can't,'' and he replied, ''oh, yeah?'' he prevailed, attracting customers to his homey tasting room on main road with his vin de l'ile blanc and other wines. today, respectable rieslings remain minor gems at some north fork wineries.  mr. blum sold his property in 1999 to ursula and paul lowerre, who renamed it peconic bay winery. the winemaker, greg gove, said, ''we were going to do away with vin de l'ile blanc, but we discovered there was a following for it, so we kept it.'' he went on producing the wine, but recently the owners decided to replace it with another wine in a different style, he said. after the last 28 cases are sold, it will be history.  the nonvintage vin de l'ile blanc, now a $12 riesling-chardonnay blend, is described by the winery as having ''luxuriant notes of pineapple, honeysuckle, fresh apple and pear.''  mr. blum bequeathed long islanders a sweet memory.  long island vines  