new governor, new energy czar   richard m. kessel, the chairman of the long island power authority and the face of electric power on long island for most of two decades, has for some time been among the most instantly recognizable and enduring public figures east of new york city.  but as long island's appointed energy czar, mr. kessel, who began his career in the 1970s as a gadfly on consumer issues, always depended on the support of governors.  last week, after he had spent less than a month in office, gov. eliot spitzer announced that mr. kessel's long reign at the authority was coming to an end. mr. spitzer named kevin s. law, a top aide to the suffolk county executive, steve levy, to succeed mr. kessel as the authority's chairman.  mr. kessel will remain as the chief executive and president through a transition period that is expected to last until fall.  what lipa's new direction will be is unclear.  ''it's a bit early to say, but kevin law is a highly professional person and he understands long island very well,'' said matthew t. crosson, the president of the long island association, a business group. ''richie kessel has done a very capable job with lipa, but new leadership generally tends to bring new directions.''  mr. law, a lawyer versed in energy matters, long island politics and government operations, will take over as lipa forges its relationship with the british-owned energy giant national grid, which is negotiating a merger with keyspan, lipa's principal electric provider. keyspan operates the island's power-transmission system under a contract with lipa.  mr. law will also play a leading role in deciding whether the authority should go forward with a 40-turbine wind complex off the south shore that could supply up to 140 megawatts of electricity. mr. kessel and many environmental groups ardently support this alternative energy initiative.  but critics, including some south shore residents and elected officials, say the turbines would be costly, produce relatively little power and spoil the view from ocean shores including jones beach state park.  as he settles in, mr. law will reap the benefits of the near-completion of the underwater neptune cable, also championed by mr. kessel, which is scheduled to bring 660 megawatts of power from new jersey to long island by the peak electricity demand period this summer.  bert j. cunningham, lipa's vice president for communications, said that because of $2.5 billion in investments over the past eight years, the authority's electricity transmission system had never been in better condition. that is another plus for mr. law.  mr. law's appointment may give mr. levy, a frequent lipa critic, an inside track on regional energy issues. it may also shift long island's power center eastward. mr. law, 46, is from st. james, in suffolk county; mr. kessel, 57, is from merrick, in nassau county.  mr. levy and others have been critical of lipa's rate structure and have raised questions about authority policies for passing along higher fuel costs as surcharges. the authority has also been accused of doling out patronage jobs, which it has denied. it has nearly 100 employees.  ''i think kevin will bring to lipa the levy management style that weeds out the perks and excess and run as tight a ship as possible,'' mr. levy said. ''richie is a remarkably dedicated public servant. it's not unexpected that a new governor would want a change of scenery, but that's no reflection on richie's performance.''  an exuberant executive with a hands-on approach, mr. kessel appears to relish his post and thrive in it. he had spoken of leaving lipa on occasion, but it was not clear last week whether mr. spitzer had hastened his exit.  mr. kessel served as the authority's chairman from 1989 to 1995 as an appointee of gov. mario m. cuomo and took a leading part in negotiations that led to the shuttering of the shoreham nuclear power plant, which was completed but never operated commercially.  in february 1992, mr. kessel memorably handed a $1 bill to officials of the long island lighting company as a ceremonial payment for signing over the $5.5 billion shoreham plant to lipa. a longtime opponent of the plant, he then presided over its decommissioning and the shipment of its nuclear fuel off long island.  after a two-year hiatus, during which he remained a lipa trustee, mr. kessel, a democrat, became chairman again in 1997, this time as an appointee of a republican governor, george e. pataki.  in more recent times lipa bills have risen sharply -- because, the authority has said, of higher fuel prices and more costly purchased power. mr. kessel has maintained that lipa has protected customers from the full brunt of higher fuel costs by absorbing some of them, but critics, including mr. levy, have demanded more details.  mr. law will face decisions about lipa's involvement in repowering keyspan's large generating stations in northport, port jefferson, glenwood landing and island park so they produce more electricity with fewer emissions. repowering initiatives stalled after keyspan announced its merger with national grid, which is still pending.  mr. law's supporters said he was well qualified for what lay ahead. ''i have known kevin law for 25 years,'' said wayne r. horsley, a democratic suffolk county legislator from lindenhurst. ''he may not be as exuberant as mr. kessel, but he is a guy who knows his business.''  