in a corner of a square, his own spot   sprawled on sidewalks, begging for handouts: that's the familiar image of the homeless.  but that's in the city. on long island -- and yes, we have plenty of homeless people here, and they're plenty cold this time of year, mild winter or no -- they keep to the margins, whether in cars or patches of woods or desolate industrial areas.  then there's panama, who may well hold the title of long island's best known homeless person. for almost a decade, panama has presided prominently over an unofficial plaza in front of the waldbaum's and the walgreens here in the swan nursery commons shopping center on montauk highway.  with much of the town's population passing through to shop, this is the closest thing this working-class hamlet has to a town square. and the shoppers know panama, there in his corner where the facades of the two stores meet. ''it's like watching the whole town on a big-screen tv,'' he said. ''i know everybody.''  his neighbors are a dozen other stores, including some restaurants, a nail salon, a card shop, the video store, the pet shop and a furniture rental place. panama himself has furnished his spot with borrowed items, including a barricade of 10 shopping carts that cordon off his space and a fold-up bed where he sleeps under the store overhang with lots of blankets given to him by shoppers.  he keeps his ''valuables'' in one of the carts, secured with bicycle chains and a homemade lid. most people are friendly, he said, but in case they're not, he has two baseball bats and a razor.  panama is a fixture leaning on a shopping cart with his budweiser-in-a-bag and a lighted newport. even laden with layers against the cold, he cuts a trim and spry figure for his 63 years.  he has endured cold winters and much prefers this milder one, he said. ''global warming is mother nature telling me she loves me,'' he said with a wheezy laugh. ''all the kids working in these stores, they all have colds in the winter. not me.''  he says he makes money redeeming bottles and cans, and he rarely has to go searching for them. shoppers bring him empties, which he redeems at a machine inside waldbaum's. when the machine jams, he has a key to open and unclog it.  waldbaum's workers know him and say his name is roberto lane, but panama wants to remain just panama, nicknamed for the country he says he emigrated from in 1969. employees at waldbaum's said that a regional director at one point said panama would have to go. after the staff protested that panama had helped the store in various ways, including corralling shopping carts and spotting shoplifters, he was allowed to stay, they said.  panama is part of sizable group of homeless individuals. the nassau-suffolk coalition for the homeless will announce results of a census of unsheltered homeless people on the island in several weeks, but a count in january 2005 reported 1,464 homeless people in nassau and 2,981 in suffolk.  ''we're seeing more and more homeless and homeless families on long island, and the causes include a lack of affordable housing, incomes not meeting the rising rents and cost of living, to the point where people have to choose between paying rent and buying food,'' said joan noguera, the coalition's executive director. ''you even have families losing homes to foreclosure, and they've never been homeless before.''  panama said he raised a family, worked many jobs, battled crack addiction, finished probation, and now indulges only in alcohol and cigarettes. he has found redemption in returning bottles and cans, and he is his own boss. sometimes he must return specific bottles to other redemption spots -- some to pathmark, others to king kullen, the stop & shop or the nearby beer distributor. this can get him winded and dizzy. he lights a cigarette and explains that he has emphysema and that is why he rattles when he breathes.  panama says he occasionally takes the train to brooklyn to visit his mother. he has his own room there, but he says he prefers to live outdoors.  ''i like to be away from all the aggravation,'' he said. ''i don't have to be here. if i wasn't comfortable here, i'd be gone.''  he said he accumulated $400 in handouts around the holidays. ''if i was on the street in brooklyn, people wouldn't even look at you,'' he said. ''here, they give me bottles to cash in. they give me money, clothes, food.''  soft food only, though, because his knapsack, containing his dentures and important papers, was stolen. he says he will not accept charity from the government. no welfare.  ''i can make $20 or $30 a day with the bottles,'' he said. ''i made $6 today and i'm happy.''  he waved to evellette papagni, 53, from patchogue, one of a dozen people panama has coffee with each morning at the nearby mcdonald's.  ''we call it the breakfast club,'' mrs. papagni said. ''we're all retired seniors, you know, with homes. panama's homeless, but he's one of us. we all look out for him.''  the island e-mail: theisland@nytimes.com  