what's on tonight   8 p.m. (turner classic movies) paris when it sizzles (1964). paris isn't just for springtime. tonight, tcm takes a winter break in the city of light, starting with this william  holden and audrey hepburn vehicle about a boozy writer who has two days to deliver a script to a hollywood producer and hires a temporary secretary to help him get the job done. they fall in love, but of course. at 10, gene kelly and leslie caron (above) trip the light fantastic to a luscious gershwin score in the grand musical ''an american in paris'' (1951). and  at midnight, alec guinness and vernon gray play a scottish father and son who visit the city and tumble into mild infatuations -- the son with an older woman, the father with a girl --in ''to paris, with love'' (1955).  8 p.m. (fox) nanny 911 nanny deb helps the mcdowell family, whose three rambunctious boys think they're in charge.  8 p.m. (cmt) cowboy u the greenhorns toughen up in this episode, in which the challenges include driving a horse and wagon and, after a lesson from a professional bullfighter, getting into the ring with a 1,500-pound bull in seven rings of fire, a competition the show is calling a ''terrifying test of courage.'' but maybe it's just in preparation for the campfire elimination.  9 p.m. (fox) trading spouses: meet your new mommy marguerite perrin, aka the god warrior, concludes her second trade. last time, ms. perrin initially refused the $50,000 traditionally given at the end of the show, declaring it tainted -- and then decided to use it for gastric-bypass surgery. no word yet on what she'll do with this stint's prize.  9 p.m. (usa) monk natalie suspects foul play in the deaths of her parents' neighbors. good thing she has mr. monk as an employer.  9:30 p.m. (sundance) the motel (2005). a 13-year-old chinese- american boy (jeffrey chyau) who lives and works in a sleazy motel run by his mother finds a father figure in a ne'er-do-well tenant (sung kang, above right, with mr. chyau), who takes a room at the inn for an hour with a prostitute -- and then decides to stay. he likes to give advice, including how to seduce women.  10 p.m. (usa) psych vulnerability is such an attractive trait, isn't it? when lassiter starts having doubts about his own crimesolving ability, shawn tries to give him a confidence boost by helping him solve an astronomer's mysterious death.  10 p.m. (showtime) washingtonians revisionist history: after his grandmother's funeral, a man (jonathan schaech, above center) finds an artifact in her basement that suggests that george washington was a cannibal in this ''masters of horror'' episode. turns out washington's followers didn't mind treating themselves to a nibble now and then either.  kathryn shatuck  