yes, she has a sweet tooth, but she's a major carnivore   interspecies mating is always a challenge, particularly when one species likes to eat the other. in the lupine love triangle ''blood & chocolate,'' a reluctant romanian werewolf named vivian (agnes bruckner) spends her days making chocolates in a bucharest candy store. if her customers could see how she celebrates the full moon, they would think twice before letting her handle their macaroons.  lurking in a church one evening, vivian meets aiden (hugh dancy), a cherubic graphic novelist researching the inner lives of werewolves. soon it's vivian's innards he's obsessed with, unaware that she's already promised to the leader of her pack, a sleek specimen named gabriel (olivier martinez). audience members still tingling from mr. martinez's seduction of diane lane in ''unfaithful'' will agree that this is not much of a contest.  uninvolving and cliché-ridden (even shape-shifters, it seems, deserve a falling-in-love montage), ''blood & chocolate'' is ''romeo and juliet'' with fewer manners and more exotic dentition. cribbing shamelessly from joel schumacher's 1987 vampire classic, ''the lost boys,'' the director, katja von garnier, perches her pack on roofs and in rafters -- an aerial lifestyle that works for bats but seems a bit of a stretch for wolves.  more in line with mythology is their vulnerability to silver cutlery; in the movie's best scene, aiden battles for his love armed only with a single place setting.  ''it was too much to ask, i guess -- a human girl,'' our hero laments. when love goes wrong, it's always the woman's fault.  ''blood and chocolate'' is rated pg-13 (parents strongly cautioned). it has blood, chocolate and violently deployed silverware.  blood & chocolate  opened yesterday nationwide.  directed by katja von garnier; written by ehren kruger, based on the novel by annette curtis klause; director of photography, brendan galvin; edited by martin walsh and emma e. hickcox; production designer, kevin phipps; produced by tom rosenberg, gary lucchesi, richard wright and hawk koch and wolfgang esenwein; released by metro-goldwyn-mayer pictures. running time: 98 minutes.  with: agnes bruckner (vivian gandillon), olivier martinez (gabriel), hugh dancy (aiden galvin), katja riemann (astrid) and bryan dick (rafe).  film review  