a halting plea for mercy, heavily edited   ronell wilson said he was sorry.  to the widows of the two detectives he shot dead, to their children and parents and brothers and sisters, he directed his remorse.  to his own mother watching from the front row of the courtroom, he offered his prayers.  before a full gallery of police officers and off-duty prosecutors, crusaders against capital punishment and curious onlookers, he cataloged his sorrows.  and to the 12 men and women who will decide whether he is to live or die, he delivered his fate.  ''i, ronell wilson,'' he began, speaking yesterday in federal district court in brooklyn, ''wrote a statement that i want to read to you, the jury.''  what followed was an apology that had been three years, 10 months and 15 days in the making. mr. wilson, 24, stands convicted of capital murder for shooting detectives james v. nemorin and rodney j. andrews, each in the back of the head, as they worked undercover to buy a gun on staten island in march 2003.  during two weeks of testimony for the penalty phase of the trial, jurors have seen his life rent open for inspection. they have learned of his serious violence in jail, of his petty crimes as a teenager. they have seen his kindergarten grades. they know he sucked his thumb; they know he wet the bed.  prosecutors have portrayed mr. wilson as a dangerous gang member; defense lawyers have cast him as a broken child.  next week, at the close of a two-part trial that began in november, they will make their final arguments to end or spare mr. wilson's life. no federal jury in new york has ordered an execution for half a century.  as defense lawyers completed their case, they called the revenants of mr. wilson's short history, educators and counselors and more.  ''i used to date his cousin vanessa,'' testified one witness, milton munroe. he described the pre-adolescent ronell as ''sad.''  other witnesses told of mr. wilson's failure to obtain a high school equivalency certificate, to find a job or even to complete an application. a defense lawyer, kelley j. sharkey, asked some witnesses to tell the jury: ''do you like mr. wilson?'' they said they did.  and then came his turn to speak. his words were rigorously edited, the product of a robust debate outside the presence of the jury. in an order on jan. 12, judge nicholas g. garaufis gave mr. wilson leave to read a brief statement of remorse without swearing to tell the truth, without subjecting himself to cross-examination.  last week, his lawyers submitted a letter ascribed to mr. wilson, seeking to substitute it for the earlier statement. in court filings, this message was characterized as a meditation on the crime, its victims, the circumstances of mr. wilson's childhood and his resolve to live faithfully in prison. his lawyers described it as the work of a conscience stricken by testimony of one victim's teenage son.  prosecutors challenged the substitution, arguing that mr. wilson should subject himself to their questions if he wished to dispute their arguments. the lawyers argued through at least three drafts of the statement mr. wilson would read.  as the hour approached for mr. wilson to speak directly to those who will choose his fate, judge garaufis ruled on the script line by line.  ''i know what it means to be a young kid who never had a father figure,'' was disallowed. but jurors had already seen mr. wilson's father, a barely lucid man who said he had concentrated on his recovery from alcoholism to the exclusion of visiting his son in the hospital.  ''i have matured greatly and respect others,'' was disallowed, but the jurors could measure that from the testimony of his prison guards.  ''if i'm spared, i'll be locked up for the rest of my life,'' was disallowed, but the judge had already explained the alternative sentence to the jury.  ''when i was growing up, i was thankful for everything anybody would give me,'' was disallowed, but his sister had already testified about his neediness.  in an allusion to the process of revision, the penultimate draft contained the phrase ''i can't say much.'' that was altered to read: ''i am not good with words; i wish i could explain myself better.''  after some last legal arguments, a microphone was placed on a cardboard box, then moved lower. mr. wilson entered the room in a gray suit and a purple tie. a small tattoo bridged his right thumb and forefinger. he wore a thin mustache.  a screen for the display of evidence photographs was lifted mechanically, framing his face against an expanse of dun paneling. he took a drink of water. he rocked slightly in his chair. he rose.  ''i want you to understand my deepest sorrow towards the victims' family and friends,'' he said.  his head down, his voice low and plodding, he continued: ''because i know how painful it is, i would never wish this for anyone. so i cannot be remorseless.''  he did not look toward the gallery. he did not look up.  ''i say it again and again. i am so sorry,'' he said. then he concluded: ''i know that the victims' families may not accept my apology but i pray that god will give them all the comfort and strength that they need to move on from this tragedy. i have the same prayer for my family also.''  after the hearing, the families of the murdered men called his apology insincere.  ''he did what he did,'' said rodney andrews, father of the detective. ''you can't rectify that.''  michael j. palladino, the president of the detectives endowment association, characterized the statement as a plea for mercy, not unlike one mr. wilson had rejected from one of his victims.  ''he begged for his life,'' mr. palladino said. ''i just hope the jury does exactly what he did.''  a cousin of mr. wilson's, vanessa warrick, said he had spoken from the heart.  ''ronell's a sincere person, a loving and kind person, and i just hope the victims' families received his apology,'' she said. ''my entire family is sorry for this.''  as he watched the jury depart, mr. wilson reached forward and touched the stand of his microphone, ending the connection.  