beirut university dispute escalates into rioting, killing 4   violence erupted in beirut on thursday for the second time in three days, as an altercation in a university cafeteria escalated into rioting and gunfire.  the army declared a rare night curfew throughout the city amid fears that lebanon's two-month political crisis had entered a violent phase.  at least four people were shot dead -- two supporters of the government and two of the opposition -- and 150 were wounded in street fighting that began with a scuffle in the student cafeteria at beirut arab university in tariq jadidah, a sunni neighborhood. it spilled into the street, and men arrived and started shooting as each side apparently summoned reinforcements.  vanloads of antigovernment protesters arrived. they smashed cars parked in the university lot and on adjacent streets, setting them on fire and burning tires.  arriving lebanese soldiers fired into the air and used tear gas and stun grenades to try to disperse the crowds, but with little success. in some instances, soldiers stood on sidewalks or took cover in their armored personnel carriers, watching the violence.  members of the march 14 movement, supporting the government of prime minister fouad siniora, accused the soldiers of giving the shiite protesters, most of them backers of hezbollah, free rein to go on a rampage.  ''they allowed them into the neighborhood, they are scared of them,'' a pro-government protester said.  others accused saad hariri, the leader of the future movement a sunni party that supports the government, of abandoning the residents of the area by not arming them.  the deep-seated anger was palpable as the fighting continued through the afternoon, uncovering a widening sectarian divide in many lebanese neighborhoods.  ''animals, they are animals,'' said abdallah tassi, in tears, as his car burst into flames. he directed his anger at sheik hassan nasrallah, the hezbollah leader. ''nasrallah is a liar,'' he said. ''he pretends to be the enemy of israel, but really he is the enemy of the sunnis.''  the air filled with thick smoke as tires burned and young men hurled stones and shouted epithets.  ''the blood of the shiites is boiling, boiling!'' shouted one opposition member, as he watched the fighting.  television stations run by each side of the political divide blamed the other side for the violence, while leaders on each side urged calm.  hezbollah supporters were seen firing m-16 rifles, while members of the future movement were observed firing pistols. hezbollah men carrying the group's trademark walkie-talkies mingled among the rioters and managed the crowds.  ''let them get their anger out,'' said one hezbollah member, his radio held close to his mouth.  some witnesses reported seeing shots fired from roofs. government supporters said opposition snipers had fired at them from buildings.  sheik nasrallah, in a prerecorded message released thursday night, contended that his group had uncovered information that snipers were brought into the country in recent days by ''pro-government militias.'' hezbollah's marksmen have long been a point of pride for the group, which used them to great advantage against advancing israeli soldiers in the summer war with israel.  government loyalists also hurled incendiary devices at an office of a pro-syrian party nearby, setting the building on fire, witnesses said.  but by nightfall, all lebanese leaders appealed for calm.  sheik nasrallah issued a fatwa, or edict, telling his followers to leave the streets and restore calm. the future movement urged its supporters to show self-restraint and calm.  mr. siniora, at an aid conference in paris, called on all the parties ''to return to the voice of reason.''  nabih berri, leader of the shiite amal party and speaker of lebanon's parliament, said, ''what everyone should do now is halt the strife.'' he added, ''we must all remain united or we will find our country in the graveyard of history.''  tensions remained high thursday night, even as the fighting ebbed.  sheik nasrallah ''wants us to wait until they kill us; he does not want to give us weapons!'' an opposition member shouted. ''where is he, why isn't he giving us weapons?''  