crochet undergoes an upgrade   dumbo, the nickname for the neighborhood down under the manhattan bridge overpass, sounds like an acronym made up by a developer. but there's nothing prefab or disney-esque about the place.  rather, on a dreary january afternoon, dumbo resembles the set of ''blade runner,'' or some futuristic movie in which humans and robots and aliens with tentacles coming out of their foreheads hang out playing chess or shooting one another with purple lasers in a seamy wharfside bar. turn-of-the-century brownstones nestle at the flanks of high-rise apartment buildings. a train, subterranean in other parts of the city but high overhead here, crisscrosses a rickety-looking platform next to the thrumming automobile traffic on the bridge. it's jetsons meets dickens, old and new playing out as urban theater.  on the thoroughfare below, a hardware store stands near a glossy west elm outpost. on front street, a deli with fluorescent lights is not far from a high-end organic grocery store on adams street called foragers market. it's safe to say the only foraging going on in foragers is the search for the american express platinum card at the bottom of one's handbag.  if one store best represents front street in dumbo, it is loopy mango, a transplant from the east village that opened in september. the store, a glossy gallery of a space, sells vintage clothes and antiques alongside smart, new fashion and jewelry from designers like tufi duek, tocca, rachel roy and tracy reese.  a study in contrasts, loopy mango offers old and new, exotic and prim -- sometimes in the same item. a denim utility suit by deener, brand-new and stiff, was $275 and just the thing someone might need for a devo reunion party. next to it, a dusty framed photograph of kittens cost $75. a black julie haus pleated silk chiffon dress was $375. nearby, a tiny antlered skull mounted on a wooden plaque was $68.  a very modern alexis hudson handbag in black patent leather sat in the front window atop a giant leather women's wedge-soled sandal, an antique shoemaker's advertisement that was on sale for $750. and, i'd venture to guess, it will be on sale for some time to come. dresses by robert rodriguez and swingy coats by twinkle mingled with pieces of vintage dior luggage.  one of founders of loopy mango, waejong kim, is a crochet artist, and the store has become something of a destination for crochet fetishists. crochet became popular in europe in the 1800s as a less costly replacement for lace, and went on to become the hobby of grandmothers with time on their hands. on my childhood kitchen table, for instance, the salt and pepper shakers were covered in tiny cozies crocheted to resemble small men with pointy hats.  they were made for us by our neighbor, mrs. iverson, who spent her time crocheting, worrying about how to camouflage unsightly salt and pepper shakers and perfecting her salisbury steak recipe. we kept them on the table for reasons i never quite understood. i think perhaps my mother worried that the delicate mrs. iverson might pop over for a surprise visit, see her cozies weren't in situ, and drop dead from a heart attack.  eventually we moved, and the cozies were phased out. the 1970s saw a rise in the granny square, and i admit i played a small part in the manufacture of a large caftan.  but the loopy mango crocheted products are unlike any crochet work you have seen. imagine a one-piece cutout bathing suit that pam anderson might wear to her next wedding, but crocheted in pink and mint-green yarn. or a pair of cherry earrings, in crochet. or a sparkling flame-red see-through minidress, in crochet. or a crocheted pompom necklace. or a crocheted dog caftan with matching crocheted pompom leash, and coordinating human outfit in pink and green crochet. i might wear one of the flapper-style crocheted hats with the large crocheted flowers. might.  the store stocks an interesting assortment of jewelry: gold and silver birds on delicate chains by jackrabbit; necklaces mixing new and vintage pieces by bazz. i liked the arte povera style of gaye soley, who mixes rubber and pearls and metal in each piece. for $150, i bought a necklace for my stepdaughter. everyone should skip the gift-giving in december and instead give presents in january, that great yawning monday of a month when things turn really depressing.  a display of eau de brooklyn soap ($10 each) was on sale near some vintage books, including ''the blue flower'' by henry van dyke ($40), an american clergyman who wrote fairy tales with a religious bent. i opened ''the blue flower'' and read: ''he felt an irresistible desire to bathe in the pool. slipping off his clothes he plunged in. it was as if he bathed in a cloud of sunset. a celestial rapture flowed through him. the waves of the stream were like a bevy of nymphs taking shape around him, clinging to him with tender breasts, as he floated onward, lost in delight, yet keenly sensitive to every impression.''  a clergyman longing for the touch of nymphs' breasts, a boutique for disco crochet in brooklyn: in the shadow of the manhattan bridge, it all made sense.  loopy mango  117 front street (between adams and washington streets), brooklyn; (718) 858-5930  atmosphere -- an art gallery of old and new, offering clothing and antiques and art and perfume and jewelry.  service -- helpful and friendly. the proprietors speak english, russian, japanese and korean.  key looks -- crocheted hot pants and vintage housedresses.  prices -- 1920s linen cabinet, $600; tocca red cotton dress, $352; mischen silk dress, $750; rachel roy sweater dress, $280; handmade leather bag with horn handle, on sale for $325.  critical shopper  