game of risk and reward, and rookie is a good bet   in two days at the buick invitational, brandt snedeker has become a favorite of the grandparents and the gamblers.  while he was increasing his lead friday with a two-under-par 70 on the south course at torrey pines -- and increasing the possibility of unexpected victory against a sturdy pga tour field -- money was changing hands in snedeker's name behind the gallery ropes.  ''today on 15, i hit my first fairway on the back nine and a guy said, 'i finally won a dollar,' '' snedeker said. ''i guess they were betting on me hitting the fairway. he's probably broke.''  he holds a three-shot lead over charles howell iii, who shot 64 on the north course.  snedeker, a pga tour rookie, hit only three fairways in his round, but he saved strokes like a veteran and continued to defy expectations. his 13-under-par total of 131 also gave him a four-stroke lead over rich beem (68), bill haas (66) and charlie wi (72).  tiger woods, in his season debut, trailed snedeker by seven shots after a 72 on the south course. phil mickelson stood nine shots behind after a 66 on the north course.  on a day when the wind was up, snedeker said he did not feel overly nervous trying for his first victory on the pga tour. he said he spent an enjoyable thursday night watching the movie ''the departed'' and returned the more than 30 telephone and text messages left on his telephone after his opening-round 61.  he also spoke to his parents, candy and larry, who were watching his round from gulf shores, ala. he said his father always got a little excited.  ''giddy like a schoolgirl,'' he said.  the 26-year-old snedeker said one of the toughest parts of his second round was trying not to think about his record-tying first round. players kept walking up to congratulate him while he was on the driving range friday morning.  he was a little out of sorts when he walked to the first tee.  ''sure enough, i blew one off the planet, right,'' snedeker said. ''i was on my way again to missing a bunch of fairways. still, it was a good day. i scrambled well and shot a pretty good number considering how bad i hit the tee shot.''  good fortune also visited snedeker. he rolled in a 40-foot putt for birdie on the third hole and added three more birdies against two bogeys.  woods, who has four buick invitational titles and is bidding for seven straight pga tour victories, experienced a round that included precision and error. he made three birdies but erased them with three bogeys.  ''all i need to do is a little work on the range and a little work on the greens and i should be alright tomorrow,'' woods said.  despite his deficit to snedeker, woods was not ready to crown the rookie with the title.  ''he played well yesterday and, obviously, consistent today, so we'll see what happens on the weekend,'' woods said. ''there's a bunch of guys in with a chance. the south course, with the way it's playing, it's going to be a stern test for all of us.''  snedeker, who is from nashville, has greeted his early brush with fame with shrugs of the shoulders and smiles. when he made par on no. 8, a fan said to him that he would be cheering for him during the tournament's final two rounds.  after the round, snedeker said he did not know why so many fans were pulling for him.  ''i think if you found out the answer to that question, a lot of guys out here would pay a lot of money to figure that out,'' he said. ''i was just reacting to the way they were to me. that's how i was brought up. if somebody smiled at me, i smiled back. my dad would kick my butt, to be honest with you, if i hadn't done that.''  the mass of humanity was waiting for snedeker as he made his way to the 18th hole, where he tapped in for a par.  as he walked off the south course and toward the scorer's tent, a man leaned over a railing and yelled at him.  ''hey,'' the fan shouted. ''i have a bet. how old are you?''  ''twenty-six,'' snedeker said, sending away another satisfied customer.  golf  