the 'cutest senior couple,' a bit frayed after 20 years   with more bromides than a hallmark shop, ''the pavilion,'' by craig wright, is receiving a gentle, at times sweetly engaging, production at the two river theater company in red bank. by turns lyrical and sophomoric, the play, directed by aaron posner, is a kind of ''our town'' or ''talley's folly'' without the nuance.  try this on for size: ''time only goes in one direction.'' or this: ''it's life! bearable's the best we can hope for!'' you get the idea.  mr. wright, an emmy-nominated writer for the television shows ''lost'' and ''six feet under,'' has set his play at a 20th high school reunion in rural pine city, minn. gathered at the town's lakeside pavilion, a century-old dance hall scheduled to be destroyed at the end of the evening in the name of progress, are members of the class of 1986: the boy most likely to succeed, now a microsoft millionaire; the girl with the best sense of humor, still single; and, most important, both halves of the cutest senior couple.  the lives of the couple in question took separate paths on a fateful september day when peter went out of town to college, leaving kari pregnant and facing an abortion.  kari is tenderly played by kate eastwood norris as a woman determined to cope. with her face frozen in a wan smile of regret, she clutches her sweater closed as though trying to hide her broken heart. still working at the bank, down in the basement among the safe-deposit boxes, and still married to hans, the local golf pro who rescued her in her time of need, she hates golf almost as much as she despises the memory of peter and their unborn child.  the desperately clueless peter, played by erik steele, went to graduate school to become a shrink. lonely, unable to establish any meaningful relationships except with artistic 20-somethings, he remains obsessed with the idea of reconnecting with kari. he actually appears at the dance with a bouquet of flowers clutched in his hand, seeking forgiveness. kari is not feeling charitable.  andrew polk rounds out the cast as the narrator, for whom mr. wright has written some richly poetic segues. in a vocal tour de force, mr. polk also assumes the personas of a dozen or so of the class's most colorful, if condescendingly local-yokel, ''fargo''-inflected characters. they include pudge, the dense suicide hot line counselor; kent luneburg, pine city's chief of police, whose wife, angie, is having an affair with the paranoid, often stoned mayor, cookie brustad; and angie herself, who believes in ''changing the rules if you're not happy.''  recriminations, followed by the sharing of burdened hearts, followed by a tenuous pas de deux of reconciliation and redemption, bring ''the pavilion'' to a close. whether the final ''sweethearts dance'' at midnight will send kari and peter off happily ever after is not to be revealed here. with little enough dramatic tension in the second act, i'm not about to give away the ending.  ''the pavilion'' is at the two river theater company, 21 bridge avenue, red bank, through feb. 4. information: (732) 345-1400 or at trtc.org.  theater review  