black teenagers convicted in beating of 3 white women   a juvenile court judge found nine black teenagers guilty friday of beating three young white women with pumpkins, newspapers and a skateboard last halloween in an attack that has shined a spotlight on racial tensions here.  in a packed courtroom, the judge, gibson w. lee, announced felony assault convictions against eight girls and one boy, ranging in age from 14 to 18, and the acquittal of one 12-year-old girl. eight of the teenagers were also convicted of hate crimes.  frank williams jr., one of the defense lawyers, said he was ''disheartened, puzzled and grief-stricken.'' the verdicts will be appealed, he said, but he added that he did not ''have too much confidence in the justice of the appeal system.''  the defendants' parents said their children were denied their rights, noting they have been in custody since their arrest on oct. 31. in california, there is no bail for juveniles.  cherralle hardison, the mother of the 12-year-old and three of the convicted teenagers, wept.  ''my heart is heavy. it hurts to know your kids didn't do anything and you can't do anything to help them,'' said ms. hardison, 46. outside the courthouse, helicopters and a dozen satellite news trucks along with the hundreds of defendants' supporters awaited the verdicts in what has become known here as ''the halloween incident.'' police officers, some in riot gear, guarded the building and the fifth floor of the courthouse.  when news of the verdicts made its way outside, the mostly african-american crowd reacted with anger, some saying the convictions amounted to ''mob justice'' and ''a lynching.''  judge lee will hear victim impact statements on wednesday before sentencing the youths. they face a minimum of at-home probation to several years in a california youth authority facility, up to age 25.  long beach, a suburb about 20 miles from downtown los angeles, has a history of racial unrest. riots broke out in high schools in 1967 and during the 1992 street riots prompted by the rodney king verdict, the violence spilled over into long beach.  the halloween attack happened in the bixby knolls section of long beach, a well-to-do diverse neighborhood where children say they like to go trick-or-treating because residents give ''whole candy bars.''  the young women said a group of boys sexually taunted them as they entered a haunted house organized by area homeowners. they tried to ignore them, they said, but on their way out, they encountered the boys again. within a few minutes, the women said, they were beaten, scratched, kicked and pummeled with newspapers, lemons and miniature pumpkins as someone yelled, ''i hate white people,'' adding an expletive.  at a news conference last week, two of the victims, laura schneider and michelle smith, both 19, described the assault and its aftermath. ms. schneider has dropped out of school and a third victim, loren hyman, 21, is awaiting surgery to repair 12 facial fractures.  ms. smith said she thought ms. schneider was dead when she saw her unconscious on the ground. ''what would you think?'' ms. smith said.  after the verdicts, doug otto, a lawyer for the victims, said his clients were relieved and looking forward to making their impact statements to the judge. but, he said, ''they are worried about their safety.''  throughout the hearings, assistant district attorney andrea bouas hailed the prosecution's star witness, kiana alford, as ''a hero.'' ms. alford, who is black, testified that she saw the entire attack and that despite the darkness, the crowd of people in the street and the fact that some of the defendants were wearing the same t-shirt, she was sure she had identified the correct people as the attackers.  prosecutors accused the defendants' friends of trying to bully ms. alford after her testimony by rear-ending her car. brian schirn, a deputy district attorney who oversees long beach juvenile prosecutions, said ms. alford was leaving long beach because of the intimidation.  throughout the trial, critics said the identification of the suspects was severely flawed. the police never presented the victims or ms. alford with a line-up or photographs that included people who were not suspects. instead, mr. williams, the defense lawyer, said in his closing statements, officers told ms. alford, ''we got them,'' as they drove her to a supermarket parking lot near the scene of the attacks to identify the suspects.  defense lawyers did not dispute that the white women were attacked, but they called it a ''high school fight'' that got out of control and said 911 callers indicated that the victims were being attacked by boys, not girls.  mr. williams and other defense lawyers pointed to the testimony of two other witnesses whose accounts differed from ms. alford's. they also said the three women had initially fought with the group and that there was evidence the victims had been drinking alcohol that night. the women denied drinking and provoking the attack.  but primarily, the defense attacked ms. alford's credibility.  ''there is no way for her to have seen what she said she saw,'' mr. williams said of ms. alford.  