the neediest cases; from a rough, nomadic childhood to young motherhood   mirza norales remembers waiting for her mother to pick her up from the emergency room as midnight approached one summer night in 2000, but she never came.  they had gone to st. barnabas hospital in the bronx together after they had a fight where ms. norales, who was 14 at the time, suffered a blow to the head, she said. her mother had warned her not to bring men into the house or she would throw her out, but ms. norales did, and her mother caught her.  that day was the beginning of the second phase of a turbulent, nomadic childhood for ms. norales, now 20, who bounced from home to home beginning when she was 4. the woman she waited for in the bronx hospital was, in fact, one of several women she had called ''mom.''  she was passed along from the homes of aunts and uncles in honduras, her home country, for seven years after her parents died. ms. norales has never learned how her parents died. when she was 11, her relatives moved her to new york so that her maternal aunt and legal guardian could take care of her, as her biological mother had wished. but the situation was less than ideal and ended with ms. norales stranded in the emergency room that summer night in 2000.  ''i was rebellious, and sometimes i think it was my fault,'' she said.  she was taken from the emergency room to 7 laight street in manhattan, an emergency intake center for children. she was then moved to geller house school on staten island, where she stayed longer than the six months she was originally told she would stay, she said.  she behaved well because she wanted to go home, but after a year, her aunt refused to take her back, saying she did not have room in her one-bedroom apartment. ms. norales was then sent to pleasantville cottage school in westchester county, a coeducational residential treatment center run by the jewish child care association, a part of the uja-federation, one of the seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund.  her time there was turbulent.  ''i used to go awol because all you see in pleasantville is trees,'' she said. she watched as her friends came and went to and from home visits, and she yearned to get out as well. so she would sneak a ride on a bus and ride along with her friends, or visit friends in the city. she soon got a job as a cashier at a mcdonald's, where she worked for seven months.  after a year in pleasantville, she was placed with foster parents, but it did not work out, and ms. norales was moved again. it was then that she met michelle jones, her third mom. she lived in brooklyn with ms. jones and her two children for two years, and finally felt that she was wanted and could have a good life.  although she was treated by ms. jones as family, ms. norales still wanted to be with her actual family, so, when she turned 18, she moved in with another aunt in the bronx.  soon after she moved back to the bronx she took a trip to honduras, where she became pregnant and her adult life began, at 18.  her son, jaylen, was born prematurely on april 30, 2005, and her aunts were there to help. but after a lifetime of living somewhere between dependence and independence, ms. norales was ready to be on her own. she applied to public housing, got a job as a home assistant and moved into a one-bedroom apartment in the webster/morrisania houses in the bronx in march 2005, with the help of $626 from the neediest cases for a deposit and first month's rent.  she cooks hot honduran meals for her son every day, keeps a clean house and tries to give him toys that she never had. ms. norales puts jaylen in day care when she goes to work at mimi maternity in manhasset, n.y., and takes him to speech and physical therapy.  she plans to start community college full time next month and wants to earn a nursing assistant certificate. ''i need something better for my son than just to be in people's houses,'' she said.  previously recorded: $7,213,701.25  recorded wednesday: $149,800.03  total: $7,363,501.28  last year to date: $6,566,951.98  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  