transactions   major league baseball  american league  boston red sox--agreed to terms with of j.d. drew on a five-year contract.  yankees--agreed to terms with inf miguel cairo on a one-year contract. designated rhp matt desalvo for assignment.  seattle mariners--agreed to terms with lhp arthur rhodes on a minor league contract.  national league  mets--designated rhp jason standridge for assignment.  philadelphia phillies--agreed to terms with of karim garcia on a minor league contract.  n.b.a.  seattle supersonics--recalled c mouhamed sene from the idaho of the nbadl.  n.f.l.  san diego chargers--named clarence shelmon offensive coordinator.  arena football league  colorado crush--signed db james taylor.  georgia force--signed wr-db jarrick hillery.  kansas city brigade--signed db isaiah trufant. released ol-dl chad pegues.  tampa bay storm--released ol ricky hall.  n.h.l.  anaheim ducks--traded lw curtis glencross, c zenon konopka and a 2007 or 2008 seventh-round draft pick to colombus for c mark hartigan, rw joe motzko and 2007 fourth-round draft pick. traded lw chris durno to nashville for c shane endicott and assigned endicott and motzko to portland of the ahl.  calgary flames--recalled rw dave mossand lw eric godard from omaha of the ahl.  carolina hurricanes--activated d tim gleason from injured reserve.  colorado avalanche--recalled c ben guite from albany of the ahl..  detroit red wings--recalled f matt ellis and f matt hussey from grand rapids of the ahl.  florida panthers--named randy sexton assistant general manager.  nashville predators--recalled d kevin klein from milwaukee of the ahl.  vancouver canucks--recalled d yannick tremblay from manitoba of the ahl.  major league soccer  columbus crew--announced the retirement of g jonny walker.  college  colonial athletic association--suspended drexel men's basketball c frank elegar for one game for unsportsmanlike  conduct in a jan. 20 game.  army--named alma kovaci women's volleyball coach.  charleston southern--announced f v.j. fails has been dismissed from basketball team.  livingstone--named lamonte j. massie football coach.  minnesota--named dave manka women's assistant volleyball coach.  