three courses for $25, all night, every night   it's like restaurant week all year long at gabrielle's brasserie in rockville centre. this appealing spot, formerly 22 north park under the same owners, changed its name, its chef and its menu in late november. it now offers a three-course dinner for $25 that is sure to be a hit with patrons who love good food but don't want to break the bank every time they eat out. that price includes everything on the menu: no exceptions, no supplements. it is offered all night -- not just during ''early bird'' hours -- every night of the week. it was even in place on new year's eve.  the $25 meal is a story; the quality and quantity of the food here, which is intensely flavorful and stylishly presented, make it a compelling one. jeffrey c. deville, a graduate of the culinary institute of america in hyde park, n.y., is the executive chef. he has worked alongside susan spicer at bayona in new orleans and under mario batali at lupa in manhattan; his last position was as sous chef at 105 harbor in cold spring harbor.  tom schaudel, long island's peripatetic restaurateur, served as the consulting chef and helped develop the new menu.  it is an exciting one, with a dozen appetizer picks, the same number of entree choices and about a half-dozen desserts. (there are also specials.) the appetizer i'd make a beeline for is pan-seared rock shrimp cakes with a perfect avocado-pineapple salsa. there was also a pleasing crabcake special atop a crunchy kimchi salad, but the shrimp cakes, with their arresting, chunky texture, put it in the shade.  fork-tender ribs (four meaty ones), accompanied by a green papaya slaw and a log of cornbread, were a hearty and delicious opener. so was the gratin of long island oysters: four large ones in their shells combined with boursin cheese and cubes of spicy andouille sausage. the grilled and roasted veggie plate sounded light but was actually large enough to pass as an entree. it included mounds of hummus, tapenade and roasted red peppers and arrived with grilled pita.  the adventurous were rewarded with a special of grilled smelts atop a mélange of roasted sweet potato cubes and what our waiter called fava beans. they looked and tasted like black beans; in any case, they were seductively good.  entrees were equally appealing. the braised lamb shank was a fall-away-tender success atop roasted root vegetables and three-cheese polenta. other winners were perfectly turned-out salmon over a barley pilaf, pan-seared flounder with leeks, tomato and capers and a chewy yet flavorful hanger steak with crunchy toasted gnocchi and spinach.  speaking of gnocchi, the menu offers these light potato dumplings in a flavor-packed sauce with tomato, zucchini, lemon and cheese, generously crowned with grilled shrimp. (i counted nine in my dish.) also hitting the high notes was fettuccine in a bolognese sauce that had a bit of a spicy kick.  the eight-ounce kobe burger was cooked medium-rare as ordered and came with terrific crisp fries and the desired sautéed onions but also sported a cap of unadvertised melted mozzarella. i would have preferred it without the cheese.  desserts also delivered. i loved the new orleans-style bread pudding with sourmash custard and the exceptionally moist and rich molten chocolate cake. a shortbread shortcake with mixed berries was another winner.  servers were as excited about the new restaurant and its food as the diners were. on one evening, the service was nearly perfect; on a second night, our server was enthusiastic but tended to guess about ingredients rather than check with the kitchen. on both nights, busboys did a great job refilling water glasses and replacing bread baskets with fresh ones. (the rolls in those baskets were just average, though.)  the restaurant may look just like its predecessor, but the $25 three-course dinner makes this more than just the same old place with a new name.  gabrielle's brasserie  22 north park avenue  rockville centre  (516) 536-6611  very good  the space -- striking yet sedate dining room with an aquarium and arresting curved panels of multicolored stained glass hanging from the ceiling. complete wheelchair access.  the crowd -- casual small groups and couples. very few children.  the bar -- a wall of colored glass squares forms an ever-changing color and light show. there are a few cozy booths for two and an adjacent lounge area with leather chairs and couch. diverse wine list of 36 bottles, $22 to $35; 19 wines by the glass, $6 to $14.  the bill -- three-course lunch, $10 or $15. sunday brunch, $20, includes a cocktail. three-course dinner, $25 (higher à la carte). american express, mastercard, visa and discover card accepted.  what we like -- rock shrimp cakes, spare ribs, gratin of long island oysters, grilled and roasted veggie plate, grilled smelts, salmon, flounder, lamb shank, hanger steak, fettuccine bolognese, gnocchi with shrimp, molten chocolate cake, bread pudding, berry shortcake.  if you go -- lunch tuesday through saturday, noon to 4 p.m.; sunday brunch, 11 a.m. till 3 p.m. dinner 5 to 10 p.m. sunday and tuesday through thursday, till 11 p.m. friday and saturday. closed monday. reservations for parties of six or more.  reviewed jan. 28, 2007  dining/rockville centre  