a commercial landlord's biggest sale may be itself   for several years, equity office properties, the huge commercial portfolio assembled by the chicago real estate magnate samuel zell, lagged other publicly traded office landlords.  no matter what remedial steps the company took -- extricating itself from weak markets by selling $2.7 billion worth of property in 2005 alone, focusing more on strong markets and reducing the vacancy rate in its buildings -- the share price did not budge significantly until rumors began circulating that the company might be sold.  many analysts were scornful, or at best skeptical, of mr. zell's strategy of creating a national brand of office buildings scattered among 37 metropolitan areas.  now, however, equity office, its holdings pared to 590 buildings from its peak of 774, is the object of a fierce bidding war involving some of the industry's most prominent risk takers. the contest drove equity office's share price to $52.44 at the market close yesterday, a big jump over its 52-week low point, on feb. 15, of $29.25 a share.  the battle over equity office pits a group of investors led by vornado realty trust, the owner of more than 100 million square feet of property and one of the nation's most successful publicly traded real estate companies, against blackstone group, a private equity fund that has been acquiring real estate at a breathtaking pace over the last five years. in november, equity office accepted an all-cash offer of $48.50 a share from blackstone, in a $36 billion deal, including debt, that would represent the largest leveraged buyout ever.  last week, however, vornado and its partners sought to top that bid by offering $52 a share in stock and cash. equity office, which had appeared to welcome a competing bid, according to analysts, agreed on monday to give the vornado team access to nonpublic information and said the challenger had until jan. 31 to make a formal offer, which is just six days before equity office shareholders are scheduled to vote on the blackstone bid. none of the parties would agree to be interviewed.  the frenzy over equity office is only the latest indication of how much capital is flowing into commercial real estate, especially office buildings, the last sector to recover from the recession that began with the dot-com bust in 2000. many investors, including steven roth, the chairman of vornado, say they believe that vacancy rates will continue to decline in the next couple of years, with a corresponding rise in rents.  in vornado's latest annual report, mr. roth described the transactions in which private companies have paid large premiums for publicly traded real estate companies as an ''epidemic,'' and said this trend ''seems to support the conclusion, with which we agree, that public market trading prices are cheap to private values.''  yet mr. roth, who parlayed a stake in a discount appliance chain in new jersey into a diversified real estate empire that includes premier office buildings in new york and washington, the merchandise mart in chicago, and some of the costliest retail space on madison avenue in manhattan, has stayed on the sidelines while other reits like trizec properties, carramerica realty and reckson associates realty were acquired.  last summer, according to a document filed by equity office with the securities and exchange commission, top executives of an unidentified company met with mr. zell to discuss a possible merger, and was given access to the company's books. but nothing came of those discussions. (analysts said the company was vornado.)  a deal with equity office would give mr. roth the chance to acquire quality buildings in desirable markets where his company is not currently represented while avoiding the rich prices that individual buildings are commanding.  last month, vornado paid $542 million, or about $1,009 a square foot, for 350 park avenue, a 30-story office building between 51st street and 52nd street in manhattan. earlier this month, it bought the 1-million-square-foot manhattan mall in herald square for $689 million, augmenting the 6 million square feet of space it owns in the rapidly appreciating neighborhood around penn station.  under mr. roth's agreement with his consortium partners in the equity office bid, vornado would be able to expand its presence in new york and washington while entering three markets where development opportunities are scarce -- boston, downtown san francisco and los angeles -- said michael knott, an analyst at green street advisors, a research company in newport beach, calif.  that would give vornado prestigious addresses like the 39-story 1999 avenue of the stars in the century city section of los angeles and the ferry building overlooking san francisco bay, a renovated 19th century structure containing 65,000 square feet of food markets and 175,000 square feet of prime office space.  vornado's partners -- starwood capital group and walton street capital -- would be left with slower real estate markets like chicago, but they would also gain a foothold in more promising cities like san jose, seattle and miami, mr. knott said. the partners operate real estate funds whose investors overlap with one another's and with blackstone's, real estate specialists said.  walton street was founded by the principals in jmb realty, a chicago development company, where barry s. sternlicht, the chairman and chief executive of starwood capital group, got his start. at age 29, mr. sternlicht engineered a $425 million leveraged buyout of randsworth trust, a british real estate company just two years before the collapse of the real estate market, which cost the company and its pension-fund investors all their equity in the project.  but, like mr. zell himself, mr. sternlicht saw the distressed market as an opportunity to buy buildings at bargain prices. he bought millions of dollars worth of apartment buildings and sold them for a stake in equity residential property trust, another reit founded by mr. zell. he also bought a troubled hotel reit that he transformed into starwood hotels and resorts.  mr. sternlicht, a lodging industry innovator who is credited with creating the w hotels brand, left the hotel company after a falling out with the board but has remained active in that sector. in 2005, starwood capital acquired the company that owned the storied hotel de crillon in paris and also bought control of the mammoth mountain ski area in california.  neil g. bluhm, the president of jmb and a co-founder of walton street (and mr. sternlicht's former boss) has also been an active buyer of hotels. last year, walton street and its partners bought the drake hotel in chicago.  in december, pennsylvania authorities awarded mr. bluhm and his partners a license to operate a slot-machine casino in the former jack frost sugar refinery in philadelphia's fishtown neighborhood. he and mr. sternlicht teamed up last year in an unsuccessful effort to buy control of the riviera holdings corporation, the owner of the riviera hotel and casino in las vegas.  that industry leaders are vying over his office reit is sweet vindication for mr. zell, who has long argued that wall street has not given his company the respect it deserved. over the last seven years, equity office's total returns (share price plus dividends) were 138 percent, compared with 280 percent for vornado, according to keven s. lindemann, the director of real estate for snl financial, a research company in charlottesville, va. during the same period, the snl reit office index grew by 166 percent.  ''the management team at equity office had been arguing all along that the market was not valuing their company properly,'' mr. lindemann said. ''pretty much every management team says that. in this case, the equity office people were right.''  square feet  correction:  january 29, 2007, monday  a picture caption on the square feet pages of business day on wednesday with an article about the bidding war for equity office properties referred imprecisely to e.o.p.'s control of the ferry building in san francisco. while e.o.p. and its partners have a long-term lease on the building, they have not acquired the property. the building is owned by the port of san francisco.  