williams not willing to give up pinstripes   there is no spot on the yankees' roster for bernie williams, who is uncomfortable as a free agent after 16 seasons in new york. williams does not want to retire, yet he does not want to leave the yankees.  jorge posada, who received an award at the baseball assistance team dinner in manhattan last night, said he has kept in close touch with williams this winter. apparently, retirement is not an option.  ''he's not even talking about that,'' posada said. ''he said he wants to play one more year.''  posada said williams, 38, has told him that other teams have called. but with the start of spring training less than three weeks away, williams has resisted.  ''he wants to be a yankee forever,'' posada said. ''hopefully, he gets a chance to do that.''  but the only way williams can return to the yankees is if he comes to them and asks for a minor league contract. they accommodated the veteran al leiter that way last spring, letting him come to spring training and retire during an exhibition game.  posada said he doubted williams would seek a minor league deal, but he guessed that he might try to stay in shape in the hope that the yankees would sign him during the season. scott boras, williams's agent, has declined interview requests about him for weeks.  the yankees appear comfortable moving on. last year was presumed to be williams's final season, but injuries to starters pushed him into a semiregular role, and he responded with a .281 average in 420 at-bats.  ''bernie's been a great one for us,'' said gene michael, the yankees' senior vice president who oversaw williams's development. ''he's done a great job for a long time. it'd be different without bernie. i like bernie a lot. he can still play.''  as a pinch-hitter, though, williams had just 3 hits in 19 at-bats last season. that would be his role this season, with hideki matsui, johnny damon and bobby abreu entrenched as starters and melky cabrera as the backup.  the yankees also plan to carry two first basemen, a backup infielder and a backup catcher. with 12 pitchers, that leaves no room for williams.  the yankees would make room for another veteran free agent: roger clemens, who will be in town next wednesday to speak at a banquet for the st. john's baseball program. brian cashman, the yankees' general manager, said he was not aware of that visit, and clemens has no plans to drop by yankee stadium.  ''he will not be meeting with the yankees, because there is no reason to do so,'' randy hendricks, clemens's agent, said in an e-mail message.  clemens's personal trainer, brian mcnamee, is a former st. john's catcher who is close with the st. john's coach, ed blankmeyer. after his opening speech, clemens will take questions from the audience. according to hendricks, there will not be many new answers.  ''he will only play for houston, new york or boston, if he plays,'' hendricks said. ''he will not play a full season, if he plays. we are in no hurry to make a decision.''  yet there have been some playful hints lately that clemens could favor the yankees. at a party last weekend at the sundance film festival, he showed off a yankees world series ring for photographers.  also, as first reported by the new york post, yankees second baseman robinson canó has already ceded no. 22 to clemens.  posada had little insight into clemens's decision. while posada said he had been in touch with williams ''a lot,'' he and clemens have not talked for a while.  ''i don't have his number,'' posada said. ''i used to. i don't have it anymore. he changes it every three months.''  all posada knows for sure is that he will be in tampa, fla., when pitchers and catchers report feb. 13. clemens's return seems far off. williams's return seems unlikely.  ''it looks like there's not a spot for him,'' said lee mazzilli, the former yankees coach who will be a studio analyst for the mets this season. ''it's hard to see that with bernie. he's a player who stands for all that baseball's about and all that the yankees are about. i'm not too sure anyone out there doesn't pull for bernie.''  inside pitch  the yankees have known for months that they will play host to the 2008 all-star game in the final season at yankee stadium, and major league baseball will finally make it official in a news conference at city hall next wednesday. the yankees last played host to the game in 1977, the year after the stadium was remodeled.  baseball  