for nash, 3 m.v.p.'s can't take place of title   steve nash wants no part of the debate. nash, the phoenix suns' point guard, is a top contender to win his third consecutive most valuable player award, which would make him only the fourth n.b.a. player to accomplish the feat.  each of the three who have done so -- bill russell, wilt chamberlain and larry bird -- won at least one championship while collecting the individual honor. nash, however, is without a title.  would he pass up another m.v.p. award for a championship ring?  ''oh, are you kidding?'' nash said tuesday in washington, after helping the suns win their 14th game in a row. ''i'd trade all three for a championship.''  only russell, the boston celtics center, won three straight titles (1960-61, 1961-62 and 1962-63) the same seasons he won three consecutive m.v.p. awards. russell gushed about nash's abilities.  ''i think, on the world stage, he's one of our great athletes in all sports,'' russell said last night by telephone. ''i'm a big fan. the two m.v.p.'s he got, he deserved. part of the reason that he's so good and so effective is that the guys like playing with him. he creates an atmosphere where they win games.''  after last night's 112-107 victory against the knicks, nash had led the suns to a franchise-record 15-game winning streak, their second this season. isiah thomas, a hall of fame point guard and the knicks' coach, called nash ''definitely one of the best i've ever seen'' and said he was the ''joe montana of this era of point guards.''  and yet, when asked if nash needed to win an n.b.a. title to be considered great, thomas said that the m.v.p. award used to have different criteria.  ''when i came in, you had to win; that was the bar that the media set,'' thomas said last night before nash had 22 points and 14 assists. ''it was always to me -- what cousy won. till you win, you can't be talked about in the same breath as cousy.''  russell won 6 of his 11 titles with bob cousy at point guard, including in 1956-57, the only season cousy won his m.v.p. award. russell said that thomas's argument was legitimate, but that nash's lack of a title did not diminish his accolades.  ''i think that the m.v.p. is for the regular season,'' russell said. ''i will say this -- first of all, his career is not over. a lot of guys that won championships, they won it after their prime.''  and a lot of guys did not win it at all, he added. ''do you consider charles barkley great?'' said russell, 72, who was also the m.v.p. in 1957-58 and 1964-65. ''you have to consider the body of their work. i've been watching the n.b.a. since 1950. and so i've known what i was watching, and steve nash is one of the guys that stands out over that period.''  soon to be 33, in his 11th season in the n.b.a., nash only seems to be getting better, his teammates say.  ''he's at a level where there's not much room to grow,'' suns guard raja bell said, ''but when most guys wouldn't be able to grow that extra inch, he finds a way to get better and mean a little bit more to a team that has more weapons that it did last year.''  nash's statistics, like his demeanor, are not dazzling. but unlike the other early leading m.v.p candidates, kobe bryant and nash's favorite -- his best friend and former dallas teammate, dirk nowitzki -- nash has had an impact on phoenix that does not always show up in the box score.  nash carefully studies his body in off-season fitness training to maximize his play and minimize his back pain, saying he ''learns something new'' about himself every summer. suns coach mike d'antoni called nash the ''most prepared'' player, mentally and physically, he had ever coached.  nash admits he may be more ornery this season, squeezed by the urgency of such a small window.  ''it's important,'' he said. ''i'm not going to play forever, and we're not going to have a team as talented.''  nash knows his teammates' tendencies instinctively on and off the court, calculating when to raise his voice -- albeit sparingly -- to spur his teammates.  ''i'm a pretty easygoing guy, but i'm very narrow-focused this season when we get in the locker room, on the practice floor and the court,'' he said. ''on the rare occasion, it comes out, but not necessarily by design, more by passion and want. i still think that my style of being a teammate is much more of encouraging and of sharing than of chastising.''  when asked tuesday to reflect on the suns' remarkable run of 30 victories in 32 games, nash shrugged and said, ''we expect to win most of our games, and if we don't we'd be disappointed.''  after nash led a 127-105 rout of washington, wizards coach eddie jordan said matter-of-factly: ''phoenix is a very good team, a very unselfish team. they pass the ball, and steve nash is the ultimate playmaker. nash is the m.v.p. for reasons we saw tonight.''  russell said he was curious to see how the rest of the season unfolds for nash and the suns. in new york to attend a board meeting of his foundation, the national mentoring partnership, russell dismissed talk of nash's suspect defense. it is not as if nash is the only superstar whose defense has been questioned.  ''get in line,'' russell said.  asked if russell would have loved to have played with nash, he answered with a chuckle. ''i played with a guy just like that -- and it was fun,'' russell said.  bob cousy had something, however, that nash does not have, russell added: ''he had me.''  basketball  