'the state of our union is strong; our cause in the world is right'   following are excerpts from a transcript of president bush's state of the union address as recorded by the new york times. a full transcript: nytimes.com/washington.  the rite of custom brings us together at a defining hour when decisions are hard and courage is needed. we enter the year 2007 with large endeavors under way and others that are ours to begin. in all of this, much is asked of us. we must have the will to face difficult challenges and determined enemies, and the wisdom to face them together.  some in this chamber are new to the house and the senate, and i congratulate the democratic majority. congress has changed, but not our responsibilities. each of us is guided by our own convictions, and to these we must stay faithful. yet we're all held to the same standards, and called to serve the same good purposes: to extend this nation's prosperity; to spend the people's money wisely; to solve problems, not leave them to future generations; to guard america against all evil; and to keep faith with those we have sent forth to defend us.  we're not the first to come here with government divided and uncertainty in the air. like many before us, we can work through our differences, and we can achieve big things for the american people.  domestic policy  tonight, i want to discuss three economic reforms that deserve to be priorities for this congress.  first, we must balance the federal budget. we can do so without raising taxes. what we need is spending discipline in washington, d.c. we set a goal of cutting the deficit in half by 2009 -- and met that goal three years ahead of schedule. now let us take the next step. in the coming weeks, i will submit a budget that eliminates the federal deficit within the next five years. i ask you to make the same commitment. together, we can restrain the spending appetite of the federal government, and we can balance the federal budget.  next, there's the matter of earmarks. these special-interest items are often slipped into bills at the last hour when not even c-span is watching. in 2005 alone, the number of earmarks grew to over 13,000 and totaled nearly $18 billion. even worse, over 90 percent of the earmarks never make it to the floor of the house and senate; they are dropped into committee reports that are not even part of the bill that arrives on my desk. you did not vote them into law. i did not sign them into law. yet they are treated as if they have the force of law. the time has come to end this practice. so let us work together to reform the budget process -- expose every earmark to the light of day and to a vote in congress and cut the number and cost of earmarks at least in half by the end of this session.  and finally, to keep this economy strong we must take on the challenge of entitlements. social security and medicare and medicaid are commitments of conscience, and so it is our duty to keep them permanently sound. yet we're failing in that duty. and this failure will one day leave our children with three bad options: huge tax increases, huge deficits, or huge and immediate cuts in benefits. everyone in this chamber knows this to be true, yet somehow we have not found it in ourselves to act. so let us work together and do it now.  when it comes to health care, government has an obligation to care for the elderly, the disabled and poor children. and we will meet those responsibilities. for all other americans, private health insurance is the best way to meet their needs. but many americans cannot afford a health insurance policy.  and so tonight, i propose two new initiatives to help more americans afford their own insurance. first, i propose a standard tax deduction for health insurance that will be like the standard tax deduction for dependents. families with health insurance will pay no income or payroll taxes on $15,000 of their income. single americans with health insurance will pay no income or payroll taxes on $7,500 of their income. with this reform, more than 100 million men, women and children who are now covered by employer-provided insurance will benefit from lower tax bills.  at the same time, this reform will level the playing field for those who do not get health insurance through their job. for americans who now purchase health insurance on their own, this proposal would mean a substantial tax savings: $4,500 for a family of four making $60,000 a year. and for the millions of other americans who have no health insurance at all, this deduction would help put a basic private health insurance plan within their reach. changing the tax code is a vital and necessary step to making health care affordable for more americans.  my second proposal is to help the states that are coming up with innovative ways to cover the uninsured. states that make basic private health insurance available to all their citizens should receive federal funds to help them provide this coverage to the poor and the sick. i've asked the secretary of health and human services to work with congress to take existing federal funds and use them to create affordable choices grants. these grants would give our nation's governors more money and more flexibility to get private health insurance to those most in need.  it's in our vital interest to diversify america's energy supply, and the way forward is through technology. we must continue changing the way america generates electric power by even greater use of clean coal technology, solar and wind energy, and clean, safe nuclear power. we need to press on with battery research for plug-in and hybrid vehicles, and expand the use of clean diesel vehicles and biodiesel fuel. we must continue investing in new methods of producing ethanol, using everything from wood chips, to grasses, to agricultural wastes.  we made a lot of progress, thanks to good policies here in washington and the strong response of the market. and now even more dramatic advances are within reach. tonight, i ask congress to join me in pursuing a great goal. let us build on the work we've done and reduce gasoline usage in the united states by 20 percent in the next 10 years. when we do that, we will have cut our total imports by the equivalent of three-quarters of all the oil we now import from the middle east.  to reach this goal, we must increase the supply of alternative fuels, by setting a mandatory fuels standard to require 35 billion gallons of renewable and alternative fuels in 2017. and that is nearly five times the current target. at the same time, we need to reform and modernize fuel economy standards for cars the way we did for light trucks, and conserve up to eight and a half billion more gallons of gasoline by 2017.  fight against terrorism  for all of us in this room, there's no higher responsibility than to protect the people of this country from danger. five years have come and gone since we saw the scenes and felt the sorrow that the terrorists can cause. we've had time to take stock of our situation. we've added many critical protections to guard the homeland. we know with certainty that the horrors of that september morning were just a glimpse of what the terrorists intend for us, unless we stop them.  with the distance of time, we find ourselves debating the causes of conflict and the course we have followed. such debates are essential when a great democracy faces great questions. yet one question has surely been settled: that to win the war on terror we must take the fight to the enemy.  from the start, america and our allies have protected our people by staying on the offense. the enemy knows that the days of comfortable sanctuary, easy movement, steady financing and free-flowing communications are long over. for the terrorists, life since 9/11 has never been the same.  our success in this war is often measured by the things that did not happen. we cannot know the full extent of the attacks that we and our allies have prevented, but here is some of what we do know: we stopped an al qaeda plot to fly a hijacked airplane into the tallest building on the west coast. we broke up a southeast asian terrorist cell grooming operatives for attacks inside the united states. we uncovered an al qaeda cell developing anthrax to be used in attacks against america. and just last august, british authorities uncovered a plot to blow up passenger planes bound for america over the atlantic ocean. for each life saved, we owe a debt of gratitude to the brave public servants who devote their lives to finding the terrorists and stopping them.  every success against the terrorists is a reminder of the shoreless ambitions of this enemy. the evil that inspired and rejoiced in 9/11 is still at work in the world. and so long as that is the case, america is still a nation at war.  in the minds of the terrorists, this war began well before sept. 11 and will not end until their radical vision is fulfilled. and these past five years have given us a much clearer view of the nature of this enemy. al qaeda and its followers are sunni extremists, possessed by hatred and commanded by a harsh and narrow ideology. take almost any principle of civilization, and their goal is the opposite. they preach with threats, instruct with bullets and bombs, and promise paradise for the murder of the innocent.  our enemies are quite explicit about their intentions. they want to overthrow moderate governments, and establish safe havens from which to plan and carry out new attacks on our country. by killing and terrorizing americans, they want to force our country to retreat from the world and abandon the cause of liberty. they would then be free to impose their will and spread their totalitarian ideology. listen to this warning from the late terrorist zarqawi: ''we will sacrifice our blood and bodies to put an end to your dreams, and what is coming is even worse.'' and osama bin laden declared: ''death is better than living on this earth with the unbelievers among us.''  these men are not given to idle words, and they are just one camp in the islamist radical movement. in recent times, it has also become clear that we face an escalating danger from shia extremists who are just as hostile to america, and are also determined to dominate the middle east. many are known to take direction from the regime in iran, which is funding and arming terrorists like hezbollah, a group second only to al qaeda in the american lives it has taken.  the shia and sunni extremists are different faces of the same totalitarian threat. but whatever slogans they chant, when they slaughter the innocent, they have the same wicked purposes. they want to kill americans, kill democracy in the middle east and gain the weapons to kill on an even more horrific scale.  in the sixth year since our nation was attacked, i wish i could report to you that the dangers have ended. they have not. and so it remains the policy of this government to use every lawful and proper tool of intelligence, diplomacy, law enforcement, and military action to do our duty, to find these enemies, and to protect the american people.  this war is more than a clash of arms -- it is a decisive ideological struggle, and the security of our nation is in the balance. to prevail, we must remove the conditions that inspire blind hatred and drove 19 men to get onto airplanes and come to kill us. what every terrorist fears most is human freedom: societies where men and women make their own choices, answer to their own conscience and live by their hopes instead of their resentments. free people are not drawn to violent and malignant ideologies, and most will choose a better way when they are given a chance. so we advance our own security interests by helping moderates and reformers and brave voices for democracy. the great question of our day is whether america will help men and women in the middle east to build free societies and share in the rights of all humanity. and i say, for the sake of our own security, we must.  in the last two years, we've seen the desire for liberty in the broader middle east, and we have been sobered by the enemy's fierce reaction. in 2005, the world watched as the citizens of lebanon raised the banner of the cedar revolution and they drove out the syrian occupiers and chose new leaders in free elections. in 2005, the people of afghanistan defied the terrorists and elected a democratic legislature. and in 2005, the iraqi people held three national elections: choosing a transitional government, adopting the most progressive, democratic constitution in the arab world and then electing a government under that constitution. despite endless threats from the killers in their midst, nearly 12 million iraqi citizens came out to vote in a show of hope and solidarity that we should never forget.  a thinking enemy watched all of these scenes, adjusted their tactics, and in 2006 they struck back. in lebanon, assassins took the life of pierre gemayel, a prominent participant in the cedar revolution. hezbollah terrorists, with support from syria and iran, sowed conflict in the region and are seeking to undermine lebanon's legitimately elected government. in afghanistan, taliban and al qaeda fighters tried to regain power by regrouping and engaging afghan and nato forces. in iraq, al qaeda and other sunni extremists blew up one of the most sacred places in shia islam, the golden mosque of samarra. this atrocity, directed at a muslim house of prayer, was designed to provoke retaliation from iraqi shia, and it succeeded. radical shia elements, some of whom receive support from iran, formed death squads. the result was a tragic escalation of sectarian rage and reprisal that continues to this day.  iraq  this is not the fight we entered in iraq, but it is the fight we are in. every one of us wishes this war were over and won. yet it would not be like us to leave our promises unkept, our friends abandoned, and our own security at risk. ladies and gentlemen: on this day, at this hour, it is still within our power to shape the outcome of this battle. let us find our resolve, and turn events toward victory.  we're carrying out a new strategy in iraq: a plan that demands more from iraq's elected government and gives our forces in iraq the reinforcements they need to complete their mission. our goal is a democratic iraq that upholds the rule of law, respects the rights of its people, provides them security and is an ally in the war on terror.  in order to make progress toward this goal, the iraqi government must stop the sectarian violence in its capital. but the iraqis are not yet ready to do this on their own. so we are deploying reinforcements of more than 20,000 additional soldiers and marines to iraq. the vast majority will go to baghdad, where they will help iraqi forces to clear and secure neighborhoods, and serve as advisers embedded in iraqi army units. with iraqis in the lead, our forces will help secure the city by chasing down the terrorists, insurgents, and the roaming death squads. and in anbar province, where al qaeda terrorists have gathered and local forces have begun showing a willingness to fight them, we're sending an additional 4,000 united states marines, with orders to find the terrorists and clear them out. we didn't drive al qaeda out of their safe haven in afghanistan only to let them set up a new safe haven in a free iraq.  the people of iraq want to live in peace, and now it's time for their government to act. iraq's leaders know that our commitment is not open ended. they have promised to deploy more of their own troops to secure baghdad, and they must do so. they've pledged that they will confront violent radicals of any faction or political party. and they need to follow through, and lift needless restrictions on iraqi and coalition forces, so these troops can achieve their mission of bringing security to all of the people of baghdad. iraq's leaders have committed themselves to a series of benchmarks to achieve reconciliation: to share oil revenues among all of iraq's citizens, to put the wealth of iraq into the rebuilding of iraq, to allow more iraqis to re-enter their nation's civic life, to hold local elections and to take responsibility for security in every iraqi province. but for all of this to happen, baghdad must be secured. and our plan will help the iraqi government take back its capital and make good on its commitments.  my fellow citizens, our military commanders and i have carefully weighed the options. we discussed every possible approach. in the end, i chose this course of action because it provides the best chance for success. many in this chamber understand that america must not fail in iraq, because you understand that the consequences of failure would be grievous and far reaching.  if american forces step back before baghdad is secure, the iraqi government would be overrun by extremists on all sides. we could expect an epic battle between shia extremists backed by iran, and sunni extremists aided by al qaeda and supporters of the old regime. a contagion of violence could spill out across the country, and in time the entire region could be drawn into the conflict.  for america, this is a nightmare scenario. for the enemy, this is the objective. chaos is their greatest ally in this struggle. and out of chaos in iraq would emerge an emboldened enemy with new safe havens, new recruits, new resources and an even greater determination to harm america. to allow this to happen would be to ignore the lessons of sept. 11 and invite tragedy. ladies and gentlemen, nothing is more important at this moment in our history than for america to succeed in the middle east, to succeed in iraq and to spare the american people from this danger.  this is where matters stand tonight, in the here and now. i've spoken with many of you in person. i respect you and the arguments you've made. we went into this largely united in our assumptions and in our convictions. and whatever you voted for, you did not vote for failure. our country is pursuing a new strategy in iraq, and i ask you to give it a chance to work. and i ask you to support our troops in the field and those on their way.  the war on terror we fight today is a generational struggle that will continue long after you and i have turned our duties over to others. and that's why it's important to work together so our nation can see this great effort through. both parties and both branches should work in close consultation. that's why i propose to establish a special advisory council on the war on terror, made up of leaders in congress from both political parties. we will share ideas for how to position america to meet every challenge that confronts us. we'll show our enemies abroad that we're united in the goal of victory.  one of the first steps we can take together is to add to the ranks of our military so that the american armed forces are ready for all the challenges ahead. tonight i ask the congress to authorize an increase in the size of our active army and marine corps by 92,000 in the next five years. a second task we can take on together is to design and establish a volunteer civilian reserve corps. such a corps would function much like our military reserve. it would ease the burden on the armed forces by allowing us to hire civilians with critical skills to serve on missions abroad when america needs them.  this is a decent and honorable country, and resilient too. we've been through a lot together. we've met challenges and faced dangers, and we know that more lie ahead. yet we can go forward with confidence, because the state of our union is strong, our cause in the world is right, and tonight that cause goes on.  god bless.  state of the union  