iraqi official offers terms from militia to avoid fight   an iraqi official authorized to speak on behalf of field commanders for the country's most powerful militia has approached western military officials and laid out a plan to avoid armed confrontation, senior iraqi and american officials said this week.  the official is rahim al-daraji, the elected mayor of the sadr city district, the vast grid in the northeast corner of the capital that is the stronghold of the militia, the mahdi army. mr. daraji has met twice in the past two weeks with lt. gen. graeme lamb, a british officer who is the deputy commanding general in iraq, said a senior iraqi official in the office of the prime minister.  during the meetings, which took place on jan. 17 and, most recently, on monday, mr. daraji laid out a proposal from what he said were all the major political and militia groups in sadr city, the senior iraqi official said. the groups were eager to head off a major american military offensive in the district, home to two million shiites, as the americans begin a sweeping new effort to retake the streets of baghdad.  mr. daraji said in an interview that field commanders would forbid their foot soldiers to carry guns in public if the american military and the iraqi government met several basic demands, mostly involving ways to ensure better security for sadr city. he is communicating with the commanders through a shiite politician who is close to them.  ''the task is to eliminate the armed presence in sadr city,'' he said. ''to confiscate illegal weapons,'' carried openly by militia members in public places.  the talks appeared to have been the first between an intermediary for the mahdi militia and a senior commander from the american effort. the military fought the militia twice in 2004, and the militia's leader, moktada al-sadr, a renegade cleric who is virulently anti-american, has resolutely refused to meet with american officials of any kind.  even so, it was far from clear whether mr. daraji, who said he was not related to abdel hadi al-daraji, the former spokesman for mr. sadr who was arrested on murder charges last week, was even able to speak for the sprawling, grass-roots militia, which, according to american military estimates, numbers at least 7,000 in baghdad alone.  saleh al-agheli, a member of parliament from mr. sadr's political bloc, said the bloc's political committee had ''blessed and supported'' the effort by mr. daraji.  the meetings were very preliminary, officials stressed, and came as the american military was stepping up pressure on mr. sadr's militia. it was not clear how american officials received the efforts. they are already making some headway against shiite militias without help from mr. daraji and his supporters.  a spokesman for general lamb declined to comment. ''the general meets with a number of people in the course of his duty,'' he said. ''we respect the confidence of those meetings.''  the american ambassador, zalmay khalilzad, confirmed that meetings had taken place and said that mr. daraji had told representatives from the american embassy and from the military that local residents would not challenge weapons searches by american soldiers.  ''he said all the right things at this point,'' mr. khalilzad said, but added that it was too soon to tell if the offer would lead to anything more concrete.  controlling the militia -- at the heart of the new strategy president bush announced this month -- is no easy task. mr. sadr's political bloc was instrumental in installing prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki, and he has often gone out of his way to protect mr. sadr's allies.  but in recent months, mr. maliki appears to have changed his approach, mr. khalilzad said, allowing for more arrests and for the americans to apply tough military action. talks with mr. sadr had not produced the desired results, mr. khalilzad said.  ''he felt that he had exhausted and relied too much on political engagement,'' mr. khalilzad said in a news briefing. ''he became disappointed that he didn't produce as much results as he would have hoped.''  mr. daraji said he represented 14 political and military groups in sadr city. he said local residents, including mahdi army commanders, wanted to find ways to work with the americans to avoid any large-scale confrontation. commanders would tell militiamen to keep their weapons off the streets, he said, if americans agreed to certain demands.  some of the actions mr. daraji said he had requested in exchange for the promises from the militias seemed likely to draw stony stares from american military officials, namely to stop conducting raids in sadr city and to release a number of those who had been arrested.  but other demands -- to provide jobs for sadr city residents, to bring in new construction projects and to triple the number of police stations there -- seemed more realistic.  the government official, who works as an aide to mr. maliki, said he trusted mr. daraji.  ''there is an honesty with this man,'' said the official. ''the chances for success are higher than before.''  the struggle for iraq  