suicide bomb erases a fading vestige of joy in baghdad   there used to be two great joys on fridays for iraqis in baghdad: browsing the ancient bookshops, and exploring the ghazil animal market, home to an extraordinary array of creatures.  one by one, though, the storied booksellers on mutanabi street have seen business fade away, the customers fearful of crowded places.  the animal market, too, has suffered, having been reduced to a shell of its lively former self. when a bomb exploded there on friday, killing 15 people and wounding 50, it was the third such attack since june.  in the chaos after the blast, snakes slithered through bloody streets where animal carcasses were jumbled with human remains. exotic birds flew off as rescue workers tried to aid the wounded.  ''we were standing in the middle of the market, looking at the birds, and suddenly there was a massive explosion,'' said a man who gave his name as qusay, and who liked to scout for rare pigeons to breed. both his legs were broken by the explosion. he said he was taken to the hospital, where he found doctors with no supplies trying to treat ghastly wounds.  his family took him home, he said in a telephone interview, because they thought they could treat him better themselves.  the attack was about more than taking lives, residents said. it was about taking life from the living.  remarkably, the market was still frequented by sunnis and shiites, even after months of sectarian clashes. but fewer and fewer people have been showing up since the june bombing. before that first attack, merchants and regular customers said, the market had carried on mostly as it had for centuries, despite the war, poverty and the general lawlessness on the streets.  the animal dealers would arrive early in the day and set up stalls along jamhuriya street.  the bedouin would come in from the desert with scorpions and snakes and spiders, selling the venom for medicines. merchants would bring in exotic animals, monkeys, foxes and even wolves, simply to attract a crowd so they could sell their more mundane animals, like chicken, sheep, dogs and goldfish.  the sellers would do just about anything to get attention.  small birds were often painted bright colors to attract children, and fish were put in ornate glass jars to show off their brilliant colors. men gathered in alleys to watch dog and cock fights. tea and snacks were sold by wandering merchants.  birds were a big draw, with rare pigeons being particularly popular.  one vendor, an egyptian, according to witnesses, once put a chicken on a metal box and began rhythmically clapping. the chicken hopped from one foot to another, and the egyptian claimed it was the world's only dancing chicken.  but the crowd discovered a hot stone under the metal. iraq has long been a rough place and the customers, who did not appreciate the trick, beat the man badly.  on fridays, the day of rest, large crowds went to look at the animals before going to the mosque.  nearly everyone here can remember a morning spent in this way.  ''i used to breed birds, it's a hobby of mine and i used to buy and sell pigeons,'' dorid abu assad said in a telephone interview. ''every friday we would go to the market to try and find some rare kinds of pigeons. it was fun to go there and be with all the people.''  but he stopped going just before the attack in june, fearing a bombing. in that attack, 4 people were killed and 50 wounded in twin bombings. then last month, militants launched a mortar into the market, killing 3 and wounding 28.  the animal sellers tried to go on, but by this friday, residents said, the market was badly diminished. most of the more exotic animals could no longer be found, and the sellers who came were mainly just trying to scrape by marketing chickens, sheep and small birds.  the bomber disguised himself as just another bird merchant, selling pigeons, witnesses said. as the crowd leaned in for a better look at his pigeon box, he walked away and set off the bomb.  although it is impossible to know who exactly was responsible, the bombing fits a pattern of attacks by sunni extremists that have picked up in intensity as shiites prepare to celebrate ashura, one of their holiest days.  the violence on friday was not confined to the animal market. the area around haifa street, an important commercial strip, was again racked despite an effort by american and iraqi soldiers to rid the area of militants. a suicide bomber attacked an iraqi army checkpoint in the neighborhood, killing two people and wounding 14, according to an iraqi official, who said it was unclear how many casualties were soldiers.  there were 27 bodies recovered on the streets of the city, most showing signs of torture. the american military announced the death of a marine in fighting in the sunni arab anbar province.  the animal market was empty and sad. the police had sealed off the area, and the fire department had washed the blood from the streets.  the sidewalk was charred black and the splintered cages in the shops down the narrow alleyways sat empty. for this day, at least, the tumult of the bazaar had been quieted, its life drained away.  the struggle for iraq  