contributor to gossip column won't be charged   federal prosecutors have decided not to file charges against a former freelance contributor to the new york post's page six gossip column after an investigation into whether he had demanded payments for favorable coverage, a lawyer for the contributor said yesterday.  the contributor, jared paul stern, was suspended last april after the post reported that the california supermarket billionaire ronald w. burkle had complained to the authorities.  at the time, people involved in the investigation said that mr. burkle had secretly videotaped mr. stern demanding a $100,000 payment and a $10,000 monthly stipend. mr. stern was heard saying that in return, he would keep unfavorable mentions of mr. burkle out of page six.  yesterday, a person with knowledge of the decision confirmed that federal prosecutors in manhattan had decided not to prosecute mr. stern. the decision was reported on the new york observer's web site yesterday afternoon.  ''i'm relieved, obviously,'' mr. stern said. ''i was not expecting to be charged, but it's always good to have them come out and say it.''  a spokeswoman for the united states attorney's office in manhattan declined to comment. but mr. stern's lawyer, joseph tacopina, said he had been told of the decision.  ''we've always been confident that there was no evidence of any crime,'' mr. tacopina said. ''what we've said from day 1 is, this is a campaign to spread lies fueled by burkle's personal vendetta against the new york post. there was never any evidence of wrongdoing on mr. stern's part.''  after the investigation became public, associates of mr. burkle said that he had been upset about items he considered inaccurate. he set up a meeting with mr. stern, who suggested that he become a source. mr. burkle said no, the associates said, but said he would buy five dozen shirts from mr. stern's clothing line.  later, a burkle associate said when the investigation became public, mr. stern sent an e-mail message saying that mr. burkle had ''the means'' to do something about the way page six covered him. mr. stern and mr. burkle met twice more, and mr. burkle's security detail videotaped the conversations.  a spokesman for mr. burkle issued a statement yesterday that repeated that mr. stern had sought money in return for ''mr. stern's 'efforts' to stop the publication of false reports about mr. burkle.''  ''mr. burkle followed the government's instructions from the onset,'' the statement said.  ''mr. burkle didn't question their decisions previously,'' the statement said, ''and he isn't going to start doing so now.''  a spokesman for the post, howard j. rubenstein, said, ''the post is pleased that there is no crime involved.''  the post suspended mr. stern when it reported the allegations.  mr. stern said yesterday that if the post offered to reinstate him, ''i'd consider it.'' mr. rubenstein said the post would not comment on ''a personnel matter.''  after the articles about mr. burkle's recordings appeared, several law enforcement officials suggested that the news accounts had precluded federal prosecutors and f.b.i. agents from making additional recordings and possibly collecting enough evidence to make a case.  