quiet cover for a vital brew   brown is not exactly the color of excitement. to achieve a hint of glamour, brown must adopt more seductive aliases, like chestnut, cocoa or cafe au lait. unaltered, brown might as well be plain vanilla, the blah-est of moods, the charlie brownest of the ordinary. ''brown shoes don't make it,'' frank zappa sang in a more cutting assessment of this most defenseless of colors.  so how is one to talk up what the british for centuries have so doggedly called brown ale, except when they were using the alternate, equally soporific mild ale? the germans haven't done much better. their own version of brown ale, long the signature beer of the düsseldorf region in northwestern germany, is called altbier, literally old beer.  ever creative and unbeholden to tradition, american craft brewers have made the brown-ale style their own. the name, alas, remains brown.  perhaps it's left to us, the dining section's tasting panel, to rescue brown ales from marketing torpidity and reveal the vitality within, for these beers are anything but dull. yes, they are quiet, subtle and even self-effacing. more important, they are delicious, and they especially shine with food. for the tasting, florence fabricant and i were joined by two guests, richard scholz, an owner of bierkraft in park slope, brooklyn, and lew bryson, a beer writer and managing editor of malt advocate magazine.  as with great character actors who are so easy to take for granted, you have to pay close attention to brown ales to appreciate their virtue. they have roles to play -- quenching thirst, facilitating conversation, sharpening the appetite -- and they do it well. if by chance you notice the fine, almost sweet maltiness of the aroma, and the brisk, dry, mineral quality of the flavors, even better. more likely, it's the absence of these qualities in a poor example that stands out, conveying the sense of something missing.  brown ales come in more than one flavor. the british offer two styles, the crisper northern brown ale and the softer, sweeter southern ale. german altbiers tend to be earthier and fruitier, with a refreshingly bitter aftertaste. and the american brown ales; well, if it is possible to turn up the volume on this sedate style, american craft brewers will find a way, often by adding the citrus and pine aromas of american hops.  the result is a stylistic hodgepodge of beers bound primarily by their color, and even that is a stretch. for while all the beers were indeed brown, they represented every shade of brown, from copper, tawny and brick to mahogany bordering on black.  ''it's such a stylistic spectrum,'' mr. scholz said, ''that you have to evaluate them by asking what is good to drink.''  by that criterion, the very best was ellie's brown ale from the avery brewing company in boulder, colo., which had such a beautiful malt aroma that sniffing it seemed like pleasure enough. but drinking it was awfully good, too, with its interwoven flavors of smoke, fruit and minerals.  our no. 2 beer, goose island nut brown ale from chicago, had a roasted malt aroma and flavors that were elegant, deep and balanced. like the best of these ales, it made you want to keep drinking it, not much of a problem since the alcohol levels generally hover around a low 5 percent.  goose island was one of three beers with the enticing moniker nut brown, fittingly evocative of old england as it was derived from samuel smith's nut brown ale, a classic of the northern english style. smith's, a no-nonsense brew, has long been one of my favorites, offering earthy, dry flavors and a refreshing balance between malts and hops.  while our top two beers were both american, our no. 3, the long trail double bag ale from vermont, was the first to epitomize a distinctly american style, with aromas from american hops. should you wonder about the origin of the name double bag, the label's image of a well-endowed cow will resolve the issue.  domestic beers dominated our selection, with 18 american brown ales against four from germany, two from england and one from the netherlands, and they accounted for eight of our top 10 brews.  the lone german beer among our favorites was the uerige sticke alt, which is a slightly hoppier version of the traditional altbier that uerige makes several times a year. unlike some of the other imports, this beer was extremely fresh and deliciously lively. incidentally, while altbier means old beer, what it really connotes is beer made in the old style, an indication that even as most german brewers converted to lager beers in the 19th century, those in the düsseldorf area clung to their ale-making ways.  while altbiers have remained popular in germany, brown ales have become less so in britain, which may be why we could find only two. in his 2003 book, ''the brewmaster's table,'' garrett oliver of the brooklyn brewery suggests that mild brown ales, the knock-back drink of thirsty coal miners and dock workers, are not so appealing to post-industrial office workers, who are less thirsty and more aspirational.  nonetheless, they seem highly popular among americans who are unburdened by the coal-encrusted history of brown ale. brews from the ithaca beer company, brooklyn brewery and smuttynose were all superb in their own way, with ithaca and brooklyn following the quieter british style and smuttynose going all-out hoppy american.  while we had room for only 10 top beers, we liked many more as well. do not sneer at brown ales like the chocolate-inflected dogfish head, the creamy samuel adams, the fruity alaskan, the sweetly malty newcastle from britain or the hoppy southampton, whose secret ale was inspired by the uerige sticke alt.  and don't forget the netherlands brown ale either, although it is easy to miss. it comes from grolsch, better known for its lager beer in a distinctive swing-top bottle. the brown ale, fittingly, comes with a plain old bottle cap. it's fruity and refreshing, more altbier than british brown. and perhaps because it's adapting another country's beer heritage, grolsch felt free to take a marketing liberty. this brown is labeled amber ale.  tasting report: shy brown ales find their sweet voice  avery brewing company ellie's brown ale -- boulder, colo. 12 ounces: $1.50 *** 1/2 [rating: three and a half stars]  brisk, with rich malt aromas. fruit, mineral and bitter hop flavors.  goose island nut brown ale -- chicago 12 ounces: $1.50 *** [rating: three stars]  aroma of chocolate and malt; clean with good depth of flavor.  long trail double bag ale -- bridgewater corners, vt. 12 ounces: $1.75 *** [rating: three stars]  inviting, malty and refreshing, with aromas of sweet fruit and piney hops.  samuel smith's nut brown ale -- tadcaster, england 18.7 ounces: $4 *** [rating: three stars]  strong malty aroma, with dry, brisk flavors that linger. (importer: merchant du vin, tukwila, wash.)  uerige sticke alt -- düsseldorf, germany 11.2 ounces: $5.50 *** [rating: three stars]  very fresh, with aromas of chocolate and malt, and bitter, lingering flavors.  (b. united international, redding, conn.)  ithaca beer company nut brown -- ithaca, n.y. 12 ounces: $1.40 *** [rating: three stars]  pale brown with a pleasing oatlike, nutty aroma; distinct and refreshing.  brooklyn brewery brown ale -- brooklyn, n.y. 12 ounces: $1.50 *** [rating: three stars]  british style, with roasted malt aroma and minerals and nutlike flavors.  smuttynose old brown dog ale -- portsmouth, n.h. 12 ounces: $1.95 *** [rating: three stars]  dominated by piney american hop aromas, yet pleasing and refreshing.  otter creek brewing copper ale -- middlebury, vt. 12 ounces: $1.95 ** 1/2 [rating: two and a half stars]  well balanced with herbal and fruit aromas, and lingering, bitter flavors.  dick's brewing company working man's -- brown ale, centralia, wash. 12 ounces: $1.45 ** 1/2 [rating: two and a half stars]  piney hop aromas with dry malt and herbal flavors.  what the stars mean:  ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the panel's reaction to ales, which were tasted with names concealed. the panelists this week are eric asimov; florence fabricant; richard scholz, an owner of bierkraft in park slope, brooklyn; and lew bryson, a beer writer and managing editor of malt advocate magazine.  the tasted ales represent a selection generally available in supermarkets, beer distributorships and over the internet. prices are those paid in the new york region.  tasting coordinator: bernard kirsch  nytimes.com  recent wine columns from the new york times are online: nytimes.com/wine. this week, members of the panel discuss their favorite brown ales.  ales of the times  