arts, briefly   reich and rollins win polar prize  the composer steve reich, above left, and the jazz saxophonist sonny rollins, above right, were named the winners yesterday of the polar music prize of $143,000 each for their contributions to music, the associated press reported. the swedish royal academy of music, which chooses the winners, said mr. reich, 70, had ''transferred questions of faith, society and philosophy into a hypnotic-sounding music that has inspired musicians and composers of all genres.'' the academy, describing mr. rollins, 76, as ''one of the most powerful and personal voices in jazz for more than 50 years,'' cited him for raising ''the accompanied solo to the highest artistic level -- all characterized by a distinctive and powerful sound, irresistible swing and an individual sense of humor.'' the winners will receive their prizes from king carl gustav xvi in stockholm on may 21. the award was established in 1989 by stig anderson, manager of abba, through a donation to the academy.  british muslims protest film depictions  a british islamic group complained yesterday that western films as old as ''raiders of the lost ark'' in 1981 have promoted a negative stereotype of muslims, reuters reported. the group's report called upon british censors to be given expanded power to cut ''objectionable material'' and urged cultural watchdogs to be more effective in ensuring ''responsible coverage'' of muslims. ''there is no such thing as a muslim good guy,'' complained arzu merali, a co-author of the report by the islamic human rights commission. its study, attributed to responses from nearly 1,250 british muslims, said that 62 percent felt the british media were ''islamophobic,'' and 14 percent called them racist. ''cinema, both in hollywood and britain, has helped to demonize muslims,'' mr. merali said. ''they are portrayed as violent and backward. that reinforces prejudices.''  german panel rejects american's claim to posters  a special german panel yesterday rejected an american's appeal for the return of rare and valuable posters stolen from his father by the nazis, the associated press reported. as grounds for its ruling, the panel cited a compensation payment in the 1960s and a 1966 letter from hans sachs, the father of the claimant, peter sachs of sarasota, fla., in which he told a west german friend that he viewed the payment as appropriate compensation. reacting to the decision by the panel, mr. sachs, above, said, ''i am inexpressibly saddened by the recommendation made today.'' now 69, he was only a year old in 1938 when his father's collection of 12,500 posters was seized, and his family fled from germany to the united states. he had hoped to achieve the return of the remains of the collection, about 4,300 political, entertainment and advertising posters valued at $10 million to $50 million and held by the german historical museum in berlin.  no god saved for 'the queen'  a zealous novice editor cut all references to god from the academy award-nominated film ''the queen'' after he was told to cut all profanities, including blasphemy, from the version distributed to delta air lines, air new zealand and other carriers, the associated press reported. jeff klein, the president of jaguar distribution, the company that distributed the film, which stars helen mirren as queen elizabeth ii, to airlines this month, said: ''a reference to god is not taboo in any culture that i know of. we excise foul language, excessive violence and nudity.'' mr. klein said he learned of the problem when a london-bound air new zealand passenger complained, and the airline apologized. jaguar has been replacing the purged cassettes. a spokesman for miramax, producer of the film, declined to comment.  