officer who epitomized ills of ground zero workers dies   a former new york city police officer died of a lung disease last night, hours before his son attended the state of the union address to draw attention to the plight of 9/11 rescue workers like him who became ill after they were exposed to toxic dust at ground zero.  the police officer, cesar a. borja, 52, died around 6:15 p.m. at mount sinai medical center, where he was enrolled in a monitoring and treatment program for ground zero workers, said lauren woods, a hospital spokeswoman.  officer borja died of pulmonary fibrosis, a type of chronic lung disorder that involves scarring of the tissue between the air sacs.  officer borja had been in intensive care and had been accepted as a potential candidate for a lung transplant, but his critical condition, complicated by infection, precluded him being listed to receive a lung, said his physician, dr. maria l. padilla.  a congressional official briefed on the officer's case, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of federal health privacy rules, said that federal officials had approved government financing for virtually all of officer borja's care -- an acknowledgment that his condition was linked to work at ground zero.  officer borja's 21-year-old son, ceasar, had been invited to attend president bush's address as a guest of senator hillary rodham clinton. on monday at ground zero and again yesterday in washington, the young man stood next to mrs. clinton and discussed the need for federal financing for treatment of 9/11 workers.  ''it is really painful for me to be here, so close to where my father contracted this disease,'' ceasar borja said in new york on monday, wearing a dark blue coat and speaking slowly and softly. he said he was trying to stay strong for his mother and two younger siblings and added, ''9/11 did not end that day.''  last night, the son was at a dinner at bullfeathers, a capitol hill restaurant, when he received a phone call notifying him of his father's death, according to an official briefed on the situation.  four congressional aides were at the dinner, along with several other guests invited to attend the presidential address in order to draw attention to 9/11 responders. those at the dinner tried to comfort ceasar borja, the official said, and he decided to go through with his plan to attend the address.  officials warned last month that money for two major monitoring and treatment programs -- one run by mount sinai and the other by the city's fire department -- would run out in a matter of months.  representative vito j. fossella, the only republican house member from new york city, has urged white house officials to support the workers, but so far he has evidently not met with success. president bush did not mention the 9/11 workers in his address last night.  