deadly suicide bomber attack at hotel in pakistan's capital   a suicide bomber blew himself up outside a marriott hotel here on friday afternoon, killing himself and a security guard, the police and security officials said. at least five other people were wounded.  no one immediately claimed responsibility.  the attack took place in an upscale neighborhood of the pakistani capital considered to be a high-security zone.  many foreign visitors stay at the marriott, and important government and private functions are often held there. the prime minister and many of his cabinet ministers, members of parliament and diplomats live nearby.  the united states embassy issued an advisory to american citizens in the country.  ''the embassy strongly advises all americans to avoid the area, exercise caution, and limit unnecessary travel,'' the statement read.  officials and witnesses said the suicide bomber had tried to enter the hotel through an entrance near the parking area.  ''there is an emergency gate which is used by the employees of the hotel,'' brig. javed iqbal cheema, a retired officer who runs the national crisis management agency, said in an interview at the blast site.  he said the bomber appeared to have planned to force his way through the emergency gate.  ''the guard, as a matter of fact, resisted entry into the gate and did not allow him to get inside,'' he said, adding that when the bomber saw that he could not enter, he detonated his bomb there. the bomber and the guard were killed.  ''we don't know where he parked his car, but primarily he was on foot and trying to make forced entry into the hotel,'' brigadier cheema said.  officials here said the bomber's remains would be examined by forensic investigators. he is believed to have been in his mid-20s, according to initial reports.  the blast shattered the glass of several vehicles parked in the nearby parking lot.  the police cordoned off the area, and security forces were put on high alert in the city. three hotel staff members were wounded and hospitalized. no hotel guests were injured, according to a statement issued by the office of the district magistrate in islamabad.  pakistani officials said it was too early to try to determine who might be behind the attack. pakistan has experienced sporadic violence carried out by local militants and groups linked to al qaeda since president pervez musharraf allied himself with the united states in 2001 in the effort to curb terrorism.  international hotel chains like marriott and sheraton and branches of foreign companies like kfc and mcdonald's have been targets.  ''one should not speculate whether it's a reprisal or a continuation of what is going on in this country and region,'' brigadier cheema said.  the same view was echoed by tariq azim khan, the minister of state for information and broadcasting. ''it would be premature to judge the motives of the suicide bomber,'' he said.  rights activist disappears  islamabad, pakistan, jan. 26 (ap) -- a prominent human rights activist who campaigned for the release of dozens of people said to be held by pakistani intelligence agencies disappeared friday, his family and the police said.  the activist, khalid khawaja, chief coordinator of defense of human rights, disappeared from a residential area of islamabad while on his way to a mosque for morning prayers.  