at 38, same quick step and added motivation   he was born for speed. in november 1968, his father sped a camaro containing his mother through the san diego night to a hospital, where shaun palmer was born. and so began a wild ride for one of the most accomplished and versatile action-sports athletes.  palmer, in the midst of a second snowboarding comeback in a year, is at the winter x games this week, the scene of some of his greatest feats. he is tied with shaun white, the 2006 olympic champion in men's halfpipe, for the most career winter x gold medals, with six. but palmer won his medals in three sports -- snowboarding, skiing and mountain biking, a former winter and summer competition no longer contested at the games. his most recent gold came in 2001.  on saturday, he will compete in the finals of snowboardcross along with seth wescott, the gold medal winner from last year's olympics. his attempt to reach the skicross finals fell short friday during qualifying.  he is one of the oldest competitors at the games, but peter foley, his coach on the united states snowboard team, said palmer could not be counted out of any race.  ''on an everyday basis, he's the same as these guys,'' foley said about the united states team. ''but he's got the insane history of really big events and stepping up when it counts.''  palmer said he had found new focus after a string of setbacks during the past two years.  palmer's first snowboard comeback followed an overdose of drugs and alcohol may 30, 2005, when he was airlifted to a hospital in reno, nev., and spent several days in intensive care.  rather than seek treatment for substance abuse, he announced he would attempt to qualify for the winter olympics in snowboardcross, even though he had retired from snowboarding almost two years earlier to pursue a motocross career.  perhaps he shocked others, but not himself, when he made the olympic team a year ago. but days later, he tore an achilles' tendon during a world cup race, forcing him to miss the olympics.  rather than join most of his peers in retirement, palmer chose to rededicate himself to snowboarding.  ''after you od and you make the olympic team and then rip your leg in half, yeah, i want to come back and win,'' palmer said. ''after you've been through a road like that, i'm real motivated.''  palmer's career has traced the history of snowboarding itself. he grew up in south lake tahoe, calif., an incubator for snowboarding on the west coast. in 1983, at 15, he became the third snowboarder to have a pro model board. he soon dropped out of high school to pursue the life of a professional snowboarder, a lifestyle he helped shape with a punk-rock sensibility.  in those days, palmer also competed in freestyle events like halfpipe. he would often arrive at a contest in a vintage cadillac with a bottle of whiskey and take a few belts before his runs. his partying stamina impressed as much as his riding.  ''it was a pretty wild lifestyle we used to live,'' said andy hetzel, a former professional snowboarder and teammate. ''moderation was not a word in our vocabulary. for me and palm, we didn't look at our futures -- especially palm. he burned through a lot of cash.''  as action sports boomed in the 1990s, palmer was its biggest beneficiary. he was a world halfpipe champion in 1990, and in 1995 he parlayed his early success into palmer snowboards with a group of investors. it is one of the leading brands today.  but 1997 was a breakthrough year for him and his sports. palmer won the inaugural snowboardcross event at the winter x games. in 1998, he placed second at the mountain bike world championships in dual slalom. then in 2000, he won the skicross gold at the x games against professional skiers. his legend was certified, and activision rewarded him with a signature video game.  if his deeds did not speak loudly enough, palmer has been only too willing to say it himself.  ''he used to tell me how great he was after winning,'' hetzel said. ''if shaun could learn some humility after winning, that would be a giant victory.''  ever restless, palmer gave up winter sports a few years later to pursue motocross. but he never matched his previous success, which he found hard to handle.  his overdose in 2005 on alcohol, cocaine and prescription painkillers came after a motocross sponsor abandoned him.  he has been in a black mood lately, since finishing eighth at a king of the mountain snowboardcross event a week ago in beaver creek, colo. and he continues to struggle with substance abuse.  those close to palmer trace his demons to a troubled childhood. shortly after palmer's father drove his mother to a hospital, he raced out of their life for good. his mother moved to carson city, calif., to work, leaving him to be brought up by his maternal grandmother.  ''his home life was a tough one,'' said bob klein, a professional snowboarder who grew up with palmer around lake tahoe, and is now his agent.  ''he'll feel great on the podium, because he's showing his parents he amounted to something without their help,'' klein said. ''in spite of their rejection, he's a success.''  in an expletive-filled reply, palmer said recently that at his age, he no longer cared what anyone thought, adding, ''i'm just going to win, man -- that's it.''  action sports  