red storm makes its last shot count   after two poor months, st. john's has had two very good days.  about 53 hours after beating syracuse sunday afternoon, the red storm pulled off another upset in the big east last night at madison square garden. with the freshman larry wright breaking a 68-68 tie with a 3-pointer from the right wing with 10 seconds remaining, st. john's defeated no. 22-ranked notre dame, 71-68. it was the first victory of the season for st. john's against a ranked team.  this is the same st. john's (12-8, 3-4 big east) that lost four straight games before the syracuse victory, was defeated at home earlier this season by illinois state and was forced into overtime before defeating boston university.  ''i think they're starting to understand what we need to do to win,'' st. john's coach norm roberts said. ''we've got to play extremely hard and we've got to do the little things. we've got to be fundamentally sound, which we aren't all the time. when you play that hard, you have a chance to win, and that's what we're doing now.''  colin falls made one of two free throws for notre dame (16-4, 4-3 ) with 40.3 seconds left to tie the score at 68-68. on the next possession, st. john's followed roberts's instructions and got the ball inside to forward lamont hamilton. but hamilton was double-teamed, so he passed to wright. averaging only 3.9 points a game, wright, a freshman, was an unlikely candidate to have the ball in such an important situation. but he made the most important shot of his college career.  ''it felt really good when it left my hand,'' said wright, who finished with a season-high 11 points. ''i kind of knew it was good, but when it went in i was kind of shocked. i couldn't believe what had happened.''  after wright's basket, notre dame's russell carter missed a shot from well beyond the n.b.a. 3-point line and hamilton grabbed the rebound to seal the victory.  ''winning against syracuse was a big confidence booster for us,'' st. john's guard eugene lawrence said. ''we realized what we were capable of doing and what we should've been doing since the beginning of the season.''  hamilton led st. john's with 23 points, all in the first half. lawrence had 13 points, but he also had 10 turnovers.  carter led notre dame with a career-high 32 points.  for st. john's, the opening half might have been its best 20 minutes of offensive basketball this season. the red storm was in front, 49-41, at the break, led by as many as 14 points during the half and shot 59.3 percent from the field.  most of the damage was done by hamilton. at times, it seemed that he could do whatever he pleased inside. he not only had 23 points in the half, he also pulled down 5 rebounds and had 3 steals.  ''in the first half, they were playing man to man and they weren't trapping, so i took advantage of that,'' hamilton said. ''in the second half, they did a good job of slacking down on me so i made sure i kicked it out.''  notre dame started quickly in the second half. carter scored 9 straight points for notre dame to open the half, and his 3-pointer with 16 minutes 30 seconds to go gave the irish a 50-49 lead.  st. john's finally picked up its first points of the half when wright hit a 3-pointer with 13:42 to go that tied the game at 52-52. the red storm missed its first 10 shots of the half.  notre dame has struggled away from its home court all season. the irish are 14-0 at the joyce center and 2-4 elsewhere. the road losses include an 18-point loss to georgetown and a 15-point loss to villanova.  notre dame learned monday that point guard kyle mcalarney would be suspended for the semester for his arrest last month on a marijuana possession charge.  up next for st. john's is a trip saturday to pittsburgh to play the ninth-ranked panthers, who are considered the class of the big east.  college basketball  