love is up against the wall, so now it's time to fight   ''estimated time of arrival'' is not one play but five, a series of thin comic vignettes presented over the course of an economical 90 minutes that prize the sort of love consumed by its own inertia. our sympathies are toward the couple who can't get out of the ring, the kind who break plates and scream into the night and fail to see in all their ostensible passion the dull routine to which they've been condemned.  it is typically the young mind that excites at the idea of such alliances. and indeed the actors involved in ''estimated time of arrival'' seem a steep climb from middle age, at that point in life when, understandably enough, you cannot imagine moving on from the person you have loved since the first day of college, but you know that you must.  the production is presented by the thirteenth night theater company, which has as its artistic director sarah megan thomas, a 27-year-old actress who stars in more than one of the five pieces. one of them, ''split part one,'' written by the playwright and screenwriter michael weller, is about a young married couple torn by mutual jealousies.  the short play follows the couple as they wait for an acquaintance to come to dinner, an acquaintance the husband, paul (reese madigan), may or may not have slept with. witty insults are exchanged and then, inexplicably, very ugly ones. and because there is virtually nothing that seems to connect these two people, the abrupt shift in tone leaves you feeling as if you are watching ''who's afraid of virginia woolf?'' reinterpreted as an episode of ''friends.''  but ''split part one'' proves not to be as disappointing as the company's production of ''hang up,'' a play about a phone call, by anthony minghella and originally produced for the bbc radio. here it just seems a hodge-podge of confusing, groundless agonies as a profoundly grating young woman can't manage to break up with her boyfriend (who is either living a continent away or around the corner -- the staging doesn't make it clear), or manage a civil tone.  far more engaging is ''double click'' by amy fox, a young playwright who examines the traumas of meeting up after you've decided -- possibly -- to move on.  ''estimated time of arrival'' runs through feb. 10 at urban stages, 259 west 30th street; (212) 868-4444.  theater review  