q&a: ask science   natalie angier answered readers' questions regarding her first column for science times, about the nature of time.  q. working under the assumption that our numbering system is based on the number of our fingers, i've always figured if humans had been born with six on each hand we wouldn't be celebrating the millenium for another 800-odd years. but why sixty seconds, sixty minutes, and 24 hours? if the circadian clock is set to 25 hours--nearly perfect for our finger system--what nitwit came up with our current clock, and what was his reasoning? - p. hahn  a. our reliance on the number 60 in timekeeping -- 60 seconds in a minute, 60 minutes in an hour -- is a legacy of our babylonian and sumerian forebears, who apparently loved the way 60 could be divided painlessly and fraction-free by so many other numbers: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 12, 15, 20, 30. (the same sixties fixation also explains our 360-degree circle).  as for the 24-hour day, that figure is, in fact, the ''mean solar day,'' the average length of time, over the course of a year, between one noon and the next.  q. thank you for the whimsical overview of time scales provided in natalie angier's article ("making sense of time"), conveying the broad range of time-scales for events of all types, from quark orbits to cosmic big bangs.  she omitted to mention one important detail, as many readers will have noticed. she writes that the big bang "set this and all clocks ticking", but what she doesn't say is that each of those clocks keeps its own time; none of them keeps any sort of universal time. this is connected with relativity theory, and means that a clock at the farthest reaches of our expanding universe not only moves outward much more rapidly than one nearer the centre of the original big bang; it is also ticking much more slowly than a clock that hasn't been accelerated to quite such a dizzying speed. any dramatic acceleration, whether due to gravity or some other force, would have such a result.  if we could bring two such clocks into one room and set them on a table side by side, we would see the graphic refutation of our commonsense view of time as a broad flowing river that carries people and things along with it in a straight line. each timepiece keeps its own time. on our everyday human scale, the differences in acceleration and speed tend to be so modest (compared with the cosmic scale) that we don't notice the difference, even if we compare a couch potato's wristwatch with that worn by an airline pilot. the slippage is infinitesimal, so we ignore it; but it is there, even so. and on the cosmic scale it dominates the entire picture. - e. friesen  a. you are absolutely right that, as albert einstein showed, there is no such thing as absolute time, no background clock or final arbiter against which we can measure events. my omission of this and so many other fascinating notions about the nature of time boils down to a lack of that other partner in the great space-time continuum, viz, column inches.  i had to cut out a lot of good jokes, too.  q. just as a footnote to your excellent commentary about the nature of time, and certainly not meant as a criticism: the earth's current day length (about 24 hours) is just a snapshot that happens to coincide with human existence. the earth's rotation is constantly slowing due to "tidal drag" (caused by the moon's and the sun's gravity effects on earth) such that the earth's daily rotation used to take a mere 8 hours and will, eons from now, slow to a complete stop sometime before our sun explodes. as you know, i'm sure, the length of an earth day is entirely independent of the length of an earth year -- and when the rotation finally stops altogether (relative to the sun), an earth day will be precisely as long as an earth year (relative to nearby star positions). and two more interesting tidbits: (1) the length of a second will never change because it is, as you correctly noted, defined with reference to the oscillations of the cesium atom which -- so far as we know -- will never change. (of course "never" is a heck of a long time.) and (2) our moon is also slowing in terms of its orbit around the earth -- a consequence of the energy it expends in the course of creating the earth's tidal drag. accordingly, the moon is -- by necessity -- "drifting" farther and farther from the earth as its orbit slows (current distance: about 240,000 miles). as it gets farther from the earth, the earth's gravity force on the moon and the moon's gravity force on the earth will become so weak that the two celestial bodies may some''day'' part company forever. time and tide waits for no man. at least not at the moment. - e. rogalin  a. you are correct that our day has lengthened over the eons as a result of the slowing of earth's rotation, mostly from the chronic tugging of the moon. if not for the moon, earth would spin considerably faster, and our days might be a mere five or six hours long. however, the discrepancies between our current and primordial day lengths, or between earth's day length and that of saturn or neptune, are insignificant compared to the extraordinary differences in scale that distinguish our time from subatomic or cosmic times.  q. you say: "the fundamental quivers of the atom 'are exceedingly regular,' ...our beloved second, once defined as a fraction of a solar day, is now officially linked to oscillations in a cesium atom."  this makes me wonder: do cesium atoms oscillate in synch? some of them, all of them, none of them? - t. helck  a. the technical definition of a second is now the duration of 9,192,631,770 periods of radiation between two hyperfine levels of the cesium 133 atom in its ground state, at 0 degrees kelvin. in other words, these are the fundamental oscillations of a cesium atom when it's as close to standing still as an atom can get. if you were to excite the atom, say, by heating it up or zapping it with light, its periodicity, the behavior of its component particles and the tiny fields by which they interact, would change accordingly. in real life, outside of extremely well-controlled laboratory conditions, atoms are almost never in this sort of super-cooled ground state.  q. i am a grade 11 student and i have a question about time. does time really exist as an entity or is it an idea that we have given to a succession of events (changes) in order to help us cope and understand them according to our pattern of knowing? yes, changes take place and will keep taking place, but to say that there is such a thing as time is, to my way of thinking, a logical mistake. it is one thing to understand change and another to attribute it to an idea that we have made up-time. also, this idea of change, does it apply to an immaterial level of reality? for example, the very idea 'time' belongs to a realm of ideas along with such greats as 'love', 'truth', 'justice', 'beauty', etc. even though there have been changes to these over the centuries they remain fairly consistent.  is this realm immune to time? when two people are in love and they say that "time stands still" for them i realize that they might be speaking metaphorically, but are they not talking about psychological time? and is psychological time not related to the idea of the eternal? - m. topic  a. the study of time perception -- how we perceive the passing of time - is a surprisingly neglected field of research. nevertheless, there is some evidence that the brain's basic ''start'' and ''stop'' buttons, the neural centers in charge of estimating the duration of everyday events, are responsive to stress hormones like cortisol and to neurotransmitters like dopamine and serotonin. if so, that could explain why our sense of time gets out of whack, seems to stand still or passin a flash, during extreme experiences like car crashes or falling in love, when our body is flooded in hormones of fight, flight, terror and joy.  