a fund giant not fretting about no. 1   in october, investments in mutual funds passed the $10 trillion mark, according to the investment company institute. the mutual fund company vanguard, based in valley forge, pa, has more than $1.1 trillion of that amount under management. last year, congress passed the pension protection act, which aims to encourage savings for education and retirement. for instance, the tax benefits for 529 plans, due to expire in 2010, are now permanent, as are the recent increases for yearly individual retirement account and 401(k) contributions.  vanguard's chairman and chief executive, john brennan, 52, spoke recently about these developments, the financial services industry and the small investor. following are excerpts:  q. how is vanguard's wealth management advisory services business affected by schwab's recent sale of its wealth management group, u.s. trust, to bank of america?  a. it doesn't change the competitive landscape for vanguard. we're competitively aware, but not competitively reactive. our business with our high-net-worth clients continues to grow from a product and service standpoint and is responsive to clients. we're not going to have local branches or do a lot of what wealth management entails.  q. similarly, vanguard is known for its low fee structure, but aren't you concerned about the rise of hourly fee financial advisers?  a. we actually think it's a good thing. we have a growing business with financial advisers. our diversified low-cost investment options dovetail well with the advisory community. from an adviser standpoint, the world has advanced from ''let me advise you on these three stocks'' to asset allocation. when you get to that, you want diversified vehicles to use.  q. what about competition from other companies that are lowering their fees?  a. it's a natural evolution in the marketplace. fees would have to come down.  q. vanguard is among the largest asset management companies in the world. is your goal to surpass fidelity as the largest mutual fund company?  a. we get asked that a lot. no. we want to provide the absolute best value to our clients and if that hits home with them, great. we've never had a growth objective and don't intend to have one. we're owned by our clients, which is unique, and don't spend time thinking about where we're positioned in the rankings.  q. you're starting your 12th year as c.e.o. of vanguard. to what do you owe your longevity?  a. i'm very fortunate personally. i absolutely love what i do. it's easy to stay energized. but being c.e.o. is not an individual job.  q. do you think we've seen the last of the big wall street scandals?  a. i hope so. there are cycles in all parts of business. the dot-com cycle got overextended, and the financial markets got overextended. i'm optimistic, though. things like sarbanes-oxley have helped.  q. so sarbanes-oxley has done what it set out to do, and offers enough controls on investment firms?  a. it's not perfect, but i'm a fan. as an investor, we feel the best we have in years about the financial statements we use to make decisions. the integrity of financial statements leads to the integrity of the markets, which leads to confidence.  q. what do you see happening in the industry as a result of the pension protection act of 2006?  a. i think you'll see a huge uptake in the employer community, which will create a better sense within the employee community and the public at large that they're on the right path.  q. more states are making personal finance a requirement for high school graduation. are you optimistic about schools teaching financial literacy to coming generations?  a. i say yes, with a little hesitancy. it's been a hole in the curriculum. we've sponsored some initiatives with think tanks and other groups. one thing schools can do is rely on members of the community to help, to go in and talk about how to buy that first house or avoid credit card debt, for instance.  one day one of my children said to me, ''dad, i have to pass a swimming test to graduate from college, but i don't have to have a clue about credit cards or how to balance a checkbook.'' that's a telling statement.  an extended version of this interview is online at nytimes.com/business.  saturday interview  