first-time all-stars put their stamp on game   alex ovechkin did not waste time in breaking down the race to become the national hockey league's most valuable player. all he had to do was look to the seat next to him, which was occupied by sidney crosby.  ovechkin, the washington capitals' wing, and crosby, the pittsburgh penguins' center, shared top billing at the 55th n.h.l. all-star game and added to the hype by skating on the same eastern conference line here at the american airlines center.  but once the puck dropped wednesday night, they and others on this season's crowded m.v.p. marquee were regulated to assisting roles while a crop of first-time all-stars dominated.  led by two goals apiece from phoenix's yanic perreault, minnesota's brian rolston, chicago's martin havlat and columbus's rick nash, the western conference cruised to a 12-9 victory over the eastern conference. rolston and havlat were making their all-star debuts and nash was playing in his second all-star game. buffalo's daniel brière, with a goal and four assists for the east, was named the game's most valuable player. he fell one point short of tying mario lemieux for the most points in an all-star game.  in all, nine players making their first all-star game appearance scored, five from the west and four from the east. the east's ovechkin and west's teemu selanne were the only players among the league's top 10 scorers who had a goal.  the all-star game was heralded as the coming-out party for crosby, the 19-year-old star, but he failed to score a point. he and ovechkin, 21, are among about a dozen players considered candidates for the m.v.p. award, although ovechkin apparently already knows the winner.  ''crosby,'' ovechkin quickly quipped while sharing an interview stage with crosby before the game.  ''there's too many guys right now,'' crosby said of the quest to be m.v.p. ''i mean, the best answer would be ovechkin, right?''  ''there's so many guys who have had great first halves, and whether or not teams make the playoffs, that makes a difference too,'' crosby continued. ''you want to have someone that really helps their team get to that next level and be a winning team. it's too hard to tell.''  the all-star game was not the place to start an m.v.p. campaign, the ice filled at any one time with three or four players likely to be among top vote getters. but the newcomers quickly took control, scoring 7 of the first 12 goals.  ''this is just a showcase,'' colorado's joe sakic said. ''it's what you do for your team down the stretch.''  the event is mostly a sharpshooting contest in which goaltenders are used for target practice. in 13 of the 14 all-star games before this one, at least one team had taken 40 or more shots.  ''there wasn't too much strategy when you have the ability to put great players over the boards on every shift,'' west coach randy carlyle of anaheim said. ''as far as crosby was concerned, i thought some of the older players in the league really showed their worth.''  look beyond crosby and ovechkin -- who are among the leading scorers in the league -- and potential m.v.p. talent appears spread evenly across both conferences.  the rangers' brendan shanahan? anaheim's teemu selanne? maybe detroit's nicklas lidstrom or buffalo's brière? perhaps san jose's joe thornton might repeat as the hart trophy winner?  sakic, the 2001 m.v.p. who joined tampa bay's martin st. louis, the league's no. 2 scorer this season, and thornton as the only former hart trophy winners on the all-star game rosters, has never seen such a crowded stage at midseason. sakic's four assists gave him 16 for his career and moved him ahead of mark messier (14).  he points to a rise in team and individual parity. no longer does a singular superstar dominate a season as wayne gretzky or mario lemieux did in their primes.  ''now there's so many different players leading their teams, and it all depends on how the teams do,'' sakic said. ''a lot is going to happen in the second half.''  thornton, last season's m.v.p., believes goaltenders should be given extra consideration when it comes to voting by the professional hockey writers association. as an example, he cited vancouver goaltender roberto luongo, who has tightened the patchwork canucks defense with a 2.38 goals against average and helped them reach a tie for first place of the northwest division.  luongo started for the western conference and allowed 3 goals while facing 12 shots during his first-period stint. although he and his fellow goaltenders were simply trying to keep the score from reaching double digits, he represents how far flung the wealth has been spread in the league.  hockey  