reader responses   the following are excerpts of reader responses to david leonhardt's jan. 24 column on the economics of illness prevention:  david leonhardt unfortunately perpetuates the big lie most of us tell ourselves concerning health care, when he writes about "the current american medical system." there is no such "system," unless a system can be defined as a collection of disparate, disorganized elements, often functioning at cross purposes to each other. we do ourselves a terrible disservice by claiming that there is anything systematic about american health care, over all.  dr. valentin fuster, quoted in the article, offers a more accurate term: "it's a disaster." it will continue to be a catastrophe until we do actually construct a health care "system," rather than a mess of non-systematic, poorly adhering band-aids. every time we repeat the great "system" lie, we delay progress toward health care disaster relief.  - michael mckernan  thank you for your article. i have been a family physician for 26 years and i know how costly it is to prevent disease. in family medicine, we can manage 90% of what our patients have and naturally we try to address the big killers (smoking, diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia). but we can also manage the pain in the back, cough, rash, funny-looking moles, and so on. so, when my quadruple threat patient is in the room i can deal with what he or she wants to address -- that is, the things that bother them now -- or the things that will kill or disable them later.  there is a ceiling on what i can collect for my time. insurers will not pay me for the hour needed to address problems properly. insurers will not question the angioplasty, or repeat angioplasty, or coronary bypass when angioplasty fails, or heart transplant when all else fails (this scenario actually happens in my practice) or the kidney transplant when a heart finally works and now the same things that killed the first heart is killing the kidneys.  it takes a constant dedication to doing what is right to continue to address the risks for cardiovascular disease. if dr. agatston were not earning money on his publications, as your article implies, he would be doing catheterizations and stress tests to earn his living, that's for sure. prevention does not pay.  - john j. messmer  please review medical school curriculae: m.d. candidates do not learn how to heal and prevent illness, they learn to treat the symptoms of illness.  turning the medical profession's pay & incentive program on its head by rewarding better results (i.e., a patient population that lives longer, healthier lives,) is a bit too utopian - it sounds a bit too much like common sense. a movement like this would be akin to tearing the shroud in the hallowed hall of the american medical association.  - daniel lowry  excellent story, and a critical issue. it is astonishing how few insurers provide wellness stipends for employers and/or self-employed  - mark b. solomon  are insurance companies just stupid? don't they understand how good an investment it is to spend a small amount on prevention instead of giant amounts on treatment?  maybe the insurers are just stupid, but maybe they're just smart. if an insurer disburses $100 for preventive care on me today, does it save a $1000 on treatment for me in five years? not if i change jobs and my new employer uses a different insurance company. not if i keep the same job and my employer switches insurance companies.  job mobility currently means insurance mobility. why would an insurer make an investment today when there is a high probability that a competitor will enjoy the return? universal insurance via private insurance doesn't solve this if people can switch carriers (maintain "freedom of choice").  - r. m. erik gordon  did you see mcdonald's made $1.2 billion in profits in one quarter? what is that the 99-cent sandwich really costing us in future healthcare costs, especially since mcdonald's customer base is more likely to be uninsured?  - paul im  i have a suggestion to simplify things. do as the chinese do and pay your doctor to keep you healthy. if you get sick, he pays you. there is an incentive to wellness, not sickness.  - john l. benson  i enjoyed your article on prevention, but how come you did not look at the dean ornish program for reversing heart disease? his organization is the preventative medicine research institute and he has been doing this research for 30+ years. i know many people whose lives have been changed by the program.  - jim venturi  does the coaching and personal care have to be rendered by doctors and nurses who are highly compensated and whose time is in great demand? if the approach has so much potential to save lives, save us from surgery, and, yes, save money, then why not create a new role for coaches who are specially trained in this field? what if a corporate division had a health coach, who with proper releases from employees, was looped in to medical tests results such as cholesterol counts, heart problems and other related issues? the coaches could be the ones providing the information, coaching, encouragement, goal setting and tlc. same objectives achieved at far less cost.  - marshall tarley  your message that preventative care is not properly incentivized for physicians is definitely long overdue and underappreciated. while it is important to motivate health care providers to push for preventative measures that work, patients need to do their "homework" too. too often, physicians face a public that wants to have their cake and eat it too. how can preventative measures work for those patients who continue to abuse tobacco, overeat, or are not compliant with their medications. those patients who work hard to maintain their health should be incentivized to do so monetarily. physicians are now being asked to participate in a "pay for performance" model where certain clinical behavior is rewarded by third party payers. wouldn't preventative measures work best if our patients are incentivized as well with their version of "pay for performance"?  -charles h. koo, md  great article. i'm afraid the problem isn't just confined to america. here in the uk, when i went to the doctor on an unrelated issue and asked if there are health screenings that i should undergo to identify potential health issues, i was told that unless i'm above a certain age (i'm 31 but think that if i wait for the body to start failing, it is too late to make those changes which need to be made now, really) the national health service does not cover any tests. the only test that has proven to save lives which i will be allowed to take is a pap smear.  grrr...private medical insurance will screen (via basic blood tests) but it will cost £250 on top of the insurance premium?! surely we should be rewarded for wanting to know where we stand health and fitness wise. i suspect they think i'm one of the worried well.  - hazel tan  there are two achievable and rapidly emerging, themes that will drive rapid change in the way health care is delivered. first and foremost, we must make consumers more accountable (financially) for making better health choices. second, we must provide the tools with which they can make those choices.  the is a mounting pile of evidence to suggest that consumers will change their health behavior with even small financial incentives (penalties) to encourage them. as your article suggests, there is also a growing amount of data to suggest that prevention works. thus, if we create real accountability on the part of the consumer and we provide the tools with which they can practice prevention, the results will be powerful. prevention is relatively cheap and it does not need to be delivered by a doctor or in a hospital. it can be delivered by lower cost providers (nurses, pharmacists, exercise and nutrition specialists, etc.) outside of a doctors office or health center.  there is no quick or easy fix to the complex problems facing our nations health care system. however, there are clear and proven steps that can begin to address the root issues.  -brooks o'neil  i broke my arm falling into a ditch in kyoto 6 yrs ago. my husband, who is an internist/non-invasive cardiologist, took one look at my rapidly swelling arm, and we found a hospital near our hotel. for $150 i got 4 x-rays; consultation with the chief of orthopedics who had done some training in maryland and spoke enough english; a sling to immobilize the arm; and enough pain medication to last the remaining 10 days of our trip. oh, and my husband was offered a cup of green tea my husband was offered while he waited for the meds at the attached pharmacy. there was no insurance involved, and it took about 1 1/2 hrs from start to finish. so i'm a believer in universal single-payer health care.  - sue lyon  as the precursors of heart disease are present to the eye in the aortas of teenagers (bogalusa heart study), we have to start teaching the science of prevention in primary school. it may be too late if we wait till one is an adult. i argue that learning how the body works and what makes it stop working is exciting science. it should be a major part of our school's curriculum, along with how to feed your genome to prevent what killed most of your relatives and will kill half of you. we all need to become pretty good preventive health doctors for our own bodies.  -c.e. grim md  