judge puts settlement on katrina in question   a federal judge in mississippi, citing the need for more information, has rejected -- at least temporarily -- a settlement by state farm insurance that was expected to provide several hundred million dollars to help policyholders rebuild homes destroyed by hurricane katrina 17 months ago.  in an eight-page order, judge l. t. senter jr. of federal district court in gulfport, miss., said he was rejecting the agreement because it did not provide enough information for him to conclude that it was ''fair, just, balanced and reasonable.''  state farm said last night that it had expected the agreement to be approved and that it now looked forward to addressing the judge's concerns.  the lead trial lawyer in the case, richard f. scruggs, and mississippi officials also expected court approval.  last night, mr. scruggs and jim hood, the attorney general of mississippi, said they were optimistic that the agreement would be revived. mr. hood said he was confident that state farm would ''fix the things that need to be fixed.''  in the agreement, state farm said it would pay at least $130 million to policyholders and participants in the negotiations and said costs to the insurer could increase by another $600 million. the state farm settlement was expected to be a model for other insurers to use in seeking settlements, which would help jump-start the lagging recovery of mississippi's coast.  the dispute with state farm and other insurance companies centered on the insurers' refusal, as stated in their policies, to pay for damage from the heavy flooding -- driven by the high winds of hurricane katrina -- that swept over the mississippi coast on aug. 29, 2005. some insurers refused not only to pay for flood damage, but declined to pay for harm to houses that had been battered by wind and waters.  even so, the insurers paid $5.3 billion for wind damage to more than 330,000 homes in mississippi and $10.3 billion for nearly a million homes in louisiana. the rejected settlement did not include homeowners in louisiana.  the settlement, which was announced on tuesday, was twofold. one part settled 640 lawsuits arising from the hurricane for $80 million; the other required state farm to reopen up to 35,000 damage claims that state officials and trial lawyers said had been underpaid. in that part, state farm had agreed to pay at least $50 million.  judge senter's order dealt exclusively with the second part, the reopening of the damage claims. it was not clear whether the settlement of the 640 lawsuits would proceed. but during the negotiations, participants said that state farm had refused to settle unless both the lawsuits and the 35,000 damage claims were parts of one agreement.  a spokesman for state farm, phil supple, said yesterday that the two elements were separate. but he would not respond to questions seeking to clarify the linkage and whether the entire agreement might be scuttled if the judge's concerns about the 35,000 damage claims could not be resolved. in an interview, mr. scruggs said he expected the settlement of the 640 lawsuits to stand, partly because state farm has already paid the first installment.  ''we're going to start dispersing those settlement funds next week,'' mr. scruggs said.  as part of the overall settlement, mr. hood, the mississippi attorney general, agreed to drop a criminal investigation into state farm's handling of hurricane damage claims and to remove the company from a civil lawsuit accusing it and other insurers of treating policyholders unfairly.  mr. hood said he was continuing the lawsuit against other insurers. on thursday he urged other insurance companies to follow state farm's lead, to settle hundreds of other lawsuits and to reopen thousands of storm damage claims.  in rejecting the agreement, judge senter raised concerns about a lack of detail on how much money policyholders might receive. he noted that state farm had agreed to pay at least $50 million for reopened claims. but, he said, ''there is no way i can ascertain how this sum compares to the total claims'' of the approximately 35,000 homeowners, nor ''how thinly this large sum may be spread.''  he said he was also troubled about the potential unfairness of an arbitration process intended by the negotiators to provide an appeals process for homeowners who requested that their claims be re-evaluated. he said that under the agreement, arbitration hearings were to be limited to two hours and that there was no apparent provision for legal representation for homeowners.  judge senter said the agreement also failed to provide information on what the lawyers had done to justify an agreed-upon payment of up to $20 million in relation to reopening the 35,000 damage claims. the lawyers are to receive another $26 million for settling the 640 lawsuits.  carl tobias, a professor at the university of richmond school of law, said he thought judge senter was being ''extraordinarily careful to attempt to protect the interests of all the homeowners.''  professor tobias said he did not think the settlement ''was all over,'' but, he added: ''a lot of work has to be done to satisfy this judge.''  