senators say 2 resolutions on troop plan should merge   senate critics of president bush's troop buildup in iraq suggested tuesday that competing resolutions opposing the plan should be merged in an effort to attract the largest bloc of senators in a strong statement of congressional dissent.  as they prepared for the senate foreign relations committee to consider the issue on wednesday, both democrats and republicans said the two bipartisan resolutions were in fundamental agreement on objecting to the troop increase.  ''the resolutions are so close in terms of the key issue: whether or not we support an increase in military involvement and increasing the number of troops in iraq or not,'' said senator carl levin, the michigan democrat who is the chairman of the armed services committee and a co-author of one proposal. ''there are other language issues, obviously, but they are not particularly significant. the likeness and the similarities far, far, far outweigh any language differences.''  senator harry reid of nevada, the democratic leader, said a hybrid version of the resolutions would produce a clearer sign of the depth of opposition to the president's plan than either of the proposals could individually. ''the bottom line is that the situation we have is unacceptable, and both resolutions clearly indicate that,'' mr. reid said.  but senator john w. warner, republican of virginia and lead author of the other proposal, said he saw important distinctions between them. he said he was not prepared to enter any negotiations until after he saw wording approved by the foreign relations committee.  ''i think there is substantial difference,'' mr. warner said tuesday, adding that his approach puts more emphasis on specific benchmarks to assess progress in iraq and calls for military rules of engagement to reflect that american forces are not to play a role in sectarian violence. ''there is a lot in ours that is not in the other one.''  the proposal from mr. warner and senators susan collins, republican of maine, and ben nelson, democrat of nebraska, also declares that the president is the commander in chief and that it is not the senate's intent to contravene his authority -- wording that drew the attention of some lawmakers.  ''history tells us that congress does have power when it comes to the president's authorities as commander in chief,'' said senator richard j. durbin of illinois, the no. 2 democrat in the senate. he and others said democrats also raised questions about whether the warner proposal would allow troops to be increased in areas outside baghdad, particularly in anbar province, which ms. collins and others have said is a hub for activities of al qaeda.  senate republican officials acknowledged that the prospect of one bipartisan resolution emerging was troubling in a political sense because it held the potential to attract significant numbers of republicans and nearly all democrats, producing a vote that would be a major embarrassment to mr. bush as he seeks to sell his iraq plan.  on tuesday, senator gordon h. smith, republican of oregon, announced that he would sign on to the warner resolution. supporters of mr. bush's strategy used a senate armed services committee confirmation hearing on tuesday to raise the prospect that any resolution expressing opposition to the strategy could bolster insurgents in iraq and demoralize the american military. other lawmakers dismissed the idea.  senator joseph r. biden jr., democrat of delaware and chairman of the foreign relations committee, has said he is open to changes in the resolution he drew up with mr. levin and senator chuck hagel, republican of nebraska. the panel will consider the proposal on wednesday, and it could be sent to the senate floor quickly.  the reach of war  