with dna from exhumed body, man finally wins freedom   roy brown, who spent 15 years in prison on a murder conviction and uncovered evidence while there that linked another man to the crime, was released from prison on tuesday after dna tests on the other man's exhumed body matched saliva on a nightshirt at the crime scene.  after 15 years behind bars, mr. brown stepped out of court into a light snowfall and gently pushed his way through a cluster of relatives who vied for his attention. the reception was fine, he said, but he is too sick with liver disease to stand on his feet for long.  ''changes have got to be made, man,'' mr. brown said later at a lawyer's office across the street, answering questions in a monotone as he rested awkwardly in a black swivel chair. ''they say the wheels of justice move slowly, but you know what? the wheels of justice are flat.''  mr. brown, 46, is the eighth person in new york state exonerated through dna evidence in the past 13 months, more than in any other state during the same period.  the dna tests that freed him confirmed the results of his own jailhouse investigation, in which he discovered documents that incriminated barry bench, a volunteer firefighter, in the murder of sabina kulakowski, 49, a social worker who had lived with mr. bench's brother until months before her death.  earlier dna tests conducted by mr. brown's lawyers linked mr. bench's daughter, katherine eckstadt, to the genetic code lifted from the saliva on ms. kulakowski's nightshirt.  mr. bench jumped to his death in front of an amtrak train in 2003, five days after mr. brown mailed him a letter accusing him of the crime.  the cayuga county district attorney, james b. vargason, ordered mr. bench's body exhumed after a hearing here last month during which judge peter e. corning declined to vacate mr. brown's conviction. mr. vargason, who prosecuted the case in 1992, argued that the earlier dna tests were irrelevant without a paternity test proving that mr. bench was miss eckstadt's father.  but on tuesday, mr. vargason joined the defense's motion to release mr. brown, and judge mark h. fandrich, who took over the case upon judge corning's retirement, offered an apology before setting mr. brown free.  ''i'm sorry it's taken such a long time for you to come to this day,'' judge fandrich said. ''i'm happy for you and your family. good luck to you, sir.''  one of mr. brown's lawyers, nina morrison, said he has no money, does not know where he is going to live, and suffers from hepatitis c and cirrhosis of the liver.  he had been released from jail just days before ms. kulakowski's slaying, after serving eight months for threatening another social worker in her office, a man who had ordered mr. brown's daughter removed from his home. he did not know ms. kulakowski, who was found bitten, stabbed, beaten and strangled on may 23, 1991, outside the farmhouse where she lived in the town of aurelius.  some new information was disclosed in court on tuesday. peter j. neufeld, another of mr. brown's lawyers, said that peter j. pinckney, who investigated the murder, had dismissed a firefighter's suspicions about mr. bench's involvement because he knew mr. bench and thought him incapable of killing anyone. mr. pinckney was later elected sheriff of cayuga county but resigned in 2002 after pleading guilty to stealing from a drug investigation fund.  also revealed on tuesday was that one of the nation's leading forensic odontologists, dr. lowell levine, analyzed the bite marks on ms. kulakowski's body before trial and told the district attorney at the time, paul a. carbonaro, that the one mark he could interpret ''excluded'' mr. brown, according to copies of dr. levine's handwritten notes. but mr. carbonaro never asked dr. levine to file an official report, mr. brown's lawyers said tuesday. instead, the prosecutors relied on another expert, a local dentist, whose testimony helped convict mr. brown.  even as he supported mr. brown's release, mr. vargason said he would not dismiss the indictment against him, and that he needs another month to reinvestigate the case so as to ''follow avenues of inquiry that were possibly underdeveloped or even ignored in 1991.'' judge fandrich will rule on the indictment on march 5.  meanwhile, mr. brown said he will work on ''picking up the pieces.'' after his release, he went out to eat lasagna with his stepfather and siblings.  as he was about to leave court, mr. brown blurted out, ''i can't wait to play pac-man.'' he looked sorely disappointed when one of his nieces, a perky teenager, told him that the popular 1980s arcade game is now a collector's item.  