house restores some voting rights to congressional delegates   the democratic majority in the house restored limited floor voting rights to the congressional delegates from the district of columbia and four territories on wednesday after a rancorous debate with echoes of the days before the republicans won the majority in 1994.  the change approved on a party-line vote of 226 to 191 was mostly symbolic because the five delegates will be allowed to vote just on floor amendments, not on final approval of bills.  if their votes influence the outcome on amendments, a new vote will be taken without their participation.  the return of the privileges, first allowed by democrats in 1993 and rescinded by republicans in 1995, resulted in republicans' pouring out their frustration about their treatment by democrats in the first weeks of congress. the sour mood threatened efforts at forging a more cooperative relationship between the parties.  ''we've extended the hand of friendship to each other in hopes of working together for the common good,'' representative john a. boehner of ohio, the republican leader, said as he accused democrats of trampling house rules. ''unfortunately, the hand of friendship is being slapped away by the actions of the majority.''  democrats responded by suggesting that republicans were demeaning the role of the delegates who represent the virgin islands, guam, puerto rico and american samoa and refusing to recognize that the five million residents of those territories and the district of columbia deserve representation on the house floor.  democrats noted that residents of the territories were among the people being killed and wounded in iraq.  ''the house is ordained to be a marketplace of ideas,'' speaker nancy pelosi said. ''we should work to expand democracy, not limit it.''  delegate eni f. h. faleomavaega, democrat of american samoa, bristled at republican gibes that he would be able to vote on the floor when he represents 60,000 residents compared with the approximately 600,000 in a typical congressional district.  ''i am saddened this has gotten to the point where we are caught in this crossfire,'' mr. faleomavaega said about the broader dispute over democratic management of the house.  republicans said the proposal on delegate voting was one more democratic initiative rushed to the floor without committee hearings. they called it an unconstitutional power grab and derided it as ''representation without taxation,'' because residents of the territories do not pay federal income taxes though residents of the district of columbia do.  ''under this rule, the majority party could seat anybody in the house,'' said representative tom price, republican of georgia.  referring to the chairman of the national democratic party, mr. price asked: ''who is next? howard dean? he has a significant constituency.''  republicans used similar tirades at democrats, accusing them of arrogance in their operation of the house when they instituted delegate voting rights in 1993. a court challenge failed when a judge ruled that the voting was essentially meaningless and thus was not unconstitutional. on taking control of the house, republicans reversed the rule.  in their winning midterm campaign, democrats promised to treat the republicans more fairly than the republicans treated the democrats in their 12 years in the majority.  