u.s. picks an inauspicious time to restart mideast talks   it would be hard to imagine a less promising moment for the united states to restart serious palestinian-israeli peace negotiations.  six years after the last such talks, the palestinian government is controlled by hamas, which preaches israel's destruction. approval ratings for the israeli prime minister are barely in double digits. gaza and neighboring lebanon are in turmoil. president bush is weak.  yet the administration is holding a meeting on feb. 2 of the so-called quartet, whose other members are the european union, russia and the united nations, to be followed by ''informal talks'' between israeli and palestinian leaders, with help from secretary of state condoleezza rice, about the shape of a final peace treaty and the nature of a palestinian state beside israel.  the americans are responding to pleas for re-engagement from the european union, the palestinian president and moderate arab nations.  but expectations are purposely low. ms. rice and her israeli counterpart, foreign minister tzipi livni, have borrowed a phrase from frustrated palestinians and speak only of providing ''a political horizon'' to the two parties. they have been vague about the content and the path.  the european union foreign policy chief, javier solana, has no doubt what he wants to see.  ''it's time to enter final status talks, it's time to enter a discussion of the end of the conflict,'' he said in an interview. ''the crisis-management approach to the israeli-palestinian conflict is over. we need to enter the conflict-resolution stage and try to end the occupation of 1967.''  but the european union does not run the quartet; the americans do.  the main aim, senior american officials suggest, is to increase palestinian confidence in a two-state solution and thereby elevate those palestinians who advocate such a solution -- mahmoud abbas, the president of the palestinian authority, and his fatah movement -- and hope to undermine the appeal of hamas, which rejects a permanent peace with israel.  ms. rice also hopes that new american involvement and leadership will help its arab allies like egypt, jordan and saudi arabia, let alone the fragile government in lebanon, which fear the growing influence of iran and syria, supporters of hamas and its shiite lebanese counterpart, hezbollah.  while it is unlikely that either ehud olmert, the israeli prime minister, or mr. abbas has the political strength to deliver big concessions, ''sometimes it's best to try to buy in at the bottom,'' a senior american official said.  israelis are nervous about the coming talks, and see them as part of the growing internal rivalry between mr. olmert and ms. livni, who has said publicly that she is prepared to become prime minister and has become close to ms. rice.  uzi arad, who had been an aide when benjamin netanyahu was prime minister and is now the director of the annual herzliya conference here devoted to security issues, said the american initiative was essentially for show, to try to pacify domestic critics on iraq and nervous arab allies.  ''we all want to do something, but let's see what's doable, to help tranquilize the situation as much as possible and look like progress, without harming our security,'' mr. arad said.  richard n. haass, a middle east specialist who runs the council on foreign relations in new york, said here that ''there's a difference between negotiating final status and raising final status.'' he said the case was strong for doing the latter, which he described as ''prenegotiations,'' starting a process that could only conclude when stronger governments could take serious risks.  ''it's important to shape the palestinian debate and signal to them that there are strong reasons to forgo violence,'' mr. haass said. ''if there's a place to go, it puts hamas on the defensive. it can either strengthen the moderates or help the process of transforming the radicals.''  with the israelis battered by the war in lebanon, rockets coming from gaza and a palestinian power struggle, few israelis would support large new withdrawals from the west bank when mr. abbas cannot control palestinian militants and the palestinian authority is run by hamas.  mr. olmert is also unwilling now to modify the so-called road map peace plan of 2003, which calls in its first stage for palestinians to begin to disarm militants and dismantle terrorist organizations while the israelis freeze settlement building. final-status negotiations are left to the third stage. but no one in 2003 expected hamas to be running the palestinian authority, and mr. abbas has been regularly calling for final-status talks to begin now as a way to provide ''a political horizon'' and do an end run around hamas.  these new talks are a compromise -- a serious discussion that can clarify a final settlement, including final borders and what will happen to jerusalem and refugees -- without committing either party. if there is a new, all-party commitment to an independent palestinian state based essentially on 1967 boundaries, it may reinforce the idea of a permanent israel next to a palestine, which hamas, iran and islamic jihad currently reject.  some palestinians, too, are skeptical. moderates welcomed the rice initiative ''because what's important to them is change, even if it is only a facade, that promises a 'positive possibility' for the future,'' wrote ali jarbawi a professor of political science at birzeit university, on a web site devoted to an israeli-palestinian dialogue, bitterlemons.org.  if the result is ''an end to the israeli occupation and the creation of a palestinian state on 1967 borders (with minor and agreed-upon adjustments) and solving the issue of refugees according to international resolutions,'' mr. jarbawi wrote, then fine. ''but this is not in the framework of thinking of this administration,'' he said, calling it ''hostage to the israeli perspective,'' which prefers ''a long-term transitional stage.''  salam fayyad, a former finance minister for the palestinian authority, said, ''we need an agreed definition of where we're going and how to get there.'' the current situation is deteriorating, he said, and too much time is wasted on negotiating peripheral issues like roadblocks. ''a political horizon is a framework in which internal issues can also be addressed,'' he said.  david makovsky, a middle east expert with the washington institute for near east policy, said for the united states the israeli-palestinian issue was not central. ''the issue is a derivative of getting arab support for iraq and iran policy,'' he said. ''they want a broad front, and this is part of helping those arab leaders they see as important on these other issues.''  news analysis  