hezbollah and its rivals fight in streets of lebanon   thousands of supporters of the iranian-backed hezbollah, which is seeking to bring down the pro-western government, clashed with government supporters and blocked highways leading into beirut, the capital, on tuesday, raising fears that the political crisis might lead to open sectarian conflict.  the police said at least three people died and 100 more were wounded throughout the country in the violence, the worst since hezbollah began demanding more political power late last year. mobs of men burned tires, set cars on fire and fought occasional gun battles with their political opponents.  in some cases, partisans yelled slogans with clear sectarian undertones, an especially frightening development for those who lived through lebanon's bloody civil war from 1975 to 1990.  by nightfall, the opposition began removing most of the makeshift roadblocks in the beirut area and announced that it would call off the nationwide general strike that had set off the unrest. but the group warned that more protests could follow.  ''this is a one-day show of force for the time being,'' said paul salem, director of the carnegie middle east center in beirut.  the opposition has accused prime minister fouad siniora, a sunni, of corruption and graft and has dismissed him as a western puppet. opposition forces have called for his resignation and for a ''unity'' government that would ultimately give hezbollah and its allies veto power.  the violence on tuesday occurred two days before a crucial conference of donor nations in paris to secure $5 billion in loans and aid to rebuild parts of lebanon destroyed in the israeli-hezbollah war last summer. hezbollah has vied with the government to provide help to residents in the country's south and in beirut's southern suburbs, which were the worst hit during the monthlong war.  mr. siniora insisted tuesday that nothing would keep him from paris.  ''i urge you to think clearly where they want to take you, away from your interest and that of the country,'' mr. siniora told the protesters on television. ''we will stay together against intimidation. we will stand together against strife.''  the turmoil started at dawn, when groups of protesters set up roadblocks along major thoroughfares leading into beirut, blocking roads with burning tires, trucks and rubble said to be from buildings demolished last summer by israeli bombs. they set fire to vehicles and, on several instances, were filmed attacking cars trying to pass their cordon.  in beirut, many of the clashes were in mixed neighborhoods, where young men on each side shouted epithets and hurled stones at each other.  along a thoroughfare, the men got into a brawl amid sporadic gunfire. one side raised photos of sheik hassan nasrallah, the hezbollah leader and a shiite, and burned those of former lebanese prime minister rafiq hariri, whose assassination in 2005 set off lebanon's latest political turmoil, a witness said. the other side lined up across the street and raised photos of mr. hariri, mr. siniora and even of saddam hussein, a sunni.  on the coastal highway north of beirut, supporters of gen. michel aoun, leader of the free patriotic movement, a christian group and a hezbollah ally, fought with men loyal to samir geagea, a government ally, in especially violent clashes.  ''it is a revolution against us, they are attacking us with stones and burning pictures of our leaders and blocking our roads,'' said ibrahim hijazi, 29, a government backer.  opposition leaders insisted their supporters were protesting ''peacefully'' when residents began hurling stones at them. they also said they would not allow themselves to be dragged into a sectarian conflict.  ''blocking roads is a democratic expression that happens all over the world,'' said hussein haj hassan, a member of hezbollah's parliamentary bloc. ''the government refused all the solutions we proposed, so we were left with only these options, and i warn them that we still have many other means of protest.''  mr. siniora, on lebanese television on tuesday night, insisted that he would not step down and that he still enjoyed the country's support.  ''we are at a crossroads today,'' he said. ''let's choose coexistence, civic peace, unity and stability, freedom and democracy instead of roads that will further split us and waste our energy and increase chances for violence and terrorism.''  stores and businesses in many parts of lebanon were closed in support of the general strike called by sheik nasrallah, as streets remained empty and many areas were covered in smoke from the burning tires.  at rafik hariri international airport, hezbollah men in black ski masks and brandishing batons blocked travelers.  according to the associated press, two of the deaths were in tripoli, where two groups -- one largely sunni and one alawite, a shiite muslim offshoot -- fought each other in a gun battle. the other death was in a gunfight in the christian batroun region, the a.p. said.  