rules dispute imperils khmer rouge trial   the cambodian judges were on one side and the foreign judges on the other this week in a dispute that captures a decade of difficulties in bringing to trial the last surviving leaders of the murderous khmer rouge.  if they cannot agree on procedural rules soon, analysts and officials at the tribunal say, some foreign judges may walk out. that would cast a deeper shadow over a process that some critics say is already so compromised as to be of doubtful value.  seventeen cambodians and 12 foreigners took office as judges and prosecutors in july, inaugurating a united nations-sponsored process that mixes cambodian law with international standards of justice. it is an awkward formula made more questionable by the meager qualifications of the cambodian judges, who are seen as poorly trained and subject to political manipulation.  pragmatists say that a flawed trial is better than none and that there is no choice but to proceed with the tribunal you have rather than the tribunal you may wish to have.  almost three decades have passed since the khmer rouge ruled cambodia, from 1975 to 1979, causing 1.7 million deaths through killings, torture, starvation and overwork.  the potential defendants are aging and some have died, notably the khmer rouge leader, pol pot, in 1998. the targets of the trial are top leaders and ''those most responsible'' for the crimes and is expected to focus on at most a dozen defendants. among the handful of names often mentioned, only one is in custody, with the rest living freely in cambodia.  the foreign co-prosecutor, a canadian named robert petit, has been pursuing the evidence vigorously but has not said where it is leading him. in an interview, he said he was ready to propose his first indictments once the judges formalized the rules at a plenary session tentatively set for march. a trial might then begin by the end of the year.  cambodia and the united nations agreed on the structure of the mixed tribunal in 2003 after years of negotiations that involved technical and political differences. those differences remained at the heart of the disagreements that have stalled the trial since november, say experts on the tribunal.  a rules committee of nine judges is trying to resolve the differences. sean visoth, the tribunal's cambodian coordinator, said, ''if there is no compromise and there is no plenary, the international judges will walk away.''  the delay has revived a concern that prime minister hun sen may not in fact want the trial to proceed and may be throwing up the latest in a long series of roadblocks that have stalled it over the years. among other things, he is believed to be under pressure from china, which does not want to see a trial that would be likely to demonstrate its close ties to the khmer rouge government.  the core disputes appear to involve a long-running issue: the independence of the trial from cambodian political manipulation.  on the cambodian side, an important issue is control, said the american ambassador to cambodia, joseph a. mussomeli. ''the government in general tries to keep tight control over the judiciary and anything that could have negative consequences,'' he said.  the first concern is the scope of indictments in a country where the politics of the present remain tangled in the past. some former middle-ranking khmer rouge are prominent in the current government, including mr. hun sen -- although experts say he is not culpable. other potential defendants may have powerful patrons trying to protect them.  one point of contention among the judges, said people close to the negotiations, is a provision that would in effect allow an indictment to proceed without the agreement of the cambodian side. that provision is one of several balancing acts in the tribunal's super-majority system that at most junctures allows foreign and cambodian judges to cast what amount to vetoes over one another's decisions.  the cambodian side is also seeking to limit the right of defendants to be represented in court by foreign lawyers, which it says is a violation of cambodian legal sovereignty. foreign analysts say the cambodian concern is that aggressive foreign lawyers would be independent of any political guidance and could send the case in unpredictable directions.  a british lawyer, rupert skilbeck, who will coordinate the lawyers' work, said defendants would be placed at a disadvantage if they could not select their own lawyers.  ''it's important that the trials are very fair, because if they're seen as show trials, then there will be no justice,'' he said in november.  mr. mussomeli said the cambodian government, accustomed to controlling the judiciary, might be reacting defensively to mr. petit, who has taken on his job as prosecutor with an energy and independence that is unfamiliar here.  in the interview, mr. petit sought to calm these concerns, saying he was aware that the tribunal could be derailed by an overaggressive prosecution. ''we have to apply the law in the context of cambodia,'' he said. ''i'm not stupid. you have to exercise discretion.''  mr. petit has been involved in tribunals in rwanda, sierra leone, kosovo and east timor, and he said he understood that in cases like these it was not possible to follow the law blindly, without reference to its context. ''we all have a sense of our responsibilities,'' he said. ''our primary responsibility is to deliver justice to the victims of these crimes.'' that will not be possible, he said, if the process is shut down for any reason.  ''having a right and exercising it with good judgment are two different things,'' he said.  he said he did not know how many cases he would forward to the next level of the tribunal, the investigating judges, who are to issue indictments. ''in this particular tribunal there are very specific expectations,'' he said. ''everyone 'knows' what happened. we've got the evidence there; you just have to pick it up and carry it into court -- well, it doesn't work that way.''  ''we have to grasp events of great magnitude that happened 30 years ago and be legally and morally convinced that we have cases against individual people,'' he said.  