putin in india: visit is sign of durability of old ties   a new nuclear accord, booming trade and an ever closer partnership with the united states notwithstanding, the guest of honor this week at india's republic day ceremony, an annual display of military pomp, will be a symbol of new delhi's newest old friend: president vladimir v. putin of russia.  mr. putin's two-day visit to this country, starting thursday, is his fourth since becoming president and is seen as testament to the enduring ties between india and russia. battered by the end of the cold war and challenged by india's warmer relations with the united states, those links have been revived by the strategic demands of a prospering india, namely energy and arms. in both areas russia stands to be an important partner.  asked about the visit's significance, one indian government minister took pains to point out that his country's old camaraderie with moscow ought not to alarm its new friends in washington.  ''our relationship with russia is not directed against the united states, and our relationship with the united states is not at the expense of our continued engagement with russia,'' said jairam ramesh, india's junior commerce minister.  for starters, india wants to expand its access to investment in russia's vast oil reserves. on the agenda during mr. putin's visit, indian officials have said, is a proposed joint venture to explore for oil in siberia. india's $1 billion stake in an existing project called sakhalin i is this country's largest foreign investment.  reliance industries, an indian energy company, has floated the idea of investing in a russian refinery.  and according to indian officials, russia has expressed interest in investing in a pipeline that would carry natural gas from iran through pakistan to india. the bush administration has repeatedly expressed reservations about the project.  india's current oil imports from russia, or indeed from anywhere outside the middle east, are negligible, primarily because of transportation problems.  far more important, analysts pointed out, moscow is already new delhi's largest defense partner. paradoxically, when the india-united states nuclear deal opens the door for new delhi to buy nuclear technology to expand its civilian nuclear program, russia may benefit.  kanwal sibal, india's ambassador to russia, predicted that russia would be ''among the first, if not the first, to walk in.''  india would be allowed to purchase nuclear fuel, reactors and other technology on the world market, but only after it gained approval from the 45-nation nuclear suppliers group, which regulates international atomic energy trade.  russia is already building two nuclear reactors in this country. this week, the interfax news agency quoted the russian defense minister, sergei b. ivanov, as saying his government was prepared to build additional reactors here.  likewise, india has moscow to thank for a variety of conventional weaponry, from tanks to an aircraft carrier and fighter jets. russia remains india's biggest military partner, though new delhi's utter dependence on moscow during the cold war has been complicated by new entrants, most prominently israel.  the indians and the russians have jointly produced a short-range missile called the brahmos, which, contrary to russian objectives, india wants to sell on the private market. and india's ambitions for space research -- particularly in light of china's successful testing of an antisatellite missile last week -- rely heavily on russian cooperation.  ''russia continues to be as important an ally as before and will remain that way, but the contours of this relationship have changed,'' said ashok mehta, a retired general.  best of all from an indian perspective, russia has displayed none of the compulsions that the united states has, for instance, to maintain good relations with india's neighbor and rival, pakistan.  gauging russia's future importance to india is a matter of debate. if india is allowed to shop on the world nuclear market, russia is likely to face competition from france, c. raja mohan, the strategic affairs columnist of the indian express, argued, and from the united states and israel on conventional weapons.  russia's soft power in this country has all but collapsed. where once there were state-sponsored performances of the bolshoi ballet in new delhi and russian literature flooded indian libraries, there are now only a handful of relics of russian romance left: a statue of lenin at a public park here in the capital or a prominent politician in the south named after stalin.  trade with russia has plummeted. at roughly $2.5 billion, it now represents a little more than a tenth of india-china trade. in an effort to fix that, a trade delegation is expected to come to india next month.  