last stalwart in klein's top ranks is going   as longtime veterans of the new york city school system departed in droves in recent years, especially from the top leadership ranks where chancellor joel i. klein has favored outsiders from the corporate and legal worlds, one stalwart remained in the inner circle: rose albanese depinto, a lifelong city educator who for most of the 1990s was principal of william cullen bryant high school in queens, mr. klein's alma mater.  but on monday night, less than a week after mayor michael r. bloomberg announced another round of huge changes for the school system, ms. depinto, too, decided it was time for a change and announced her retirement after a 32 years.  when she leaves, on jan. 31, there will be no one on the chancellor's senior leadership team who worked in a similar role before mr. klein took office in 2002.  ms. depinto's deputy, elayna konstan, will succeed her and will be in the chancellor's cabinet but will report to deputy chancellor kathleen grimm, not directly to mr. klein.  ms. konstan has worked in the school system for more than 30 years, mostly in special education and the alternative schools district, but is less well known than ms. depinto, who was citywide superintendent of high schools under former chancellor harold o. levy.  the only other veteran city educator remaining in the cabinet is eric nadelstern, the chief executive for empowerment schools, in which principals have more autonomy from the school system if they agree to meet performance goals.  mr. nadelstern spent most of his career as a high school principal in queens and later as an administrator in the bronx. he was brought to headquarters by mr. klein to lead the empowerment program. even as mr. klein announced ms. depinto's retirement ''with great admiration and gratitude,'' veterans of the system said her departure signaled the nearly complete transformation of the central administration.  ''there are no teachers working there any more,'' said one high school principal, who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of alienating mr. klein and other superiors. ''i am a teacher first,'' this principal said. ''but the people they are bringing in aren't.''  ms. depinto, who most recently was the senior counselor for school intervention and development, overseeing a citywide safety initiative in which troubled schools are flooded with police officers, said in an interview yesterday that she, too, viewed herself first as a teacher. after being laid off by the school system in 1975, ms. depinto said she did not hesitate about going back at the first chance.  ''i always knew that my love and my passion was in teaching,'' she said. ''i ran right back to school.''  after 17 years as a foreign language teacher, at schools in manhattan and brooklyn, she moved to bryant high in queens as an assistant principal. she became principal in 1992, and met mr. klein, who visited to speak to students about his work in the united states justice department.  ''he spent more than two hours with the kids, and he really talked about his love for the school,'' she recalled. after his speech, mr. klein brought students to the windows in the school library and pointed to the housing project where he grew up. ''it was one of the most moving moments in my career,'' ms. depinto said. ''for me and for the kids.''  