ahead | guitar festivals; classical music for six strings   andrÉs segovia, widely known as the father of modern classical guitar, may have explained its sophisticated appeal better than anyone else. ''the guitar is a small orchestra,'' he said. ''it is polyphonic. every string is a different color, a different voice.''  midwinter brings these colors and voices to concert halls around the country in the form of classical-guitar festivals, which have a way of attracting a broad range of fiercely dedicated aficionados.  ''classical music is classical music, but guitar has a kind of interesting crossover appeal,'' said andrew zohn, a guitarist, composer and director of a guitar competition and symposium next month at the schwob school of music at columbus state university in columbus, ga. ''most people who like classical guitar, myself included, started out playing or liking rock 'n' roll. so there are people who can be very apathetic about classical music per se, but are big fans of classical guitar -- of what it can do technically.''  the columbus festival, which attracts musicians and fans from 30 states, canada and mexico, takes place in late february. this year it will feature performances by mr. zohn and prominent classical guitarists, including judicaël perroy, a parisian guitarist who was recognized as a prodigy by age 11; jeffrey mcfadden, who tours, records and teaches master classes; and david rogers, a guitarist and lute player with the terra nova consort in oregon.  their recitals are the biggest public draw of the festival, but it also includes master classes for guitarists and competitions, which can be fierce and are popular with both the guitarists and the curious public. ''there's a real interest in not only seeing the established talents, but in seeing the younger generations, who are doing some mind-boggling things with the instrument,'' mr. zohn said.  in san antonio, guitarists from germany, france, vietnam, mexico and the united states will compete at the southwest guitar festival feb. 7 to 11. the marquee performers are pepe romero, a classical guitar legend, and mr. perroy (who's making the rounds). this festival's organizers are proud of its diversity: it has partnerships with both the san antonio chamber music society and the instituto de méxico. ''we have a setting here that's a confluence of mexican and american cultures,'' said matt dunn, the director.  an overlapping festival takes place at round top, an institute in texas that is renowned for summer classical concerts. ''we had never presented any guitar until we brought a quartet here a few years ago,'' said alain g. declert, round top's festival director, ''and the response was wonderful.'' that inspired him to start the international guitar festival at round top, which runs feb. 10 and 11 this year. among those scheduled to play are eduardo isaac of argentina and the quarternaglia guitar quartet of brazil, which will join james dick, the classical pianist and founder of round top, for the premiere of ''quintet for another time'' by sergio molina.  ''i just want to present some works not usually heard; to offer an exotic repertoire for classical guitar,'' mr. declert said. also on the program is chamber music including flutes and bassoons. there's plenty to do between concerts in round top, mr. declert said. ''it's in hilly, green country, and there is a small downtown with art galleries and shops.''  another guitar event coming in march is the rantucci international guitar festival & competition at buffalo state college. the festival will include performances by stephen aron, whose guitar recordings range from chopin mazurkas to vaudeville songs, and paul galbraith, known for playing on a unique eight-stringed instrument called the brahms guitar, which he helped to develop.  for a true getaway with your dose of music, there's the international guitar festival scheduled in march in zihuatanejo, north of acapulco on mexico's pacific coast. it's a full week of performances by mexican, other north american and eastern european artists in various settings -- for children, with dinner in a supper club and even right on the beach.  details  san antonio -- university of texas at san antonio  what: southwest guitar festival (210-458-5685; www.swgf.org).  when: feb. 7 to 11.  round top, tex. -- international festival institute at round top  what: international guitar festival at round top (979-249-3129; www.festivalhill.org).  when: feb. 10 and 11  columbus, ga. -- schwob school of music, columbus state university  what: columbus state university guitar competition and symposium (706-568-2001; http://music.colstate.edu/events/guitar/).  when: feb. 24 to 25.  buffalo -- buffalo state college  what: rantucci international guitar festival & competition 716-884-0714; www.rantuccifestival.com  when: march 22 to 25  zihuatanejo, mexico  what: zihuatanejo international guitar festival, 52 -755- 554-7385; www.zihuafest.info.  when: march 11 to 18  miami -- university of miami frost school of music.  what: miami international guitar festival, (305) 284-1607.  when: june 19 to 23.  