the neediest cases; after getting family out of shelter, mother has a new challenge: paying the rent   in march, necessity moved carmen laureano and her two daughters from florida to new york city.  ms. laureano, 36, lost her job when the day care center where she had worked for about three years came under new ownership. ''everything changed for me; everything was down,'' she said.  she moved with her girls, luz and franchesca rivera, 12 and 10, to the bronx, hoping to stay with her mother. but the young family could not stay in her mother's housing complex for the elderly. she and the girls quickly found themselves homeless and entered the shelter system.  ''for the people living in the shelter it's not that easy to get out,'' ms. laureano said. but she did. with persistence, determination and some help from catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york, ms. laureano has made a new city her family's new home.  in june, they moved into a one-bedroom apartment in the bronx, and ms. laureano gave the bedroom to her daughters so they ''could have privacy.'' framed family photos hang in the living room, where ms. laureano sleeps.  for a year, the $925 monthly rent is covered by housing stability plus, a department of homeless services program that offers a five-year subsidy that decreases gradually each year. ms. laureano is already worried about paying next year's rent.  ''i'm going to start studying because in one year i have to work,'' she said. since moving here in the spring, ms. laureano has spent her time finding housing, schools and medical services for her family and caring for her daughters. she plans to take computer classes with the help of catholic charities. ''i have to start paying rent by myself.''  her willingness to work is real, but so are her worries. caring for franchesca takes a special effort. ''franchesca is a special girl,'' ms. laureano said. a lack of oxygen to her daughter's brain during birth caused mild mental retardation and behavioral problems. ms. laureano must be home when franchesca returns from school. ''i have to be here, at 3; i have to be downstairs,'' she said.  finding the right school to meet her daughter's needs was also a challenge. when they arrived in new york, franchesca was mistakenly put in mainstream classes.  ''my daughter was in regular class and it was a mess,'' ms. laureano said. franchesca was disruptive and could not do the work. ''it was hard for her, for the teacher, for the students.''  ms. laureano found help and a feeling of home, at the thorpe family residence in the bronx, where the family lived while it was homeless. the thorpe residence is affiliated with catholic charities, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund. the thorpe staff connected ms. laureano to the services she needed. ''they give you support,'' she said. ''they help you out a lot. they are like a family.''  counselors at thorpe referred her to medical and educational services for franchesca, and ms. laureano did considerable work following through. ''i have to start from the shelter, then i have to talk with the social worker to see if she could help me,'' she said, ''i went to two schools before i get that school.''  the school is public school 161, where franchesca started in the fall. she is in spanish-language special education classes with her peers, working at a first-grade level. the family is from puerto rico, and ms. laureano taught herself english in florida. luz, in the sixth grade, speaks both spanish and english, but is in some bilingual classes to provide better comprehension.  franchesca, who speaks spanish, was crying on the first day. but, by the second day, ''she was the friend of the teacher,'' ms. laureano said.  being taught in spanish and working with children at her level has made a big difference for franchesca.  ''mommy, mommy, i know how to read!'' ms. laureano remembered her daughter announcing one day after school. the family celebrated, ''we made a party,'' ms. laureano said.  ms. laureano was also referred to a clinic for her daughter's mental health issues, and franchesca received new medication to control her behavior. now, franchesca is calm and more focused, ms. laureano said. ''she could really learn. she could hear. without the medication she just wants to fight.''  the family's monthly income is limited to $145 in public assistance and $255 in food stamps. with the help of staff members at thorpe, ms. laureano is applying for social security supplemental income for franchesca.  two weeks after school began, the family received $425 in neediest cases money for school clothes, shoes, socks and underwear. the family also bought four folding chairs to put around a dining table. ''thank you for all the help,'' ms. laureano said.  franchesca is shy around strangers. she stayed in the bedroom and sometimes hid under the covers. she is not shy with her family. ''no way,'' ms. laureano laughed. ''it's different when we three are alone.''  previously recorded: $7,109,434.83  recorded monday: 23,675.42  total: $7,133,110.25  last year to date: $6,503,473.98  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  correction:  january 26, 2007, friday  a picture caption on wednesday with an article about carmen laureano, a bronx woman who received money for clothing and furniture from the new york times neediest cases fund, misidentified the subject of the picture in some copies. she was luz rivera, ms. laureano's 12-year-old daughter, not ms. laureano.  