a breadwinner rethinks gender roles   when my son was born last fall, my husband and i had a plan. after a short maternity leave, i would continue to work, and he would quit his job to take care of the baby.  i didn't think of myself as becoming the breadwinner; i had always earned the higher income. the fact that my mate would have a job at home, just not a paying one for now, didn't bother me.  the main hurdle, we assumed, would be figuring out how to afford the shift from two incomes to one. that has turned out to be the least of our problems. the real challenge is navigating the kinds of financial and emotional issues that you can't enter into a calculator or plug into a spreadsheet.  like so many women raised at the tail end of feminism's first wave, i assumed that my spouse and i would enjoy a relationship based on equality. equality is an overworked word, but to me it meant sharing the income, chores and child care.  so when my husband asked me the other day, ''did your concept of 'equality' ever include supporting the family?'' i had to admit that my answer was no.  i wanted it to be yes. if men could provide for their wives and families, as they have traditionally in many cultures, why shouldn't women feel just fine about assuming that role themselves? why didn't i?  to put it simply, because we're not there yet, says kathleen gerson, a co-author with jerry a. jacobs of ''the time divide: work, family and gender inequality'' (harvard, 2004). ''we are all quite comfortable with the dual-earner household. it's become a cultural template,'' she said. ''but for some reason we hit a roadblock when it comes to single-income households where the single earner is a woman.''  according to ms. gerson's research, the number of households where the wife is the sole earner, from 1970 to 2000, jumped from about 4.1 percent to over 7 percent, and has grown since then. that does not include women who are the primary earners in their families.  a 2003 survey by the bureau of labor statistics indicated that about a third of wives earned more than their husbands. and about 43 percent of household income overall was earned by women, according to a 2003 study by the families and work institute, a group in new york.  this data doesn't begin to reveal the uncomfortable situation that breadwinner women are in: how to renegotiate expectations for everything from who manages the money to who does the laundry -- when you're c.f.o. of the household.  when i say uncomfortable, i'm trying to be polite. the women i know in these shoes are seething -- with uncertainty, resentment, anxiety and frustration. the patterns that seem ''normal'' when the husband is the breadwinner don't hold up when women earn most or even all of the income.  that is partly because ''men have a sense of esteem, of identity that comes with being the provider,'' says barbara risman, professor of sociology at the university of chicago. ''women don't get the same identity benefit -- there's a sense that one has a double burden.''  take my own situation: i'm supporting the family economically -- my husband is supporting us domestically. while i write, he cooks, cleans, shops and takes care of our son. it sounds like an idyllic 21st-century twist on the old ''father knows best'' scenario. yet i alternate between pride in our arrangement -- and terror that i'll be the breadwinner forever.  does the fact that he's doing so-called women's work have so little value in my eyes -- or am i afraid of how others might view a man whose contribution can't be measured in dollars? am i a susie homemaker wannabe because i sometimes pray my husband will decide to go to law school and earn a good living?  that sounds petty -- especially because, with deepest thanks to my husband, i'm earning a good living. but for many frustrated women, financial power hasn't created the balance they were hoping for, and they're still working what the sociologist arlie hochschild dubbed ''the second shift.'' as one breadwinner friend of mine put it, quoting an old enjoli perfume commercial about a woman who ''can bring home the bacon/fry it up in a pan'': ''i didn't think i'd have to serve the bacon and clean the pan, too.''  and i didn't think i'd feel so guilty, or derelict in my womanly duties, when my husband is quick to comfort our fussy 4-month-old -- or reminds me where we keep the muffin tin. or that i'd feel so much chest-tightening pressure when i monitor our bills -- or remind myself that if i don't sign us up for life insurance, nobody will. because it's my job.  basic instincts  