matching the police to the populace   as part of an initial push to recruit minority officers to the long beach, n.y., police department in 2004, the civil service exam was opened to nonresidents for the first time. that move, police officials said, led to the hiring of a hispanic woman and an asian-american man, both new york city police officers.  but the department was unable to hire a police officer who was black in that recruitment drive. ''we diversified but were still missing a part of the target population,'' said lt. bruce meyer, who heads the recruitment efforts for a department that had no black officers for almost four decades. ''at that point i said we have to do more.''  police departments in suburbs and towns across the region have been putting a new emphasis in recent years on bringing more black and hispanic officers into their ranks as, census figures show, the white population in the suburbs has declined by 2.1 percent and minority populations have grown in the last five years.  the departments are using different tactics, with mixed success, including tweaking residency requirements and recruiting candidates who live beyond their borders. they are holding civil service tests more frequently, initiating new advertising campaigns and turning to the military for possible candidates.  in long beach, where the black population is 6.2 percent, according to the 2000 census, the decision was made to try again with a more ambitious recruiting effort. lieutenant meyer said the police department persuaded the civil service commission to hold another test a year later, rather than wait the usual four years. this time, posters announcing the test went up in churches, and a recruiting unit was assembled from the department's few minority officers.  the effort yielded results: some 750 candidates applied for the new test, up from 341 in the previous round, including more than five times the number of black candidates and three times the number of hispanics. two black officers were sworn in to the now 78-member police department last fall. it was the first time in 38 years that long beach had hired a black police officer.  officer judy arroyo, who joined the long beach department in july 2005, said she had become a de facto point person for spanish-speaking women enduring domestic abuse. ''i've seen that people call and request me,'' she said. ''they see they can connect with me.''  in bergen county, n.j., sheriff leo p. mcguire said his department has also been making a big push to diversify its ranks by changing its recruitment tactics. instead of limiting job candidates to the county, positions for rank-and-file officers were made available to people statewide for the first time. last month, the 466-member department swore in eight black officers, seven of them women.  ''now the public is saying this administration means business,'' sheriff mcguire said.  in paterson, n.j., where hispanics make up 57 percent of the city's population and blacks make up 30 percent, the police department took the opposite approach by focusing its recruiting efforts within the city's borders.  in addition, the city's police force recently agreed to hire ''police assistants,'' a position created by the new jersey department of personnel five years ago to help municipalities broaden their candidate lists with a more accessible entry-level post.  ''we put ads in the local newspapers,'' said michael walker, the department's civilian police director. ''we addressed every criminal justice class at passaic county community college in paterson, across the street from our headquarters. we went to the religious community.''  as a result, the paterson police force expects to hire 18 police assistants -- most of whom are hispanic men and women -- by the spring, mr. walker said.  maki haberfeld, chairwoman of the department of law, police science and criminal justice administration at john jay college of criminal justice, said the public feels more comfortable when they know that ''people of the same background are represented on the force.''  dr. haberfeld added, however, ''i do not think effective policing in any shape or form is related to someone's race or background.''  some police departments that have failed to increase the number of minority officers have come under scrutiny by the united states justice department, which has entered into consent decrees to help oversee the recruiting efforts of a number of departments, including those of both nassau and suffolk counties.  under such decrees, the justice department typically helps shape the content of civil service exams. but steve levy, the suffolk county executive, said the department's input had done little to raise the number of minority officers.  ''the test was ridiculous in that it was basing questions on biographical information and very subjective things such as your favorite color -- things that had no correlation to one's ability to be a good police officer,'' he said.  in addition, mr. levy said the justice department vetoed his idea in 2005 to recruit police officers from suffolk communities where crime was high. ''unfortunately we have a justice department that tells us what we can't do,'' he said, ''but doesn't tell us what we can do.''  cynthia magnuson, a spokeswoman for the justice department, said the consent decree with suffolk county, agreed to in 1986, has resulted in a ''significant improvement'' in police minority hiring. in 1983, when the justice department first lodged complaints of discrimination against the county, only 25 women, or less than 1 percent of the force, and only 59 blacks and hispanics, or 2.3 percent, were on the county police force.  in 2005, there were 320 women, or 12.1 percent, and 262 blacks and hispanics, or 9.9 percent.  ''our contact with the county is through the county attorney, who has not conveyed to us any criticism regarding this department's input into the county's civil service examinations, or this department's monitoring of the consent decree we have with the county,'' ms. magnuson said.  the proposal from mr. levy that the justice department struck down, she added, would have violated nondiscrimination provisions of the consent decree and the civil rights act of 1964 by instituting a racial quota. mr. levy's plan sought ''an absolute preference'' to fill 20 percent of entry-level police officer slots from minority communities, she said.  ambitious and focused efforts do not always get results. five years ago, the hartford police began administering the department's civil service test more frequently and enlisted community leaders to help recruit candidates.  but lester mccoy, the assistant police chief, conceded that those efforts had apparently not worked. the 420-member force is about 60 percent white, 20 percent hispanic and 18 percent black, just as it was five years ago.  ''we're not doing any worse, but were not doing any better,'' he said, adding that the force has not had the budget to dispatch its own recruiting teams to minority colleges and other potential sources.  