breaking ground   mondrian south beach  what -- waterfront residential and hotel development.  where -- miami beach.  amenities -- a marina and a rooftop bar and garden, among others.  prices -- residences range from $400,000 to $6 million.  status -- expected to open in december.  developer -- morgans hotel group.  contact -- (877) 809-0007 or www.mondriansouthbeach.com.  details -- fronting biscayne bay on the west side of miami beach, this is the first project by morgans hotel group -- the owner of the nearby delano hotel, the royalton in new york, the mondrian in los angeles and a new mondrian expected to open next week in scottsdale, ariz. -- that will include residences. there will be 342 units, including studios, one- and two-bedroom suites and four penthouses, all in a renovated 16-story apartment building. the units will include furniture by marcel wanders, who is also the interior and landscaping designer of the project, and will be sold in whole ownership. they may be placed in a revenue-sharing rental program when owners are away. a bar in the lobby will extend outdoors to a pool area, which will have a cafe and cabanas, and inside there will be a fine-dining restaurant, a lounge and a spa and fitness center. residents and guests will have access to the beach at the delano.  one steamboat place  what -- residential project at a ski area.  where -- steamboat springs, colo.  amenities -- ski-in, ski-out access, a full-service spa and a fitness center, among others.  prices -- residences range from $415,000 to $4.5 million.  status -- construction is scheduled to begin this spring and should be finished in 2009.  developers -- timbers resorts and sv capital.  contact -- (970) 963-4626 or www.onesteamboatplace.com.  details -- this project, approved earlier this month, is at the base of 10,568-foot mount werner in steamboat springs, about 150 miles northwest of denver. it will include 78 residences in a six-story building adjacent to a gondola. all units will range from 2,500 to 4,700 square feet, and they will be divided into 36 whole-ownership units with four to five bedrooms and 42 furnished units with four bedrooms that will be sold in one-eighth shares. buyers of the shared-ownership units will be able to use their residences at least six weeks a year. in addition to the spa and fitness center, amenities at the development will include swimming pools, a lounge, restaurants and shops. owners will also receive membership in a nearby club that offers golf and fishing.  nick kaye  breaking ground is a weekly look at projects, planned or under construction, that include weekend or vacation homes.  