a friendly face with a foul mouth that sings   bridget everett is, without a doubt, the life of the party. whether it's a party you'd be interested in attending -- or one you'd instantly flee in search of xanax -- depends on your affection for big-boned, loudmouthed, dirty-talking girls with attitudes stretching from here to kansas.  ms. everett in fact comes from manhattan, kan., and is probably unknown to even the most avid theatergoer or cabaret fanatic residing in the manhattan she now calls home. unless you've had a particularly bruising encounter with a bosomy waitress at a certain pan-asian eatery on the upper west side. or watched in astonishment as hurricane bridget stormed onto the seedy stage of your favorite karaoke bar and held the place hostage for the next hour.  the brief biographical note in the program for ms. everett's solo show, peculiarly titled ''at least it's pink,'' which opened last night at ars nova, mentions her upbringing in kansas, boasts of a degree in vocal performance from arizona state university (who knew?) and concludes with this unprepossessing sentence: ''soon after, she promptly abandoned it all to move to new york, sing karaoke and work as a waitress.''  those endearingly modest goals accomplished, ms. everett has now set her sights a little higher. somewhere in her perambulations among the city's karaoke hot spots, or perhaps while slinging duck and mushroom egg rolls uptown, ms. everett encountered a couple of gentlemen who have encouraged and abetted her growing ambition.  the co-authors of her show, a woozy combination of cabaret, stand-up and a particularly volatile episode of ''the jerry springer show,'' are michael patrick king, a writer and director of ''sex and the city'' on hbo (and creator of the cult favorite ''the comeback''), and kenny mellman, the piano-playing, relatively sober half of the now-near-legendary downtown club duo kiki and herb. all three share general authorship; mr. king directs; mr. mellman and ms. everett wrote the songs.  all that fastidious apportioning of credit would seem to suggest that ''at least it's pink'' is a conscientiously artful, carefully constructed evening of entertainment. this is not exactly the case. smarts and savvy do eventually reveal themselves to be ingredients in this throat-scorching glass of punch: the last 15 minutes are ingenious. but for much of the 80-minute evening ms. everett holds forth at center stage with little regard for coddling the audience with coherent monologue, comforting song or useful insight.  then again, a performer this bold and brash -- o.k., frightening -- doesn't need such easy props to keep her audience from getting restive. ms. everett's vulgarity and abrasiveness are her selling points, and sell them she does, with all the delicacy of a linebacker. in between generous swigs from a bottle of white wine, she tells bawdy anecdotes and sings raunchy songs, then tells raunchy anecdotes and sings bawdy songs. she wails tales of wayward evenings spent searching for hookups online, of her attraction to black men and their fabled attributes, of her affection for anal sex. some of this is funny; not much is quotable.  ms. everett's act recalls the sexual insouciance and joyous exhibitionism of early bette midler, as does her cultivated rapport with her largely gay audience. but her voice has far less depth and color than ms. midler's, and in ms. everett's case chutzpah ultimately outstrips talent.  the appeal of her songs is mostly comic, in any case. the glaze of irony that twinkles in most of the material comes from the peculiar discordance between ms. everett's rather friendly, unexceptional looks and her foul mouth. a similar dissonance is reflected in the music-making. while mr. mellman is supplying wistful easy-rock melodies at the piano, ms. everett is singing of a teenage romance that led to an abortion, in a mock-elegiac tone.  in referring to ms. everett's unexceptional looks i should clarify that i referred only to her face. ms. everett's richly endowed figure is more striking. there is an admirable audacity in her careless flaunting of a body type that cultural attitudes dictate she should disguise in shape-hiding fabric. none of that for big bridget everett. in the glare of the solo spotlight, the most demure article of clothing she chooses to wear is a fake-snakeskin bustier.  of course ms. everett's courageousness in displaying her curves does have its drawbacks. you may well leave ''at least it's pink'' ruing the day that fishnet was invented, for instance. to say nothing of the thong.  at least it's pink  book by bridget everett, michael patrick king and kenny mellman; original music and lyrics by mr. mellman and ms. everett; directed by mr. king; sets by lauren helpern; costumes by angela wendt; lighting by tyler micoleau; sound by jorge muelle; associate producer, kimberly rosenstock; general manager, reuben saunders; production manager, melissa zygmant; production stage manager, alaina taylor. presented by ars nova, jon steingart, jenny wiener and jason eagan, producers. at ars nova, 511 west 54th street, manhattan; (212) 868-4444. through march 11. running time: 1 hour 20 minutes.  with: bridget everett (herself), kenny mellman (himself), rosa curry (woman), sean jenness (straight man), peter kim (gay man) and michael-leon wooley (simon).  theater review  