inside   budget office predicts further decline in deficit  the nonpartisan congressional budget office predicted that the federal budget deficit would shrink again this year and could actually swing into a surplus in 2012 -- but only if president bush's tax cuts expire in 2010.  the agency predicted that the deficit for 2007 would decline to about $200 billion. it would be the third big annual decline in a row. the decline comes on the heels of unexpectedly large increases in tax revenue and slower-than-expected increases in spending on medicare.  page a21  kerry rules out an '08 race  senator john kerry, the massachusetts democrat who narrowly lost the presidency to president bush in 2004, announced that he would not proceed with a second bid for the white house. ''we came close, certainly close enough to be tempted to try again,'' mr. kerry said at the end speech attacking mr. bush's iraq policy on the senate floor.  page a19  n.f.l. enhances drug policy  the n.f.l. and its players union said that they have agreed to strengthen the league's testing program for performance-enhancing drugs, including increasing the number of tests and adding financial penalties.  sportsthursday, page d1  life's hard-won pleasures  jim harrison, author of rugged, outdoorsy books like ''true north'' and ''legends of the fall,'' has spent a vigorous life, and he has been known to hold his own at the table with trenchermen like orson welles and john huston. now, at 69, health problems have slowed him down, but he still identifies food with literature and a love of life.  the arts, page e1  pollution in the closet  because of the way clothes are made and cleaned, they have become a large and worsening source of the carbon emissions that contribute to global warming, according to a new report.  thursday styles, page g1  a fantasia in paris  john galliano's ice-cream colors and origami folds of fabric for dior highlighted the haute couture collections in paris. a review by cathy horyn.  thursday styles, page g1  