ex-cheney aide contradicts libby's version of events   a former spokeswoman for vice president dick cheney gave testimony in the trial of i. lewis libby jr. on thursday that directly contradicted mr. libby's version of events during a crucial period that is at the center of the perjury case against him.  cathie martin, mr. cheney's former spokeswoman, testified that she had a clear memory of telling both mr. cheney and mr. libby that a prominent war critic's wife worked for the c.i.a., days before he contends he first learned it from a reporter.  ms. martin was the fourth witness for the prosecution in the trial of mr. libby, who is charged with lying during an investigation of who leaked the name of the c.i.a. operative, valerie wilson. unlike the previous three witnesses, who worked at the c.i.a. and state department, ms. martin's testimony may prove especially damaging to mr. libby because of her perspective as a former insider in the vice president's office and as a former colleague of mr. libby. she repeatedly referred to him as scooter, his nickname.  she testified that both mr. cheney and mr. libby were intensely interested in ms. wilson and her husband, joseph c. wilson iv, who had been sent to africa to investigate reports that saddam hussein was trying to buy uranium from niger for his nuclear weapons program.  ms. martin, who no longer works for mr. cheney but remains at the white house as a communications assistant to the president, described how mr. libby had telephoned a senior central intelligence agency official in her presence sometime in early july and asked about the wilson trip. she said she was then put on the phone with bill harlow, the c.i.a. spokesman, who told her that mr. wilson went to africa on behalf of the agency and that his wife worked there.  she testified that, later that day, in a meeting with mr. libby and mr. cheney, she related the fact that mr. wilson's wife worked at the agency.  mr. libby is facing five felony counts that he lied when he told a grand jury and f.b.i. agents that he learned of ms. wilson's identity from reporters. ms. wilson's identity was first disclosed in a news column by robert novak on july 14, 2003, just days after her husband had written a commentary in the new york times asserting that the bush administration had distorted intelligence to build the case for invading iraq.  ms. martin's testimony raised difficulties for mr. libby's defense in two respects. she bolstered the prosecution's assertion that mr. libby was made aware of ms. wilson's identity from a number of administration officials. he denied passing her name to two reporters, but those reporters have told a grand jury otherwise.  she also described an incident in which his behavior appeared less than noble. she recounted a senior staff meeting at the white house in which stephen j. hadley, the deputy national security adviser, expressed anger after receiving a query from andrea mitchell of nbc. ms. mitchell had heard that the white house was blaming the c.i.a. for causing the president to inaccurately say in his state of the union address that the british government had confirmed iraq's efforts to buy uranium in africa.  ms. martin made it clear earlier on thursday that it was mr. libby who had gone out of his way to take on the task of speaking to ms. mitchell about that issue.  but at the july meeting in the white house, she said, mr. hadley made a point of turning around and looking directly at her as if to signify he knew she was ms. mitchell's source.  ms. martin was asked by patrick j. fitzgerald, the prosecutor, whether she was, in fact, the source.  ''no,'' she said.  mr. fitzgerald asked what mr. libby was doing when mr. hadley was all but accusing her.  ''he was looking down at the floor,'' she said.  at the end of the meeting, she said, mr. hadley took her and other press aides aside and upbraided them further.  theodore v. wells jr., mr. libby's chief lawyer, in his cross-examination of ms. martin, tried to challenge her memory, as he has done with other witnesses. he noted that she originally told investigators that she spoke to mr. harlow sometime after july 7. but she has since acknowledged it must have been earlier because she recognized mr. wilson when he appeared on the nbc news program ''meet the press'' on july 7 to make his charges about the administration.  over all, however, ms. martin was a self-assured witness whose testimony appeared to have frayed mr. libby's version of events. she is also a loyal republican who was recruited to work for the vice president by mary matalin, a close friend of both mr. libby and mr. cheney.  she is married to kevin martin, the chairman of the federal communications commission, and now works as the deputy director of communications for policy and planning for president bush.  her cross-examination will continue when the trial resumes monday. she will be followed on the witness stand by ari fleischer, the former white house press secretary.  