giuliani is expected to sell one of his three businesses   former mayor rudolph w. giuliani has recently taken steps to sell the biggest division of his consulting business as he considers running for the presidency, according to a person with detailed knowledge of the firm's plans.  the sale of the division, giuliani capital advisors, a boutique investment bank, is being pursued to prevent its clients' activities from being used against mr. giuliani in a heated political campaign, said that person, who spoke only on the condition of anonymity.  the same could be said about giuliani partners' clients, which have included companies embroiled in accounting scandals, and about bracewell & giuliani, a houston law firm that mr. giuliani joined in 2005 that represents energy producers often accused of being major polluters.  the possible sale, first reported yesterday by the new york post, is one more indication that mr. giuliani is moving toward running for president. mr. giuliani has put off moving from an exploratory phase to formally announcing his candidacy. aides have recently said a decision could be months away. mr. giuliani declined to comment, a spokeswoman for him said.  joseph mercurio, a political consultant, said he believed that mr. giuliani was heading toward a run, but he said that the moves on the corporate front did not relieve his more immediate difficulty: that his support of abortion rights, gay civil unions and gun control would be likely to trouble core voters in a republican primary.  ''i think he's running. i don't think there's any question about that,'' said mr. mercurio, who has represented both democratic and republican candidates. ''the only question is, given his policies and positions on issues, can he run very far?''  the possible sale of the investment bank appears to have been considered only in recent weeks. during extensive interviews earlier this month about the firm's future, mr. giuliani's top aides said nothing of that order was under consideration.  the sale would greatly diminish the size of mr. giuliani's consulting business, cutting its overall revenue by as much as half and reducing the employee count by nearly 60 percent. such a move would leave giuliani partners, which has about 60 employees and 12 to 20 clients, and giuliani security and safety, which has only 10 employees and an unknown number of clients. such a sale would likely further amplify questions, already hotly discussed both inside and outside the giuliani offices, about whether any of the businesses could survive the departure of mr. giuliani and the key executives who would be expected to join his campaign.  in december 2004, giuliani partners bought the firm from ernst & young, the accounting firm, for $9.8 million. under ernst & young, the firm reported revenues of $85 million in the 2004 fiscal year and $76 million in the 2002 fiscal year (its publicly available filings for the 2003 fiscal year are incomplete), or about $6.7 million a month.  during the last five months that ernst & young owned the firm, its revenues dropped to $3.3 million a month. in 2005, the first year under giuliani ownership, revenues rose to about $4 million a month.  the firm has not yet reported its 2006 revenues. but based on the 2005 figures, giuliani capital advisors could fetch in the neighborhood of $80 million to $100 million and would likely generate considerable interest, said matthew a. litfin, an analyst who covers the industry for william blair & company, a chicago-based investment firm.  ''for a company like giuliani capital advisors, i think there would be a premium paid because they are quite balanced across different industries and their people are known for being high quality,'' said mr. litfin.  steven d. oesterle, a partner in giuliani partners and chairman of the investment bank, said three weeks ago that capital advisors had replaced most of eight managing directors who left last year, and had a bright future. ''the firm is in a strong and profitable financial position,'' he said.  