at lawmakers' retreat, pep talks address concerns of the new g.o.p. minority   president bush tried to rally house republicans on friday as the lawmakers hunkered down on the eastern shore and struggled to come to grips with their new minority status and the challenge of the continuing war in iraq.  gathered to plot how to make their stay in the minority as brief as possible, 160 house republicans were exhorted by mr. bush to work with him on education, health care, immigration and retirement issues and to give his troop buildup in iraq a chance to work.  ''i fully understand there are differences of opinion, but one of the things i have discovered is in washington, d.c., most people understand the consequences of failure,'' mr. bush said. ''and if failure is not an option, then it's up to the president to come up with a plan that is more likely to succeed.''  after his public comments, mr. bush took more than a dozen questions from lawmakers in a closed session. republican leaders said mr. bush offered a detailed explanation of his iraq strategy and made it clear that he understood the political pressure the war was putting on lawmakers back home. they said the president's determination bolstered the republican rank and file, which will face a fight over a democratic resolution opposing the president's new strategy.  representative adam putnam of florida, chairman of the house republican conference, said mr. bush told lawmakers that ''because i sleep in the white house, don't think i don't know what is going on out there.'' mr. putnam said that that ''reminds people that he really does get it and understands what ordinary members are going through.''  ''and he said: 'know this,' '' mr. putnam said. '' 'there is a commander in chief and i ran for this office and that is the expectation of this office and the responsibility of this office.' '' the comments came on a day the administration stepped up its campaign against congressional opposition to the troop increase.  though house republicans have been among the president's most reliable supporters, there is deep skepticism among even these loyalists about whether his new iraq plan will work. the skepticism is coupled with political unease about what may happen if the plan does not -- particularly after election losses influenced by public frustration with the war.  mr. bush sought to allay those concerns and made a veiled reference to calls by some democrats to block spending on the added troops, noting that he had met earlier in the day with lt. gen. david h. petraeus after the senate confirmed the general as the new commander in iraq.  ''it reminded me as the president i must make sure he has everything he needs, that he thinks he needs to succeed in the mission that we have sent him on,'' mr. bush said. ''and i look forward to working with you to make sure that our generals and our troops that we put into harm's way have the support of the united states congress.''  in his public comments, mr. bush made no mention of the recent election's outcome for his party, though he seemed pleased to see no sign of the democrats.  ''i'm glad to be among friends,'' said mr. bush, who is scheduled to visit a democratic retreat next week.  the majority of house republicans attending the two-day retreat at a resort in this historic waterfront community have never served in the minority, having joined the house after the republican takeover in 1994.  trying to inspire the house members, the party leadership brought in newt gingrich, the former speaker and the architect of the 1994 victory, who urged them to think big. they examined where they lost direction in the months leading up to the midterm elections and what they could do to recover. lou holtz, the former football coach who led notre dame to a national championship in 1988, delivered what was described as a rousing motivational speech.  many house republican lawmakers and senior aides acknowledged that the sudden loss of the majority had been a shock and that they were having difficulty adjusting. people who once ruled the house find themselves with much less to do and much less power with which to do it. the republicans also believe they have been badly mistreated by the new democratic majority in the opening days of the 110th congress, as democrats who promised a more inclusive house rammed through their priority legislation with little consideration for republican views.  but the new minority has won little sympathy, given that the democrats complained bitterly that republicans ran roughshod over them in the 12-year republican reign, subjecting democrats to some of the same treatment.  republican officials said the question-and-answer session with the president covered a variety of issues and touched on one lawmaker's flood control project. the president was applauded for his new health care push, and lawmakers said he gave no ground on immigration -- a subject on which he and house republicans have diverged. republicans compared the session to a frank family discussion.  ''i felt it did a lot of good to have the president here,'' said representative eric cantor of virginia, the chief deputy whip.  