with 52 points, crawford steals the show   when you are as hot, as brilliant and as close to perfect as jamal crawford was last night, the record shattering does not end at the final buzzer. an hour after crawford lit up the madison square garden scoreboard and the miami heat, he picked up his cell phone.  ''twenty-four messages,'' crawford said in disbelief. ''never had that many before. it's usually six.''  it was the only time all night that crawford seemed in awe of anything. the dumbfounded expressions mostly belonged to the heat, and crawford was the one who put them there.  delivering the best individual knick performance in nearly four years, crawford scored 52 points to lead a 116-96 rout and cause a sudden bottleneck in the wireless voice-mail network.  the scoring total beat crawford's career high by 2 points and represented the fifth-highest total in franchise history. it was perfectly timed, as well; the knicks were missing their leading scorer, eddy curry, and were desperate for a victory after a rough week.  ''that was heavenly intervention,'' said jerome james, who took curry's place in the starting lineup and checked shaquille o'neal.  only four nights earlier, the heat (19-24) routed the knicks (19-26) by 18 points in a game that ranked among their worst this season. they had lost five of their past seven games, and another defeat would have dropped them nine games below .500, which would have been a new low.  instead, the garden was filled with roars of delight, chants of crawford's name and one very large group hug by the knicks' bench. they routed the defending champion heat for the second time this season -- and this time with both dwyane wade and o'neal (albeit briefly) in the lineup.  ''i wasn't even thinking about it being my night. i just wanted to take what was there,'' crawford said.  crawford made 20 of 30 field goals, went 8 for 10 from 3-point range and converted all four of his free throws. during a 23-minute stretch -- from late in the first quarter to late in the third -- crawford hit 16 consecutive shots, including all eight of the 3-pointers, for 42 points.  according to the elias sports bureau, no other player has converted that many in a row in a game in the past 10 years (the only years they could track). o'neal was the last to hit 16 straight, over two games in february 2006. crawford fell three shots short of johnny newman's franchise record for consecutive makes over two games in 1988.  the streak ended for crawford when he missed a 19-footer with 2 minutes 17 seconds left in the third quarter. he struck again, making an 11-footer 21 seconds later.  ''i didn't look at anybody. i just stayed in my own zone,'' said crawford, whose previous high of 50 points came on april 11, 2004, while playing for the chicago bulls in a game against toronto.  coach isiah thomas said he was unaware of crawford's career mark, but he happened to leave him in just long enough to beat it. thomas said he pulled crawford once wade (37 points) was on the bench for good. wade checked out during a timeout with 6:52 left.  the knicks led by 20 points heading into the fourth quarter. crawford started the period by making a driving layup that got him to 48. after shooting an air ball from the arc, he struck from 12 feet and got his first standing ovation. he finished the night with a 22-footer with 6:59 left.  crawford skipped to the bench during a timeout at 6:52 and was mobbed by stephon marbury, quentin richardson, david lee and nate robinson. thomas left him in for one more possession, and had crawford foul michael doleac to stop the game and give the fans a chance for one more standing ovation. he left for good with 6:51 left.  ''he did it very classy, because we still had seven minutes to go,'' crawford said of thomas. ''i appreciated that.''  during the third quarter, thomas gave crawford his best advice.  ''i told him not to get around too many people and just try to stay balanced and stay focused and stay in the quiet, peaceful place that you're at right now,'' thomas said.  the last knick to score 50 points in a game, the retired allan houston, watched the show from a courtside seat. ''i was fortunate i could be here for that. it was amazing to see,'' houston said.  crawford was a picture of humility, crediting his teammates for unselfish passes and screens and thomas for calling great plays.  the only hint of cockiness came late in the streak, between field goals 15 and 16. with the crowd chanting, ''lets go, crawford,'' he jogged upcourt, glanced at the press table and winked.  ''unbelievable performance,'' said wade. ''i have never seen anything like that before. the guy was hot.''  the heat had a 41-40 lead in the second quarter when crawford began his run. he scored the knicks' next 10 points. the knicks finished the half on a 25-8 run, with crawford providing 17 points and giving them a 65-49 lead at halftime. the knicks sealed the game with an 11-0 run to open the second half, with crawford providing 7 of the points.  crawford missed his first four shots of the game before starting the streak. he started in place of the slumping jared jeffries. thomas said he wanted more offense on the court but would not say whether the move was permanent.  o'neal, who returned to the heat's rotation on wednesday, after a two-month absence, started the game in place of alonzo mourning, who was ill. o'neal, still regaining his stamina after knee surgery, played just 15 minutes and finished with 11 points.  marbury, who missed the knicks' last six quarters because of a sore left knee, was steady in his return, with 9 points and a season-high 13 assists.  rebounds  the worst moment of nate robinson's nba career will not prevent him from repeating his best moment. the league has invited robinson to defend his slam-dunk title next month at all-star weekend. robinson had feared he might be denied that chance because he instigated the dec. 16 brawl with denver. robinson served a 10-game suspension. ''i'm ecstatic,'' he said of defending his title. regarding the fight and its effect on his image, robinson said, ''that's behind me, what happened.''  pro basketball  