why iraq's a mess: just count the ways   to the editor:  re ''bush iraq plan is condemned by senate panel'' (front page, jan. 25):  vice president dick cheney, as you report, said congressional action would not interfere with iraq war plans, declaring to cnn, ''it won't stop us.''  unfortunately for america and the world, that statement pretty much sums up the unilateral approach and arrogance of this administration and explains why america is in the mess it's in.  brant thomas  brooklyn, jan. 25, 2007  to the editor:  ''the president has made his decision,'' vice president dick cheney told cnn. never mind that a senate panel has condemned the plan to send more troops to iraq. never mind how many more lives will be lost, how many more families will shed tears, how many people will march against the war in washington on saturday.  it is reported that 3,044 american service members have died for president bush's war. never mind. the president smiles and sleeps very well at night. do you?  monique frugier  ardmore, pa., jan. 25, 2007  to the editor:  the senate foreign relations committee's denunciation of plans to send more troops to iraq is next to worthless. the measure's nonbinding nature is, in effect, a green light for a buildup.  this is not what a majority of the electorate voted for in november.  arnold mori  fairport, n.y., jan. 25, 2007  to the editor:  ''in a new joint u.s.-iraqi patrol, the americans go first'' (news article, jan. 25) tells us all the reasons our military efforts in iraq have no chance of success.  iraqi troops who are supposedly being trained to help us secure baghdad don't show up on time, disappear at key moments and act with a complete lack of professionalism when they are present.  american troops are fired upon from many angles by unidentifiable insurgents. incredibly, after the iraqi troops disappear, the americans wonder if these same soldiers are shooting at them. all this to retake an area of slums and deserted high-rises that we've now fought to regain at least three times before.  as if to highlight the absurdity of our position, an iraqi soldier points a rifle at an american reporter, pulls the trigger and then laughs because there's no ammunition.  how terribly sad for americans and iraqis alike that we are in this hopeless conflict. a completely new approach is now required.  ken swensen  pound ridge, n.y., jan. 25, 2007  to the editor:  re ''iraq parliament finds a quorum hard to come by'' (front page, jan. 24):  this is an insult to americans. as we send our young men and women abroad to bring order to iraq, many of its so-called leaders, democratically elected leaders, have abandoned their posts. why aren't these members of parliament discussing and arguing and trying to find solutions to their country's problems?  we have given the iraqis an opportunity, a sanctuary where they can iron out their differences, and they throw it back in our face. iraq does not deserve our help.  roger woody  mancos, colo., jan. 25, 2007  