the neediest cases; in fighting disorder, family stays vigilant   norma turner, 14, is her mother's daughter. her mother, kareen brown, held a recent portrait of the two of them, which showed their striking resemblance. the same eyes, same face, same tendrils of hair, the same happiness shines out of the picture.  they also suffer from a disorder that puts them both at high risk for developing cancer and subjects them to numerous preventive operations. ''it's in the family, the genes,'' ms. brown, 35, said.  in 2002, ms. brown was sick. she was in the hospital, but she did not know what was causing the terrible pain in her stomach or the bleeding from her rectum.  norma, who keeps all the details of the treatment in order, told the story: ''she felt something wet. she just got up and saw the bed was messed up with blood.''  ms. brown had colon cancer. she was in the operating room before she even knew what was happening. afterward, she spoke to the doctor. ''he said, 'do you know what you have inside of you?' i said, 'no,' '' she remembered. ''it was a tumor. i was so sad.''  ''i didn't know what to do, like i'm lost,'' she continued. ''i was saying, 'i'm going to die? leave her? what's going to happen?' it was scary. a lot of people die of cancer.''  ms. brown received a diagnosis of familial adenomatous polyposis, a genetic condition that causes thousands of tiny polyps to develop on the wall of the colon. if left untreated, the polyps usually develop into cancer.  ''they say it was just ready to spread. i'm lucky. i'm lucky,'' ms. brown said. but the polyps keep coming. ms. brown had four operations in as many years. from november 2005 to february 2006, a major infection kept her in the hospital. norma lived with a great-aunt and ms. brown, on life support and unable to eat, lost 80 pounds.  ms. brown was the first in her family to receive the diagnosis. her father, two brothers, and a twin sister have the same disorder. in may, norma also received a diagnosis of the disorder. the polyps in her colon would require surgery.  ms. brown said she was in disbelief after learning that her daughter would have to be operated on. ''oh my god, at the age of 14,'' ms. brown said. ''she was too young.''  in september, norma underwent a seven-hour surgery to remove the polyps. ''there was a 50-50 percent chance of me getting a colostomy bag,'' norma said.  the night before the surgery, ''they put a tube up my nose and inserted it in my stomach,'' norma said. it was awful, she said, adding that she remembered asking, ''why did my grandfather have to have this sickness?''  she does not remember much of that morning. ''all i remember, i said goodbye to my mother,'' she said. ms. brown added: ''she was strong. she was brave.''  ''i remember i woke up,'' norma continued. ''i remember seeing stephanie there.'' stephanie mendell, a social worker at new alternatives for children, has been working with norma since shortly after the disorder was diagnosed.  new alternatives provides preventive services for families with medically fragile children and is a member agency of the federation of protestant welfare agencies, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund.  because doctors were able to save enough of norma's colon, she did not need a colostomy bag. every six months she will require a colonoscopy to check for polyps. ms. brown hopes that her own colostomy bag will be removed this spring. but the disorder remains: doctors found two more polyps in ms. brown's intestines in december.  while struggling to treat the disease, norma and ms. brown were also struggling with not having a stable home environment. in august 2005, they moved into a basement apartment in the bronx after spending about six months in a homeless shelter.  the $825 rent is covered by housing stability plus, a department of homeless services program, and a preventive subsidy from the city's administration for children's services. ms. brown's monthly income is $178.50 from public assistance, supplemented with $144 in food stamps.  the disease should qualify her for supplemental security income. but ms. brown, an immigrant from jamaica and a legal resident, is not a citizen, which makes her ineligible. ''she can't qualify for s.s.i., and she absolutely can't work,'' said ms. mendell, who is helping her apply for citizenship.  this winter, $1,070 from neediest cases was used to buy them winter clothing, bedding and pajamas. the money was also used to buy twin beds, an improvement over the one bed they had to share. ''one, i'm not kicking her,'' norma said. ''and two, we're not fighting for blankets.''  norma, an eighth grader, is still catching up on school work that she missed while she was recovering from surgery. ''norma's an amazing kid,'' said ms. mendell, noting the girl's resilience. ''i just look at her as someone with a lot of potential, who really wants to do well, and can do well, given the right opportunity.''  previously recorded -- $7,363,501.28  recorded thursday -- 13,963.00  total -- $7,377,464.28  last year to date -- $6,593,664.83  neediest cases  correction:  february 6, 2007, tuesday  a chart with articles on jan. 27, 28 and 29 about the new york times neediest cases fund misstated the amount of donations recorded on jan. 25. it was $13,693, not $13,963. as a result, the chart also misstated the total amount donated as of then. it was $7,377,194.28, not $7,377,464.28.  