aid conference raises $7.6 billion for lebanese government   led by saudi arabia and the united states, international donors from more than 30 countries on thursday pledged $7.6 billion in aid for lebanon, in a bold effort to try to prop up the government of prime minister fouad siniora.  but even as mr. siniora was shaking hands and thanking world leaders in paris for exceeding the conference's goal of $5 billion, there was chaos back in lebanon. four people were shot dead and 150 wounded in clashes between groups supporting the government and protesters aligned with the hezbollah-led opposition. both sides appealed for calm.  the clashes in lebanon this week, which came just as mr. siniora sought to present his country as ripe for investment, were another embarrassment to the prime minister, who has been fighting to keep his government afloat. the political faction led by hezbollah and backed by iran and syria has been calling for his resignation for more than two months.  lebanon is a battlefield in a larger proxy war. the united states, its sunni arab allies and europe, all represented at the conference, are on one side. iran and syria are on the other, backing hezbollah as it seeks to increase its power. they have been giving an estimated $40 million a month to hezbollah and other groups in lebanon, analysts say. the money available to rebuild towns and communities damaged in hezbollah's war with israel last summer is seen as pivotal to winning the support of the lebanese people.  saudi arabia, which is seeking to counter the rising influence of iran in the muslim world, led the pledges for the government on thursday with a promise of $1.1 billion in loans and grants. the united states pledged $770 million in loans and grants, bringing to $1 billion the amount it has pledged to the government of mr. siniora since september.  the donors in paris took pains to deflect criticism that their aid pledges were solely meant to prop up mr. siniora. secretary of state condoleezza rice, when asked whether the united states pledge was contingent on mr. siniora remaining in power, deflected the question.  mr. siniora, seated beside ms. rice during an early morning news briefing, quickly interjected, ''no conditions, no conditions.'' ms. rice replied that the money was for the lebanese people.  ''clearly this is a package that is for lebanon, and that is extremely important to understand,'' she said. ''lebanon is a democracy. that said, lebanon is also undertaking some important economic reforms that are critical to making any of this work, and it's not at all unusual that donors expect that those reforms are going to continue, in fact, as the donor community responds to the needs.''  when pressed later on whether the american funds would be cut off if hezbollah gained control of the lebanese government, she said she did not want to discuss ''hypotheticals.''  ''as you know, hezbollah is considered a terrorist organization by the u.s.,'' she said.  the european union offered $522 million in loans and other aid, while france separately promised $650 million in loans.  the conference, in the kleber conference center near the arc de triomphe, had a somewhat surreal air. one after another, foreign dignitaries at a conference table announced, in french, arabic and english, how much money they were willing to put forward.  ''be brief, be good and be generous,'' president jacques chirac of france, the host, exhorted the group before the event.  the world bank offered $1 billion in loans, grants and other aid. the european investment bank offered $1.2 billion, and the islamic development bank followed with $250 million.  lebanon is hobbled from the economic and political impact of the israel-hezbollah war, and reconstruction efforts have been burdened by the country's $41 billion public debt.  on tuesday, groups opposing mr. siniora's government essentially shut down the country, staging protests in beirut, blocking roads with burning tires and setting off clashes that killed three people and left more than 130 wounded. thursday's clashes added to the burdens of mr. siniora, whose survival thus far, lebanon analysts say, is attributed not only to his support from about half of the country, but also to his strong international support.  even with the $7.6 billion in donations and pledges, mr. siniora will still return to lebanon with a battle on his hands as he tries to establish an international tribunal that could eventually implicate syria in the assassination of rafik hariri, a former lebanese prime minister who was an outspoken critic of syria.  syria occupied lebanon for 30 years but was forced to withdraw its troops after mr. hariri's death. the united states has accused syria and iran of trying to bring down the siniora government to wreck plans for the creation of an international tribunal to try suspects in the case.  