material things, cataloged   despite the less-than-scintillating title, ''inventory control'' brings to the anthony giordano gallery at dowling college an appealing group of works by seven artists, most of whom exhibit frequently. some viewers may even recognize individual works, for a few have made the rounds of group shows in and around new york city.  judith page, a brooklyn-based artist and curator, is behind this exhibition, which invites us to think about the role of lists, records, databases, statistical charts and graphs -- what you might call inventory -- in our lives. the artworks she has chosen reflect the process of making lists, reports or records, as well as the kinds of items and ideas listed in them.  as a subject for artworks, inventory is not new. as ms. page points out in the exhibition catalog, we might understand the first, prehistoric scribblings of animals, humans and spirits on cave walls as a ''system of classification.'' they are something like a symbolic inventory.  inventories for religious, civic, scientific or other purposes continued to be given visual representation throughout history. most obviously, the hieroglyphs often found inside ancient egyptian temples and tombs listed the possessions that the deceased owned in their time on earth or that they thought they would need to live comfortably in the afterlife.  a similarly detailed, itemized record of things in their possession was made by some of the artists in this exhibition, among them elise engler, who during 1997 and 1998 produced a detailed visual inventory of everything she owned. it is an extraordinary list, not to mention an appealing artwork: 17 panels containing 13,127 minute color drawings of every imaginable household object.  similarly, susan hamburger inventories her personal possessions in small, cropped paintings of different aspects of a kitchen, while dahlia elsayed charts changing emotional states, making inventory-oriented topographical paintings that associate geographical locations with moods, thoughts and states of mind. her work, ''start of the pre-season'' (2005), was painted late last summer, at a time of pleasant anticipation of the months ahead -- the beginning of the new art season, the return to school and the buildup to the football season.  chris bors collects and inventories imagery from the internet, which he then uses to create image collages and videos about youth culture. ''leaving my boots in the mosh pit'' (2005) is a compilation of found imagery of youths dancing and fighting at rock concerts. nearby is ''slayerslayerslayer'' (2003), a video of the artist, face obscured, recounting in nauseatingly adolescent detail an alcohol- and lsd-fueled visit to a concert by the metal band slayer in upstate new york. here the inventory is of a personal experience.  other works are less stimulating, like josh jordan's collection of 33 quick sketches of beautiful women seen on new york's l train, or jim costanzo's virtual performance, in which he inventories his daily activities through written records, digital photographs and scanned receipts, which are posted online and printed out in daily update sheets for viewers.  then there is charley friedman's ''carpet world'' (2006), a humongous globe made of detailed sections of colored carpet. here the notion of inventory relates more to the materials used by the artist, though the work makes you think of stores like carpet world, with their endless range of styles and colors.  mr. friedman's fuzzy, cuddly carpet globe has a haunting, momentous presence, though it is not clear why. is it a comment on changing country configurations? (he has not fully delineated the newly independent, post-soviet union states in central asia, for example.) or is it a metaphor for the ultimate inventory, life on earth?  ''inventory control,'' anthony giordano gallery at dowling college, idle hour boulevard, oakdale, through feb. 25; (631) 244-3016 or dowling.edu.  art review  