relatives' groups use tv and internet to call for more details with names on 9/11 memorial   far from having been settled last month behind closed doors at the world trade center memorial foundation, the three-year battle over the arrangement of victims' names at the 9/11 memorial escalated yesterday to television and the internet.  a group of prominent advocates for victims' relatives said that they would begin showing a 60-second advertisement today on ny1 news. it says that the arrangement put forth by mayor michael r. bloomberg, who is also the foundation chairman, will be ''just a cold, random list of names.''  the ad is posted on a new web site, www.savethe911memorial.com, that the family groups hope will marshal public support for their alternative.  mr. bloomberg quickly dismissed their effort. ''you can't please everybody,'' he said yesterday during a question-and-answer session with reporters. ''we've come up with a rational basis on which to list the names.''  ''the naming issue is something that has been decided,'' he added, noting that the arrangement has been approved by the foundation's executive committee.  most family members on the foundation board favor the mayor's plan, as does the uniformed firefighters association. but the uniformed fire officers association has criticized it for not specifying ranks.  broadly, the mayor's plan and the alternative put forth by the family groups are similar. they both would arrange the names of the 2,979 victims on parapets around the memorial pools marking the locations of the twin towers. in both cases, the names of those who died at the trade center would be at the pool that corresponds to their tower. both proposals set uniformed rescue workers apart, arrayed by company or unit.  but the proposals differ in personal details that many family members say are critical to telling the full story of 9/11. the mayor's proposal would allow co-workers to be grouped together, but there would be no indication on the memorial parapet of what companies they worked for. neither would their floor locations be shown. the ranks of uniformed workers would not be indicated. and ages would not be given for anyone.  the family groups' proposal would provide all those elements.  ''ages are important, ages are important,'' said c. lee hanson. his son, peter, daughter-in-law, sue, and granddaughter, christine, were aboard united airlines flight 175, which hit the south tower.  he imagined visitors' experience at the memorial if the family groups' alternative were adopted. ''they're going to see, 'christine, 2 1/2 years old,' '' he said, ''and will say, 'who could do such a thing?' ''  edith lutnick, the executive director of the cantor fitzgerald relief fund, said that under the mayor's plan, if she were directed to find her brother's name on the memorial, she would confront a bewildering array of codes indicating his location at the north tower pool. ''he will be n.t.-s.-22-9,'' she said, ''instead of gary lutnick, 36, cantor fitzgerald, 101st to 105th floors.''  