strict vegan ethics, frosted with hedonism   isa chandra moskowitz, a vegan chef, does not particularly like to talk about tofu. ditto seitan, tempeh and nutritional yeast.  ''i think vegan cooks need to learn to cook vegetables first,'' she said last week during a cupcake-baking marathon. ''then maybe they can be allowed to move on to meat substitutes.''  ms. moskowitz, 34, was born in coney island hospital, lives in brooklyn, and is a typically impatient and opinionated new yorker. she can't stand how slowly most cooks peel garlic, makes relentless fun of rachael ray and rolls her eyes at the mention of california hippies.  but as a vegan and a follower of punk music since age 14, she is also part of a culinary movement that helped turn the chaotic energy of punk culture of the 1970s and 1980s into a progressive political force.  ''punk taught me to question everything,'' ms. moskowitz said. ''of course, in my case that means questioning how to make a hostess cupcake without eggs, butter or cream.''  the charm of ms. moskowitz -- in person, in her cookbooks and on her public-access television cooking show, the post-punk kitchen (theppk.com/shows/) -- is that she makes even the deprivations of veganism and the rage of punk seem like fun. like feminism that embraces makeup and miniskirts -- the frivolous bits -- ms. moskowitz's veganism embraces chocolate, white flour, confectioners' sugar, and food coloring.  wearing a black ''made out of babies'' t-shirt (it's a friend's band) above a red-and-white checked apron, she bent maternally over a batch of strawberry cupcakes. ''don't you just want to pinch their little cupcake cheeks,'' she said.  but can a cupcake be cute and punk at the same time? in the early days of punk, bands like the sex pistols were notorious for nihilism, anarchism and epic consumption of drugs and alcohol -- none of which would seem to lead to tofu and chamomile tea. but as punk became more political (and as bands self-destructed) in the 1990s, many punks adopted a more profoundly rebellious stance: against drugs, against alcohol and against the whole habit of mindless consumption.  ''it was about purifying the movement, about being poison-free,'' said ted leo, of ted leo and the pharmacists, who led the band chisel in the 1990s. he became vegetarian in 1988 and has been vegan since 1998. many punks became vegetarian to protest corporate and government control of the food supply. veganism takes vegetarianism farther into cruelty-free territory by avoiding anything produced by animals: milk, cheese, eggs, honey, etc.  ''i would love to live in a world where i knew the eggs came from happy chickens,'' ms. moskowitz said. ''but in brooklyn? that's not going to happen.  ''besides, eggs are the big lie in baking. all the books say they provide structure, but that's kind of crap.''  at 16, ms. moskowitz dropped out of the high school of music and art in new york to follow bands, live in squats in the east village and cook for social justice.  ''i learned knife skills by cooking for food not bombs,'' she said, referring to the activist group that protests corporate and government food policy. ''but i also learned to love julia child and martha stewart. vegan food can and must be pretty,'' she said, pounding a fist on the butcher-block counter.  ms. moskowitz's kitchen, like punk music itself, has a strong do-it-yourself aesthetic. her husband, a carpenter, builds more shelves when the ingredients threaten to take over, the oven needs frequent coaxing to get up to temperature, and if fizzle the cat wants to sit on top of the refrigerator, the cupcakes must move over and make room.  ''here is the hideous curdled face of vegan baking,'' ms. moskowitz said, gesturing to a bowl of soy milk mixed with vegetable oil and cider vinegar. baking, she said, has long been the final frontier for vegan cooks.  her second cookbook, ''vegan cupcakes take over the world,'' was published by marlowe and company last fall. her first, ''vegan with a vengeance'' (marlowe, 2005), has sold more than 50,000 copies.  ''omnivores'' -- that's meat-and-dairy eaters -- ''can't imagine baking without eggs and butter,'' she said. ''but we use cider vinegar instead of buttermilk for tenderizing, and really good shortening for the fat, and the rest just happens.'' nonhydrogenated shortening and margarine produced by earthbalance and full-fat soy milk from silk are her baking staples.  from them, instead of lumpy, penitential scones and muffins (the usual vegan baked goods) ms. moskowitz and her co-author terry hope romero produce insanely fetching cupcakes with mousse fillings, butter cream frostings, chocolate ganache icings and sprinkles galore.  ms. moskowitz says that she has received passionate e-mail messages not only from vegans but also from parents of children allergic to eggs or dairy products, who are thrilled to find vegan baked goods that are not made with whole-wheat flour and egg substitutes and that actually taste good.  the next book by the two women, to be published in the fall, will be ''the long-awaited vegan joy of cooking,'' ms. moskowitz said. ''vegan food is everywhere.''  in the recipes below, north african spices lighten a rich vegetable stew with a peanut base; sweet butternut squash stands in perfectly for the sweet shrimp in an otherwise traditional vietnamese spring roll.  ms. moskowitz and ms. romero both have been vegetarian since age 16, and vegan for almost that long. ''it's kind of like being gay, in that vegans tend to remember an 'aha' moment in adolescence or childhood,'' ms. moskowitz said. ''it happens when you realize that the lambs or chickens on your plate are the same as the ones at the petting zoo.''  it is also like being gay in that, 20 years ago, the notion of a vegetarian teenager was far more alien than it is today.  ''people used to throw chicken nuggets at me in the cafeteria,'' said ms. romero, who grew up in plainville, conn.  the number of adult vegetarians has remained steady at 2 to 3 percent, the vegetarian resource group has found in 10 years of regular polling. but american teenagers have been taking up vegetarianism in growing numbers.  in a 2005 harris interactive poll for the group, 10 percent of girls ages 13 to 18 said they ''never'' ate meat, poultry or seafood.  in a 2006 poll of 100,000 college students by the food service giant aramark, 30 percent of all students said that it was ''very important'' to them to have vegetarian food options on campus, up from 26 percent in 2004.  but punk vegans like ms. moskowitz and mr. leo acknowledge that they are still far outside the mainstream, and that the label ''vegan'' -- unlike ''vegetarian'' -- can still inspire a strong negative reaction.  ''any time you confront a deeply ingrained societal norm, people are going to get upset,'' mr. leo said.  ms. moskowitz agreed that the vegan movement is in need of a public-relations overhaul. ''i can't say there's no self-righteousness in the movement, and also, a lot of the food is awful.''  she said vegans should stop whining about what they can and can't eat, and start cooking. ''when someone invites you to dinner, bring something delicious, and share it,'' she said.  this peaceable approach -- smoothing frosting over the rough edges of rage -- might be the key to ms. moskowitz's appeal.  ''you can't stay angry forever,'' she said. ''either as a punk or as a vegan.''  butternut squash rice paper rolls  adapted from isa chandra moskowitz  time: 45 minutes  for the rolls:  1 pound butternut squash, peeled and cut into 1/2-inch cubes  1 tablespoon olive oil  4 ounces vermicelli rice noodles or rice sticks  12 8-inch round rice paper wrappers  1/3 cup roasted salted pumpkin seeds or peanuts, coarsely chopped  1 cup cilantro leaves and thin stems, torn into bite-size pieces  for the dipping sauce:  1 to 2 tablespoons soy sauce  2 tablespoons rice vinegar  2 teaspoons sugar  2 tablespoons asian hot chili oil  2 teaspoons sesame oil.  1. heat oven to 400 degrees. place squash on a baking sheet, drizzle with oil and spread in a single layer. roast 15 minutes, toss gently and return to oven until tender and caramelized, about 10 more minutes. transfer to a plate to cool.  2. meanwhile, prepares noodles: bring a large pot of water to a boil. turn off heat, add noodles, and allow to sit for 10 minutes, stirring occasionally. drain in a colander and rinse with cold water; set aside.  3. to assemble rolls: fill a large pie plate or shallow bowl with very warm tap water. lay a clean, damp kitchen towel on counter to use as a work surface; this will prevent wrappers from sliding. submerge two paper wrappers in the water to soften, about 1 minute. gently transfer one wrapper to towel.  4. in lower third of circle, place a small handful of noodles, leaving about an inch and a half of empty wrapper on either side. place two or three pieces of squash on top of noodles, and sprinkle with pumpkin seeds and cilantro. to roll, fold left and right sides of wrapper snugly over the filling. lift the bottom of the wrapper over the filling, tucking it underneath, then roll up firmly but gently. place seam side down on a plate, and continue with remaining wrappers and filling. cut in half when ready to serve.  5. for dipping sauce: in a small bowl, stir together 1 tablespoon soy sauce, the vinegar and sugar. add chili oil and sesame oil, and taste. if desired, add additional soy sauce.  yield: 12 rolls.  devil's food cupcakes with fluffy white filling and chocolate icing  adapted from ''vegan with a vengeance,'' by isa chandra moskowitz (marlowe, 2005)  time: 1 hour 45 minutes  for the cupcakes:  nonstick cooking spray  1 cup all-purpose flour  1/4 cup dutch-process cocoa powder  3 tablespoons black cocoa powder (see note) or more dutch-process cocoa powder  1 teaspoon baking powder  1/2 teaspoon baking soda  1/4 teaspoon salt  1 cup plain soy milk  1/4 cup canola oil  1/2 cup pure maple syrup  1/4 cup sugar  1 teaspoon apple cider vinegar  1 teaspoon vanilla extract  for the filling:  1/3 cup nonhydrogenated margarine, such as earthbalance  1/3 cup nonhydrogenated shortening  2 1/2 to 3 cups confectioners' sugar  2 teaspoons vanilla extract  for the chocolate icing:  1/3 cup plain soy milk  4 ounces bittersweet or semisweet chocolate, chopped  2 tablespoons pure maple syrup or confectioners' sugar  for the royal icing:  2 cups confectioners' sugar  1 to 2 tablespoons plain soy milk.  1. for the cupcakes: heat oven to 350 degrees. line a 12-muffin pan with paper liners, and spray lightly with nonstick spray. in a mixing bowl, stir together the flour, cocoa powder, baking powder, baking soda and salt. in a mixer, combine the soy milk, oil, syrup, sugar, vinegar and vanilla. mix at medium speed for 2 minutes. add half the dry ingredients and mix to blend. add remaining dry ingredients and mix for 1 minute.  2. use a standard ice cream scoop to fill cupcake liners 3/4 full. bake until a toothpick inserted in center comes out clean, 25 to 30 minutes. turn out onto a cooling rack and allow to cool completely.  3. for the filling: in a mixer, beat margarine and shortening until combined. add 21/2 cups confectioners' sugar and beat until very fluffy, about 10 minutes. taste for sweetness and add remaining 1/2 cup sugar if desired. add vanilla and beat for 1 minute more.  4. for the chocolate icing: in a small skillet, bring soy milk to a simmer. reduce heat to very low and stir in the chocolate and maple syrup, stirring until just melted. turn off heat.  5. for the royal icing: using an electric mixer or by hand, sift sugar into a bowl and add 1 tablespoon soy milk. mix, adding up to 1 more tablespoon soy milk until consistency is like stiff toothpaste.  6. to assemble: prepare two pastry bags, one fitted with a large plain tip, and one with a small writing tip. fill large-tipped bag with filling, and the small-tipped bag with royal icing. (instead of pastry bags, thick resealable plastic bags may be used. for filling, cut off one corner of bag so the opening measures a scant 1/2 inch across. for icing, opening should be just large enough to pipe a thin line.)  7. using your pinkie, poke a hole in center of each cupcake top about an inch deep. push tip of pastry bag with filling into each hole, firmly squeezing in filling and slowly drawing tip up and out. when all cakes have been filled, wipe off any excess that sticks out from holes; tops of cupcakes should be flat.  8. place cupcakes on a baking sheet or tray that fits in refrigerator. rewarm pan of chocolate icing over low heat if necessary, stirring constantly. dip top of each cupcake into icing, swirling to coat completely. when all cupcakes are dipped, refrigerate 10 to 15 minutes to set. when set, use royal icing to make squiggles across center of each cupcake. keep refrigerated until ready to serve, up to 1 day.  yield: 12 cupcakes.  note: black cocoa, which gives the cake its characteristic dark color and bittersweet flavor, is available from king arthur flour, (800) 827-6836, kingarthurflour.com  spicy peanut stew with ginger and tomato  adapted from terry hope romero  time: one hour  1 medium-size eggplant, peeled and cut into 1/2-inch dice  1 teaspoon salt, more to taste  1 teaspoon ground cumin  1 teaspoon ground coriander  1/4 teaspoon turmeric  1/8 teaspoon cayenne  1/4 cup peanut oil  2 shallots, thinly sliced  2 inches fresh ginger, peeled and minced  1 to 2 jalapeño chilies, seeded and minced  1 onion, chopped  1/3 cup tomato paste  1 small (14.5 ounce) can diced tomatoes, preferably roasted  4 cups vegetable stock or water  1/2 cup natural unsweetened peanut butter (creamy or chunky)  1 medium-size zucchini, 6 to 8 ounces, cut in quarters lengthwise, then sliced 1/2 -inch thick  2 tablespoons freshly squeezed lemon juice (1 to 2 lemons)  1/3 cup coarsely chopped cilantro leaves, plus whole leaves for garnish  cooked rice, for serving  chopped roasted salted peanuts, for garnish (optional).  1. in a colander, toss eggplant with 1 teaspoon salt; set aside for 30 minutes. rinse, drain well and set aside. in a small bowl, combine cumin, coriander, turmeric and cayenne; set aside.  2. in a large pot, heat 3 tablespoons oil over medium-high heat. add shallots and fry, stirring often, until soft, crisp and caramelized, about 10 minutes. using a slotted spoon, transfer shallots to a large bowl, leaving oil in pot. raise heat to high and add eggplant. cook, stirring often, until lightly browned and just tender, about 10 minutes. transfer to bowl with shallots.  3. add remaining 1 tablespoon oil to pot and heat over medium-high heat. add ginger and chilies and cook, stirring for 30 seconds. add spices and cook, stirring, 30 seconds more. add onion and cook, stirring to scrape up any browned bits, until softened and translucent, about 5 minutes. add tomato paste and cook, stirring, 1 minute.  4. add diced tomatoes, stock or water, eggplant, shallots and a sprinkling of salt. bring to a boil and cook 5 minutes. place peanut butter in a medium bowl, addone or two ladlefuls of hot soup, and stir until emulsified, then pour mixture back into soup.  5. reduce heat to a simmer, add zucchini, cover and cook 10 to 15 minutes, until vegetables are tender. turn off heat and stir in lemon juice and chopped cilantro. let cool slightly and taste; add salt if necessary. serve in bowls with rice, garnished with cilantro leaves and chopped peanuts, if desired.  yield: 8 servings.  