pleasures of the hard-worn life; jim harrison hunts, cooks, eats and writes with abandon   jim harrison, author of rugged, outdoorsy books like ''true north'' and ''legends of the fall,'' is tough on vehicles. his current ride is a much-abused chevy tahoe that every day is pounded over terrain most s.u.v.'s experience only in commercials: splashing through creeks, lurching down hills, bouncing over rock-strewn dirt roads in the back country of southern arizona, where mr. harrison and his wife, linda, spend the winter months in an adobe casita on the sonoita creek. the shock absorbers are so overstressed they've gone a little spongy.  mr. harrison, who is 69 with a lot of miles on his tires, is not much kinder to his own chassis. he is half-blind in his left eye, which gives him a wild, cockeyed look, and a pack or two of american spirits every day have left him with a voice like gravel. mr. harrison was once a legendary eater and drinker, the sort of iron-livered, barrel-chested trencherman who could hold his own at the table with orson welles and john huston and who thought nothing of a 10- or 12-course lunch at ma maison followed by champagne and a gross of oysters for supper. but that was back in his days as a part-time hollywood screenwriter, when mr. harrison also befriended jack nicholson (whose watercolor of mr. harrison and four nude dancers at the crazy horse saloon in paris hangs on a wall of the casita) and both made and quickly blew through a good deal of money, much of it spent on meals.  at least he paid. mr. welles and mr. huston used to try to stick each other with the check, he recalled recently, and once faked simultaneous heart attacks. ''writers go out to hollywood for the same reason stockbrokers go into business, and that's greed,'' mr. harrison said, adding, ''even when they're cheating you, they're cheating you at a level that's unheard of in academe, say. but i finally quit because i didn't want to die in that suckhole.''  since coming down with type 2 diabetes a couple of years ago, mr. harrison has had to modify his behavior a bit, but that doesn't preclude daily infusions of vodka and red wine or carefully prepared meals of game. mr. harrison is still a passionate, two-dimensional diner -- one who appreciates quality and quantity both. his self-coined motto is ''eat or die,'' a phrase he sometimes loftily attributes to pushkin or lermontov.  like many of his books, mr. harrison's newest novel, ''returning to earth,'' published this month by grove/atlantic, is set in the upper peninsula of michigan, where he used to have a cabin. it's about a man of finnish and chippewa descent who is dying of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or lou gehrig's disease, and wants to end his days and be buried in traditional native american fashion on a hillside overlooking lake superior. the book, his 28th, is wrenchingly sad in places, and mr. harrison recently acknowledged that writing it wasn't always easy, explaining that the death a year ago of his beloved older brother, john, was partly behind the story. he had recently found a quote in his journal, he said. ''what cannot be said will get wept,'' it read.  ''in other words,'' he went on, ''you have to write this kind of story to avoid it imploding in you.'' and yet four days after finishing ''returning to earth,'' he started another book, a comic novel called ''the english major'' -- about ''all those preposterous people who major in english in college,'' he said -- and, even rationing himself to a page a day, quickly finished it. ''my mind can't stop running fictively,'' he said, explaining that he was turning out books these days faster than his publisher could cope with them. ''but that's o.k. maybe i'll just write some novels and leave them to my daughters, so they'll have something when i cack.''  this time of year, mr. harrison (who also has a house in montana) does his writing, in longhand, at the dining room table of a nearby tin-roofed, ocotillo-hedged ranch house he rents from a neighbor he calls rancher bob. machinery is scattered around the place, and dogs and horses wander freely. the house itself looks like a time capsule from the early 1950s, with shriveled rattlesnake skins on the wall and rusting canned goods in the kitchen. some glass-jarred preserves there are so gunky-looking they could explode at any moment. ''that's why i like it here,'' he said. ''it has absolutely nothing to do with life in our time.''  most days, mr. harrison winds down from writing by hunting with zilpha, his scottish lab. one of their favorite spots is a ranch owned by the san rafael cattle company -- a place that is, as mr. harrison says, ''preposterously beautiful,'' almost savannah-like, with knobby hills, rolling ridges and stately emory oaks. off in the not-so-far distance are the huachuca mountains, sometimes dusted with snow. ''this place is so visually overwhelming that you forget you're hunting,'' mr. harrison said. ''i'm spoiled. i have to hunt where it's lovely, which means that i am no longer a serious american sportsman of the blast-and-cast school.''  on a recent saturday, he and zilpha made a perfunctory sweep though a little valley, mostly just for exercise and for pleasure, not bothering to climb up on the ridges where mr. harrison suspected that quail were nesting, waiting for the day to warm up a bit. zilpha got ''birdy,'' or excited, a couple of times, and kept racing back to check on her master's enthusiasm, but in the end mr. harrison, not in the least disappointed, never got off a shot. he accidentally flushed a covey of quail with his truck and a little later did the same with a bunch of doves, but seemed more interested in some graceful sycamores in a gully and in the startling blue of the clearing sky.  there was plenty for dinner nonetheless: some doves he had killed a day or two before, antelope from a recent hunt up in flagstaff and elk loin that a friend had sent from montana. mr. harrison, a self-described ''food bully,'' has very particular ideas about cooking. he thinks rosemary should be banned. he has no use for huge restaurant-style ranges: ''why should i spend $7,000 for a stove when i could spend $7,000 on food?'' and he doesn't believe that game, birds especially, should be tarted up with elaborate sauces. ''as the french say, game birds taste best at the point of the gun,'' he said.  so he roasted the doves over a mesquite fire in the living-room fireplace, after first basting them with butter and lemon juice and squirting a little worcestershire sauce into the body cavities, just ''for aromatic purposes.'' then, an american spirit dangling from his lip, he set to sautéeing the antelope and the elk in a hot skillet on top of the electric stove while zilpha and a visiting golden retriever scurried underfoot. the secret, mr. harrison explained, was to cook the meat very quickly in lardo, the neck fat of a pig that, for the final months of its life, dines on only fruit and milk. the elk was served with polenta, prepared with egg and gruyère cheese by linda, and there was plenty of red bandol to drink, along with a couple of between-course cigarettes.  mr. harrison pointed out that it was important not to overcook doves, lest they turn into ''billiard balls,'' and after pondering a bit, pronounced the antelope more delicate than the elk, even if some ranchers think that antelope are little better than prairie rats, eating up all the hay. then he declared: ''food is a great literary theme. food in eternity, food and sex, food and lust. food is a part of the whole of life. food is not separate.''  jim harrison's mesquite roasted doves  time: 5 minutes  2 doves per person (as an appetizer)  2 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted  2 tablespoons freshly squeezed lemon juice  1 teaspoon worcestershire sauce  1. find some wild doves, shoot them.  2. pluck their feathers, checking for shot pellets in the flesh.  3. prepare a fire using mesquite wood, preferably in the fireplace.  4. rub the outside of the birds with the butter and lemon juice. place a few drops of the worcestershire sauce in each bird's cavity.  5. roast until done. the exact timing will depend on the heat of the fire you have made, but be careful not to overcook the doves or they will turn into ''billiard balls.''  yield: 1 serving.  linda harrison's egg and gruyère polenta  slightly adapted from a recipe in ''splendid fare'' by albert stockli (knopf, 1970)  time: about 35 minutes  1/2 pound (one cup) finely ground yellow cornmeal  3 tablespoons minced onion  3 tablespoons unsalted butter  1 teaspoon salt  1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper  2 eggs, beaten  1 1/2 cups of grated gruyère cheese  1. preheat oven to 400 degrees.  2. bring 31/2 cups of water to a simmer in a saucepan. gradually stir in the cornmeal and onion with a wooden spoon. simmer, uncovered, for 25 minutes. stir often.  3. stir the butter, salt, pepper, eggs and 1 cup of the cheese into the cornmeal.  4. spread the mixture evenly in a shallow baking dish. sprinkle with the remaining cheese and bake until the topping is melted and golden brown, about 10 minutes.  yield: 4 to 6 servings  an interview with jim harrison  