luxury by the fraction   the good life can be acquired in limited pieces. what works for vacation homes and private planes -- fractional ownership -- is rapidly becoming available for pleasure boats and wineries.  the benefits when it comes to boating are clear, writes john clarke jr. in men's journal. ''there's no long-term financial commitment, no having to find a slip, no winterizing costs, no annual ritual of scraping barnacles off the hull. but there is boat ownership and all the pride and fun that comes with it.''  the concept is called fractional boating, and for a monthly or yearly fee, depending on the company involved, you get the right to use a boat for a specific amount of time.  for example, a one-eighth share might cost $6,000 a year, which would buy you seven or eight half-days a month on the water in a 37-foot sailboat or a 40-foot powerboat.  julie coe writes in departures that wineries around the world are offering shares, ''which allow aspiring winemakers to buy or lease their own vines and create libations with the help of world-renowned vintners.''  at cal celdoni in the conca de barberà wine region of spain near barcelona, a one-time fee of $5,125, plus $40 a month in dues, buys you a 25-year title to 20 vines, as well as 42 custom-label bottles a year.  managing minutiae -- countless opportunities are going to spring up as the population ages. one you may not have thought of is providing a service that handles the legwork and paperwork associated with being retired and growing older.  edmond walters, chairman and chief executive of emoney advisor, is convinced this will become the new field of ''retirement management services.''  he says that in coming years he expects all the major financial advisory firms to add ''elder care experts to their staff,'' and that these firms will charge a flat yearly fee to ''take care of all the day-to-day financial details of a retired client's life, like filling out insurance forms, finding and arranging medical care and even balancing a checkbook,'' as well as making sure the bills are paid.  in an interview with marshall eckblad in financial planning, mr. walters says he expects that the cost of such a service could be $1,500 a year. he says some financial planners are already ''building practices around the delivery of exactly these kinds of services.''  networking leaders -- ''what differentiates a leader from a manager is the ability to figure where to go and enlist the people and groups necessary to get there,'' write herminia ibarra and mark hunter in the harvard business review. ''recruiting stakeholders, lining up allies and sympathizers, diagnosing the political landscape and brokering conversations among unconnected parties are part of a leader's job.''  in other words, you have to network.  ms. ibarra, a professor at insead in france, and mr. hunter, an adjunct professor there, say they know that many executives do not like to network. these executives complain about the time involved or say that it somehow seems false.  but ms. ibarra and mr. hunter say that if you are going to succeed, you need to have three networks firmly in place.  an operational network, so you can do your work efficiently.  a personal network that can help in your personal and professional development and provide referrals to the information and contacts you need.  a strategic network to help figure out the priorities and challenges your organization will face and to help you figure out how to accomplish them.  ''the alternative to networking is to fail -- either in reaching for a leadership position or succeeding at it.''  final take -- there are communists at wal-mart stores, retail traffic reports.  employees at the china headquarters of wal-mart ''have set up a communist party branch,'' the magazine writes. several of the stores in that country also have communist party branches, retail traffic says.  no word if the employees who greet you at the door say, ''welcome, comrade.''  paul b. brown  what's offline  