against roddick, federer may truly be tested   tommy robredo of spain had been vanquished in less style than usual. andy roddick was up next in the semifinals, and roger federer was sitting comfortably, legs crossed. he spoke a bit wistfully about how great it had been to watch a five-set match the night before, when rafael nadal's staying power got the better of andy murray's brain power.  ''very interesting, i thought,'' said federer, who stayed up late monday night to see the finish of the nadal-murray match on television in his hotel room. ''raf is incredibly tough. i like to watch him just battle it out. i love seeing that. i mean, he was so strong in the end. he deserved to win.''  for the moment in melbourne, the small screen is as close as federer, the world's no. 1 player, has been to a five-set match. despite fluctuations in form and weather conditions, federer has not come close to going the distance at this australian open.  in five matches, he has not lost a set. even losing his serve four times, as he did against the seventh-seeded robredo on a cool, gusty tuesday night that played tricks with his timing, was not enough to keep federer from closing out the match, 6-3, 7-6 (2), 7-5.  ''i think he has a level of confidence that is way up there,'' said robredo, a smooth baseliner who has lost all seven of his matches against federer. ''he comes up with what he needs.''  federer has set the bar so high that even straight-set victories can seem deflating if they contain a few too many shots off the frame or a few too many groans of frustration. but the continuing test of a champion is how his game responds to true pressure. federer has played and won two tie breakers in melbourne, but it appears from the state of roddick's mind and form that he could make things much more interesting against federer on thursday night, when they meet for the 14th time.  ''i look forward to it,'' roddick said. ''we've done it before. i'm sure we'll do it again. i feel like i'm in good form. i'd love to see where i match up.''  after fighting his way past the former australian open champion marat safin in four sets in the third round and past mario ancic in five sets in the next round, roddick conserved some energy tuesday, when he put friendship aside for 1 hour 27 minutes and overwhelmed his former housemate mardy fish, 6-2, 6-2, 6-2. roddick, who is seeded sixth, kept the celebration to a minimum.  ''you know, it's always difficult; it's a weird, weird situation,'' said roddick, who made only four unforced errors in the match. ''being that we're close, i think it takes away maybe a little of the elation because you're not really solely focused on your side of the court. maybe you're a little more conscious of both sides. it wasn't a planned reaction not to do anything. it was just kind of what i felt.''  a victory over federer would leave roddick with no reason to hold back. theirs, for now, is much more a relationship than a rivalry. federer has won 12 of their 13 matches; his only loss came in the semifinals of the masters series event in canada in 2003, when he was one victory from claiming the no. 1 ranking for the first time.  ''it was so important for me this experience, this kind of pressure, because never in my life had i handled pressure like this,'' federer said in recalling that match, which he lost in a third-set tie breaker. ''so i was so disappointed, but so happy to have gone through it later on.''  by the end of the 2003 season, roddick was ranked no. 1, but federer had begun to take control of the sport. he has maintained that control for three full seasons, clamping down hard on roddick in a series of matches in late 2004 and 2005.  but after successfully recruiting jimmy connors to help coach him, roddick has made changes to his backhand and tactics. above all, he has recovered his sense of the possible.  ''i'll be the first to say it was a welcomed change, almost a new life,'' roddick said. ''just the way he put things, it just clicked. i don't know if you can minimize the effect that he's had on me.''  with connors, the winner of eight grand slam titles, in his box and in his corner, roddick won a set off federer in last year's united states open final before losing in four sets. more encouragingly, he held three match points against federer in a round-robin match at the masters cup in shanghai in november before losing. and he defeated federer in the final of an exhibition tournament at kooyong in melbourne before the australian open.  federer looked anything but devastated, which was understandable. an exhibition is just that, but it could not have hurt roddick's confidence to have another taste, however diluted, of what it feels like to beat the world's no. 1.  ''anytime you can get over the hump at all, i think it helps you,'' said john roddick, who remains his brother's co-coach. ''you're definitely not going to blow it out of proportion, but definitely, you kind of tuck it away in the back of your head and know you can do it.''  mats wilander, a three-time australian open champion from sweden, agreed. ''for roger, losing in kooyong is nothing, but for andy, it's huge,'' he said.  wilander, who won seven grand slam singles titles, was one of roddick's sharpest critics last year here when he was upset in the fourth round by the unseeded marcos baghdatis. wilander said roddick was hitting too hard from too far behind the baseline, was slicing his backhand instead of driving it, and was far too predictable and mechanical in his forays to the net.  a year later, wilander said he does not find roddick predictable and likes the way he is hitting through his backhands and taking the ball earlier.  ''i think he has answered the call; i think he answered it already at the u.s. open,'' wilander said. ''if you wouldn't have the history behind you, just looking at both andy and roger playing here, i'd say this match is 50-50. but because of the history, blah, blah, blah, i'd say it's 60-40 federer, but i do think federer has to step it up a little to win this tournament. he still hasn't played a guy who believes he can beat him. i think andy does and rafael does.''  tennis  