five american security employees killed in baghdad helicopter attack   five members of a private security detail protecting an american convoy were killed tuesday when their helicopters came under attack, and one plummeted to the pavement through a tangle of electrical wires in one of baghdad's most dangerous neighborhoods.  the four-man crew in one helicopter was killed, and the gunner in a second helicopter apparently died when he was struck by gunfire, american officials said. the crash set off a chaotic five-hour battle in which american attack helicopters crisscrossed the skies over baghdad and fired at least one hellfire missile into the streets below.  it is unclear if the first helicopter, nicknamed a little bird because it is small and nimble, crashed as the result of gunfire, because it got tangled in the wires or as it was trying to land because a passenger was wounded. but an american military official said that at least four of the victims had suffered gunshot wounds to the head, raising the prospect that some of them had been shot on the ground.  american ground forces made their way to the crash site to retrieve the bodies and secure the area, american officials said. it was unclear what condition the bodies were in when they were recovered.  the helicopters were operated by blackwater, the same private security firm that lost four contractors in march 2004 in an ambush in the desert town of falluja, their bodies mutilated, set on fire and hung from a bridge. that episode led to a three-week siege of the city by american marines.  this time, the blackwater contractors were on a routine protection detail in baghdad, monitoring an official convoy traveling by road, american and iraqi officials said. the company has a major contract with the state department to protect officials traveling outside the protected green zone.  a company statement said the men, all american citizens, ''were killed while working on behalf of the united states government.''  an iraqi military officer said that the convoy being escorted also came under attack, but american and iraqi officials said no one in the convoy was killed. lou fintor, a spokesman for the state department, declined to comment on who was in the convoy.  the attack was carried out as the helicopters swooped low over the fadhil neighborhood, an ancient warren of narrow, twisting streets that is home predominantly to sunni arabs and has been the site of numerous battles with insurgents in recent months. the crash took place near the shorja market in central baghdad, an military officer said.  on the ground, fierce gun battles lasting several hours could be heard from blocks away. american apache helicopters took to the sky soon after the attack and could be seen sweeping over the area, making sharp loops over the eastern banks of the tigris river and then flying low over the neighborhoods.  initially, according to an american military official, they were just searching for the downed helicopter.  but at one point, they fired at least one hellfire missile, although military officials could not confirm that it was in response to the downed helicopter. other small helicopters like the one that carried the blackwater contractors darted repeatedly over the baghdad skyline, occasionally disappearing from view as they dipped close to the streets.  other violence swept the city all day, with multiple bombings in shiite areas leaving at least seven people dead. security forces recovered 27 bodies around the city, killed execution style. the killings may have been part of a cycle of revenge following sustained attacks on shiite areas as they prepared for one of their most sacred holidays, ashura.  in two other battles on tuesday, american forces killed 16 insurgents, the military said. north of baghdad in haditha, the forces engaged in a hectic chase as a group of armed men tried to escape by boat across a lake. after those men met other insurgents across the lake, they were attacked by an american aircraft, killing seven. separately, insurgents fled across rooftops in baghdad before throwing grenades and firing at american forces that were in pursuit. the americans returned fire and killed six of the insurgents.  much about the helicopter attack remained unknown late tuesday. but american officials said that no diplomats or embassy employees were killed. a spokesman for the state department refused to comment on specifics.  ''a small civilian helicopter crashed in baghdad this afternoon,'' mr. fintor said. ''we are attempting to determine the facts.''  insurgents have carried out a series of other sophisticated attacks in recent days. on saturday, insurgents driving humvees and dressed in american military clothing killed five american soldiers in an ambush in karbala. the same day, an american black hawk helicopter crashed near baghdad, killing all 12 people aboard.  an american officer who spoke with a witness in a second helicopter said flares from the black hawk's antimissile systems were activated before it exploded in the air, strongly suggesting that it was shot down. as its investigation continues, the american military has so far refused to confirm officially that the black hawk was shot down.  the reach of war  