with fort closing, towns ponder a 1,126-acre windfall   when gerald j. tarantolo, the mayor of eatontown, n.j., places a price tag on the 452 acres of land his town hopes to acquire when fort monmouth closes, he is not exaggerating.  ''hopefully, $1 will be able to pay for it,'' he said. ''after all, we do have a long history with fort monmouth.''  the fort -- established in 1917 as camp little silver and renamed in 1925 in honor of revolutionary war soldiers who died in the battle of monmouth court house -- is scheduled to close by sept. 20, 2011, part of an effort to cut military spending.  when the fences come down, eatontown and the neighboring monmouth county boroughs of oceanport and tinton falls could inherit and divide 1,126 acres of fort monmouth property within their borders.  mr. tarantolo and the other mayors, lucille chaump of oceanport and peter maclearie of tinton falls, are considering how best to use the property, which not only would alter their existing landscapes but could also have a major economic impact.  the fort monmouth economic revitalization planning authority, a 10-member panel that includes the three mayors, must approve plans for the land. the authority is required to make its decision by dec. 8.  ''with this additional land, eatontown will grow by 11 percent,'' mr. tarantolo said. ''the initial mind-set is to just expand on what we already have, but that might not be the way to pursue this. by growing, you run into a lot of problems, like providing new schools, enlarging your police force and maybe even expanding the public works department.''  according to mr. tarantolo, eatowntown's piece of the fort monmouth pie would include 486 units of vacant military housing, an 18-hole golf course, a football complex with a track and a 20-lane bowling center.  while eatontown and oceanport hope to share a fitness center that includes an indoor swimming pool, a gymnasium, a weight room and two racquetball courts, oceanport's potential bonanza includes a marina and a parade ground that could be used for general recreation.  ''we've hired a planner to help us look at this space,'' said ms. chaump, who said she expected 419 acres. ''we're going to have town meetings to discuss housing, open space, commercial space, traffic and anything else regarding this expansion.''  with oceanport receiving the smallest parcel -- roughly 252 acres, including an outdoor swimming pool -- mr. maclearie said his preference ''would not be to expand but to keep the extra land as open space.''  the mayors want the federal government to turn over large areas -- a combined 352 acres -- through what is called a public benefit conveyance, or as ms. chaump put it, ''a 100 percent discount.'' although the remaining 774 acres would belong to the towns, the defense department would seek fair-market value from anyone who wants to build there.  ms. chaump said that if the planning authority approves handing over the land to the towns, the fort monmouth open space and recreation resources group -- which plans open-space use and which the three mayors belong to -- will decide how best to maintain the additional land.  the towns, along with any government agency or nonprofit group seeking free or reduced-price facilities, have until march 8 to make their best pitches for the land.  mr. tarantolo said his $1 bid would be accompanied by a reminder that since the late 1950s, eatontown has ''accepted the responsibility of paying the bill to educate the children of military dependents.''  he said that if the land conveyance occurs, all three towns ''will really need professional land consultants to help us through this transition.''  ''essentially, when fort monmouth closes, it will become three towns, and we must all figure out how we will reuse this land,'' he said. ''we all have a lot of studying to do.''  development  correction:  february 4, 2007, sunday  an article last sunday about plans for the property at fort monmouth, n.j., after it is closed misidentified the borough that would receive the smallest parcel, of 252 acres, and whose mayor prefers to keep the land as open space. it is tinton falls -- whose mayor is peter maclearie -- not oceanport.  