does abe foxman have an anti-anti-semite problem?   james traub (jan. 14) makes some good points in his article, but he reveals an old, and bad, jewish trait: the fear of being too demonstrative and loud as individuals. hence his repeated emphasis on abraham foxman's gesticulating and habit of crying gevalt.  apparently the visibility of the ''jewish lobby'' is an example of how making noise generates embarrassment among jews, as well as criticism by others. perhaps a better measure of influence would be those interests like saudi arabia and the evangelical far right that don't even need a lobby.  jack herschlag  upper montclair, n.j.  abraham foxman's style may be melodramatic, as james traub suggests, but he is certainly not exaggerating the resurgence of anti-semitic and anti-zionist incidents across the globe. it seems reasonable that foxman, a holocaust survivor, has legitimate grounds on which to be alarmed when a prominent member state of the united nations, iran, holds a conference promoting denial of the holocaust and iran's president, mahmoud ahmadinejad, speaks openly about destroying the state of israel.  ari fridman  new york  traub asserts that foxman ''upset many of his colleagues by extending a welcome to christian conservatives . . . even as they spoke in disturbing terms of america's 'christian' identity.'' but in a well-publicized talk, in november 2005, foxman said that some christian conservatives were attempting to ''christianize america'' by imposing their religious beliefs on others. that speech upset many in the jewish community, who criticized him for alienating some of israel's strong supporters. foxman has been resolute in his support of the state of israel. he has as well criticized those, whether friends of israel or not, whose activities threaten the preservation of religious freedom in our country.  robert g. sugarman  new york  an often-overlooked point in this discussion is that, once uttered, the accusation of jewish control is impossible to disprove. it is similar to the familiar right-wing charge of liberal-media bias. favorable coverage of democratic policies? must be liberal bias. criticism of the president? ditto. similarly, jewish decision makers in washington may claim they don't control the action, but they're not likely to be believed. perhaps the word of non-jewish policy makers should be sufficient. but according to the thesis, they are controlled by jewish money.  the most dangerous aspect of the accusation of jewish influence is that efforts to rebut it are offered as evidence of its truth. foxman may be brash, but he's right.  gregory shill  cambridge, mass.  