spotlight is shifting to youth at n.h.l. all-star game   the national hockey league trotted out oscar-style surroundings for its first all-star game festivities in three years, with a red carpet, paparazzi, fans clamoring for autographs behind barricades, a television interviewer, cheerleader escorts and an honor guard tapping hockey sticks on the cold cement in salute.  it was a fitting arrival for hockey's royalty after the absence caused by the labor lockout in the 2004-5 season and the winter olympics last year. as sidney crosby made his way into the american airlines center on tuesday night for the super skills competition, which followed the young stars game, the image appeared even less symbolic.  at 19, crosby, with his skillful moves and highlight-reel goals, has seemingly bypassed heir-apparent status and moved straight to being celebrated as hockey's next king. a center for the pittsburgh penguins, he is mature beyond his age when it comes to accepting a role once filled by his idols, wayne gretzky, mario lemieux and steve yzerman.  ''it's something i'm fine with,'' crosby said after working his way down the red carpet. ''i've always had that approach. it's part of being in the spotlight.  ''i don't put that sole pressure on myself because i know there's a lot of good people and a lot of good players in the game. there's more than just me that's going to be able to do that. but i understand there are some guys that will have an extra role in that.''  the n.h.l. all-star game on wednesday will include a farewell to a generation of players, including mike modano, joe sakic, peter forsberg and teemu selanne. but the passing of hockey's torch here can be viewed as the biggest youth movement since gretzky and lemieux made the game a personal showcase in the 1980s and '90s.  led by crosby and washington capitals wing alex ovechkin, 20 players are making their first all-star game appearance. (eleven others are playing in their second game.) seven starters are age 27 or younger and were put there by fans by way of a record internet voter turnout.  ''it goes in waves,'' rangers wing brendan shanahan said. ''guys like gretzky, mark messier and lemieux, they really made these events. they were the reason people tuned in to watch the games. now you've got the same thing coming. there's so many of these young guys. there are a lot of n.h.l. players on break right now who are going to watch the game because they want to see these guys play together.''  crosby and ovechkin, 21, are likely to play on the same line for the eastern conference, showcasing two of the league's top scorers.  despite missing three games with a groin injury, crosby leads the league with 72 points (24 goals, 48 assists), 6 ahead of tampa bay's martin st. louis (30 goals, 36 assists) and 7 in front of ovechkin (29 goals, 36 assists) and two others.  eastern conference coach lindy ruff says that a changed landscape since the last all-star game has helped give rise to younger stars. new rules have opened the ice to a free-wheeling style and led to increased scoring. shootouts have added drama to regular-season games and given stars a better chance to showcase one-on-one skills.  ''you saw the changeover from after the lockout where speed and skill really kills them,'' said ruff, who coaches the buffalo sabres. ''these players have dominated the game and made it exciting. they've made it a lot more dramatic than it was in the past.''  last season, crosby became the youngest player in league history to produce 100 points in a season. he is on a scoring pace similar to gretzky's at 19, when gretzky tied for the league lead with 137 points.  scoring may be on the rise, but nobody has produced 150 points in a season since lemieux had 161 in 1995-96. crosby needs to average a little more than 2 points a game to reach that mark.  like crosby, ovechkin plays down the idea that any one player or two stars can transform hockey in the way that magic johnson and larry bird remade the n.b.a.  ''we need to concentrate on the game and don't think about our faces, the n.h.l. or magic johnson or larry bird,'' said ovechkin, who beat out crosby for rookie of the year last season. ''we need to concentrate on our game and team.''  slap shots  wednesday will be the first all-star game to be played midweek since 1989. the switch from a weekend schedule gives players a longer break and allows the league more time for community events, said gary meagher, n.h.l. vice president for public relations.  devils forward zach parise had two goals and four assists to help the eastern conference beat the western conference, 9-8, in the young stars game. boston forward phil kessel, who had surgery last month for testicular cancer, had three goals.  the east won the skills competition when sidney crosby scored twice and buffalo's ryan miller made two saves in the shootout, the last event, to break a tie.  hockey  