love means always having to say you're sorry   ''breaking and entering,'' the latest film by anthony minghella, climaxes in a welter of apologies. everyone in london, it seems, has cause for remorse -- the burglar, the philanderer, the seamstress, the budding gymnast -- and for my part i regret that i lost count of the number of times the words ''i'm sorry'' were uttered on screen.  in any case, the apology is a notoriously tricky speech act, one that frequently involves expedient self-exculpation rather than a genuine plea for forgiveness from another. and the festival of bad feelings that wraps up mr. minghella's well-intentioned tale of modern miscommunication is clearly meant to soothe rather than to trouble the conscience. a schematic exercise in liberal, privileged guilt -- in the tradition of ''crash'' and ''grand canyon,'' but without the prepackaged southern california anomie -- ''breaking and entering'' moves through a series of moral and social crises as if they were yoga poses and comes to rest with a smile of virtuous complacency on its face.  the star of the movie is jude law, who is perhaps too adept for his own good at portraying an entitled, narcissistic charmer. handsome, physically graceful and articulate (except when a hugh grant-like stammer serves his purposes better), mr. law plays will, a successful architect whose firm has opened a spacious new office in the rough-edged king's cross section of north london. will shares a sleek town house with liv (robin wright penn), his half-swedish girlfriend of many years, and her 13-year-old daughter, bea (poppy rogers), who has autism. we now pause to consider the allegorical significance of these characters' names. time's up.  bea's condition, liv's remoteness and will's absorption in his work combine to put a strain on their domestic relations, and will's nerves are further shaken by a series of break-ins at the office. one of the perpetrators is an acrobatic teenager named miro (rafi gavron), a bosnian refugee, half muslim and half serb, who lives with his mother, amira (juliette binoche), in a battered housing project. when will discovers miro's involvement in the robberies, he does what any tormented bobo architect would do in his place, namely, has sex with the boy's mother.  it seems to be an axiom of mr. minghella's practice as a filmmaker that, in each of his movies, exactly one person is allowed to be funny. (rueful irony, of the sort practiced by both will and his partner, sandy, played by martin freeman, doesn't count.) in ''the talented mr. ripley,'' the job fell to the lucky mr. law; in ''cold mountain,'' renée zellweger got the assignment. (''the english patient'' would appear to be an exception to the rule.) here, happily, the task belongs to vera farmiga, playing a russian prostitute who shows up in will's car to drink coffee, squirm to some loud music and discuss the themes of the movie.  sadly, she doesn't stick around for very long, and will's sexual attention turns to amira, who is not funny at all, though ms. binoche does what she can to infuse her gloom with a touch of warmth. sandy, meanwhile, gingerly acts on his infatuation with one of the office cleaners (caroline chikezie) -- ''lattes have been drunk,'' he announces, which means that they're dating. i guess the best way for entitled, liberal englishmen to address the problem of inequality is to sleep their way down the social ladder. perhaps they should even get a tax deduction for doing so.  what saves ''breaking and entering'' from foundering altogether in earnest self-regard is mr. minghella's evident affection for london, a city of inexhaustible architectural and human variety. freed from the pompous constraints of costume drama, the director's eye (and benoit delhomme's camera) ranges over contemporary urban geography with what feels like genuine curiosity, finding beauty in building sites, alleyways, community centers and concrete apartment blocks. there are moments of lovely, painful intimacy between will and amira, and especially between liv and bea, whose relationship feels sadder and more real than anything else in the movie.  this may be because bea, something of a symbol herself, has trouble grasping the concept of metaphor. (hearts, will has to explain, don't literally break.) mr. minghella, unfortunately, has no such trouble; he seems more concerned with the significance of the story than with the story itself. other, less cautious writers and filmmakers -- mike leigh comes to mind, and also hanif kureishi -- have immersed themselves in the contradictory and chaotic realities of modern london and returned with a credible picture of life in a class-riven, conscience-stricken milieu. mr. minghella, more overtly concerned with preconceived problems, manufactures easy, unsatisfying solutions. be nice. listen. apologize. i'm sorry, but it isn't enough.  ''breaking and entering'' is rated r (under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). it has nudity, sex scenes and strong language.  breaking and entering  opens today in manhattan.  written and directed by anthony minghella; director of photography, benoit delhomme; edited by lisa gunning; music by gabriel yared and underworld; production designer, alex mcdowell; produced by sydney pollack, mr. minghella and timothy bricknell; released by the weinstein company and miramax films. running time: 119 minutes.  with: jude law (will francis), juliette binoche (amira), robin wright penn (liv), rafi gavron (miro), poppy rogers (bea), martin freeman (sandy), vera farmiga (oana), caroline chikezie (erika) and ray winstone (bruno fella).  film review  