to deliver their remarks, democrats opt to put a fresh face front and center   when president bush concluded his state of the union address, democrats did not turn to the house speaker, nancy pelosi, or to the senate majority leader, harry reid, to deliver their response. they chose a different face for the party: a former republican, an ex-marine and a secretary of the navy in the reagan administration.  that democrat, senator jim webb of virginia, who won his seat at least in part through his tenacious opposition to the iraq war, wore his son's combat boots on the campaign trail last year. and on tuesday evening, mr. webb invoked his own biography, and his family's three generations of military service, as he declared that today's soldiers could no longer trust the judgment of their commander in chief.  ''the majority of the nation no longer supports the way this war is being fought, nor do the majority of our military, nor does a majority of our congress,'' mr. webb said. ''we need a new direction.''  the choice of mr. webb was intended to provide a symbol, through his words and appearance, for the new majority in congress. in a commanding voice, the senator chastised the administration for its economic and foreign policies, but said democrats would try to work with mr. bush to change course.  ''if he does not,'' mr. webb said, ''we will be showing him the way.''  late last year, before being sworn into the senate, mr. webb created a minor furor when he declined to stand in line for a photograph with the president at a white house reception. when the two men finally came face to face, mr. bush asked mr. webb about his son, who was deployed in iraq, to which mr. webb replied tersely, ''that's between me and my boy.''  in a city that cherishes photo opportunities, where even political rivals are inclined to extend a hand and smile, the private moment highlighted deep tensions of the day. the conservative columnist george f. will derided mr. webb as a ''pompous poseur'' disrespectful of the president, while liberal bloggers hailed him as a burst of fresh air.  mr. webb, 60, is a leading member of the freshman class of democrats who arrived here with a mandate of change. his triumph over senator george allen, a one-term republican, made him a hero among democrats, particularly among antiwar activists, and prompted representative pelosi, of california, and senator reid, of nevada, to tap him for the marquee position.  ''he represents to me what the new america is all about,'' mr. reid, ''someone who understands what it means to go to war, what it means to have peace, what it means to work on a bipartisan basis, someone who understands reagan democrats and the non-reagan democrats and independents and republicans out there.''  at the same time, mr. webb also illustrates the internal challenges facing democrats as they settle on a response to the president's iraq strategy. his five-minute speech did wade into the thorny question of whether the party will go beyond a symbolic resolution denouncing mr. bush's plan to send more troops to baghdad.  ''we are now, as a nation, held hostage to the predictable -- and predicted -- disarray that has followed,'' mr. webb said, speaking against a backdrop of a united states and virginia flag on the capitol's second floor. ''the war's costs to our nation have been staggering.''  in his speech, which was approved by democratic congressional leaders, mr. webb also criticized mr. bush as presiding over an era of economic injustice.  ''it's almost as if we are living in two different countries,'' mr. webb said, noting that corporate profits might be reaching new highs, but that those benefits were reserved for the few. ''the middle class of this country -- our historic backbone and our best hope for a strong society in the future -- is losing its place at the table.''  state of the union  correction:  january 25, 2007, thursday  an article yesterday about senator jim webb of virginia and his response, for the democratic party, to the state of union address omitted part of a conversation he had with president bush at a white house reception for new members of congress in november. president bush approached mr. webb, whose son is a marine serving in iraq, and asked, ''how's your boy?'' mr. webb replied, ''i'd like to get them out of iraq, mr. president.'' mr. webb did not say at that point in the conversation, ''that's between me and my boy, mr. president.'' mr. webb did not make that statement until after mr. bush had said of the iraq comment: ''that's not what i asked you. how's your boy?''  the article also referred incorrectly to how mr. webb's speech dealt with democrats' response to the president's iraq strategy. the speech did not mention whether the party will go beyond a symbolic resolution denouncing mr. bush's plan to send more troops to baghdad.  