in last three games, nets are missing the point   the nets' margin of error over the past three games can essentially be measured in three possessions and 3 points. the resulting burden has manifested itself in blank stares, mumbled answers and an unusually quiet locker room.  when cuttino mobley hit a 3-pointer with six-tenths of a second remaining thursday night in a game against the los angeles clippers, it sealed a third consecutive 1-point defeat for the nets. each time, their opponent scored the winning shot on its final possession.  the nets (20-23), who play saturday night against the high-powered nuggets in denver, became the fourth team in n.b.a. history to lose three consecutive games by a point. with two games remaining on their five-game western trip, the nets are again looking for reasons to smile after their season appeared headed in a positive direction only a week ago.  ''especially with the way that we're losing, it seems like if we can just make that one play, get that one loose ball, get that one close out on an open shot, maybe that'll change things for our favor,'' power forward jason collins said.  last saturday, the nets beat the orlando magic to cap a four-game winning streak and return to .500 for the first time in two months. two days later, richard jefferson, their starter at small forward, had arthroscopic surgery on his right ankle that could keep him out until early march.  that same night, for 47 minutes 49 seconds against the kings in sacramento, the nets looked as if they would overcome the loss of jefferson and secure one of their biggest victories of the season. but then their bizarre stretch of tough luck and late-game mistakes began.  the kings, who overcame a 20-point third-quarter deficit, went to point guard mike bibby on their final possession. bibby had taken over the game in the fourth quarter, but he missed a shot from the top of the key. kings forward brad miller came down with the rebound and missed a layup attempt. the ball was tipped back out to bibby, who was wide open at the top of the key. his shot with 10.3 seconds remaining gave the kings an 88-87 victory.  ''we shouldn't have put ourselves in that position, being up by 20 points,'' nets point guard jason kidd said after the game.  against the golden state warriors on wednesday night, the nets were ahead by 109-108 when forward bostjan nachbar missed a shot from the corner with just over five seconds remaining. the warriors' baron davis raced the ball upcourt and found guard monta ellis, who hit a shot from the wing at the buzzer.  on thursday, the nets took a 101-99 lead with 1:07 to play, but the clippers got their chance after calling a timeout with eight seconds left.  point guard sam cassell, who was guarded by the nets rookie marcus williams, dribbled around a screen at the top of the key and streaked down the right edge of the lane. as cassell got past williams, vince carter came over to double-team, leaving mobley open behind the 3-point line. cassell passed to mobley; carter could only watch as mobley hit the winner.  that final play seemed to weigh most heavily on carter, despite his 33 points in one of his best offensive performances of the season.  ''i screwed it up,'' he said. ''i feel bad for it.''  those three failed defensive stops are the difference between a seven-game winning streak and a three-game skid for the nets. each defeat has seemed to deflate them even more. heartbreakers do not normally happen this often and this close together.  the nets' previous three 1-point losses were spread over 21 months and three seasons.  ''you put your heart and soul as a player and coach into this,'' nets coach lawrence frank said after the loss to the clippers. ''this hurts. every loss hurts and the fact that you put all three together, it really hurts you.''  frank was speechless at times during his postgame news conference thursday night. even after defeats, the nets players usually find something to joke or smile about in the locker room after the game. not much of that was going on after the game against the clippers.  still, the nets were trying to find a silver lining to what has happened over the past few days, perhaps a means of keeping their psyches straight as they enter what might be the most difficult games of this trip.  ''when you give yourself a chance to win, that's all you can ask for,'' kidd said. ''it's not like we're getting blasted by 20 and you're trying to search for what we need to do.''  the nets may know their formula for success. now they have to figure out how to stick to it for a full 48 minutes.  pro basketball  