a backyard mayan temple may be doomed   when barbara winston had a stone replica of a mayan temple built in her backyard, it was meant to give her a sense of peace.  instead, it started a war.  in august 2005, mrs. winston, who lives on a 13-acre estate with her husband, bruce, had a stonecutter erect a $25,000 replica of guatemala's temple of the great jaguar at the rear of their property. while the temple's scale is one-seventeenth of the original, it is by no means small, with granite blocks forming three staircases rising nine feet to a rectangular platform.  it is also 24 feet from the horse barn and riding ring of the winstons' neighbor, diane lewis, who complained to the town of bedford that the temple detracted from the enjoyment of her property.  in september, the zoning board of appeals rejected the winstons' request for a variance and said that the temple was a structure requiring permits and a 50-foot setback from adjacent property. it questioned why the winstons, with 13 acres to choose from, put the temple so close to ms. lewis's property.  the ruling left the winstons with three choices: tear down the temple, move it, or fight. in october, they sued the board in state court.  ''i swear to you, i will chain myself to it,'' mrs. winston said recently. ''i love her. i'm not moving one stone.''  she said the temple, which she calls ''tikalita'' -- tikal was a legendary mayan city -- was built for spiritual comfort after the recent deaths of her father and sister, and was placed at the back of the property to catch the sunlight. moving it would destroy it, she said.  in their lawsuit, the winstons argue that the temple was not a structure as defined in the ordinance. even if it were, they said, the town should grant the variance because of the temple's spiritual significance.  joel sachs, the town attorney, said the temple clearly met the definition of a structure. in a letter to the board, he wrote that the winstons' claims that it was infringing on their right to religious expression was ''a sham.'' even churches must meet zoning requirements, mr. sachs said.  if the winstons lose their case, they would face a $250 fine, and the fine could grow if they fail to take down the sculpture.  mrs. winston said she and her husband, the son of the jewelry magnate harry winston, were mystified by the board's unwillingness to compromise. the winstons have planted dozens of spruce trees to block the view from ms. lewis's property.  mrs. winston said that before building the temple, she had no problems with ms. lewis and never complained when ms. lewis had several trees chopped down to build the horse barn. records show that around the time the temple was built, mrs. winston called the building inspector's office, complaining that the barn smelled and that riding lessons were being given there.  ms. lewis could not be reached. her phone number is unpublished.  reactions to the temple were mixed among several people here on a recent afternoon.  kathryn phelps-summers, who has lived in katonah for 37 years, said that, at the least, the winstons should have informed ms. lewis before starting construction.  ''it all boils down to being a good neighbor,'' she said.  eunice lawson, a resident of nearby brewster who works in a katonah art gallery, said the town was wasting time and money.  ''there are other issues to deal with,'' she said. ''get a life.''  zoning  