wal-mart settles u.s. suit about overtime   the united states labor department announced yesterday that wal-mart stores had agreed to pay $33.5 million in back wages plus interest to settle a federal lawsuit that accused the company of violating overtime laws involving 86,680 workers.  department officials said many of the violations involved failing to pay time-and-a-half premium pay to managers in training, programmers in training and some other salaried, nonmanagerial employees when they worked more than 40 hours a week.  the department also accused wal-mart of violating the fair labor standards act, the federal law that governs overtime, by failing to properly include factors like bonuses and geographical differentials in calculating the base wages to determine the time-and-a-half rate.  steven j. mandel, associate solicitor in the department's fair labor standards division, praised wal-mart for bringing the overtime problem to the government's attention. he said the settlement was one of the largest ever reached by the department under the fair labor standards act, which requires employers to pay an overtime premium to employees who work more than 40 hours a week, except for some salaried employees like top managers.  more than 40 state lawsuits have been filed against wal-mart, accusing it of making employees, whom it calls associates, work off the clock and often not paying them all the overtime they had earned. most of those lawsuits are pending.  but wal-mart officials said that yesterday's developments showed that the company had made major improvements in wage compliance. they noted that not only had wal-mart alerted the labor department to the overtime problems after finding them in an internal audit, but that wal-mart had already corrected all the calculations.  ''we want our associates to know that the situation has been fixed, that overtime calculations now are being done correctly, and that we've added safeguards to our payroll processes to make sure these types of errors don't happen again,'' said sue oliver, senior vice president of wal-mart's human resources division.  in the consent decree filed in federal district court for the western district of arkansas in fort smith, wal-mart, as it often does, denied any liability for the accusations in the lawsuit. it denied ''any wrongdoing and liability whatsoever'' under the fair labor act ''or any other law.'' it also denied that ''any of the facts'' that the federal government alleged ''or could have alleged are true.''  the average compensation for the nearly 87,000 employees will be around $375. wal-mart said 75 employees would receive more than $10,000 in back wages; mr. mandel said the highest amount anyone would receive was $39,775. the employees are also to receive interest.  many companies have stumbled in calculating the base pay for establishing overtime pay. in this case, the labor department accused wal-mart of making improper and illegal calculations by computing pay on a biweekly rate rather than a weekly rate. the department also accused wal-mart of including vacation and sick pay in determining the base hourly rate, yielding a lower rate.  ''i don't think these are particularly unusual violations,'' said john simley, a wal-mart spokesman.  federal officials said wal-mart had predetermined the salaries of some managers in training and others based on a 45-hour or 48-hour week, but had nonetheless broken the law when it did not pay them overtime when they worked more than 40 hours.  mr. mandel said the violations involved wal-mart stores in all 50 states, washington and puerto rico.  ''they brought it to our attention because they wanted our supervision and they wanted our monitoring of these complicated efforts,'' mr. mandel said.ms. oliver, the senior vice president, said wal-mart showed its good faith by volunteering to pay five years of back wages, while the labor department often seeks just two years of back wages. ''we are committed to our associates, and we apologize to them for this error,'' ms. oliver said. ''we work very hard to make sure associates are compensated correctly.''  