bush makes sales pitch for proposal on energy   president bush made a big deal about ethanol, the fuel derived from plants, in his state of the union address tuesday night. wednesday morning, he got up close and personal with it, poking his head through stalks of corn and wheat while scientists for dupont gave him a crash course in ethanol production in a tour of their research greenhouse here.  the presidential visit to the dupont experimental station, which conducts federally financed research into the development of alternative fuels, amounted to a sales pitch for mr. bush's plan to reduce projected gasoline consumption by 20 percent over the next 10 years.  after hearing a minilecture on how plants are converted into sugars, and the sugars then distilled into fuel, mr. bush, a former texas oilman who has proclaimed americans ''addicted to oil,'' lifted up a glass beaker of switchgrass, a perennial grass that looks like hay, and stared into a bank of television cameras to drive his point home.  ''what our citizens need to know,'' mr. bush said, with a microbiologist, armando byrne, by his side, ''is that because of the research you're doing here, with some of their taxpayer dollars, that switchgrass, that can be grown all across america, can end up being made into fuel that powers their automobiles.''  mr. byrne nodded in agreement.  ''that's important,'' the president declared.  later, in a speech to dupont employees, mr. bush said he had ordered the federal government to buy more hybrid vehicles that use ethanol or alternative fuels, and to buy hybrid plug-in cars ''as soon as they hit the market.''  most federal agencies already have alternative-fuel vehicles. of the more than 586,000 vehicles in the federal fleet, 866 are hybrids and 106,869 are alternative-fuel vehicles, white house officials said.  ''we set the goal,'' mr. bush told the dupont employees. ''it doesn't make much sense for the federal government to set the goal and not participate.''  the trip itself, however, was hardly energy efficient. mr. bush made the short jaunt to wilmington aboard air force one, spending a mere 30 minutes in the air on the way up and 20 minutes on the way back. on the ground, he traveled in the usual motorcade of about two dozen vehicles, including sport utility vehicles carrying gun-toting secret service agents, and vans carrying camera-toting members of the press.  there was nary a hybrid among them.  