picking new york's comptroller   new york's legislature is expected to choose a replacement soon for comptroller alan hevesi, who resigned after pleading guilty last year to a felony. to inject some quality control into a process that could have been all political horse-trading, legislative leaders and gov. eliot spitzer set up an excellent vetting process. three former comptrollers -- two democrats and a republican -- screened candidates and were asked to pick up to five finalists.  this week, the former comptrollers narrowed a field of 18 to three finalists: howard weitzman, comptroller of nassau county; martha stark, tax commissioner for new york city; and william mulrow, a businessman and friend of mr. spitzer's.  the legislature's job now is to choose one of these three. assembly leader sheldon silver and some fellow democrats are threatening to overturn the entire process, mainly because none of the assembly members who applied made the cut. their disappointment is understandable. but it cannot be allowed to carry the day.  the comptroller is responsible for ensuring the integrity of government, and with managing a $150 billion state pension. it is far too important a post to be given out based on friendship or group loyalty.  of the three recommendations, mr. weitzman is clearly the best fit. as nassau's comptroller, and a partner in a top-four accounting firm before that, he has the strongest background, and he has shown in his current job that he can be steadfastly independent. ms. stark is also impressive, although her credentials are not as close a match. a smart, engaging lawyer who has experience managing a large agency, she sits on boards that help oversee $100 billion in pension funds. ms. stark would also add diversity to the top levels of state government.  mr. mulrow, a businessman who has run for this office before, has a great deal of knowledge about investments and experience as a manager. but his closeness to mr. spitzer and his connections to a bidder for the state's lucrative racetrack business make him the least suitable.  with reform starting to take hold, at long last, in albany, it would be a disturbing slide backward if members of the legislature abandoned the process in order to pick one of their own. we hope that they choose from the fine list of finalists, and that their choice is mr. weitzman.  editorial  