spitzer to outline plans for cuts in health spending   gov. eliot spitzer will preview his first executive budget in a speech on friday afternoon, laying out his plan to rein in medicaid and other health care spending, setting the stage for a battle with politically powerful health care providers and unions.  the governor's budget is widely expected to offer a sharp break from albany's spending practices of recent years, and medicaid, at roughly $46 billion, is by far the largest part of the budget and the one many believe is most in need of rethinking.  the full details of the governor's proposal will be disclosed on wednesday when he presents his executive budget to the legislature, but among his proposals, according to people who have been briefed on the plan, will be revamping the way hospitals and nursing homes receive nearly $500 million a year for workforce recruitment and retention.  those changes would address a formula that was worked out several years ago as part of a deal that involved gov. george e. pataki and s.e.i.u./1199, the powerful health care workers' union, in what some have criticized as a backdoor maneuver to grant raises to union workers. the overall amount is likely to be cut and the way the money is allocated revised. the spitzer administration is seeking to ensure that medicaid dollars are used for medicaid patients and are not used as a general subsidy for health care providers.  the governor will also seek to cut or eliminate the annual inflation adjustment to medicaid payments to hospitals and nursing homes, which costs more than $300 million a year, a step mr. pataki attempted unsuccessfully in the past.  mr. spitzer will also continue to reorganize the department of health, in part by creating a new office of long-term care, as the administration looks for ways to drive down the cost of long-term care and chronic illness, and is likely to centralize the department's information technology efforts. both plans were reported by crain's new york business on thursday and confirmed by someone who has been briefed on the plan.  the governor will also continue efforts to get cheaper prices when the state buys drugs, possibly by centralizing purchasing in a single entity and also by seeking to change the way prices are negotiated with drug companies.  his proposals are likely to be received with hostility by health care providers and unions, coming on the heels of a state plan to close hospitals and the bush administration's proposal for new cuts in health care.  ''it's going to be a battle in washington on trying not to lose that money, and a battle in albany not to lose that money,'' said kenneth e. raske, president of the greater new york hospital association. ''hospitals by and large break even in new york, so any money that is extracted is like pulling teeth.''  ''we've extended our hand to the executive branch,'' he added. ''we'll see how it goes.''  mr. spitzer also wants to push through a package of proposals to fight health care fraud that he supported as attorney general. one of the changes would expand the martin act to encompass health care, a statute he used to great effect to pursue securities fraud. such proposals are likely to be taken up outside the budget process, however.  mr. spitzer's first budget is expected to demonstrate that he will try to take a more fiscally conservative tack than did george e. pataki in the later years of his republican administration, though mr. spitzer, a democrat, will be dealing with the same legislative leaders.  paul francis, the new budget director, said in a recent interview that he was struck that many subsidies were ''not directly related to patient care,'' adding, ''at the end of the day, the government can only afford to do so many of those without raising taxes.''  the new deputy secretary for public safety, michael a. l. balboni, a former state senator, said in a recent interview that mr. francis told him the budget would be ''tighter than you've ever seen.''  steep cuts to health care could set up a fight pitting the governor against the legislature, hospitals and powerful unions like s.e.i.u./1199. a spokeswoman for 1199 declined to comment, but the union could be a troublesome foe for the spitzer administration because of its considerable political contributions and close ties to the republicans who control the senate. the union has endorsed a republican, maureen o'connell, in her bid to fill mr. balboni's long island senate seat in a special election next month.  the senate majority leader, joseph l. bruno, has said ''the senate will not support gratuitous cuts to health care.''  mr. spitzer's team is likely to need the health care cuts as it struggles with a number of competing agendas -- reining in overall spending while substantially increasing funds for education and lowering property taxes, and also extending health care coverage to all children in the state.  ''historically, the first year of a governor's term is the year where you make the toughest decisions, so everyone's preparing themselves for what will be a very tight budget,'' said blair horner, the legislative director for the new york public interest research group. ''look at his promises. he's not going to raise taxes but spend billions of dollars more on programs. that has to come from the existing budget. people understand this.''  