some pieces of church silver don't go gently to the auction block   it is often controversial when an american church sells its antique church silver, as reaction to a christie's sale of early american silver shows once again. its jan. 18 auction included 14 pieces of church silver consigned by the first church in salem of salem, mass., all of which sold.  typically, a pre-revolutionary puritan would donate a tankard, beaker or cup to a church to mark a special event or commemorate the death of a loved one. ''donated silver was a way that individuals of some means could attempt to assure they would be remembered in their communities, since their names were usually prominently engraved on it,'' said donald r. friary, director emeritus of historic deerfield and an authority on new england church silver.  church silver is particularly valuable if made by one of the country's first craftsmen, whether paul revere or someone less famous like jeremiah dummer, the first native-born american silversmith. silver that valuable, however, must be insured and is often kept in a bank vault.  churches that find owning such silver to be too onerous often lend it to museums; at the metropolitan museum of art, for example, several exceptional pieces of church silver on view are loans.  ''the allure of church silver is obvious,'' said jeanne sloane, the head of the silver department at christie's. ''it has unbroken provenance, and it tends to be in mint condition in terms of color, patina and in the crispness of its engraving, because it is so infrequently used. usually, it has been sitting wrapped up in a vault.''  most church silver is domestic silver that has been ''regifted'' to the church. this includes beakers, cups, canns (a type of mug) and bowls.  ''domestic silver was used because puritans were iconoclasts and they rejected the formality and rituals of the catholic and anglican churches,'' mr. friary said. ''the churches used the silver for baptisms and communion.''  part of its appeal is that it is not liturgical. ''this is secular silver,'' ms. sloane said. ''part of the puritan philosophy was not to use the trappings of the high church. they purposefully wanted people to feel there was no need for ritual objects. church silver is an incredible source for classic forms of american colonial silver.''  established in 1629, the first church in salem is thought to be the oldest continuously operating protestant congregation in the united states. in the early '70s, richard d. pierce wrote in the new england quarterly that the first church in salem ''provided the model for all later congregational churches in puritan new england.''  the christie's sale of early american silver totaled $1.7 million against a presale estimate of $1.1 million to $1.8 million, and 94 percent of the 70 lots were sold. although the first church in salem had consigned only 14 lots, 5 were in the top 10 sale prices. the total for the church silver was $787,800, against the presale estimate of $600,000 to $1 million. (the sales figures include the buyers' commissions, which are not reflected in the estimates.)  two lots will stay in salem, as they were bought by the peabody essex museum. the first, a 13-inch-high flagon made by john andrew of salem in 1769, cost the museum $102,000. andrew, 22 when he made the flagon, went on to become salem's most important 18th-century silversmith. the museum also spent $4,000 on a pair of canns made in 1805 by ebenezer moulton of newburyport, mass. one is inscribed ''gift of mrs. johanna ward.'' mrs. ward was the second wife of william ward, a china trade merchant and master mariner. their house in salem is now a national historic landmark.  why did the church sell its silver?  the rev. jeffrey barz-snell, the 31st pastor of the first church in salem, noted that the church was selling only 14 of its many silver objects. ''we have other items in our holdings, including a set of silver made by paul revere,'' he said in an interview.  ''we had no dire need for cash,'' he continued. ''this was more of a proactive than reactive decision. we've almost doubled in size in the last eight years. there is a new attitude with regard to objects of historical significance: small institutions that don't have the resources to display objects in their possession can increase exposure to them by selling them.''  in addition to the peabody essex purchase at christie's, the historical society of old newbury/cushing house museum in massachusetts bought a pair of the church's silver canns for $6,600. rebecca putnam of salem, a descendant of the endicotts, a prominent 17th-century salem family, said she had ''mixed feelings'' about the sale.  ''it was a hard decision for everyone,'' she said. ''i'm a longtime member of this church. this fall we had a special church meeting to discuss the sale and then voted for it unanimously. the economics made it necessary.''  michael j. weller, owner of the san francisco gallery argentum-the leopard's head, was one of several dealers who attended the sale, although he did not buy any church silver. ''it's sad but it's inevitable that church silver will move on to the market,'' he said. ''why should the church have to be the custodian of things that have not been used for 200 years?''  another auction attendee said that church silver was the pre-revolutionary era's equivalent of a gift of stocks or bonds, but others object strenuously to that viewpoint. ''church silver was given to dignify and honor the sacraments,'' mr. friary said. ''such pieces were not investments. they are part of the collective memory of the community.''  bill hosley, the director of the new haven museum and historical society, said, ''church silver without question has sacred value, and not only in the religious sense. in many cases, these pieces are the single oldest things that have never left a town. they are literally the crown jewels.''  church silver, he continued, ''is important for its history, its art, its sense of place and the fact it is connected to a place in the most visual way.'' he added: ''the church in salem has an unbroken continuity of more than 300 years that is almost unique. america's sense of obligation to anything that is not here and now is evaporating. what will it take to shock people into thinking there is something wrong with such sales?''  eric shrubsole, at 95 the dean of america's silver dealers, said he didn't buy any church silver at christie's. ''personally, i don't think churches should sell their silver unless they have to,'' he said. ''you know, church silver is not so salable. it may have been domestic silver once, but it was still used in a church. a lot of my clients think it's against their religion to buy it.''  antiques  correction:  january 31, 2007, wednesday  the antiques column in weekend on friday, about an auction of silver that had been owned by the first church in salem, in massachusetts, attributed an erroneous distinction to the church. the marble collegiate church in manhattan, founded in 1628, is the oldest continuously operating protestant congregation in the united states -- not the first church in salem, which was founded a year later.  