first you clear the table   almost anybody who has ever done anything big knows that the first step involves clearing the desk. or maybe the kitchen table. and new york's lawmakers, with gov. eliot spitzer as the new executive, clearly have some heavy scouring to do. besides budget reform, which mr. spitzer signed into law last week, the next step is a series of changes the governor has labeled a ''dramatic, significant, fundamental step forward'' in ethics reform.  every politician who is near a microphone talks about how albany needs to be more ethical. but anyone who has spent any time in new york state's capitol knows that many of these same politicians have no real interest in change at all.  so, even as mr. spitzer and the legislative leaders promise reform, the real fear is that the reforms will turn out to be about as deep as their television pancake makeup. to take one example, the leaders propose an independent ethics review board that would combine the functions of the state ethics commission, which monitors state government, and the temporary state commission on lobbying, which monitors lobbying.  good-government advocates are understandably wary. could this be a ploy to get rid of albany's least favorite and most independent investigator: david grandeau, the head of the lobbying commission? is it yet another grand albany-style trick or is it in fact a serious effort to air out the capitol?  other proposals on the agenda seem more promising, assuming that they are carried out. a proposed ban on gifts has long been necessary. another ban, on honorariums, is also long overdue. and putting a foot in the revolving door that allows legislative staff members to retire, then immediately start making big money by lobbying old colleagues, would be a real improvement -- although this reform would not start until the end of 2008.  we hope there is even more to come. mr. spitzer is pushing forward with campaign finance reform in ways that would lower contribution limits, close loopholes and establish some sort of public financing. the torrents of money pouring into the hotly contested special election in nassau county from both parties remind us that new york's present system of campaign financing is a statewide embarrassment that needs fixing quickly.  mr. spitzer also proposes a nonpartisan redistricting commission. this would amount to a fundamental and greatly needed change in a system that essentially allows legislators to design their own districts and thus perpetuate their political careers.  blair horner, head of albany's branch of the new york public interest research group, has for years been hearing promises of ethics reform. like most good-government advocates, he believes that an ''opportunity to radically overhaul the state's ethics laws comes along only once in a generation.'' though mr. spitzer has lots of other big things on his agenda -- health care, tax policy, education -- he needs first to convince his fellow state officials that they need to clean up the state capitol.  