cheesy pasta, redressed   there was a time when pasta dishes dressed with just cheese, cream or milk were popular, at least with me and my family, but today they seem stodgy and fat. although these popular standbys almost always feature a strong hit of black pepper, they don't contain acidity or real spice, and seem one-dimensional despite the strong flavors. they're also almost always white, beige and yellow, not exactly a stunning color combination for what for us was often a weeknight main course.  it doesn't take much to fix that. here's a variation on a classic dish, pasta with gorgonzola, that adds color, acidity and strong flavor without increasing the cooking time a single second. and it increases the shopping and prep times by only about five minutes.  there are added benefits. you use two nonwinter vegetables that are decent in midwinter: arugula and cherry or grape tomatoes. the arugula adds spice, crunch and color (watercress will work equally well). the tomatoes, which are ubiquitous in markets these days, have real flavor, unlike regular tomatoes in midwinter. they also add some much-needed acidity.  you can put this together in the time it takes to boil pasta, and it's quite straightforward. the thicker the liquid you use, the thicker and richer your sauce. you could start with skim milk -- or water, for that matter -- and have a thin but still flavorful sauce. i usually settle on whole milk but, truth be told, a bit of cream is very nice here.  buy a creamy piece of cheese that will ultimately melt into the pasta, and a variety with strong flavor: blue d'auvergne, maytag blue, good roquefort or mature stilton are all good substitutes for gorgonzola. because you turn the sauce into the pasta over heat, slightly undercook the pasta at first.  farfalle is my pasta shape of choice here, but it hardly matters. what does matter is putting a nice-looking, complex-tasting pasta dish on the table in less than a half-hour.  farfalle with gorgonzola, arugula and cherry tomatoes  time: 30 minutes  salt and freshly ground black pepper  1 cup half-and-half, cream or milk  1 cup crumbled gorgonzola or other good blue cheese  1 pound farfalle or other pasta  2 cups arugula trimmed of very thick stems, washed, dried and chopped  1 cup cherry or grape tomatoes, cut in half  freshly grated parmesan to taste, optional.  1. bring a large pot of water to a boil and salt it. in a small saucepan gently warm the half-and-half and gorgonzola just until cheese melts a bit and mixture becomes thick; chunky is o.k.  2. when water boils, cook pasta until it is just tender but not mushy. drain and return to pot over low heat.  3. stir in gorgonzola sauce along with arugula, tomatoes and a healthy dose of black pepper. stir to combine, taste and add salt, if necessary, then serve immediately, with grated parmesan if you like.  yield: 3 to 6 servings.  the minimalist  