seeking edge in china, yankees put baseball first   the yankees consider themselves the most driven team in a competitive sport, so their push to boost baseball in china is not purely altruistic. they believe there is talent to be cultivated in china, and when future prospects have a choice of where to sign, the yankees want their brand and reputation to stand out.  ''it's like latin america,'' general manager brian cashman said yesterday, after a news briefing to disclose the yankees' plans. ''everyone has equal access; you just try to do it better.''  the yankees have been working with the chinese baseball association for more than six months to forge a relationship that would allow the yankees to send coaches, scouts and trainers to china. cashman and three other executives -- randy levine, the team president; jean afterman, the assistant general manager; and michael tusiani, the vice president for corporate sales and sponsorships -- accepted an invitation to travel to beijing next week.''they're dedicated to this,'' levine said. ''they like the game. as you can see from their history, they're great athletes, and there's no doubt in my mind there will be a lot of great baseball players coming out of there in the future.''  while they are in asia, the yankees will also meet with officials from the yomiuri giants and the hanshin tigers, both japanese teams. the yankees signed hideki matsui, a former giant, before the 2003 season, and signed the former hanshin pitcher kei igawa last month.  the yankees have a working agreement with yomiuri, a partnership in which the teams share ideas and strategies, if not actual players. the relationship has also helped the yankees economically; the yomiuri shinbun, a daily newspaper, has a giant billboard across the left-field wall at yankee stadium.  the purpose of meeting with the tigers, levine said, was to thank them for facilitating the deal with igawa. hanshin accepted the yankees' bid of $26 million to negotiate with him, and afterman said the visit would help the yankees learn more about igawa's background.  but the overriding purpose of the trip is to build a foundation in china, which has produced no major leaguers and lost all three of its games in the world baseball classic last march by the combined score of 40-6.  levine said the yankees could eventually sponsor an academy in china, on their own or with major league baseball. he added that it was ''not out of the question'' that baseball could eventually stage games in china.  chinese baseball officials will also visit the yankees' facilities in new york and tampa, fla., for guidance.  ''i want to make it clear: this is paving the way for all teams,'' levine said. ''i think the power of the yankee brand all over the world is what's been driving this.''  the yankees' presence in china will give more exposure to their well-known brand, but yesterday's briefing offered few details of the business aspects of the trip. the primary motivation is baseball, levine said. to cashman, the venture made sense for the long term.  ''it's a country of roughly a billion people that has expressed an interest in the sport of baseball,'' cashman said. ''as we've all seen over the years, when china has an interest in a particular sport -- and they invest time, effort and money -- they typically become very good at that sport.  ''so on behalf of the industry, as we bring the passion of the great game of baseball to that country to speed up that process, it's in everybody's best interests.''  inside pitch  despite his long list of injuries the past two seasons, starter carl pavano is expected to handle a regular workload when spring training starts feb. 13. ''he's not a rehab player going into spring training,'' brian cashman said. ''he's going to be on the same time frame, ready to go full-bore.''  j. brent cox, a promising setup man in the yankees' farm system, broke a bone in his pitching hand and will not train with the major leaguers this spring. ''he was in a minor altercation and he won't be ready until minor league camp starts, so it makes more sense to just wait until then,'' cox's agent, randy hendricks, said in an e-mail message. cashman said cox would not be disciplined and was expected to be ready for the start of the minor league season.  lonn trost, the yankees' chief operating officer, had a mild heart attack in arizona last week after the owners' meetings. the team spokesman jason zillo said that trost, 61, had been released from an arizona hospital and planned to return to work next week.  cashman continued to dispute the idea that the yankees are the leading candidate to sign roger clemens. ''last year, we had interest, and he didn't choose us, and i don't think we were second, either,'' cashman said. ''i think it would be a mistake to say we're the team to beat.''  baseball  