court finds state agency miscalculated housing need   the state agency set up to ensure that municipalities meet court-mandated requirements to provide low- and moderate-income housing has used faulty methods in calculating housing needs in the state, a superior court appellate panel ruled on thursday.  a result of the flawed approach was that the agency, the council on affordable housing, underestimated the number of units needed statewide by as much as 100,000, the court said. the agency used outdated studies and assumptions generally applied to housing markets that were not being borne out in new jersey, the court said.  in a unanimous decision, the three-judge panel gave the state agency six months to correct the flaws highlighted in the 127-page ruling. in the meantime, the affordable-housing plans of some 300 communities that are pending before the agency will be put on hold.  the ruling grew out of a 2004 lawsuit brought by the fair share housing center, a nonprofit developer of low-income housing, and state builders' groups, who asserted that a number of agency rules ran counter to a series of landmark court decisions on zoning.  those decisions, stemming from litigation dating to 1971 and known as the mount laurel rulings, from the new jersey town where the case originated, struck down local zoning ordinances that barred affordable and rental housing for the poor. the rulings found that municipalities and regions of the state had an obligation to provide for such housing. in response, the state created the council on affordable housing to enforce local housing laws and work toward meeting goals. the council is now overseen by susan bass levin, the commissioner of the state department of community affairs.  ''the court sent a clear message to susan bass levin and c.o.a.h. that it's time to stop evading new jersey's responsibility to provide affordable housing,'' said peter j. o'connor, the executive director of fair share housing and one of the lawyers in the original mount laurel case.  ms. bass levin defended the agency's methodology thursday, saying that it promoted not only affordable housing, but also sound planning.  it was not immediately clear whether the state agency would appeal the ruling to the state's highest court. as for the six-month deadline given to the agency by the court, ms. bass levin said she feared that the construction of affordable housing would be slowed while the building of market-rate housing continued at a brisk pace. such building, she said, could increase density and consume land that otherwise could have been used to build lower-income units.  one of the plaintiffs in the case, the new jersey builders association, called on gov. jon s. corzine to direct the agency to meet with his group and the fair share housing center so that together they could devise new rules and methods. doing so, the group said, would prevent further court battles and speed the process that would put affordable housing projects back on local agendas.  