renewal, in real estate and in culture, for ancient people   as a boy, in october 1943, pacifico disegni watched from his window as two german trucks hauled people from the ghetto in rome, a city where jews have lived for 2,000 years.  last year, in blessedly more peaceful times, a rich visitor from boston took in the view from that same window. a magnificent front-row view of the theater of marcellus, first planned by julius caesar, somehow salves the sting of history.  mr. disegni, now 78, said the man produced a blank check and offered to buy the apartment on the spot.  ''he said, 'you write how many millions you want,' '' mr. disegni said.  mr. disegni, who is jewish, refused. but these bookend events at his window cast light on a paradox in the city with the oldest jewish population in europe. high real estate prices, not violence or bias, are driving the last jews from their homes in the old ghetto, which is slowly transforming itself into a trendy enclave for the rich and famous.  experts say only 200 or 300 jews remain, in a neighborhood that numbered perhaps 9,000 after the deportation of 2,000 or more during world war ii.  but there is a second paradox. even as the number of jews living in the ghetto drops to near nothing, jewish life is thriving.  rome's jewish school recently moved to the ghetto from a neighboring area. jewish shops, including the first kosher fast-food restaurants, are popular. visits to the museum at the grand synagogue have doubled in two years.  ''even if jews no longer live in the area, they come to open their shops,'' said daniela di castro, director of the jewish museum of rome. ''so there is always jewish life around, to work, to go to the synagogue, to buy from the kosher market, bring their children to school.  ''you always have a reason to come here if you are jew.''  it is a dynamic of complex layers, defying media alarmism about the loss of jewish character in central rome, but not quite assuring that character's ultimate survival.  on the other hand, this is italy, where history moves at its own unpredictable pace. for now, few locals can imagine the ghetto as having a soul that is anything other than jewish.  ''it would be impossible to erase it,'' said luciano calò, 45, a jew who owns bartaruga, a bar next to one of rome's most sublime fountains, featuring four boys playing with turtles, a whimsy bernini added 83 years after the fountain was finished.  ''history was born here,'' mr. calò added. ''and the tourists come here because of that history in the walls of these buildings. you feel the desperation of the people who lived here.''  jews are documented in rome as early as the second century b.c., first as respected guests from the empire's far reaches, later as slaves who helped build the colosseum, finished in a.d. 80.  in 1516 the jews of venice were the first in europe to be segregated -- and there the word ''ghetto'' was born, from the local dialect for the slag heaps in the area where jews were forced to live.  in 1555 a papal bull established a ghetto in rome, laid out near the tiber, amid the nubby, desiccated ruins, and locked at night. that entity was not abolished until italy's unification in 1870, but jews continued to live there, often in deep poverty, in buildings with inadequate heat and plumbing.  those conditions drove many jews to leave the ghetto after world war ii, settling in more modern apartments in monteverde or near viale marconi, to the south. many moved to israel.  as the years went on, the rich began buying up homes all around central rome, including in the ghetto. prices and quality went up -- and then up much more when italy converted to the euro in 2002.  a real estate operator, daniela di maulo, said apartments in the ghetto now cost as much as $1,000 a square foot.  ''it's only for tourists, for people on the magazine covers,'' she said.  speculation exploded, and the choicest properties were often those of the district's remaining jews, many of them elderly. one is roberto calò, 75, who said he had fended off at least 10 offers for millions of euros.  ''i would never accept,'' said mr. calò, the uncle of the bar owner. ''it's because i have old memories,'' among them of his father and brother, who were taken away by the nazis in october 1943 (and who were among the few who returned). but many did sell. with prices so high, few are casting blame.  ''it could be that there is an offer you can't say no to,'' said angelo sermoneta, 58, who was born in the ghetto. ''there is an even greater god, and that is the god of money.''  but money is not the only force in the ghetto. mr. calò and mr. sermoneta were sitting in a cozy social club in the heart of the ghetto, along with 11 older friends who were all born there. only four of them still lived there.  but they all go to the club regularly -- to chat (about sports, and about politics in italy and israel) and to drink -- basically to keep the ghetto alive and jewish. so, too, jews who live around rome worship in the ghetto, socialize there, work there, because commercial space is not as pricey as apartments.  ''for us jews to come here every night -- it's something that's in our dna,'' mr. sermoneta said. ''it's where we were born, where we lived, where our friends are.''  street life has become even more jewish, with shops and restaurants with jewish products and food that attract tourists, many of them american jews, and that keep rome's jews anchored there. seven years ago, rafael fadlon, now 36, opened the ghetto's first modern kosher restaurant, la taverna del ghetto, and last year, he started its first kosher fast-food restaurant -- both of which, he reports, are doing well.  ''if you want to keep kosher, it's simpler now than 10 years ago,'' he said.  ''if you are talking about jews living here, it's not so much,'' he added. ''but it's much better equipped than other ghettos around the world.''  with prices as they are, he cannot see jews coming back to live in the ghetto.  ''jews are not stupid,'' he said. ''they would like to move here, but they can't.''  rome journal  