a life lived in fear, but not half bad   the author's beautiful live-in girlfriend is asleep upstairs, the author himself is relaxing in his workroom, having just returned from a recording session in new york city. his life looks pretty good.  so the question for allen shawn -- whose new book, ''wish i could be there: notes from a phobic life,'' relates his fears of open spaces, closed spaces, highways, subways, elevators, planes, tunnels and the road not traveled -- goes to veracity.  are you really that phobic, mr. shawn? because you've been away from your home turf for days, recording an opera you wrote with your brother, and recording studios are sealed and small.  ''i do find recording studios, if they are not accessible by stairs and are nowhere near an open window, i do find that very claustrophobic,'' says mr. shawn, a composer and professor of music at bennington college who at 5 foot 2 sits on a stack of music when he plays his piano. in this case, though, the studio was a large hall, at the american academy of arts and letters, so it was not a problem.  ''my life is a bit like going through a maze, created by my own limitations,'' he says. ''if that studio was on the 30th floor, i might have made another decision.''  a follow-up question: how did a guy who is afraid of his shadow end up with a beautiful girlfriend -- who from the pictures around the house is a good deal younger?  ''oy, yoy, yoy,'' mr. shawn says, using an expression that his late father, the longtime editor of the new yorker, william shawn, who did not exactly advertise that he was jewish, is unlikely to have uttered publicly. ''you didn't mention short. um, i really can't account for it. it's sort of not for me to say. i admit it's surprising. you know, i must have my good sides.''  mr. shawn is 58, smart and playful, with an amiable and deft style of deflecting questions. he might be the product of a tribe of literary and clever hobbits, at whose cocktail parties difficult subjects are rendered amusing, and the intrusive and potentially hurtful is quashed. (were your phobias, including your inability to motor on any but the service roads of middle earth, related to the breakup of your marriage? reply: ''i don't want to go into it. all i can say is the phobias are part of who i am.'')  mr. shawn's former wife, to whom he was married for 25 years and with whom he has a daughter and a son, is the writer jamaica kincaid, who at six feet tall towered over him, and who is known, interestingly enough, for being plain-spoken and fearless. (ms. kincaid, who left the new yorker during tina brown's tenure as editor, told salon that ms. brown had some nice qualities, but was attracted to ''the coarse and vulgar.'')  given his phobias, was it particularly hard for him to give up his previous home in bennington when he divorced five years ago? ''to be honest, it paled beside everything else i was leaving,'' he says, but then adds, ''if the home is a symbol of where you are, then you're leaving where you are in every sense. it's just a huge crisis. it's no longer just a symbol, it's actually true that you are losing a part of yourself and you are going to have to rebuild a sense of where your center is.''  mr. shawn now lives in a little red house on the bennington campus, which he shares with his girlfriend, yoshiko sato, a pianist. but for the skylight in his workroom, the small rooms and low ceilings would suggest an old vermont farmhouse. a sofa, which came with the house, is used by one of the two cats as a scratching post, with not a word of protest from mr. shawn.  he treasures the upright piano, a gift from his father; the photos of his daughter, annie, 22, and son, harold, 18, on the workroom walls; the formica kitchen table at which he ate as a boy with his older brother, wallace, and his twin sister, mary. wallace grew up to be the playwright and actor. mary, who was mentally impaired, was institutionalized at the age of 8.  mr. shawn's book, published by viking, alternates between scientific explorations of phobias and his own life and fears. he writes about the terror and confusion he felt when his twin was sent away, and about the many forbidden subjects in his family -- money, being jewish, his sister, his father's 40-year-long relationship with the writer lillian ross. allen shawn never knew of that affair while he was growing up -- a triumph of emotional self-editing, since there was a separate telephone line for ms. ross and when his father received a call from her, he disappeared with the phone into a closet.  even now, mr. shawn does not volunteer details. how old was he when he found out? nearing 30. how did he find out? it's a difficult subject, mr. shawn says; one of the many people who knew about the affair finally spoke of it. ''this person was a bit angry at men at the time and mentioned it within the context of a speech in which she was speaking disparagingly of the way men behave, blah blah.'' mr. shawn's phobias have not prevented him from some success as a composer. but his fears have kept him from seeing his own compositions performed and accepting award nominations and overseas commissions. they also affected his family. ''this aspect of my life impacts any intimate relationship,'' mr. shawn says. ''it's terrible to live with a guy who has bizarre rules about what to do and how to do it. from the outside perspective it is a big pain. not taking decent, normal vacations, not going to a spouse's or girlfriend's country of origin because it means crossing an ocean.''  ms. kincaid grew up in antigua. mr. shawn never saw where his wife had grown up?  no, he did not.  ''terrible, terrible,'' he says. ''i didn't get to her mother's funeral.''  ''it's a part of what comes with me and it's a big pain. imagine: so-and-so invites us to a delightful weekend on their island in maine. just picture living with someone like that, who says, 'i guess you'll have a good time, dear.' ''  mr. shawn's phobias also affect his relationship with ms. sato. he has never traveled with her to paris, a city they both love. she has been with him in new restaurants in unfamiliar cities, where he was so anxious he shut down ''as if the power was turned off.''  and elevators? ''certainly i've taken some small elevator rides with her,'' mr. shawn says. he laughs painfully. ''sometimes i think i should be shot.''  enough talk of phobia. let's hear about his work.  ''you can take it from me, a lot of my music has tremendous anxiety and intensity,'' mr. shawn says. ''but a lot of my music is very joyful and outgoing.''  he sits at the piano and plays a piece called ''valentine.'' (it can be listened to at nytimes.com/garden.) unsurprisingly, he is unwilling to say for whom the piece was written. as he plays, the room is filled with music that seems to promise a lifetime of love. the mystery of why a woman would stay with a fearful piano player is gone.  at home with allen shawn  