in hojo land, the end of a 49-year stand   in a state where the roofs of old buildings are often topped by cedar and slate, howard johnson's plastic shingles, the color of cantaloupe, always stood out.  but not, perhaps, for much longer. the state's last hojo's, on south main street, off route 8, and its parent company are parting ways, which means the restaurant is losing its name and, possibly, its iconic roof.  by mid-february, the glass wall behind the lunch counter etched with ice cream flavors will disappear from a chain that once had 38 restaurants in the state, according to hojoland.com, a fan web site.  but this 170-seat restaurant, which opened in 1958, will live on under a new name, which patrons will choose in coming weeks, said nicholas bakes, the owner since 1999. the menu will change slightly, he said, because the restaurant long ago branched out beyond the hot dogs, fried fish and meatloaf that were once hojo's staples.  indeed, items available recently included liver and onions, with mashed potatoes and a vegetable, ($7.99), as well as meatball parmigiano, served with french fries and a pickle ($6.99).  but a classic hojo's dish, ''tendersweet clams,'' with french fries, coleslaw and soup, still makes the cut ($9.99).  ''we decided, enough,'' said mr. bakes, sitting in a high-backed, burgundy-accented booth, while ''walk away renee,'' the 1960s hit from the left banke, played overhead.  the problems, as he tells it, began a few years ago, when wyndham worldwide, the owner at that time, gradually began phasing out the ice cream, macaroni-and-cheese and pancake mix that the parent company had long supplied to its restaurants.  because wyndham also stopped running advertisements, mr. bakes also had to take out billboard space and buy radio spots himself, he said.  ''it's time to move on to something better,'' mr. bakes said.  the brand's current owner, la mancha group, based in new york, has said the company is moving in a new direction.  with the makeover, diners craving an authentic experience will have only have three howard johnson's options left in the country, in bangor, me., and lake george and lake placid, n.y.  still, not all traces of mid-century kitsch will disappear from the waterbury site, like the pink letters on the building's facade that spell out ''cocktail lounge.''  inside is a period piece from a bygone era when the restaurant chain was on top. the almost windowless room features a sunken floor spread before a fake fire, whose flickering flames light up two gauzy hangings with pictures of tigers and panthers.  ''it hasn't really been changed since the 1970s,'' mr. bakes said, giggling. ''you can't get this cozy look anywhere.''  noticed  