officer charged in car crash that injured woman and child   an off-duty police officer was charged with drunken driving after critically injuring a woman and her 2-year-old child on the pulaski skyway, the authorities said on wednesday.  the officer, kevin freibott, 38, was fired from the middletown police department for improper conduct in another accident but was later reinstated before joining the force in jersey city in december 2005.  about 11 o'clock on tuesday night, said edward j. de fazio, the hudson county prosecutor, officer freibott was driving his jeep cherokee on the skyway ''well over the speed limit'' when he rear-ended a pontiac grand am, causing it to flip over.  inside the car were raul posas-pineda of jersey city and relatives from honduras: ruth zelaya, 37; her son, jose carlos zelaya, 2; and her husband, an airline pilot, who was unidentified.  ms. zelaya and her son sustained severe head injuries and were hospitalized in critical condition. mr. posas-pineda and ms. zelaya's husband were uninjured.  officer freibott, who had minor cuts and bruises, was charged on wednesday with assault by automobile and driving while intoxicated, mr. de fazio said.  he was suspended without pay and is also being investigated for an unrelated matter, said capt. hugh donaghue, a department spokesman.  tuesday night's accident occurred along a treacherous stretch of the skyway, a narrow, four-lane divided roadway that connects jersey city to newark. according to mr. de fazio, the car driven by mr. posas-pineda had just entered the skyway going westbound and had moved to the right lane when officer freibott struck the car.  according to court documents, officer freibott had been on the middletown force for nine years when he was fired in 2001 for incompetence, insubordination and conduct unbecoming a public employee after misleading superiors about a car accident outside a bar.  he was reinstated after petitioning the state's merit system board, which found that he had not ''intentionally lied to his supervisors.'' although he was suspended for two months, he was an officer in good standing when he left the department, said chief robert oches of the middletown police department.  chief oches described officer freibott as ''a nice young man'' who ''comes from a strong, strong family background.'' but he added: ''drunk driving is a tragic event. and police officers should know better.''  