instead of dollars, some of the squabbling is cut out of early budget negotiations   the annual new york city budget dance, a stylized ritual that has varied little over the past decade, took a different step forward yesterday. mayor michael r. bloomberg, in another sign of his good will toward the city council, agreed to dedicate money to parks, child care and arts programs in the preliminary budget he plans to present today -- instead of making the council fight for those dollars as in the past.  the amount involved, $62 million, is tiny in a budget of around $55 billion, but nonetheless it marked an important step in the evolving -- and warm -- relationship between the mayor and the council speaker, christine c. quinn.  compared with the frosty dealings the mayor had with gifford miller, the previous speaker, the budget cycle that begins today could mark an era of good feeling at city hall. the plan mr. bloomberg presents will be the basis for his executive budget in may; he and the council must then negotiate a final budget for the fiscal year that starts on july 1.  the budget will represent a break with a practice dating back decades, in which mayors would unveil budget proposals early each year that cut, at least on paper, tens to hundreds of millions of dollars in politically popular programs including libraries, parks and cultural institutions.  each year, predictably, the council would spend the late winter and early spring restoring the money during closed-door budget negotiations. while the amount varied each year -- last year it was about $230 million -- the dance itself did not.  last year, ms. quinn she pressed the mayor to end the dance, calling it an unnecessary distraction from more important matters, like the council's oversight responsibilities.  in june, when mr. bloomberg and ms. quinn announced a budget deal for the current fiscal year, the mayor agreed to incorporate in future budgets $40 million for libraries, $10 million for summer jobs and $3 million for more frequent trash collection. in past years, those funds would be cut, then restored.  yesterday, mr. bloomberg pledged to incorporate an additional $62 million or so: $14 million to maintain parks and pay for parks enforcement officers and seasonal playground workers; $10 million for child care programs at the administration for children's services; and roughly $38 million for arts programs. he also announced a reorganization of how the city's cultural budget is distributed.  in addition, he said he would give the council more information about capital projects, which are separate from the operating budget.  mr. bloomberg said the changes ''mean the budget dance is going to be a lot shorter this june'' and will bring more transparency. ''i just think this was a discussion that christine quinn has wanted, to end what is called the budget dance, for a long time,'' he said at a news conference with ms. quinn in brooklyn.  ms. quinn said the change would let the council ''think more strategically and more long term'' during budget talks.  the change is both a victory and a challenge for ms. quinn. in exchange for the mayor's additions to the baseline budget, he expects her to hold the line on members' expectations -- and restrain them from pressing for even more discretionary spending.  an expert on public finance, dall w. forsythe of new york university, said the changes could make budget talks much smoother. ''a significant part of the budget dance has been rechoreographed,'' he said.  but carol o'cleireacain, the finance commissioner and budget director under david n. dinkins, said there was no way to know whether the comity at city hall would last after 2009, when mr. bloomberg and ms. quinn will leave office because of term limits.  ''the actors and the good will between them are a big part of this,'' ms. o'cleireacain said. ''the fiscal well-being of the city is the other part. these are flush times. the mayor is cutting taxes, and it's hard for him to say to the council with a straight face that these spending cuts are necessary.'' if the economy stumbles or the relationship sours, she said, ''the rules of the game will change back again.''  paul dickstein, a budget director under mayor edward i. koch, said the annual dance reflected the mayor's desire to control spending -- and also gave him a bargaining chip during the talks. ''the council generally feels that it needs, as a political matter, to add money to the budget,'' he said. ''that's why we didn't want to put these items into the baseline.''  