with penalties down by 20 percent from '05, n.f.l. reverses a trend   the number of penalty flags thrown in the n.f.l. declined 20 percent this season compared to a year ago, a drop that reversed a trend that had taken hold in recent seasons.  according to an analysis by the new york times, 2006 marked the first time since 2001 that the overall number of penalties went down, instead of up. penalties for offensive holding (down 34 percent) and defensive holding (down 32 percent) were among those showing the sharpest decline from 2005. penalties for delay of game, defensive offside, false starts, pass interference and roughing the passer decreased at least 15 percent.  the decline in penalties has continued into the current playoffs, although the drop-off from the 2005 postseason is not as dramatic as the regular-season decline. leading into next weekend's super bowl, 99 penalties were called over 10 playoff games, compared to 110 through the first 10 playoff games last year. that represents a decrease of 10 percent.  all but 2 of the league's 32 teams -- the carolina panthers and the chicago bears -- committed fewer penalties than they did last season. the new orleans saints made the biggest improvement, decreasing their penalties by 43 percent. there were 13.8 flags a game thrown during the regular season, compared to 17.2 flags in 2005.  have officials simply stopped calling some of the infractions they see? mike pereira, the league's vice president for officiating, disputed the notion that officials were more lenient this season, or that they missed more calls. instead, pereira said players have gradually adjusted to how games were being called, leaving officials with fewer infractions to detect.  ''it's what you would want -- fewer penalties, faster games, without a significant increase or decrease in scoring,'' pereira said during a telephone interview tuesday. ''why had penalties been going up? there were some points of emphasis that we put in place over the past few years, like illegal contact in the passing game and illegal blocks in the back that were affecting the kicking game.''  ''some of this is conjecture, because it's hard to say for sure exactly why some penalties went down,'' he added. ''but i do believe teams have a better understanding of how games will be officiated, and that's good.''  pereira said that the steady increase in penalties since 2001 had become a concern for the league.  ''of course it had,'' he said. ''the trend has a history of going up and down. but nobody goes to the game to see penalties.''  with the super bowl a little more than a week away, pereira is pleased that n.f.l. officials have so far avoided the criticism they endured during last year's playoffs. pereira said the officiating crew for this season's super bowl has already been selected, but that it would not be announced until next week.  officials made several key mistakes during last season's playoffs. the n.f.l. said that an interception by pittsburgh's troy polamalu was incorrectly overturned during the steelers' playoff victory over indianapolis. then, in the super bowl, a series of judgment calls went against the seattle seahawks during their 21-10 loss to the steelers.  the seahawks had a touchdown taken away when wide receiver darrell jackson was called for offensive pass interference. in the fourth quarter, with seattle trailing, 14-10, a catch by jerramy stevens that would have given seattle a first-and-goal at the pittsburgh 1-yard line was wiped out when sean locklear was called for holding. three plays later, seattle's matt hasselbeck was intercepted by ike taylor, and during taylor's return, hasselbeck was erroneously called for a 15-yard penalty for a low block. that gave pittsburgh the ball near midfield, and a few plays later, antwaan randel el threw to hines ward for a 43-yard touchdown that broke open the game.  this postseason has been different, with officials out of the limelight. that is exactly where the league wants them.  ''i'm not being chased down park avenue like i was last year,'' pereira said. ''what i'm most happy about is that we're talking about the games, and the players. that's all i ever want. when the game is over, i'd like people not to mention the officials, period. that's the way it's been, and we hope that's the way it remains after the super bowl. because if you're talking about us, the discussion isn't good.''  this season's decrease in penalties did not dramatically impact offensive or defensive statistics. there were 10,577 points scored during the 2006 season, a 2.7 percent increase over the 10,296 points scored in 2005. in general, teams ran the ball more effectively this season. all but 6 of the 32 teams averaged at least 100 yards a game rushing, compared to 10 teams in 2005 that failed to average 100 yards rushing. fewer holding penalties meant fewer long-yardage situations, making running plays more appealing.  asked why holding penalties on both offense and defense decreased so dramatically, pereira said the interpretation of holding had become clearer for officials to judge.  ''we rewrote the rule, where officials could look for specific things, like with pass interference,'' pereira said. ''when we categorized it, and put down specific things to look for, i think that emphasis created a lesser amount of holding calls. because there might be some relationship between the amount of holding and the increase in rushing, we'll take a look at that during the off-season to see if anything needs to be addressed.''  roughing-the-passer penalties decreased by nearly 17 percent this season, even though officials were sometimes criticized for protecting quarterbacks too strenuously.  there was a key roughing-the-passer call against linebacker tully banta-cain of the new england patriots with just over two minutes left in last sunday's american football conference championship game. the penalty occurred on the colts' game-winning 80-yard drive and moved the ball from the patriots' 23 to the 11. the colts trailed, 34-31, at that point, and had the ball remained at the 23, they might have been forced to settle for a game-tying field goal. instead, from the 11, joseph addai ran the ball three consecutive times, capped by a 3-yard run with 1 minute 2 seconds left for the touchdown.  the bears had more penalties during the regular season (132) than any other playoff team, and the colts, their super bowl opponent, were one of the least penalized teams with 95 infractions. they trailed only the denver broncos (77), the jets (79), pittsburgh (85), the cleveland browns (87), the kansas city chiefs (89) and new orleans (90).  and if the super bowl follows the pattern set this season, there will be fewer flags thrown on feb. 4, and less chance for controversy.  pro football  