what can money buy?   several news reports, all relying on anonymous sources, have suggested that the federal communications commission will soon announce a settlement with four major radio broadcasters over payola.  the first report came on jan. 11 in an article by the hollywood reporter (found at mediaweek.com ). according to that and subsequent reports, including one this week on national public radio (npr.org), the companies -- clear channel communications, cbs radio, entercom and citadel -- will agree to adhere to a code of conduct and to give more airtime to independent music, but they will not admit wrongdoing.  the broadcasters were accused of taking payments from large music labels to play certain songs. several labels, as well as cbs radio and entercom, have settled lawsuits lodged by the former new york attorney general, eliot spitzer, now governor of new york.  kevin martin, the chairman of the f.c.c., is to appear before the senate commerce committee on feb. 1, prompting speculation that he will reveal details of the settlement then. mr. martin told radio and records magazine on jan. 17, ''the commissioners are trying to decide what is the most appropriate thing for us to do.''  after the reports surfaced, senator russell d. feingold, democrat of wisconsin, wrote an open letter to mr. martin urging the f.c.c. to ''instead seek strong binding settlements'' with the broadcasters that would ''reassure consumers they will have access to small, independent and local labels and artists via the public airwaves'' (feingold.senate.gov).  the future of music coalition (futureofmusic.org ) issued a statement asserting that the settlement ''must be judged a failure'' if it does not include a ''credible oversight plan'' and ''serious penalties.'' in a report on its web site, the coalition said last month that consolidation ''has led to fewer choices in radio programming and harmed the listening public and those working in the music and media industries, including djs, programmers and musicians.''  local ownership of radio stations has declined nearly a third since 1975, just 15 formats account for three-quarters of all commercial programming and the top 10 station owners draw nearly two-thirds of all listeners, it found.  free press, a nonpartisan media-focused advocacy group, called the reported settlement a ''slap on the wrist'' that ''won't stop payola'' (freepress.net ).  'reviews' -- critics of another kind of payola -- paid-for blog posts -- were chagrined to learn recently of a new entrant. sponsoredreviews.com , a product of 360 enterprise, joins the existing services payperpost.com, reviewme.com, and others in brokering payments to bloggers for ''reviewing'' or mentioning products or services in their posts. sponsoredreviews has not gone live yet, but tony hung of the blog herald noted that its payment system will differ from others in that bloggers will name their price, to be matched by interested advertisers. ''it's the simple law of reciprocity,'' mr. hung wrote. when someone ''showers you with gold coins, how is that not going to affect what you write or how you'll write it?'' blogherald.com ).  michael arrington at techcrunch (techcrunch.com ) noted that sponsoredreviews promotes its ability to get advertisers' web pages good placement in search engine results. ''so the third-party costs are becoming pretty clear: misled readers, search engine pollution and credibility questions around the entire blogosphere,'' he wrote. ''all for a few dollars a post.'' defenders of sponsored reviews say that as long as financial arrangements are disclosed, there's no harm done.  more 'reviews' -- booksurge, the self-publishing service recently acquired by amazon, offers its client authors a review by ''new york times best-selling author, ellen tanner marsh,'' slate noted last week (slate.com ). ms. marsh was last on the best-seller list in the early 1980s for bodice-rippers like ''reap the savage wind.'' in her review of ''the beer drinker's diet,'' a self-published work, she wrote it was ''motivating and significant.''  dan mitchell  complete links are at nytimes.com/business. e-mail: whatsonline@nytimes.com.  what's online  