town is greener, with 31 found parks   officials in brookhaven recently employed a revolutionary procedure that helped identify 31 parks they never knew the town owned.  they made a list.  last month a comprehensive 700-page inventory of the town's 169 recreational sites was completed by the department of parks, recreation, sports and cultural resources and the department of planning, environment and land management. the last recorded inventory of town parks was taken in the early 1980s, said the parks commissioner, brian pratt, who called it rudimentary and incomplete.  brian x. foley, the town supervisor, said his officials could not find any ''usable information'' in the town's records that could objectively establish the conditions of each park. no one in previous administrations ever developed a strategic maintenance plan, mr. pratt said, and they performed only ''spot maintenance.''  ''outside of the highways, our parks are the most frequently used town service by our public,'' mr. foley said. ''that's why they should be in far better condition than they are in.''  mr. pratt worked with his staff to compile an updated, more descriptive catalog of land that falls under his department's responsibility. first they analyzed maps on file and the property assessment database to identify all of the parks, said a town spokesman, michael pitcher. then inspectors visited each site to record its condition.  many of the 31 parks that went under the radar ''have been heavily vandalized,'' mr. pratt said. ''some of the parks were being used as a dumping ground, some for drug use.''  now that park officials know their stock, they are developing ''a fairly aggressive capital projects plan,'' mr. pratt said. officials are also analyzing the parks department's labor and scheduling, vendor contracts and supplies, he said.  ''we are bringing business to government with good management tools,'' mr. pratt said, noting that, when compared with 2005 spending, the department saved a half million dollars last year, including $250,000 in overtime pay.  the quality controls that mr. pratt and his team have instituted are a welcome change, said mindy block, the president of quality parks, a port jefferson-based nonprofit organization dedicated to improving the stewardship of parkland. ''that's what i have been advocating all along,'' she said.  cemeteries are the next challenge. the town is responsible for maintaining all abandoned cemeteries, and the only known inventory in the parks department is a handwritten register from the 1930s. ''there were little to no surveys then, and properties were referred to by landmarks that no longer exist,'' mr. pratt said.  he said that he planned to assess the condition of all of the town's cemeteries and that many had been ''severely neglected.'' he also said he hoped to enlist community groups to keep an eye on the cemeteries, noting, ''it will cut down on graffiti and vandalism.''  noticed  