ford chief sees small as virtue and necessity   just 10 months ago, william clay ford jr. vowed that his auto company, despite its mounting losses, would ''reclaim our legacy'' in the american car market and ''emerge stronger than we've ever been.''  but there is a new message coming out of the chief executive's office at ford. alan r. mulally, recruited last fall from boeing to run ford, has signaled that the bigger-is-better worldview that has defined ford for decades is being replaced with a new approach: less is more.  instead of insisting that ford reverse its slide, mr. mulally says that ford will become much smaller. its forecasts show it may fall from second to fourth place this year in the american market, behind general motors, toyota and chrysler.  the hiring of mr. mulally, leaving mr. ford as chairman, was the first instance of any detroit carmaker's reaching outside the industry for a leader. and mr. mulally has broken with tradition in a hurry. he flew to japan to meet with top executives of its toughest competitor, toyota, to seek their advice on ways to streamline ford's manufacturing operations.  when asked about his priorities for fixing ford, mr. mulally said in an interview this week, ''at the top of the list, i would put dealing with reality.''  it is a harsh reality. on thursday, ford reported that it had the worst year in its history in 2006, posting a loss of $12.7 billion. in the last three months of the year, it lost $5.8 billion.  a big part of that was related to one-time charges from worker buyouts. but ford's losses are also accelerating because of falling sales of its big s.u.v.'s and pickups and its inability to sell vehicles without offering costly rebates.  one wall street analyst, jonathan steinmetz, calculated that ford's ''terrible'' 2006 performance was equal to a loss of $4,700 a vehicle. earlier this decade, ford earned profits of that size on its big vehicles, a time when it held almost a quarter of the american car market.  ford, whose market share dropped to 17.5 percent last year, is in the middle of shedding 44,000 workers, a third of its total staff. it is also closing 16 plants, and has said it does not expect to make any money in north america until 2009. by then, it expects to sell only about 14 percent of the cars and trucks purchased in the united states.  mr. mulally is trying to be both optimistic and pragmatic, creating a sense of urgency while reassuring his anxious workers that the company has a future.  mr. mulally is in a honeymoon period and has escaped any blame for ford's poor results last year, even though the worst performance came last quarter when he was in charge. ford executives in the past have also made similar claims about breaking with tradition, installing new ways of working and accepting reality.  in the end, mr. mulally will be judged as much by ford's success or failure in the marketplace as for his management techniques.  ''the whole thing boils down to the product that's being sold,'' said jan k. brueckner, a professor of economics at the university of california, irvine. ''we can do everything. we can build great computers, put men on the moon. why can't we design cars that appeal to people?''  some analysts also said that ford's financial results could get worse before they got better, meaning mr. mulally might have to wait years to show improvements. ''ford will suffer the most severe market share decline among the big three in 2007,'' brian johnson, an auto analyst with lehman brothers, wrote in a research report thursday. ''we expect ford's decade-long share loss to accelerate in 2007.''  mr. mulally is learning what a difficult tightrope he must walk in managing expectations amid the dire news.  as ford announced its record loss thursday, he acknowledged that the company might pay bonuses to some executives despite its dismal financial results. it did not pay bonuses in 2005, when ford performed far better than it did last year.  the issue is likely to touch a nerve with the united automobile workers, but mr. mulally said bonuses might be needed ''to make sure we are paying competitive wages and benefits,'' an explanation detroit executives have offered for years in the face of union grumbling.  mr. mulally is used to such grumbling, though, having faced off with unions during his 37 years at boeing.  and to his eye, there are other remarkable similarities between ford and boeing.  boeing bets billions to develop new aircraft. and ford, under mr. mulally, has literally mortgaged the company, pledging as collateral things like factories, its headquarters and the blue ford oval trademark to raise $25 billion in financing.  if mr. mulally is feeling strained, he is not showing it. ''we have the money and plans in place,'' he said thursday.  despite his lack of automotive experience, mr. mulally said his years running a big manufacturer, and his technical background, have prepared him for the challenges facing ford.  he has made quick changes to the way the company is managed. he demands weekly progress reports from his executives to reach the goals in the turnaround plan, called the way forward, that the company set last year before he arrived.  instead of discussing business plans monthly or semiannually as they used to, executives now visit mr. mulally's office every thursday.  there, they analyze things like gasoline prices, manufacturing methods and new automobiles from ford and its competitors.  the in-depth sessions are a contrast to executives' previous efforts to explain away bad news, said donat r. leclair, ford's chief financial officer.  ''the difference i see now is that we're actually committed to hitting the numbers,'' mr. leclair said thursday. ''before, it was a culture of trying to explain why we were off the plan. the more eloquently you could explain why you were off the plan, the more easy it was to change the plan.''  mr. mulally may be getting up to speed quickly, but he occasionally has to ask for definitions of automotive jargon -- like a ''brown field plant,'' referring to an existing factory that the company might upgrade, rather than a ''green field plant,'' meaning one that will be built new.  and he has persisted in calling the automaker the ford company, akin to the boeing company, when everyone here calls it ford or ford's, a tribute to the founding family (its actual name is the ford motor company).  mr. mulally's hiring is, in a sense, a nod to ford's past, considering it built airplanes along with automobiles in its early years. the ford tri-motor became one of the first planes to be purchased by the nation's fledgling airlines, and was used in 1930s movies starring shirley temple and jean harlow.  the similarities between the companies have made it much easier than he expected to lead ford. ''i've been through this movie before,'' he is fond of saying in interviews.  mr. mulally likens his business plan to the checklists that pilots must go through before each flight. ''it is very analogous to flying because you've got to know where you're going and you've got to know where you are so you can take corrective action to get back on that plan,'' he said.  mr. mulally even sees a similarity in the upheaval that affected both industries in the 1970s, when airlines had to deal with deregulation and auto companies faced new competition from japanese automakers in the aftermath of two energy crises.  deregulation ''meant that each of the airlines now was going to be able to compete like never before, and the consumer would decide'' who would survive, mr. mulally said. in the same fashion, foreign competition also means ''the customer gets to decide,'' he said.  in the same way that he now is trying to map out ford's future lineup, he had to take a similar gamble at boeing on what its future would be: would airlines want to buy bigger and faster planes, or more-nimble medium-size aircraft that could be flown on the shorter flights favored by low-fare carriers both in the united states and abroad?  he convened a meeting of executives from 57 airlines to ask whether they wanted to see boeing design a new superfast plane, nicknamed the sonic cruiser, or proceed with development of a more fuel-efficient jet that the airline called the dreamliner.  by a 57-to-0 vote, they opted for the dreamliner, officially the 787, which since has become one of boeing's fastest-selling planes, along with the 737.  mr. mulally made ''a huge strategic decision there that really laid out the next 20 years of manufacturing competition, and i think boeing got it right,'' said professor brueckner, an expert on transportation who has been writing about airlines for more than two decades.  there are echoes in detroit of mr. mulally's smaller-is-better thinking. g.m. is in the middle of its own revamping plan and chrysler is preparing a plan of cutbacks that will be unveiled next month.  this month, the g.m. vice chairman, robert a. lutz, known for his love of flashy designs, said g.m. would not mind yielding several points of market share to its rivals, if it meant the company would become more profitable.  at ford, mr. mulally may have more success than his predecessor, mr. ford, who was seen as reluctant to break from tradition despite his private frustration over failing to halt the company's decline, said david e. cole, chairman of the center for automotive research in ann arbor, mich.  ''by bringing in someone from the outside, it conveyed a sense of urgency in the company,'' mr. cole said. ''bill ford is a nice guy and if he said the sky was falling, people would look at him and say, 'he doesn't mean it.' ''  