dressing up bryant park   this week, just when it finally turned cold, the skating rink in bryant park was dismantled to make way for the tents of fashion week. you could almost hear the echoes of rosy-cheeked children hissing, ''awww, fashionistas.''  dan biederman, the president of the bryant park corporation, which maintains the park, has said he would like fashion week to move somewhere else, soon, and img, the company that produces the shows, is looking at new quarters. in the meantime, the two sides are battling over the size and duration of fashion week in bryant park. the next season of shows begins on feb. 2.  but there are signs that both parties have softened considerably -- they are working together to find a new location for fashion week by 2008. and in light of its appearance of being anti-fashion, the park's management has picked an odd moment to invest in a fashion makeover.  as part of the improvement projects at the park, mr. biederman commissioned the designer stan herman to create new uniforms for its custodians and horticulturalists. mr. herman's designs are intended to evoke the nature of the park: diamond quilted jackets and vests in forest green and matching cargo pants with nifty reflective stripes; and fleece shirts the sandy gray color of the park's london planes, trimmed with stripes of bright green like that of the trees' first buds.  ''this is a very special park and the workers need a very special uniform,'' said mr. herman, who has worn at least two hats in the delicate territorial negotiations between the fashion industry and park management. he is on the board of the bryant park corporation; until october, he was also president of the council of fashion designers of america. mr. herman, whose west 40th street studio overlooks the park, said he sometimes feels like ''the guy in the middle.''  ''i'm very sensitive to the needs of the park, but i'm also a fashion person,'' he said.  still, mr. biederman said the change in uniforms should not be read as a change in the park management's position on fashion week.  ''we don't view this as fashion,'' he said, ''but as a special corporate uniform reflecting the special aspects of bryant park.''  for now, including fashionistas.  front row  