from unread to in demand, thanks to 'utopia'   one of the hottest books in new york appears on no best-seller list.  ''russian thinkers,'' a 1978 collection of essays on 19th-century russian intellectuals by the philosopher isaiah berlin, has virtually disappeared from bookstores across the city, including barnes & noble, labyrinth books and shakespeare & company. the internet is not much help either: the book is sold out on bn.com, and though it can be ordered from amazon, the order won't be shipped for two or three weeks.  the culprit behind this berlin craze turns out to be none other than tom stoppard and his epic three-part play, ''the coast of utopia,'' which opened at lincoln center on nov. 27. tucked deep inside the show's playbill is a list titled ''for audience members interested in further reading,'' with ''russian thinkers'' at the top.  ''if you were intrigued and wanted to know more, this would be a good place to start,'' said anne cattaneo, the play's dramaturge, who compiled the seven-book list. ''i tried to keep it to a little george sand, a little turgenev.''  as a result, mr. berlin's book is not only all but impossible to find in new york, it is also completely out of stock with its publisher, penguin, which earlier this month quickly ordered two reprintings totaling 3,500 copies, the first time in 12 years the book has been printed, to satisfy more than 2,000 suddenly unfilled orders.  before ''coast of utopia'' opened, ''russian thinkers'' sold about 36 copies a month in the whole country, placing it solidly in backlist territory. but late in november, customers began rushing to bookstores in search of the book, ''utopia'' playbill in hand (or a nov. 24 clipping from the new york times about suggested reading for the play). ''there was definitely a run on them,'' said annie shapiro, a manager at labyrinth books on the upper west side. ''we sold out of what we had immediately.''  during a weekly penguin sales meeting on jan. 9, the publisher reported ''seeing some movement'' in requests for the book from barnes & noble, amazon and independent bookstores in manhattan, said maureen donnelly, a spokeswoman for penguin.  the other books on the ''utopia'' list experienced a surge in sales, booksellers around manhattan said. at shakespeare & company on the upper east side, about a half-dozen copies of ''fathers and sons,'' by ivan turgenev, quickly sold out last month, puzzling booksellers there. (''he is probably the least read of all the russian writers,'' said paul daly, a book buyer.)  a play hardly ever drives people to bookstores, with few exceptions, mr. daly said. when the bloody comedy ''lieutenant of inishmore'' opened on broadway, some customers snapped up copies of the script. ''but it didn't mean anybody was coming in and buying memoirs of i.r.a. men from the 1980s,'' he added.  in britain, where ''utopia'' has already finished its run, ''russian thinkers'' saw a brief rise in popularity. henry hardy, a fellow at wolfson college and one of the original editors on the book, said penguin had asked him to prepare a new edition so that it could be reissued as a penguin classic.  mr. hardy said that all of the attention would have come as a pleasant surprise to mr. berlin, who died in 1997. ''he certainly had fairly low expectations across the board,'' mr. hardy said in a telephone interview from oxford. ''he was very self-effacing and modest about the pretensions of his work and didn't hold any commercial hopes for it.''  the first printing of 2,500 copies should arrive from britain by the end of this week, then will be shipped overnight to bookstores, said ms. donnelly of penguin. the next 1,000 copies will arrive by early february.  still, there are risks to reprinting a suddenly popular book. ''you don't want to over-order a book that normally does 36 copies a month,'' she said, sounding hesitant. ''then you're stuck with it.''  