pataki opposes more troops unless iraqis do their part   former gov. george e. pataki of new york, a republican who has steadfastly supported president bush's iraq policies, said on friday that he would oppose mr. bush's plan for sending more troops to baghdad unless iraqi leaders took clearer steps to build a nonsectarian government.  in a speech at georgetown university, mr. pataki, who is considering a run for president, said the shiite-led government of prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki has failed to provide security to all its citizens and left the impression that it favors shiites in their escalating sectarian conflict with sunnis.  ''before the united states government puts more troops in harm's way in baghdad, we must have confidence that the maliki government will be an active partner'' in building a unity government, mr. pataki said.  ''if they want americans to continue to die in defense of their government, if they want americans to continue to pour tens of billions of dollars into their people's schools, services and security, we must first demand action on their part,'' he said, referring to iraqi leaders.  ''prime minister maliki must show that his government will be part of the solution and not, as many have feared, part of the problem.''  with his remarks, mr. pataki appeared to distance himself not only from the president, but also from the three men often named as the leading republican candidates to replace him: john mccain of arizona, one of the senate's most vocal supporters of the troop increase, as well as former mayor rudolph w. giuliani of new york, and former gov. mitt romney of massachusetts, who both have gone on record supporting it.  but senators sam brownback of kansas, who has announced a presidential run, and chuck hagel of nebraska, who is considering a run, have denounced the planned troop increase.  mr. pataki presented his views as a ''bridge'' between ''factions pointing fingers,'' a reference, his aides said, to lawmakers in washington who support the president's iraq strategy and those who support withdrawal.  mr. pataki's son teddy is an officer in the marines, but he has not been sent to iraq.  the speech, mr. pataki's second since leaving office last month after 12 years in albany and his first on foreign policy, comes as he considers whether to enter what is fast becoming a crowded field of contenders for the republican presidential nomination for 2008.  the speech reflected the political challenges that he and other potential republican presidential candidates face in responding to president bush's call for more troops in a war that many polls show to be increasingly unpopular.  mr. pataki has previously defended the president's iraq policies, asserting that iraq was a central front in the war on terrorism.  at a news conference in october 2003, mr. pataki said, ''it's far better to be fighting that war against al qaeda terrorists with our soldiers and sailors and marines and air force on the streets of baghdad than with our firefighters and police officers on the streets of brooklyn.''  on friday, mr. pataki argued that it was possible for the united states to withdraw troops from baghdad and still achieve what he described as america's top priority in iraq: to deny al qaeda and other islamic extremists the kind of safe haven they had in afghanistan.  he said that if the maliki government fails to undertake efforts to form a nonsectarian government, then america should ''withdraw our troops from all areas where the war is essentially a civil one between sunni and shia or between shia factions.''  ''we should withdraw to bases in iraq, kuwait and other parts of the middle east that allow us to win our global strategic objective of defeating violent insurgents and denying them victory, safe havens or training and recruitment bases,'' he said. ''no victory for al qaeda. no new bases from which to organize or plan new attacks against america or the west. no safe havens in iraq or elsewhere. and no u.s. troops deployed in the middle of sectarian shia/sunni strife.''  he also said the maliki government should demonstrate a willingness to disarm shiite militia groups, including the mahdi army. in the past, mr. maliki has been accused of being too reluctant to crack down on the mahdi army, whose leader, moktada al-sadr, has been an important part of his political coalition.  ''if maliki will not fight for iraq, then we must limit our fight to the goal of defeating the global insurgents in iraq, leaving the iraqi government to deal with the sectarian violence of baghdad,'' mr. pataki said.  