profit at sun microsystems stirs hope of turnaround   after years of losses, sun microsystems returned to profitability last quarter, while advanced micro devices swung to a loss, providing evidence that the road to recovery in the technology industry is a bumpy one.  ''it's great to be profitable again,'' jonathan i. schwartz, chief executive of sun, whose string of losses had once led analysts to question the company's ability to survive, told analysts in a conference call. ''sun's financial performance this quarter demonstrates that our strategy and discipline are paying off.''  in contrast, advanced micro devices, the computer chip maker, reported a $574 million loss, in contrast to a $96 million profit in the quarter a year earlier. ten days ago, it warned investors that lower prices had hurt its bottom line, a result of a bruising price war with its larger rival, intel.  on monday, intel announced a deal to become a second outside supplier of server chips to sun, entering territory that a.m.d. had long claimed for itself. sun also announced on tuesday that the private equity firm kohlberg kravis roberts & company would make a $700 million investment in the company in the form of convertible senior notes.  sun's net income for the quarter, the second of its fiscal year, was $126 million, or 3 cents a share, in contrast to a net loss of $223 million, or 7 cents a share, for the period last year. the latest result beat analysts' forecasts.  revenue was $3.6 billion, an increase of 7 percent over the $3.3 billion reported for the second quarter last year. sun attributed the growth to server sales, as well as strong acceptance of solaris, sun's computer operating system. revenue in sun's computer systems products unit increased 14 percent, the fourth consecutive quarter of year-over-year revenue growth, the company said.  sun's net income for the second quarter included $58 million of stock-based compensation charges, $26 million of restructuring and related charges and a tax benefit of $4 million. the impact of these three items was a loss of about 2 cents a share.  shares of sun rose as much as 8 percent, or 46 cents, to $6.12 in late trading after the report was issued, after declining 9 cents, to $5.66, during regular trading.  ''it's an important milestone,'' said brent bracelin, an analyst at pacific crest securities. ''they are well on their way to executing a turnaround.'' mr. bracelin said that the challenge now would be for sun to keep costs down as it headed aggressively into volume markets, where profit margins were lower.  while the sun-intel deal announced monday had no impact during the december quarter, it serves as an illustration of a.m.d.'s precarious position as it tries to hold on to the market share gains of the past year.  a.m.d. has spent several quarters embroiled in a fierce price war with intel in an effort to gain market share, particularly as intel introduced its new line of high-performance chips.  a.m.d. said shipments of its server processors, which have the highest profit margins, were essentially flat with the previous quarter, while the average selling prices for those chips were down significantly. the company said, however, that overall microprocessor shipments increased 26 percent .  a.m.d., based in sunnyvale, calif., posted a net loss of $574 million, or $1.08 a share, for the quarter, the fourth of its fiscal year. for the same quarter last year, a.m.d. earned $96 million, or 21 cents a share. revenue for the quarter was $1.77 billion, compared with $1.84 billion at the same time last year.  in addition to the price war with intel, a.m.d. also attributed its lower profit to heavy costs associated with its $5.4 billion acquisition of ati technologies, the graphics chip maker it acquired in october. excluding those costs, as well as employee stock-based compensation expenses, a.m.d. reported fourth-quarter revenue of $1.37 billion, compared with $1.35 billion last year.  shares of a.m.d. declined as much as 5 percent in after-hours trading after release of its earnings report; they declined 2 cents, to close at $17.51, in regular trading. a.m.d.'s warning on jan. 12 sent its shares down $1.91, or 9 percent, to $18.27, and led several wall street investment firms to lower their ratings of a.m.d.  hector ruiz, a.m.d.'s chief executive, said he expected the price war with intel to continue. ''pricing is very, very challenging and we expect it to be for all of the year,'' mr. ruiz told analysts.  he said the company was focused on reducing costs, as well as on the new chip design it planned to introduce later in the year. the company is also moving to an advanced manufacturing technology that could help make it more competitive with intel, which is in the midst of a manufacturing transition of its own.  for the year, a.m.d. lost $166 million, or 34 cents a share, on $5.65 billion in revenue. the company said it expected revenue in the range of $1.6 billion to $1.7 billion in the first quarter.  