to food pantry, even fruitcake is a help   that cellophane-wrapped holiday gift food package with the 12 different cheeses and three tins of paté. and that two-ton fruitcake. and the unopened whitman's sampler. you could live without the calories contained in those gestures of good will from the season just passed -- and people at the emergency food pantry here are willing to help.  ''we will take your girl scout cookies, too,'' said the rev. thomas w. goodhue, executive director of the long island council of churches, which has seen a steep postholiday drop in donations to its food pantries. ''anything that people won't or shouldn't eat anyway, give them to us, please.''  food pantries around the country, including the one operated here by the church council in a cinder-block building with a leaking roof, endure a donation dip almost every year at this time, after a december in which cans and vans loaded with donations from schools, churches and families often must double- or triple-park outside.  ''during the holidays, people are thinking about giving, which is good for us,'' said karen ford, director of the food bank of iowa, a consortium of a dozen pantries in the des moines area. but come january, ms. ford and others said, people's minds turn to other matters.  so this year, mr. goodhue, a tall, bearded united methodist clergyman with a manner of gentle bemusement, decided to play the calorie card in a message to donors. ''i know people are ordering their girl scout cookies about now, and i know there are all these uneaten nonperishables from the holidays sitting around in homes out there,'' he said, affecting a gimlet-eyed squint. ''we can put them to better use.''  ''there are fruitcakes being used as doorstops,'' he added, prodding. ''bring them here.''  like most food pantries, the one here is largely stocked with items of the utmost nutritional rectitude: rice, pasta, canned beans, flour, cereal, powdered milk. the idea of soliciting cookies, chocolate and paté is not exactly in perfect harmony with the culture of emergency food distribution. an e-mail inquiry sent to about 100 food pantries around the country evinced a general accord that the postholiday season is when their shelves are most depleted, but few seemed inclined to copy mr. goodhue's call for sugar.  ''i can't say we encourage the donation of fruitcakes,'' iris valanti, spokeswoman for the greater pittsburgh community food bank, wrote in an e-mail message. ''it doesn't seem fair to foist unwanted and generally already re-gifted fruitcakes to our clients.''  during a tour of his pantry this week, mr. goodhue exhibited the sangfroid of a man with a vision. ''oh, i used to worry about whether everything we gave out was perfectly nutritional,'' he said, strolling between bins filled with soup and spaghetti. ''but it's not like we're giving away nothing but soda and cheese curls. and actually, fruitcake is quite nutritious.''  he added, ''of course, when they bring us the fruitcake, we hope they will bring us some other things.''  january's shortages may be part of a boom-and-bust cycle all charities endure, but one national food bank network, america's second harvest, reported a 9 percent drop in donations over all in 2006 compared with 2005. the group attributed the decline in part to the spike in contributions made for hurricane katrina victims in 2005, and in part to what some advocates describe as katrina-related ''giving fatigue'' in 2006.  the united states agriculture department's annual survey of ''food insecurity'' estimates that 12 percent of the nation's population subsists on barely adequate quantities of food last year, a figure that has remained relatively stable for the past few years.  but food bank operators say the numbers of people seeking their services have been sharply up in the last two years, especially among the elderly.  ''we have a lot of retirees in our community, and we see more and more of them being served at our pantries,'' said joy tucker, senior vice president of the community food bank of tucson, ariz.  in new york city, there is a similar trend, said dorren wohl, executive director of the west side campaign against hunger, one of the city's largest food pantries. at the food bank here, mercedes rodriguez, a furniture saleswoman, waited at the distribution window for the few bags of groceries that she said she collects here ''about once a month, to help out.'' she picked up some boxes of pasta, tomato sauce, canned vegetables, peanut butter, cereal, tuna and canned meat.  when asked whether she would like it if girl scout cookies were added to the bags, ms. rodriguez's 4-year-old daughter, celine, said she did not know what girl scout cookies are.  ''cookies,'' said her mother. ''you like cookies?''  the girl looked up from the barbie band-aid she was studying on her left middle finger.  sure, she nodded.  