the dangers of swinging for the fences   there was once a pharmaceutical company that could do no wrong. it had the best-selling drug in the world. it saturated the airwaves with its ads, and swarmed doctors' offices with its army of good-looking sales representatives. it had mastered the art of turning drugs into blockbusters. it made many billions in profits. wall street analysts loved it.  that company, for those among you with short memories, was pfizer. and that era when it was the king of the hill wasn't some distant age -- it was just maybe three or four years ago. oh, how the mighty have fallen!  this week, during a meeting with analysts and investors, the company's new chief executive, jeffrey b. kindler, announced that pfizer was going to do some serious retrenching. for starters, it would lay off 7,800 people. along with a previously announced reduction of 2,200 sales representatives, that meant pfizer was going to cut 10,000 jobs, about 10 percent of its work force.  he also announced that pfizer would close some of its manufacturing and research facilities and reconfigure its research capabilities. but most important, mr. kindler did something his predecessor, hank mckinnell, who was shown the door last summer well ahead of his scheduled retirement (and handed an obscene exit package), had never been able to do.  implicitly at least, mr. kindler acknowledged that pfizer had hit the wall. despite the nearly $15 billion it made last year it; despite the fact that it still has the best-selling drug in the world, lipitor, which generates around $13 billion in annual revenue -- its reliable business model had begun to break down. mr. kindler's essential message to the investment community was that pfizer was going to try to do the single hardest thing any big company can try, and that is to change.  we in the newspaper business tend to obsess about the wrenching transformation taking place in the media industry. it is easy enough to see. we look at other industries, like the domestic auto business, and we can see that its way of doing business isn't working anymore either.  it is a little harder to see that with big pharma, which is still rolling in profits. but the pharmaceutical business is, indeed, changing. ''i think of the environment as a huge screw that is slowly turning,'' said steve scala, the health care analyst with cowen & company. ''you can't see it turning if you are in the middle of it, but if you walk away for a while and then come back, you notice how much it's turned.'' for pfizer, the very tactics that made it so successful for so long are precisely the ones that have now caused the company to stumble.  mr. kindler has noticed that the screw is turning. whether he can actually do anything about it, retrenchment or not, is another question entirely.  the modern pfizer was built on blockbusters, which is what the industry calls medicines that generate $1 billion or more in annual revenue. that isn't exactly a news flash: there was viagra, which it brought to market in the late 1990s and turned into a $1.6 billion drug, and its high-blood-pressure medication norvasc ($4.8 billion in sales last year). and lipitor, which, despite competing with a handful of other cholesterol-lowering drugs, is by far the dominant drug in its class.  in the 1980s and 1990s, all the big pharmaceutical companies aimed for blockbusters, of course. but no company was better at it, and no company believed more profoundly in the supremacy of the blockbuster model. pfizer was in the forefront of the mass marketing of drugs, and of getting its sales force in front of doctors to persuade them to use pfizer's products instead of a competitor's. and if its research labs weren't exactly prolific -- pfizer hasn't developed a blockbuster on its own since viagra -- it still managed to produce a steady stream of blockbusters by buying up other companies and acquiring their potential blockbusters. mr. mckinnell used to say that there were plenty of blockbusters out there -- pfizer's job was to go out and find them.  unlike most industries, big pharma can't milk its best-selling ''branded'' drugs forever. that's because drug patents expire after 17 years. indeed, because the testing and approval process comes after the patent is filed, a company usually has only 10 to 12 years to reap a high price from its drug once it hits the market. after that, the generic drug industry takes it over, and drains most of the profit out of it.  as a matter of public policy, that's surely a good thing, but it doesn't help companies that are trying to generate ever-increasing profits. for them, there is constant pressure to replenish expiring blockbusters with even bigger and more profitable drugs.  to a number of the analysts i spoke to who follow pfizer, like mr. scala, the company's problem is really pretty simple: it has a number of drugs that have either lost their patent protection or will soon -- and it doesn't have anything coming on line, at least in the short term, that will take up the slack. norvasc, for instance, will lose its patent protection this year. most ominous of all, lipitor is coming off patent in 2010. how is the company ever going to make up that $13 billion in revenue?  what's more, pfizer was banking a great deal on a cholesterol drug it had developed called torcetrapib, the first drug aimed at raising the level of good cholesterol, rather than simply lowering cholesterol levels, the way lipitor does. it would have been huge. but in early december, the company announced that it had ended its efforts to develop the drug after a clinical trial showed a higher-than-expected number of deaths. the loss of torcetrapib was a crushing blow.  but the patent expiration issue, while very real, is to my mind the symptom of something larger. the era of the blockbuster -- and the blockbuster business model --may well be coming to an end. if you get away from wall street, it's not hard to find people who view things that way. ''i don't think the model makes sense anymore,'' said the harvard economist david cutler.  ''the blockbuster model does not work as a business anymore,'' said roger longman, a managing partner at windhover information, a health care consulting company.  there are lots of reasons for this. for one, as pfizer discovered with the failure of torcetrapib, when you live by the blockbuster, you die by the blockbuster --companies simply need to become less reliant on a small handful of big moneymakers that will inevitably go away. ''if you go the blockbuster route,'' said dr. una s. ryan, the chief executive of a small biotech company, avant immunotherapeutics, ''any setback is going to be catastrophic.''  for another, the larger society has become much less tolerant of big pharma's tactics. there is a backlash against the kind of direct-to-consumer advertising that has propelled many drugs into blockbuster status. doctors are less willing to spend time with drug company sales representatives. the game-playing by many companies to extend the life of their patents is under attack by congress and the federal trade commission. the food and drug administration is giving tougher scrutiny to drug applications -- especially for drugs that are only marginally different from those already on the market.  and as health care costs continue to rise, managed care companies are looking to drugs -- and drug companies -- to save money. look, for instance, at lipitor, which is unlikely to have much more sales growth. why? part of the reason is that a competing drug, merck's zocor, lost its patent protection and is now available in generic form. pfizer can argue, as it does, that lipitor is superior to generic zocor. but it is not that much better. so a number of managed care companies have begun switching patients to the generic version, thus saving millions of dollars.  ''in some ways,'' said niko canner, a consultant with katzenbach partners, ''big pharma is a victim of its own success. there was a tremendous period when they were coming up with drugs for chronic diseases that affected lots of people. there is now a lot of very good generic product on the market. and while there have been significant innovations, there hasn't been a big wave like the last one.''  and there's more: the science of drug discovery is changing in ways that favor small, nimble biotech companies. the new discoveries tend to be in areas like cancer, where companies can charge very high prices for small populations -- and where the sales force needs to be steeped in the science of the drug. mr. cutler believes that drugs are eventually going to be customized for individuals -- and the kind of broadly available drugs big pharma has been so good at producing, requiring huge clinical trials, simply won't make sense anymore.  mr. mckinnell, pfizer's former chief executive, was wedded to the blockbuster model; in retrospect, it seems obvious that that is part of the reason he no longer has his job. (he also had very little credibility on wall street, and wasn't well liked within the company.) in his announcement this week, mr. kindler talked about needing to make the sales force operate differently, about turning its managed care customers into partners instead of foes, and about getting as good at developing $500 million drugs as in coming up with new blockbusters.  he was speaking in code, but if you were attuned to it, the message was clear. he wants to wean pfizer from its blockbuster culture. but even with 10,000 fewer employees, pfizer is still a very big company, and very set in its ways. it had a great deal of success doing things one way. and however much its people may say they want to change and thrive, mr. kindler is about to discover the same thing executives in the newspaper and auto industries already know. it's hard to teach an old dog new tricks.  talking business  