relatives of dorm fire victims lash out   anger, at once therapeutic and corrosive, along with memories still tender and painful were in the air of a crowded courtroom on friday.  it was the day that relatives of three students killed and one of those seriously burned in a dormitory fire at seton hall university in south orange, n.j., came here to deliver emotional statements at the sentencing of the two men who had admitted deliberately starting the fire.  there was no hint of forgiveness as one family member after another went from wilting tears to sudden blooms of rage.  ''you will face a higher court one day,'' said frank caltabilota, whose son, frank jr., 18, of west long branch, n.j., died in the fire.  ''and when that day comes, the sentence of that court will be that you both rot in hell together,'' mr. caltabilota continued, expressing his disappointment at the plea agreement that allowed the dropping of murder charges.  the defendants, joseph t. lepore and sean michael ryan, were allowed to plead guilty on the eve of their trial to lesser charges of arson and witness tampering. they were both sentenced to five-year prison terms, with a chance of parole in 16 months.  the sentencing of mr. lepore, of florham park, n.j., and mr. ryan, of livingston, n.j., both 26 and childhood friends who lived in the dormitory, boland hall, came seven years and one week after the fire in the chilly early-morning hours of jan. 19, 2000. it marked the end of an investigation that lasted more than three years before arson and murder indictments, followed by another three years of pretrial maneuvering in which defense lawyers contested everything from the scientific evidence of the cause of the fire to the likelihood that the deeply scarred burn victims would testify against their clients.  in the end, however, judge harold w. fullilove of essex county superior court rejected requests from defense lawyers that the two serve their sentences in a state prison for youthful offenders. they will be there for two weeks, according to michael g. morris, an assistant county prosecutor, then sent to a state prison that was not disclosed.  the fire heightened nationwide awareness of safety in college dormitories, the flammability of furnishings and the high number of false alarms that subject residents to dangerous risks. it also led new jersey to enact the country's first laws requiring sprinklers in dormitories at colleges and boarding schools.  before mr. lepore and mr. ryan were sentenced, the two -- dressed in jeans and sneakers instead of the suits and ties they wore in the weeks of pretrial hearings -- faced the families and made brief apologies for what they had admitted was ''a prank that got out of hand.''  ''i know there is nothing i can do to take away your pain,'' an unshaven mr. lepore said. ''i'm sorry. i'm terribly sorry.''  mr. ryan told the family members: ''i couldn't even imagine what you have gone through. i'm very, very sorry for your losses. i'm sorry for your losses.''  but the words did not change the 14 written statements submitted by the relatives, which were delivered over 2 hours and 15 minutes. the two men were called cowards for waiting so long to admit what they had done, ''spineless princes'' for hiding behind their families and their lawyers, and ''sociopaths'' for their irresponsible actions. and always, the family members called them murderers.  joseph karol, the father of aaron karol, 18, a freshman from green brook, n.j., who died in the fire, carried a framed photograph of his son to the front of the courtroom when it was his turn to speak. he held up the photo and turned in a slow arc, so all of the nearly 150 people jammed into the chamber could see it. he was followed by his wife, candace, who spoke of the daily rhythms of her son's life: his birthdays, the sports, dreams of becoming an f.b.i. agent.  ''there are so many never-agains,'' she said as tears welled up.  and an indignant phillip giunta, the father of john giunta, 18, of vineland, n.j., who died in the blaze, raged against what he considered the injustice of the sentence and insisted that starting the fire had been no accident and no prank. his oldest son, peter, who was also in boland hall when the fire alarm sounded at 4 a.m. and barely escaped, told the court that the sentence stung more because it seemed to confirm what he said was the defendants' attitude that they could get away with what they had done.  ''it's that attitude that i think gets everybody,'' peter giunta said. ''and i don't know whether the criminal justice system has a remedy for that.''  