washington and detroit share some issues   energy and health policy dominated the news this week, both directly, in the form of president bush's state of the union address, and indirectly, in the huge loss at the ford motor company last year. ford's problems were attributed largely to the flagging sales of its gas-guzzling sport utility vehicles and the crushing burden of providing health care to its employees and retirees.  familiar issues -- for a second year in a row, president bush made ''energy security'' a focal point of his state of the union address. this time he proposed mileage standards that he said would cut gasoline consumption by 20 percent and require the production of at least 35 billion gallons of alternative fuels a year by 2017.  in contrast to years past, hydrogen was not part of the plan. instead, the president focused primarily on ethanol -- made from corn, not the cheaper sugar -- as an alternative to gasoline and diesel fuel for cars and light trucks.  the president also called for a new program to encourage individuals without employer-provided health insurance to buy it on their own. mr. bush's proposal was to start taxing workers on the value of their employer-provided plans while also allowing some part of the plan's cost to be deducted from taxable income.  the effect would give a new tax deduction to self-employed people and others who buy their own insurance -- and, in theory, it would also encourage uninsured people to start buying coverage. the tax revenue lost by extending this deduction would be recouped from new taxes on people who now receive expensive tax-free health insurance from their employers.  the ethanol proposal has wide support in congress, but the mileage standards and health insurance proposals differ significantly from the ideas that congressional leaders have proposed.  bleeding blue -- battered by falling sales, revamping costs, worker buyouts and the falling value of unneeded factories, ford said it lost a record $12.7 billion last year -- almost half of it in the fourth quarter alone.  the loss was by far the largest in ford's 103-year history, topping the $7.4 billion it lost in 1992 and exceeding general motors' $10.6 billion loss in 2005. the biggest annual loss for any american automaker is still the $23.5 billion that g.m. lost in 1992.  even after stripping out revamping costs and focusing on the actual business of making cars, ford flopped. it lost $2.8 billion on continuing operations, more than most analysts had expected and almost 50 percent more than its $1.9 billion loss in 2005.  general motors was scheduled to report its 2006 earnings next tuesday, but has delayed their release indefinitely.  resizing pfizer -- with some of its best-selling drugs opening up to generic competition and no new blockbusters to take their place, pfizer said it would lay off another 7,800 employees -- in addition to the 2,200 announced earlier -- and would close factories and labs in brooklyn; omaha; ann arbor, mich., and abroad.  pfizer said the job cuts would reduce its worldwide work force by 10 percent and would take place by the end of next year.  sales of two of pfizer's best sellers -- the antidepressant zoloft and the antibiotic zithromax -- fell by more than 70 percent in the fourth quarter of 2006 as they lost patent protection, the company said.  another blockbuster, the cholesterol-fighting drug lipitor, could be subject to generic competition by 2010.  big gamble -- with lottery profits flagging, the state of illinois proposed selling its state lottery system, hoping for a one-time jackpot of as much as $10 billion from investors.  while illinois and other states have sold toll roads, airports and other assets to raise cash, the proposed lottery sale would be one of the largest privatizations of a state-run program. it raises concerns that cash-short states may be willing to settle for an immediate payout by selling assets that could provide consistent streams of revenue.  indiana is also considering selling its lottery and bids are due this month.  losing streak -- expanding its investigation into the multibillion-dollar online gambling industry, the justice department subpoenaed the records of four wall street investment banks, according to people briefed on the investigation.  the banks -- hsbc, credit suisse, deutsche bank and dresdner kleinwort -- underwrote the initial public stock offerings of online gambling sites that operate abroad. more than half of all bets placed to these online casinos, typically based in costa rica or antigua, are from residents of the united states.  unable to go directly after the casinos, prosecutors have sought to pursue the operations' american partners, marketing arms and now, possibly, investors.  caught cheating -- the kerr-mcgee corporation cheated the government out of millions of dollars in royalties on oil it produced in publicly owned coastal waters, a federal jury in denver decided.  the jury concluded that kerr-mcgee underpaid the government $7.5 million, accepting the estimates of a former government auditor, bobby l. maxwell, who was let go by the interior department after he raised the issue. congress and the department's own inspector general are investigating how the department enforced its royalty rules.  kerr-mcgee could be forced to pay more than $30 million. mr. maxwell could be entitled to as much as 30 percent of that.  fall out of the gap -- after the company's third dismal holiday shopping season, gap, the casual-clothing chain, forced out its embattled chief executive, paul s. pressler.  mr. pressler, who once ran the walt disney company's theme parks, cut gap's debt load after he arrived in 2002, but he could not turn around the ailing retail business. sales fell every month last year; over the critical holiday shopping period they fell 8 percent compared with the period in 2005.  speculation about a successor fell on roger n. farah, the president of polo ralph lauren, and paul r. charron, the former head of liz claiborne.  most popular -- following are the most-popular business news articles on nytimes.com from jan. 13 through jan. 20:  1. in raw world of sex movies, high definition could be a view too real  2. don't call. don't write. let me be.  3. the turntables that transform vinyl  4. gambling subpoenas on wall st.  5. what's a pound of prevention really worth?  links are at nytimes.com/business.  five days  