fresh faces give u.s. team a boost and a win   the youth of america served bob bradley well.  bradley, the interim coach of the united states men's national team, got a victory last saturday in his first game on the sideline. in a 3-1 victory against denmark, four players made their first appearance for the senior national team -- with two scoring goals -- and five others played in only their second international match.  ''during warm-ups bob told me to be ready,'' kenny cooper, a hulking 22-year-old striker, said yesterday in a telephone interview from winston-salem, n.c., where he was spending a few days before returning to training camp in california. ''i was certainly excited to find out that i would be playing.''  cooper, one of the four who earned his first cap (jonathan bornstein, kyle beckerman and bryan namoff were the others), replaced eddie johnson in the 63rd minute and did not wait long to score his first goal for the national team. he latched on to a lead pass from heath pearce, another second-half substitute, and outraced three defenders before tucking the ball into the net. a bit giddy after the score, cooper took off his jersey and was slapped with a yellow card.  ''i got so excited trying to take my shirt off, i really only wanted to kiss the badge,'' cooper said. ''but i couldn't get it off my back, then it was inside out, then i just started waving it. then i got the card.''  cooper, the son of a former professional player of the same name, turned down a scholarship from southern methodist university to sign a contract with manchester united in 2003. after a couple of years on the reserve team and two spells on loan, cooper, who is 6 feet 4 inches and 210 pounds, returned to the united states and signed a two-year contract (which includes a two-year league option) with f.c. dallas of major league soccer.  ''it was a great, great experience at manu,'' he said. ''it was a life-changing experience. but when i found out i had a chance to come home and play, i jumped at it.''  in his first season in m.l.s., cooper surprised people with his soccer smarts and skill on and off the ball, winding up with 11 goals.  cooper is merely one of the promising young americans bradley has had in camp since early this month. the united states will play mexico on feb. 7 in glendale, ariz., a game for which bradley expects to have a handful of european-based players available.  in their absence against denmark, however, bradley began to groom a new crop in advance of next summer's concacaf gold cup, copa américa in venezuela and the start of the next cycle of world cup qualifying games. there were many encouraging signs against denmark -- particularly the play of cooper, bornstein, mapp, jimmy conrad and bobby boswell -- but it is a long time between now and the start of the 2010 world cup in south africa.  yanks abroad  claudio reyna's return to the united states and the new york red bulls of m.l.s. moved closer yesterday when manchester city announced that it had terminated his contract. reyna, a 33-year-old midfielder, cost the english premier league club a $4.94 million transfer fee when he left sunderland in august 2003.  reyna, who is from springfield, n.j., is expected to become one of the red bulls' two designated players who can receive more than the league maximum salary. he also will be reunited with bruce arena, his coach on the united states national team and at the university of virginia. the team will make the announcement today.  the american central defender oguchi onyewu could be the answer to chelsea's problems on the back line. according to news reports in britain, the club is prepared to pay nearly $4 million to obtain onyewu from standard liège of belgium. his agent, will sherling, told the associated press that onyewu had turned down possible transfers to fulham, middlesbrough and real madrid because he would not be assured of a regular place in the lineup.  ''i don't know if that's the case with chelsea,'' sherling said. ''the best club for him is one that will develop his profile as a player. he doesn't need to get tangled up in which club is bigger than the next.''  onyewu has made 17 appearances for the united states national team and played in all three games in last summer's world cup.  it seems that clint dempsey has not missed a beat. after enduring multiple trips across the atlantic as details of his $4 million transfer to fulham in england from the new england revolution of m.l.s. were being worked out, dempsey made in immediate impact. entering as a late substitute last week, dempsey beat tottenham's robbie keane to a loose ball and started the play that led to fulham's game-tying goal.  ''the level is obviously higher than m.l.s., but if i had to make a comparison i would say it's similar to playing for the national team -- everyone around you is a good player,'' dempsey said on fulham's web site.  giuseppe rossi, who grew up in clifton, n.j., but moved to italy with his family, will spend the rest of the season with parma on loan from manchester united. rossi, who remains eligible to play for either the united states or italy at the senior international level, spent the first half of the season at newcastle united but was recalled by manchester united because he did not receive enough playing time.  in england, reading midfielder bobby convey entered the game in the 85th minute last weekend for his first action in the premier league since sustaining a knee injury last october.  in germany, striker josh wolff made his debut for 1860 munich of the second division.  yesterday, the american defender jay demerit scored late in the game to give last-place watford a premier league victory over blackburn rovers and brad friedel, its american goalkeeper.  notes  the united states men's under-20 national team will find out its opponents in the world championships on march 3 in toronto. the team qualified for its sixth straight trip to the finals when it won its qualifying group last week in panama. the under-20 world cup will be played june 30 to july 22 in montreal; toronto; ottawa; edmonton, alberta; and victoria and burnaby, british columbia. organizers have sold 350,000 tickets for the tournament. the united states finished 12th in the 2005 tournament in the netherlands.  the english premier league has concluded negotiations with broadcasters covering more than 200 countries and will make $1.2 billion for a three-year deal beginning with the 2007-8 season. the league more than doubled the value of its previous overseas deal.  joy fawcett, julie foudy and mia hamm, veterans of the united states women's national team, are among 15 first-timers on this year's ballot for election to the national soccer hall of fame in oneonta, n.y. the hall expects to announce the inductees next month.  cuba, guadeloupe, haiti and trinidad and tobago have qualified for the concacaf gold cup, which will be played in the united states from june 6-24.  soccer: extra time  