jack kerouac, in his cups, on a tear and on tv   ''no great society,'' which opened at performance space 122  in february, reopened last night and runs through feb. 11 at the new york theater workshop's fourth street theater, 83 east fourth street, east village; (212) 239-6200. following are excerpts from jason zinoman's review, which appeared in the new york times on feb. 11; the full text is online at nytimes.com/theater.  ''the only people for me are the mad ones,'' jack kerouac writes in ''on the road,'' ''the ones who are mad to live, mad to talk, mad to be saved, desirous of everything at the same time, the ones who never yawn or say a commonplace thing.''  he would have loved the elevator repair service, the inspired avant-garde company whose production ''no great society'' is primarily composed of the transcribed text of two television interviews with kerouac. only a slightly cracked company would read the entirety of ''the great gatsby'' in a five-hour show, ''gatz.'' or mount ''the bacchae'' with puppets.  under the careful guidance of john collins, the director, the group's show is a joy from start to finish, featuring excellent performances and the loose-limbed spirit of work born out of improvisation. the first half is a madcap re-enactment of a 1968 episode of william f. buckley's ''firing line,'' which showcases four otherworldly eccentrics (mr. buckley; kerouac; ed sanders, from the band the fugs; and an academic, lewis yablonsky) so different from one another that they don't seem to belong to the same species.  kerouac (susie sokol), who in real life died of alcoholism a year after the buckley broadcast, steals the show, drunkenly interrupting everyone and, despite the efforts of mr. buckley (ben williams), refusing to play the part of the grandfather of the beats. ''i believe in order, tenderness and piety,'' the eye-rolling ms. sokol says in a working class accent.  part 2 is loosely based on an appearance that kerouac made on steve allen's variety show in 1959. after taking off his gray wig in front of the audience, mr. williams transforms into mr. allen, all smiles and showbiz charm.  kerouac looks uneasy, but this interview quickly departs from realism and turns into something moodier and almost dreamlike. (mr. collins added the stark, affecting lighting.) ms. sokol, a youthful-looking downtown fixture with pencil-thin legs and a deadpan delivery, performs silly dances, riffs on kerouac passages and even speaks as herself.  ''susie told me she was nervous before the show,'' mr. williams says. ''are you nervous now?'' she says no.  is this a homage to kerouac's stream-of-consciousness style? or a collection of small reminders that these are actors playing characters? whatever the purpose, the elevator repair service makes sure that there is nothing commonplace about its delightful show. yawning is out of the question.  theater review  