changes sought at children's psychiatric hospital   for months, connecticut's psychiatric hospital for children has been buffeted by criticism. employees say it is unsafe and complain that their opinions are dismissed, and others worry that the children remain in custody far too long.  then last month a report concluded that there were major gaps in communication among management and the psychiatrists, pediatricians and nurses who work at the facility, riverview hospital.  on tuesday, a group of state legislators added to the chorus of dissatisfaction, saying they were eager to see improvements more quickly at riverview, the only publicly run facility in the state for children with severe mental problems.  ''we come out of this knowing that things are not where they should be, but there is improvement,'' said state senator edward meyer, the chairman of the committee that held the hearing.  after a stream of complaints from the staff and others, the superintendent stepped down in october. so far, state officials have made little progress finding a permanent replacement.  the commissioner of the department of children and families, darlene dunbar -- who herself is expected to be replaced by gov. m. jodi rell -- said at the hearing that the only viable candidate recently withdrew. and the department, which oversees riverview and several other facilities, has had several problems in recent years: there have been reports of violence at some places, and other sites that have cared for troubled children have shut down.  ''how can you have accountability when you don't know who should be held accountable?'' mr. meyer asked. many critics at tuesday's hearing said the problems had deepened in recent years because of friction between management and staff.  ''there is no vision and nobody making it clear what the hospital is meant to do,'' said jeanne milstein, the state's child advocate.  ms. milstein pointed to some children staying in the hospital for more than a year, without plans for their release to a less restrictive setting.  while the number of violent episodes reported by administrators at riverview had declined in recent months, the report issued last month said that there were ''splits at all levels'' that made it difficult to make changes at the hospital.  while several leaders, including ms. dunbar, have advocated using fewer physical restraints, in part to limit violent outbursts, the report found that there has been resistance among some staff members.  richard liburdi, a children's service worker at the hospital and one of several staff members at tuesday's hearing, said many of his colleagues felt their professional opinions were being disregarded. he described one case in which a teenage girl was moved against the advice of a psychiatrist who had worked with her for several months.  later, mr. liburdi said, the girl lashed out at some staff members and had to be restrained.  despite the criticisms, ms. dunbar said that she was confident that the latest report had provided the management and staff with a ''road map'' for what to do next.  ''will this be overnight? no,'' she told the group of lawmakers. ''but it is not as if you are coming to us and we don't know what to do. we do have a plan.''  