judge urges u.s. to drop plan to seek death penalty in case   a federal judge, at the close of the death penalty trial of a convicted drug trafficker with ties to the rap music industry, called the government's effort to seek his execution ''absurd'' and a waste of money and urged prosecutors to ask their justice department superiors in washington to abandon the endeavor.  the jury was not present when the judge, frederic block of united states district court in brooklyn, made his remarks late wednesday afternoon during a break in closing arguments at the racketeering and murder-for-hire trial of kenneth mcgriff. mr. mcgriff, who is known as supreme, is on trial in connection with two killings in queens in 2001.  ''will you kindly advise washington that in this judge's opinion, there is no chance in the world there would be a death penalty verdict in this case?'' the judge told prosecutors, according to a court transcript, which was obtained yesterday. he said his view was based on the intensity with which the jury listened to the defense summation and all the evidence. ''if i'm wrong, i will have egg on my face, but i will not be incorrect.''  under the federal death penalty law, if a jury finds a defendant guilty, a second minitrial is held to determine whether that defendant will face execution or life in prison without parole. the decision to seek the death penalty in cases around the country is made by the attorney general in washington before the case begins.  the judge said that even if mr. mcgriff, 46, is convicted of the killings, continuing to the penalty phase would be pointless and would waste government resources that could better be spent on probation officers, marshals and other services.  going forward with the penalty phase, he said, would be ''a total misappropriation'' of taxpayer funds, ''and i advise the government accordingly.'' he said he was speaking out because he believed he had an obligation to advise the justice department in washington of his assessment of the case.  ''and there's just no chance that 12 jurors will vote for the death penalty in this case, and i think it is good for us to save money, if we can do that, judicial resources,'' he said in remarks that were unusually blunt for a judge to deliver from the bench.  the attorney general can withdraw the notice of intent to seek the death penalty at any time before the jury's vote in the penalty phase, said kevin mcnally, the director of the federal death penalty resource counsel project, which coordinates the defense of federal death penalty cases for federal defenders' offices nationwide.  ''i'm not at all surprised that the judge has made this suggestion, and i wouldn't be surprised if it was acted upon,'' mr. mcnally said in a telephone interview. ''i think, from all the information we've received, this is not a case that should have been a federal death penalty trial to begin with.''  a spokesman for the justice department in washington declined to comment on the case.  robert nardoza, a spokesman for roslynn r. mauskopf, the united states attorney in brooklyn whose office is prosecuting the case, declined to comment, saying federal rules prohibited the office from doing so during a jury trial.  one of mr. mcgriff's lawyers, david ruhnke, would not comment on the judge's statements, saying only: ''his remarks speak for themselves. we certainly hope the message has been conveyed.''  mr. mcgriff's trial is one of three death penalty cases that are currently ongoing or recently concluded in the brooklyn courthouse. one is the trial of ronell wilson, 24, who faces possible execution after having been convicted for the 2003 slayings of two detectives on staten island. mr. wilson's trial has received daily news coverage, while mr. mcgriff's trial have garnered far less attention.  prosecutors have charged that mr. mcgriff, a crack kingpin who in the 1980s founded the drug-dealing supreme team and served time in federal prison, resumed his drug dealing upon his release and paid $50,000 to have two rivals killed.  at the end of the trial day on wednesday, the lead prosecutor in the case, carolyn pokorny, an assistant united states attorney, expressed concern to the judge that his remarks, if reported in the news media, could influence the jury.  ''i know that,'' he said. ''i told them not to read the paper, and the truth of the matter is, is that because of the wilson trial on the fourth floor, nobody from the press has been here today, and we're flying under the radar screen, for sure.''  the judge added: ''i have to balance this out. if i feel, as an officer, as a judge, that this is an absurd prosecution based upon what i have heard, i think i have a responsibility to let the authorities know.''  