a village that was reborn isn't eager to be a brand name   if martha stewart wanted a stage set for her earth-toned empire of tasteful traditionalism, she could not have done better than this lovely hamlet in northern westchester. it is full of quirky history and small town charm, a place where all the stores are independently owned, all the children are above average, there's stellar feng shui and the hand-lettered signs tacked to telephone poles read: ''no thank you martha.''  whoops. hold the stage set. the downtown may look pretty much like it did when this village was reborn in a small miracle more than a century ago, but, alas, the perfect place and the perfect brand aren't necessarily the same thing these days.  the latest ding on the good ship martha may never have happened had not a local lawyer, terrence mcallister, been thumbing through 900 pages of trademark applications as light reading over christmas when he spotted, to his surprise, one for his hometown. in it, ms. stewart had applied for trademark protection for the word katonah for lines of furniture, home furnishings, paint and lighting products.  on the one hand, this made sense. ms. stewart moved to her 153-acre cantitoe farm estate here in 2000, though her home was usually described as being in bedford, the even more upscale and horsey hamlet not far away.  on the other, it made some people immediately nervous. if she trademarked the town name, would businesses like the katonah cleaners, katonah wine and liquor, katonah restaurant or katonah architectural hardware be infringing on it? if someone wanted to start katonah home furnishings or katonah furniture, would her permission be required?  and thinking further, more than a few people found themselves a bit discomfited. the village of katonah was founded in 1852, named for a powerful 17th-century chief of the ramapo indians. it became home to farmers, dairymen and people who worked at an iron foundry, an optical factory and a silk mill.  when its land became part of the new york city reservoir system, the town was scheduled to be flooded out of existence to make way for the croton dam. but rather than let it die, residents packed houses and stores, 55 in all, onto a track made of timber and hauled the whole town to higher ground, where it was reborn in 1897.  the current residents figure they would just as soon remain a village rather than a brand.  ''we're a little, quiet, sleepy hamlet, and we're doing just fine that way,'' said bill o'neill, vice president of the katonah village improvement society, founded in 1878. ''we don't need to be more widely known, and i don't think we want our identity to be subsumed into the identity of a product line for martha stewart.''  the first katonah collection furniture, which will be available in february, offers both ''decorous refinement'' and ''refreshed traditionalism,'' the company, martha stewart living omnimedia, said. in a statement, ms. stewart said the new line was ''inspired not only by my own farmhouse and stables but by the beautiful landscape and topography of the region in which i live.''  diana pearson, a spokeswoman for ms. stewart, said: ''on this side, it's all about good will.'' she added that it was not ms. stewart's intention to use the trademark protection against existing businesses or others not obviously trying to confuse consumers.  mr. o'neill, however, said ms. stewart had done little to help her case by building good will or by becoming part of the local community. others with his group stressed that no one wants to pick a fight with ms. stewart, but they may want to meet with her at some time to discuss the trademark issue. two notices have been filed requesting additional time to review the application.  of course, marketing is about more than good will -- it's about image as much as reality. but then, there's plenty of that in real life.  so residents (and envious ones in nearby villages) cherish katonah's thornton wilder downtown, with venerable local businesses -- like the charles department store, weinstein pharmacy, kelloggs & lawrence hardware -- that have been around forever. but they know that there's plenty of artifice there too -- that it's small town satori in a place that increasingly has high-end beauty emporiums, personal trainers, new age healers and million-dollar homes.  ''a friend of mine said that what makes katonah special is that it's intact,'' said jeffrey a. o'connor, whose family runs the katonah publishing corporation, a printing company dating back to 1913. ''there are not many places like it. but, that's subjective, of course. i grew up here, and it was a lot more intact when i was a kid than it is now. it was more authentic. i think now, it's presenting itself the way people want to believe it is, whereas back then, there was no presentation. it just was what it was.''  our towns e-mail: peappl@nytimes.com  