visitors come calling, with enthusiastic friends in tow   the aspen santa fe ballet usually arrives in new york with a full complement of home-base admirers, and they were out in force on tuesday night when the company opened its third season at the joyce theater. their excited adulation has a tinge of wonderment that might charm the most cynical of new york dance fans. ''they raise the bar, and then they jump over it,'' one audience member from aspen, colo., said of the company on tuesday night.  the bar was certainly raised with a performance of twyla tharp's exquisite but rarely seen ''sweet fields'' (1996), staged for the company by elaine kudo and set to 18th-century american hymns by william billings. the songs, sung a cappella as written by mr. billings, give the dance its title and also its physical tone of buoyant innocence. dressed in angelic white by norma kamali, the 10 dancers do look like angels as they move across the stage in formal, shifting patterns, sinking, rising and scuffing the ground with their feet in choreography that matches the music's endearing awkwardnesses and simplicity, though with far more sophistication.  the seeds of jorma elo's new ''pointeoff,'' which opened the program, were eerily contained in the first moments of ''sweet fields.'' like dwight rhoden, whose complexions company preceded aspen santa fe at the joyce two weeks ago, mr. elo specializes in nonstop, high-energy body tangles and stretches that erupt repeatedly, dancers rooted to the stage. ms. tharp made off-kilter, physical non sequiturs into a choreographic style, but in her unusually calm ''sweet fields'' the dancing looks like purposeful, innately expressive motion.  the cast of seven merely moves in ''pointeoff,'' disappointingly not the pitched battle for both women and men in toe shoes that the title suggests. whether because of the repertory or their training, the aspen dancers are a little bland, displaying little individual personality or presence. but their look of pleasure in mr. elo's challenging full-body workout does inch the bar up a bit.  nicola fonte's new ''it's not about the numbers,'' danced to an urgently chugging score by steve reich, falls somewhere between the two works that precede it in terms of movement that feels meaningful. mr. fonte has perfectly caught the quality of shadows cast by an oddly whimsical sculptural fantasy, created by james surls, and of the sculpture's eventual slow turns and rise, in lighting designed by michael mazzola.  the aspen santa fe ballet performs through sunday afternoon at the joyce theater, 175 eighth avenue, at 19th street, chelsea; (212) 242-0800 or joyce.org.  dance review  