operetta and weill in front; moving shadows in back   a silhouette of old lace blows across a screen above the stage, tangling with the shadows of the performers singing below. then the shadows free themselves of the singers and begin to dance, as if giving life to the dreams in the music.  visuals were an important part of the austrian cultural forum's two-week ''mostly operetta'' festival, which ended on thursday with a program that fell into the ''mostly'' category: the american songs of kurt weill. enhancing each of the festival's five recital programs was a subtle screen-play of shadow and light by the installation artist victoria coeln. the shadows mingled with photographs and videos taken in ms. coeln's studio to create moving shadow images like pressed flowers with wisps of color at their edges. smoky and ephemeral and restrained so that they enhanced but never intruded on the performances, they were a thoughtful visualization of nostalgia.  the festival focused on the ''silver age'' of operetta in 20th-century vienna (following the 19th-century ''golden age'' of strauss and offenbach). operetta is tricky: potentially as sparkling and sophisticated as champagne, it is often produced today as a kind of kool-aid punch, overbright and oversweet and with very little appeal to a discriminating audience.  ms. coeln's visuals were a wonderful antidote. the difficulty -- to judge from jan. 18's program, focusing on composers forced to emigrate by the nazis, and thursday's weill evening -- appeared to lie in freeing the performers from stock clichés to attain the same kind of sophistication.  the concept of presenting operetta excerpts like lieder, in an intimate setting with piano accompaniment, was partly dictated by the limitations of the forum's tiny concert hall. it ran a bit aground on the realities of a form that emulates the climactic bigness of opera. in the program of ''exiled'' composers, elisabeth flechl and johannes föttinger belied the notion that native specialists bring more insight or liedlike subtlety to operetta by simply pumping out one number after another until their voices were spent.  ms. flechl was the more vocally limber, but sang even ''meine lippen, sie küssen so heiss'' (''my lips give hot kisses,'' the signature aria from franz lehar's ''giuditta'') with generic earnestness, failing to convey an ounce of seductive sexuality.  more successful was ute gfrerer, the soloist in the weill program (also accompanied by markus vorzellner, a staunch pianist), who arranged the songs into a kind of dramatic monologue, was more attuned to the nuances of her texts and tempered her singing with a cabaret sensibility, digging into her chest voice when appropriate. she was helped by some pretty great songs like ''lost in the stars.'' the evening made a strong case for both weill and his lyricists.  but all this did, alas, was reinforce the idea that operetta's main value in this country was as a precursor of the classic broadway musical. to truly reanimate the genre on a level consistent with ms. coeln's visuals, it would take a singer like the 94-year-old marta eggerth, who in the course of a discussion/performance on jan. 11 sang a piece by lehar, her old friend, ''warum hast du mich wachgeküsst?'' from ''friederike.'' she showed how a pro can breathe life into an operetta excerpt -- and also that the form is a dying art unless other singers can learn from her and save it.  music review  