n.f.l. and union to strengthen steroid testing   the national football league and its players union said yesterday that they had agreed to strengthen the league's testing program for performance-enhancing drugs, including increasing the number of tests and adding endurance-boosting epo to the list of banned substances.  the new policy also adds financial penalties, with players who are suspended for drug use forfeiting part of their signing bonuses. gene upshaw, the executive director of the national football league players association, said in an interview that as soon as next season, players who tested positive could also be barred from consideration for postseason awards. such recognition became an issue during the regular season that ended last month when shawne merriman, a san diego chargers linebacker, was suspended for four games after a positive steroids test, but was named to the pro bowl.  the n.f.l. is considered to have the most stringent testing policy among the major american sports leagues. but loopholes in its program drew increasing scrutiny after the charlotte observer reported last summer that carolina panthers players had received prescriptions for steroids -- including two players just days before the team played in the 2004 super bowl -- yet none tested positive during that time period. the league and the union had been negotiating since september to strengthen the policy.  ''these latest improvements will help ensure that we continue to have a strong and effective program,'' roger goodell, the n.f.l. commissioner, said in a statement. ''as we have done in the past, we will review and modify the policy on an ongoing basis.''  under the policy changes announced yesterday, the number of players randomly tested each week during the preseason, regular season and postseason would increase to 10 from 7 per team. last year, the n.f.l. increased the maximum number of times a player could be tested in the off-season to six times from two. combined, those changes should amount to more than 12,000 drug tests administered to about 1,800 players next season, an increase of about 2,000 tests. upshaw said that off-season testing would begin more quickly after the end of the regular season. that testing used to start in late march but will now begin in february to decrease the time period when players are not subjected to random testing.  the n.f.l. policy already mandates a four-game suspension for a first offense and a year suspension for a second, penalties that will remain in effect.  but the league will use the sophisticated carbon isotope test with greater frequency, it said. the use of that test has been limited in most drug-testing programs by its high price. it was previously used by the n.f.l. only to confirm positive tests. now, the league will use it randomly on all samples. the test examines the atomic makeup of testosterone in the urine and can determine if it is natural or synthetic. it is the same test that found synthetic testosterone in a urine sample from floyd landis after his victory last summer in the tour de france.  the n.f.l.'s decision to include epo on its banned list adds a substance more common to cycling and long-distance running. epo, or erythropoietin, is a synthetic hormone used to improve stamina by increasing the body's production of oxygen-rich red blood cells. no other professional sports league in the united states tests regularly for epo.  the policy changes were praised yesterday by dr. gary i. wadler, an associate professor of medicine at new york university who is a member of the world anti-doping agency. but wadler said in a telephone interview that the league still needed to include testing for human growth hormone, or hgh.  there is no reliable test for hgh. the n.f.l., pledged a minimum of $500,000 for the development of an hgh test yesterday. wadler said that amount is a fraction of the millions of dollars the antidoping agency spent on research each year. wadler said the league should have a provision in its collective-bargaining agreement that allowed for blood samples to be collected and frozen until a reliable drug test came to fruition. blood collection, he said, would at least provide a deterrent to the use of hgh until a test was developed.  ''they should at least have paved the way by saying that blood testing is an acceptable means of obtaining bodily fluid specimens,'' wadler said. ''they've made some moves in the right direction, but i don't think we should be in a position of incrementalism.''  upshaw remains adamant that blood testing is not open for discussion because there is no reliable hgh test. ''i'm still not willing to have our players stuck like a pin cushion,'' upshaw said. ''what use would it be for you to find something out two or three years from now and we've already played games? we have 25 percent turnover each year. what good is that? it's almost like changing the speed-limit sign after you've passed.''  pro football  correction:  january 26, 2007, friday  a sports article yesterday about changes in the national football league's testing program for performance enhancing drugs misstated the mandatory suspension for a player who fails a second drug test. it is eight games, not one year.  