paid notice: deaths   rosenberg, judith r   rosenberg--judith r. the family of sylvia and james ginsberg is deeply saddened by the death of our dear aunt judy. we pay tribute to her life marked by her love and devotion to our uncle al, her intense interest in the lives of her family, her close and very personal friendships, her wisdom and her deep commitment to philanthropy. so many people were touched by her gentleness and intelligence. so many others who have never met her, benefit from her generosity. ronna and ed goldstein peter ginsberg and gary levinson elizabeth goldstein and tamar malino stephanie goldstein rosenberg--judy r., died peacefully at home in manhattan on wednesday night, age 88. philanthropist, fundraiser and visionary for many new york organizations. a graduate of the university of pennsylvania, where she was a member of the sigma delta tau sorority. a founder and past president of the women's division of the albert einstein college of medicine from the college's earliest planning stages in 1953. einstein, rockefeller university, university of pennsylvania and the new york public library were among the institutions that benefited from the professorships, scholarships, curatorships and other gifts of judy and her husband, the late alfred a. rosenberg. she received an honorary doctorate from yeshiva university in 1998, and served on numerous boards and councils, including those of einstein, rockefeller, national council of jewish women, jewish child care agency of ujafederation, friends of channel thirteen and friends of the new york public library. she was also a valued participant in the political campaigns of senator jacob k. javits. her large and charming collection of dolls, cherished since childhood, now resides at the maria fareri children's hospital at westchester medical center in valhalla, ny. judy was born in brooklyn, the daughter of abraham and esther rubinstein, and lived to be the much-loved matriarch of her entire extended family, for whom her passing is the end of an era. she is survived by her nieces and nephews, karen and gordon locke, michael heffer, ronna and ed goldstein, peter ginsburg and gary levinson, and hillary and ron volper, her grand nieces and nephews, steven locke and laura edidin, scott and jill gressin locke, jeffrey locke and pam singh, elizabeth goldstein and tamar malino, and stephanie goldstein, erik volper and amanda volper, her great grand nieces and nephews, alyssa locke, dahlia locke, joshua locke, willow locke, asha locke, jacob malino-goldstein and aviel malino-goldstein and her cousins, judy blum, christopher phillips and victoria phillips. funeral on sunday, january 27, at 11:30am at the riverside, 76th street and amsterdam avenue. in lieu of flowers, the family asks that gifts be made to the fraxa research foundation, 45 pleasant st., newburyport, ma 01950, to help their work in fragile x syndrome in children.  