for the good of the herd   here we are in another flu season, and this time there is plenty of vaccine to go around. the federal government helped increase the supply by subsidizing factories that make pandemic flu vaccine and by recommending that a total of 218 million americans get flu shots -- the sick, the elderly, the late middle-aged and children under 5.  but now state and county officials expect to throw away millions of doses. this situation reflects our blasé attitude toward vaccination. most of us consider influenza more a nuisance than a danger, except in old people. of the 36,000 americans who die of flu each year, most are over 65. and we assume that the elderly take their doctors' advice to get vaccinated.  in fact, the immune systems of the old and infirm don't respond efficiently to the flu vaccine. a better way to protect the elderly from flu, studies have shown, is to vaccinate their nurses and caretakers, their children and grandchildren.  the logic behind giving shots to those who are not as vulnerable (children generally experience flu as a mild disease) is part of a concept called herd immunity. we protect the weaker lambs by bolstering the fold's communal defenses.  unfortunately, the idea of herd immunity has lost respect. in the past decade, the number of parents who refuse vaccinations of any kind for their children has more than doubled.  but our dismissive attitude toward flu shots amounts to a poor public health strategy. it not only makes the weakest more vulnerable, it also destabilizes the demand for vaccine in general, prompting vaccine makers to limit production -- and that could lead to a critical shortage in the event of a flu pandemic.  vaccination has inspired a degree of public loathing in america ever since 1721, when cotton mather introduced variolation, a primitive form of vaccination against smallpox, in boston. it involved scratching live smallpox virus into a person's arm, and bostonians found it alarming.  over the next 200 years, vaccines improved, but public skepticism persisted. during the smallpox epidemics of the early 20th century, americans rightly worried that unsanitary smallpox vaccinations could infect their children with tetanus and other bacterial diseases. people protested vaccination orders, sometimes violently. in one episode in greenwood, del., in 1926, a gang led by a former army lieutenant engaged in street fights that lasted several days.  but world war ii changed people's attitudes toward vaccines. medics inoculated military recruits with vaccines against diseases like typhoid, yellow fever, tetanus and typhus. some of the vaccines were pretty near experimental, yet our men survived, whipped the axis powers and came home with a positive attitude toward public health.  by 1947, when a dozen people in manhattan were infected by smallpox, six million new yorkers lined up to have the vaccine scratched into the skin of their arms and legs upon the urging of israel weinstein, the city health commissioner.  the smallpox vaccine turned out to be far more lethal than the disease outbreak itself, which had claimed only two lives. the vaccine killed at least eight and in as many as 100 other people it caused side effects including severe rashes and brain damage. yet no one publicly complained about this risk.  in the spring of 1955, jonas salk's polio vaccine was licensed. and although some early bad batches of it killed or paralyzed 174 people, a relieved nation recognized its greater benefit. salk floated across the public stage like a white-jacketed saint.  with the advent of vaccines against measles, rubella and mumps, the 1960s became the golden age of vaccination. but gradually, people grew complacent about the good vaccines could do; the more vaccines eliminated disease, the less important they seemed.  public apathy turned to distrust in 1998, when a new vaccine against rotavirus, which causes gastrointestinal illness in infants, showed signs of causing a bowel obstruction in very rare cases. the next year, wyeth-ayerst laboratories withdrew the vaccine, rotashield, from the market.  around the same time, pediatricians raised concerns about the use of a preservative, thimerosal, in vaccines for children. thimerosal contains only minuscule amounts of mercury, but as a precaution, the centers for disease control and prevention asked vaccine makers to remove the preservative from pediatric vaccines.  by and large this new safety consciousness was a good thing, but caution also has its costs. the withdrawal of the rotashield vaccine, which caused bowel obstruction in only about 1 in 20,000 children, meant that thousands of american infants who would otherwise have been vaccinated suffered severely dehydrating diarrhea. and in developing countries, where rotavirus kills hundreds of thousands of babies each year, the vaccine was never introduced.  the removal of thimerosal set off angry recriminations against vaccines in general. thousands of parents of autistic children, searching for a way to explain their children's illness, settled on thimerosal-containing vaccines and began suing the drug industry and the government. although these suits seem unlikely to succeed -- no clear evidence of a link between thimerosal and autism has been found -- they have already cost the industry hundreds of millions of dollars in court costs, and they have helped undercut public confidence in vaccination.  parents are now especially reluctant to inoculate children against flu, because many flu vaccines contain thimerosal. but the tiny amount of thimerosal in the vaccines is not a health threat. there is always a small risk of unforeseen side effects, but it pales next to the harm done by influenza every year -- and the harm it could do in the future if we have an inadequate supply of vaccine.  we don't know whether the deadly avian flu virus, which has claimed a small number of victims in asia and africa, will evolve in a way that allows it to sweep across the globe. but the experts are certain that it is only a matter of time before a flu pandemic strikes. keeping the vaccine pipeline running and building immunity against all types of flu will help us prepare. even in apparently humdrum flu years like this one, it behooves us to join the herd and be vaccinated.  op-ed contributor arthur allen is the author of ''vaccine: the controversial story of medicine's greatest lifesaver.''  