what's on tonight   9 p.m. (hbo) friends of god: a road trip with alexandra pelosi -- in 2000, ms. pelosi, a daughter of speaker nancy pelosi, created ''journeys with george,'' in which she spent 18 months on the road with george w. bush as he campaigned for the presidency. in this new documentary, ms. pelosi (above) traversed the country for a year in search of personal encounters with some influential members of the evangelical community -- from joel osteen, the most-watched television minister in america, to ron luce, the founder of battle cry, a christian concert tour that has drawn 2 million young people to its events. she also visited with the rev. ted haggard before he stepped down as president of the national association of evangelicals, the largest evangelical group in the country, after accusations of buying illegal drugs from a male prostitute and paying him for sex.  8 p.m. (tcm) the caddy -- (1953). jerry lewis carries the baggage, and dean martin golfs and sings in this musical about an ace golfer who's too nervous to golf in public and becomes a coach and caddy for his girlfriend's brother. and then an agent recognizes their comedic talents. with donna reed as the love interest, that's amore.  8 p.m. (discovery health) get fresh with sara snow -- when ms. snow's grandfather died, her family honored his wish to be cremated and have his ashes spread in his garden. in this episode, ms. snow (right) investigates ways to plan a natural burial before visiting a local community-supported farm and chatting with jane goodall, the primatologist, about life among the chimpanzees in africa.  8 p.m. (sportsnet new york) 2006 ultimet moments -- watch 'em soar: ''long balls,'' the second installment in the series, looks back at the best home runs of the mets' 2006 regular season.  9 p.m. (cbs) csi: crime scene investigation -- he's new to the job, but already he's causing trouble. tonight, keppler (liev schreiber, in a recurring role) convinces catherine (marg helgenberger) to participate in a covert and unconventional plan to catch the killer of a popular politician -- and no one on her team can know.  midnight (sundance) iconoclasts-- though their fields are leaps and bounds apart, there's no denying that the dancer mikhail baryshnikov and the chef alice waters are artists in their own rights. in this repeat of a november episode, mr. baryshnikov and ms. waters trade philosophies on art, food, teaching and community as they visit the baryshnikov arts center (above) in manhattan and the edible schoolyard project in berkeley, ca., and share a meal at ms. waters's restaurant chez panisse.  kathryn shattuck  