young lovers, a vespa and a frolic by rossini   if rossini had been in the audience on thursday night at the harry de jur playhouse, he would surely have found the stylish and witty new production of ''il signor bruschino'' by the gotham chamber opera as cheekily funny as everyone else did.  the revival was overdue. ''il signor bruschino,'' the last of five one-act farces rossini wrote for the teatro san moisè in venice between 1810 and 1813, was last staged in new york in 1933, according to the gotham company.  in this frothy, youthful comedy, rossini experiments with the comic gift for mistaken identities evident in his later opera ''il barbiere di siviglia.'' the venetian poet giuseppe maria foppa wrote the libretto for ''bruschino,'' based on ''le fils par hazard,'' a french farce. two young lovers, florville and sofia, want to marry. but florville is the son of an enemy of gaudenzio, sofia's guardian, who in any event has already promised her to the eminent bruschino family. florville waylays and impersonates the legitimate groom, then convinces gaudenzio that he is bruschino's son.  thanks to robin guarino's clever directing, an opera that could be mere bumbling slapstick is sharp, with snappy comic timing. donald eastman's set updates the action to the via veneto in rome in about 1960. the costume designer martin pakledinaz presents florville, sung by alek shrader, as a sort of marcello mastroianni, and sofia, sung by lisa hopkins, as a demurely dressed anita ekberg.  there were other felliniesque touches, like a vespa, a bicycle, a priest and a scampering little boy who knocks on a door to mirror the moment in the overture when the violinists tap their music stands with their bows.  ''il signor bruschino'' has plenty of tongue-twisting recitative and vocal acrobatics, but none of the strong cast seemed trapped in a coloratura torture chamber. at times they even made a merry farce of rossini's bel canto obstacle course.  there was fiery chemistry between ms. hopkins and mr. shrader, both promising performers, who sang with good phrasing and control. eric jordan gave a fine, confident performance as the jovial, fabulously named gaudenzio strappapuppole, who almost seems a personification of rossini, a cheery, witty gourmand.  signor bruschino was updated from a generic buffo character to an oily, scholarly-looking, suit-clad neurotic, excellently acted and sung by marco nistico.  as the maid marianna, emily langford johnson was a sexy, sophia loren-like flirt, while filiberto, the burly barman, was sung with aplomb by matthew lau. steven goldstein, as the police commissioner and priest, was also strong.  neal goren, gotham's artistic director, conducted a lively, tight performance of the chirpy score. rossini reportedly declared that he was ''born for opera buffa.'' on thursday night it seemed that this cast had been as well.  ''il signor bruschino'' continues through feb. 3 at the abrons arts center, 466 grand street, at pitt street, lower east side, (212) 279-4200, gothamchamberopera.org.  music review  correction:  january 30, 2007, tuesday  a classical music entry in the listings pages of weekend on jan. 19 misstated the history of the performance in new york of ''il signor bruschino,'' by rossini, which the gotham chamber orchestra is performing through saturday. the gotham chamber orchestra's production is the first professional staging of the work in new york since 1933, not the first staging since then. (the error was repeated in a week ahead entry in arts & leisure on jan. 21, in the listings pages of weekend on friday and in a review of a performance on saturday.)  correction:  february 1, 2007, thursday  a classical music entry in the listings pages of weekend on jan. 19 misstated the history of the performance in new york of ''il signor bruschino,'' by rossini, which is being performed in new york through saturday. the current production is the first professional staging of the work in new york since 1933, not the first staging since then. (the error was repeated in a week ahead entry in arts & leisure on jan. 21, in the listings pages of weekend on friday and in a review of a performance on saturday.) a correction in this space on tuesday misstated the name of the group that is currently presenting the work, at the abrons arts center on the lower east side. it is the gotham chamber opera, not orchestra.  