news summary   international a3-10  chief u.n. nuclear monitor cites iran enrichment plan  the head of the united nations nuclear inspection agency said iranian officials had told him they planned to begin installing uranium-enrichment equipment on an industrial scale.  a10  president bush and his senior aides justified american actions against iranian operatives inside iraq as necessary to protect american troops and iraqis.  a8  kosovo closer to independence  the united nations mediator on kosovo presented his proposals for the final status of the war-torn territory, likely setting it on its way toward independence.  a3  house may revise war vote  representative steny h. hoyer, the house majority leader, said congress might consider revising the authorization it gave president bush in 2002 to use military force in iraq.  a8  nato wary of u.s. afghan plan  america's european allies remained noncommittal about sending additional troops to afghanistan, even as the united states sought to inject new energy into the nato mission against the taliban by offering more american soldiers and money.  a3  millions for tortured canadian  maher arar, the canadian software engineer who was detained by american officials in 2002 and deported to syria, where he was jailed and tortured, will receive more than $9.75 million in compensation from the canadian government.  a5  national a11-15; 18  states expand efforts to help foster children  scores of states are increasing efforts to help young adults prepare for life outside of foster care, offering transitional housing, education, medical care and mentoring as they step out on their own.  a1  giuliani raises doubt over run  rudolph w. giuliani, who developed a reputation for firm leadership after sept. 11, faces the odd challenge of reassuring some supporters that he can be decisive about running for president. he has studiously avoided making a public commitment to run, but his pace and his noncommittal comments have raised some doubts about his intentions.  a1  a labor union redefined  having signed up 40,000 people from the new york area, the freelancers union is hoping to recruit far more of the nation's 20 million freelancers and independent contractors.  a11  ruling on hate crime case  a juvenile court judge found nine black teenagers guilty of beating three young white women last halloween in an episode that has shined a spotlight on racial tensions in long beach, calif.  a14  bush raises g.o.p.'s morale  president bush tried to rally dispirited house republicans as the lawmakers hunkered down on maryland's eastern shore and struggled to come to grips with their new minority status and the challenge of the continuing war in iraq.  a12  new york/region b1-6  private detectives enlisted to expose rent violators  new york city landlords are spending serious money on private investigators to track down rent law violators. with market rate rents sky-high, residents of rent-regulated apartments have dug in, and landlords are looking for grounds to dislodge them.  a1  parishioners ready to fight  some parishioners of roman catholic churches scheduled to close as part of the archdiocese of new york's broad reorganization are preparing for a battle. b1  religion journal  b6  neediest cases  b6  business day c1-10  intel's new chip  intel plans to develop microprocessor chips that are designed for computers but could be used in consumer devices, paving the way for a new generation of processors.  a1  business digest c2  editorial a16-17  editorials: the bait-and-switch white house; picking new york's comptroller; mr. bush's oil security blanket; countdown to the census.  columns: maureen dowd, stacy schiff.  bridge b16  crossword b18  obituaries b7  tv listings b23  weather b24  