bonus pay by medicare lifts quality   paying a hospital to do the right thing is a lot harder than it looks.  the 266 hospitals participating in a medicare experiment that pays them more to follow medical recommendations have steadily improved the quality of patient care.  the latest results in the three-year experiment show that more heart attack patients are getting aspirin when they arrive at the hospital, for example, and more patients are getting vaccines to prevent pneumonia.  but even some of the hospitals earning the largest payments say medicare needs to develop a more sophisticated way to reward hospitals for providing better care rather than more care.  the problem, they say, is that the experiment ranks hospitals and rewards only the top performers. it also tends to judge the hospitals more on whether they are offering certain treatments than on whether the care is actually benefiting patients.  ''this isn't the system they will ultimately use for large-scale pay for performance,'' said dr. charles a. riccobono, the chief quality officer for hackensack university medical center.  for the second year in a row the new jersey hospital was the top performer in all five clinical areas that were measured by the program, and it is receiving a bonus of about $744,000.  medicare officials are expected to announce tomorrow that they are awarding performance bonuses of $8.7 million to the 115 hospitals that were the top performers for the second year, based on 30 quality measures.  but the medicare officials also emphasize that the vast majority of hospitals were able to deliver better care. ''we continue to see improvement, quarter by quarter, in this cohort of hospitals,'' said herb kuhn, the acting deputy administrator for medicare.  the hospitals experienced nearly 1,300 fewer deaths in treating heart attack patients, and they have generally been able to score higher on quality measures than the rest of the nation's hospitals.  premier inc., a nonprofit hospital alliance, is managing the project. premier and medicare are now in discussions about whether the experiment will be extended, but congress has also asked medicare to look into developing a new payment system that would put more emphasis on rewarding the best care.  the experiment is an effort by medicare to address a fundamental concern about the current payment system. hospitals are not paid more when they help keep a heart-failure patient from coming back to the hospital, for example. the hospitals participating in this experiment are being measured on whether they give patients clear instructions when they leave on how best to stay healthy.  medicare officials say they are encouraged by the program's results so far in supporting a move to a system that ties payments more closely to quality care. ''what we see is a good trend here,'' mr. kuhn said.  others agree that the experiment supports the idea of rewarding good care. ''i think it offers a lot of encouragement for the potential of linking even small amounts of pay to the reliability of care,'' said dr. donald m. berwick, the president and chief executive of the institute for healthcare improvement, a nonprofit group based in cambridge, mass.  the financial incentives may not have been the driving force behind the improved care, but they focused the hospitals' attention on whether they were actually providing patients the right treatments. ''it was attention-getting,'' dr. berwick said.  under the experiment, hospitals can earn a bonus only if they rank among the top 20 percent in at least one of five areas of patient care: joint replacement, coronary artery bypass graft, heart attack, heart failure or pneumonia.  the hospitals involved say that payment method is not the best model for a nationwide system. hospital payments should focus on encouraging hospitals to make significant strides in improving care, and should not be based on rankings. the hospitals say they are now clustered so closely at the top that it is increasingly hard to qualify for extra payments, even if their results continue to improve.  ''the zebras are running faster and faster,'' said regina berman, the administrative director for performance improvement at hackensack.  the hospitals also raise questions about the measures being used.  one hospital, for example, said it found itself focusing on how it was delivering care instead of looking at how patients were actually faring. the scoring system rewarded it for following the recommended medical treatments more frequently but did not take into account the need to make overall improvements that actually improve care, said liz popwell, a vice president for cleveland county healthcare system in shelby, n.c.  any new payment system would need to emphasize patient outcomes, she said. ''there are some kinks that need to be worked out.''  hospitals also say that some of the measures need to change more quickly when new research shows different treatments are better. at hackensack, for example, doctors were already using a new drug to treat some heart attack patients, although they were being penalized for a time for not following the treatments established under the experiment. medicare officials were responsive, they said, and the new recommendations take into account the latest medical evidence.  mr. kuhn of medicare says the agency is already looking at the experiment's results and talking with experts to try to figure out how to address some of the concerns. in addition to focusing on the right financial incentives, medicare is also studying what measures to use and how hospitals will make public their progress. ''we're in the throes of it right now,'' he said.  the emphasis on bonuses for better performance may also be misguided, said some of the hospitals and dr. berwick of the institute for healthcare improvement.  ''from our standpoint on this program, the pay was nice but not all that important,'' said dr. donald blanford, the chief medical officer for community health partners in lorain, ohio, who said the hospital was motivated more by the public reporting of its results. the payments generally covered the costs involved in making the improvements, he said.  and hospitals and others say the program was as successful as it was because of the sharing of information among institutions about what worked and what did not.  ''we saw a major, rapid amount of knowledge transfer among hospitals,'' said stephanie c. alexander, a senior vice president at premier and general manager of the health care informatics division involved in the experiment.  but the hospitals agree that the experiment suggests a move in the right direction. ''it's a start, and we'll see where it leads,'' said dr. riccobono of hackensack.  