st. vincent and the grenadines   st. vincent and the grenadines is an archipelago of 32 islands and cays at the southern end of the caribbean. with relatively calm waters, a steady breeze and short distances between anchorages, the islands have long been a draw for the sailing and yachting crowds. but it's become more popular in the last year or so, thanks to increased marketing efforts and expansions by charter companies. barefoot yacht charters, www.barefootyachts.com, one of the longest running operators in the islands, organized about 400 sailing trips last year, up 45 percent from 2005. prices for staffed yachts vary widely depending on the size and amenities. a 47-foot, air-conditioned catamaran with a two-person crew and accommodating six guests costs about $9,660 for seven nights. a week-long charter of a 126-foot sailboat that can accommodate 12 guests will run about $64,000. footloose sailing charters, www.footloosecharters.com, a 12-year-old company based in florida, opened a new base on the island of st. vincent in october and is offering 10 percent off five-day may charters booked by feb. 5.  airlines that fly to st. vincent and the grenadines include caribbean star and liat.  a typical seven-day itinerary setting sail from st. vincent might include bequia, an island with a strong seafaring history and where model boats are ubiquitous; mustique, a private island famous for its celebrity beachcombers; and the numerous islets, coves and coral reefs of the tobago cays.  where to stay -- if you need a night on land, the frangipani on bequia is a favorite hangout for the yachting crowd and overlooks the island's harbor. doubles start at $60 a night in season (784-458-3255, www.frangipanibequia.com). on mustique, the high-end cotton house offers cottages starting at $700 a night in season (784-456-4777, www.cottonhouse.net). petit st. vincent is the only resort on the island by the same name. rates start at $940 a night for a couple in season (800-654-9326, www.psvresort.com).  the 10 point caribbean escapes plan: for sailors michelle higgins, a staff reporter for the travel section, writes the practical traveler column.  