state leaders ready to merge 2 ethics panels   gov. eliot spitzer and legislative leaders are expected to announce an agreement on wednesday to combine two state commissions that look into lobbying and ethics, merging them in a bid to centralize investigations into corruption, people with knowledge of the discussions said.  one panel, the temporary state commission on lobbying, has been investigating whether an albany-area business executive broke any state laws by providing free or discounted flights to the senate majority leader, joseph l. bruno -- who is also the subject of a federal investigation. that commission is also believed to be examining flights that another executive provided to eliot spitzer while he was running for governor.  the other panel, the state ethics commission, played a leading role in the inquiry that led to the resignation of the former state comptroller, alan g. hevesi.  civic groups expressed concern about merging the two panels, but not a third that looks into legislative ethics, even though that body is widely viewed as the weakest of the three.  that panel, the legislative ethics committee, would have some outside members who are not legislators added to its board and some of the tight restrictions on disclosure of its work eased under the changes being discussed. the agreement is also expected to extend to the legislature bans on gifts that the governor announced for the executive branch.  there was some concern that talks about ethics and disclosure rules were being conducted in secret by the three men who govern the state.  press officers for the three would say little about the talks. christine anderson, a spokeswoman for the governor, declined to comment. john mcardle, a spokesman for mr. bruno, the state's top republican, said, ''we have been involved in discussions over the last several weeks on ethics and lobbying reform.'' charles carrier, a spokesman for the assembly speaker, sheldon silver, a democrat, declined to comment.  the state ethics commission looks into the conduct of executive branch employees, while the legislative ethics committee investigates legislators and the lobbying commission investigates those who give things of value to state workers.  much of the ultimate reaction to the proposal will depend on the fine print of the agreement and the role in the new entity given to the lobbying commission's executive director, david grandeau, who is seen by many as the most active investigator of malfeasance by state officials but who has made no small number of enemies. he has at various points investigated registered lobbyists over their ties to all three of the state's current leaders.  ''if you get rid of the one person that is actually the cop on the beat now, that does concern us,'' said rachel leon, the executive director of common cause new york, a government watchdog group. but she added that there were ''many good elements'' of the proposal, or at least what was being said about it.  mr. grandeau said he had not been told about the discussions. ''i am supportive of consolidation, it is something i discussed with the transition team, but it's not about the form, it's going to be about substance,'' he said.  