today in business   coming: a compact ford -- ford motor company reported losing $12.7 billion last year, making 2006 the worst year in its history. now the bigger-is-better world view that has defined the automaker for decades is being replaced by its new chief, alan r. mulally, with a new approach: less is more. [page a1.]  g.m. foresees a profit -- general motors said that it expected to post a profit for the fourth quarter but that it would delay reporting the results because its finance arm needs more time to complete calculations. [c7.]  trouble with anemia drug -- amgen, the biotechnology company, said that its anemia drug aranesp increased the risk of death when used to treat certain cancer patients, a finding that will probably raise more questions about it and very similar drugs. [c3.]  microsoft reports sales -- microsoft reported strong sales for its latest quarter and a profit that slightly surpassed wall street estimates, but its financial results were muddled by the late arrival of important new products. [c1.]  12 percent are union workers -- union membership dropped sharply last year in the united states, falling by 326,000 to 15.4 million workers. the percentage of employees in unions is now 12 percent, down from 35 percent in the 1950s. [a17.]  protest follows raid -- an immigration raid at a huge north carolina pork-packing plant provoked protests from union officials, who charged that the company, smithfield foods, had collaborated with the authorities searching for illegal immigrants to discourage its workers from organizing. [a17.]  canadian makes an entrance -- the power corporation of canada, one of the country's largest financial services companies and quebec's pre-eminent newspaper publisher, is relatively unknown in the united states. that may change soon as power, led by its patriarch paul desmarais, left, is negotiating to acquire marsh & mclennan's  putnam investments mutual fund unit. [c6.]  letter of apology -- just a few weeks after alarming parents about the safety of infant car seats in automobile crashes, consumer reports sent letters to its readers retracting the results and apologizing for botching the test. [a16.]  a cable anchor's conduct -- the cnbc anchor maria bartiromo, who flew home from china aboard citigroup's corporate jet late last year, is facing questions over her judgment in getting too close to the people she covers. [c1.]  wal-mart settles overtime suit -- the department of labor announced that wal-mart stores had agreed to pay $33.5 million in back wages plus interest to settle a federal lawsuit that accused the company of violating overtime laws. [c7.]  subprime market slumps -- wall street firms, stung by rising default rates, have begun to tighten the spigot of money that has fueled the market for home loans to people with weak credit, or subprime mortgages. [c1.]  no red carpet -- the founder of the annual economic conference in davos, switzerland, has asked hollywood celebrities to stay home this year, as a means to restore the event's seriousness. [c1.]  higher earnings at dow jones -- dow jones & company reported sharply higher fourth-quarter earnings on special gains from the sale of several newspapers, an acquisition and stronger advertising sales at the wall street journal. [c2.]  a fast-moving economy -- the latest figures from china show that its economy grew by a whopping 10.7 percent in 2006, the fastest pace in more than a decade, with only modest signs of inflation. [c3.]  at&t profit up 17 percent -- at&t reported a 17 percent increase in quarterly profits driven by a sizable increase in wireless subscribers. the report capped a whirlwind year of merging and rebranding that has come to characterize the telecommunications business. [c8.]  it's a bargain -- commercials during the coming super bowl will cost an average of $2.6 million for each 30-second spot, a record amount. but more than two dozen marketers believe it makes sense to spend that much money compared with the many cheaper alternatives. advertising: stuart elliot. [c2.]  arrest of ex-media official -- federal authorities have arrested a former treasurer of the media conglomerate nbc universal on charges of stealing more than $800,000 to finance private jet flights, liquor and a vacation home. [c4.]  reshuffle at emi's u.s. unit -- emi group, the british music conglomerate, reorganized its american unit by merging the operations of its two main record labels. [c3.]  business briefing  articles on these developments are at nytimes.com/business.  two military contractors, the lockheed martin corporation and the northrop grumman company, posted higher fourth-quarter earnings as government spending in areas like military hardware and information and technology remained strong. (ap)  kimberly-clark, the maker of kleenex tissues and huggies diapers, said that its fourth-quarter earnings rose 30 percent, as strong sales of health care and personal products offset higher prices for raw materials. (ap)  shareholders of icos approved a $2.3 billion buyout offer from eli lilly, a deal that would combine the companies behind the impotence drug cialis. (ap)  