sorrow and reflection in killer's housing project   everything feels colder here, on a forbidding patch of brick and glass on staten island's northeast side, just blocks from the harbor. the rest of the island, the vistas of suburban lawns and town houses, could be another planet.  it is rigid, industrial, simple and ugly, with its harsh concrete lines, meshed metal fencing on layers of burnt-orange brick. this is ronell wilson's hometown: the stapleton houses, the biggest public housing complex on staten island.  across the harbor in brooklyn, mr. wilson is facing a possible death sentence after being convicted of killing two police officers in march 2003, just a few blocks from these buildings where he lived. yesterday, he spoke in court and apologized, asking that his life be spared.  it would be an exaggeration to say that everyone at the stapleton houses is following the case obsessively, picking apart every televised report, reading every word about the trial in newspapers. but without a doubt, they are paying attention, and from a different angle than people in other neighborhoods -- after all, someone from here is on trial for his life.  their reactions range from sadness as muted as the dark colors of the place, to resignation, to conspiracy theories tinged with anger. this phase of the trial has also led to reflections on life here, because much of the testimony this week focused on mr. wilson's upbringing, on his struggling existence from an early age that his defense lawyers contend played a role at the moment he pulled the trigger.  ''i heard he was a good little dude,'' said corey scott, a barber at the straight and nappy barbershop across the street from the projects. ''it's a shame, but no man deserves to die.''  ''he was a good friend of my son's,'' said paul ivory, the barbershop's owner. ''he was trapped up with the wrong cats. but he was small time.''  mr. scott said people who patronize the barbershop have grown tired of talking about mr. wilson's case because ''they're going to kill him, so, there's nothing else to talk about.''  ''people want to blame it on the community,'' said mr. scott, who said he spent eight years in prison on a gun charge. ''it's not like the community made you do this or that, that's not right to say. life is how you make it. the only way life is going to do you bad is if you go out to do bad. that's life.''  out in one of the courtyards, a young woman who gave her name as kiesha echoed many others when she said that mr. wilson's death, should it come to that, hardly seemed like a solution.  ''it doesn't matter whose fault it is,'' she said. ''if you take his life, what is that going to do? those dead officers aren't going to end up back here.''  at 2:45 p.m., neighborhood schools let out and children wearing brightly colored jackets and hats fill the courtyards and sidewalks. janet robinson, a community matriarch known as the kwanzaa lady by many, walked the corridors of several of the buildings on tuesday with jalil crawford, 3, in tow.  mrs. robinson, 65, has lived in the stapleton houses for more than 20 years and has helped to raise three generations of pregnant teenagers, juvenile delinquents and ''community babies.'' she said everybody had failed mr. wilson and the two officers he killed.  ''there is a lot pointing to why ronell did it, and a whole lot of people are at fault,'' she said.  ''i feel bad for ronell,'' she added. ''i feel bad for his mother, as a woman, as a mother. i feel bad for the community and the fact that what he has done has shed a bad light on all of us in this community.'' mrs. robinson said that she felt awful for the dead officers, too, and that they were placed in a lethal situation by the police department.  ''you send two black officers into the black community to buy guns. then, their backup doesn't come on time,'' she said. ''they were put in that position, and they ended up dead.''  mrs. robinson lived three doors from mr. wilson's grandmother, where he once lived with his mother and 11 other family members.  while prosecutors paint mr. wilson as a coldblooded killer, bully and gang member who depicted his violent lifestyle in rap lyrics, neighbors who knew him said he was just a young man lost.  they said mr. wilson's name never struck fear in the hearts of those familiar with it. they said he was just a ''little dude'' playing big-boy games, hanging out in the projects like the rest of those hustling to survive in the projects.  tony smith, a resident of the stapleton houses whose cousin omar green was a defendant with mr. wilson, stood on a sidewalk bordering the projects with his brother, fred tuller, 22. mr. tuller said that it was a rough neighborhood to live in, that violence and poverty are seared into who they are and how they see themselves. he saw his first dead body at age 5 or 6. the victim had been shot and left for dead in the stairwell of his building.  ''they call this the projects for a reason,'' mr. tuller said, looking into the hills above the neighborhood, with big houses that almost seem to be leering. ''look at us, in the middle of the projects, down here like lab rats,'' he said. ''they're laughing at us.''  