united way's top executive says he will retire in the summer   lawrence mandell, president and chief executive of the united way of new york city, stunned the staff of the organization yesterday by announcing that he would be retiring in june.  the announcement follows an internal investigation into the group's handling of its assets, united way officials said. it was the second internal investigation at the organization in a year; the earlier one found that ralph dickerson jr., mr. mandell's predecessor, had used $227,000 of the charity's money to cover personal expenses in 2002 and 2003.  bertina ceccarelli, spokeswoman for the united way of new york city, would not comment. but a person with knowledge of the investigation's findings, who would speak only on condition of anonymity because the board had voted not to discuss the matter publicly, said there was no finding of criminal conduct.  in a letter to the staff, mr. mandell said that he was leaving because he had successfully guided the organization, which raised $100 million in the year that ended june 30, 2005, toward a new mission. once focused on raising money for member charities, the group now allocates grants to a broader array of nonprofit groups that work with it on issues like helping people to achieve economic independence and gain access to health care.  ''while we have been successfully focused externally on our community impact strategy, the next phase is to look inward and shore up the systems necessary to support our impact work,'' mr. mandell wrote in his letter, a copy of which was obtained by the new york times. ''the beginning of this next phase of our transformation represents an ideal time for me to plan for succession.''  when mr. dickerson retired in 2003, mr. mandell, who is 63, seemed committed to a longer tenure, according to a current and a former united way employee. his announcement was thus a surprise, although the local nonprofit community had been buzzing for some time about the activities of a team from covington & burling, the law firm that conducted the most recent inquiry for the united way's board.  the investigative team interviewed many united way staff members and took computer hard drives during its investigation. the board's executive committee met on friday with mr. mandell to discuss the team's findings, ''and he did a lot of screaming and yelling,'' according to an employee who heard the outburst and spoke about it on condition of anonymity because they had been told not to discuss the meeting.  the team's report was presented yesterday to the full board. current and former employees who spoke on condition of anonymity said the board had become concerned that mr. mandell was failing to follow procedures for getting larger grants approved.  mr. mandell declined to be interviewed.  several top executives have left the organization during the last two to three years. most recently, one of its most experienced fund-raisers, dennis serrette, took a job at the national urban league, and gladys carrión its senior vice president, is joining the administration of gov. eliot spitzer as commissioner of the office of children and family services.  at the time the first investigation was completed, carter mcclelland, the chairman, said the organization was prepared to review more of mr. dickerson's 15-year reign. it is unclear whether the investigation reviewed by the board yesterday included that period.  the united way of america, the umbrella organization, conducted its own review of the new york city affiliate, and its lawyers are to present their findings later next month.  