lysacek goes long way with his short program   before his program was over thursday, evan lysacek had already pumped his fists once. it made his coach, frank carroll, cringe, but the crowd at the united states figure skating championships loved it. when lysacek followed his strong program with a victory lap around the rink, he was greeted with a standing ovation.  at the time, lysacek did not know he would be leading the men's competition. all he knew was he had skated his first clean short program in more than a year and he could not contain the feeling of relief. he has been trying for the past three years to surpass johnny weir as the top american men's skater, and overcoming a three-time champion is nearly impossible without a solid short program.  ''today, i was so, so happy and relieved i can't put it into words,'' lysacek said. ''it was just one of those days i had to give it to myself and say, 'all right this was fun, this was good, this was a step in the right direction.' ''  his score of 78.99 held up for first place, ahead of a slightly shaky weir, who scored 78.14. ryan bradley (73.58) finished in third place. they will decide the title in saturday night's long program.  oddly enough, lysacek and weir tackled this competition with an underdog's mentality. weir has been struggling with what he calls a ''hip/butt'' injury and has not competed well this season. although he finished ahead of weir in the world championships and the olympics last year -- he was third at the worlds and fourth in the olympics to weir's seventh and fifth -- lysacek started to think of the short program as a mental block. and he has never defeated weir at the nationals.  ''i think i'm ready to represent the united states figure skating, especially the men's field, on every level,'' lysacek said. ''with my complete heart and soul, i'd be the best athlete and representative that i could be.''  lysacek then insisted that he was not taking a slap at weir, but clearly the 21-year-old lysacek was differentiating himself from his flamboyant rival, not something that takes much effort. simply sitting next to each other at the news conference was a study in contrast. lysacek wore a black warm-up suit; weir had a high-collared black coat and a fuzzy wrap around his waist. weir recently appeared in photographs in blackbook magazine, in provocative, shirtless poses and wearing high heels.  weir, 22, has always been unapologetic about his personality. and he said that he and lysacek do get along, outside of events like this.  ''at competitions, we're not friends,'' weir said. ''i have my objective and he has his objective, and that's healthy. i wouldn't want to have a friend sitting next to me in the locker room talking about 'american idol' and curling each other's hair.  ''but when we're away from competitions and there isn't all this stress and hype going on around us, we're kind of cool.''  the only contrast that will matter in saturday's long program is the level of their performances. both are planning a quad jump, which neither has landed in competition.  carroll has been trying to keep lysacek's focus on what he can control. carroll was agitated when lysacek pumped his fists after landing a combination jump in the short program.  he also tries to keep lysacek from thinking about what is at stake.  ''i emphasize the skating, not the title, because i think it's a death knell,'' carroll said. ''you do every bit you can to achieve that, but you don't expect it. chips fall the way they may. you can't get caught up in that. it doesn't work.''  figure skating  