if the time is right, oil and water can mix   lynn biederman, 44, says this about her mother: ''had we not been mother and daughter, our paths would never cross.''  ms. biederman lives in a woodsy part of northern westchester county, in a big house full of comfy, country-style furniture. though she has a full life with her husband of 20 years and their two teenagers, and her work as a children's book writer and part-time librarian, she loves to slack off, pad around the house, eat in, sleep late. ''i would do anything to stay in bed, in a room as dark as a cave, for as long as possible,'' she says  .her mother, judith west edelman, a wealthy businesswoman who refuses to give her age (''if i have to tell you, the story's off''), lives on the upper east side of manhattan in a 40th-floor apartment with a spectacular view of the east river, rooms full of spare modern furniture and lots of unshaded windows that let the light pour in at dawn -- which is when she gets up seven mornings a week to work out at her gym.  the daughter, who's in fine shape (5 feet 3 inches, 112 pounds), once made the mistake of using her mother's personal trainer. ''i was like, 'lou, why you giving me so much weight?' he says: 'what do you mean? your mother does more reps at a higher weight and she never complains.' ''  the daughter seeks to avoid conflict. the mother relishes a fight. (she interrupted our interview to take a call about a woman she is battling in her co-op over an allegedly oversized dog.)  the daughter prefers quiet getaways and hates the hamptons. the mother likes fancy restaurants, has a big house in the hamptons and loves the scene.  the daughter is a democrat, the mother a republican.  the daughter served me home-baked vanilla cake warm from the oven and homemade cappuccino; the mother's uniformed maid served herbal tea from tea bags and low-fat cookies from the health food store.  the mother is punctual and has no time for fiddle-faddle; the daughter's constantly late because she fiddle-faddles. one of the mother's favorite sayings is, ''fast walker, fast thinker.'' one of the daughter's is, ''what's the rush, mom?''  the daughter believes her children are entitled to an explanation. the mother believes her own two children and her four grandchildren should not be overindulged. one of the mother's quippy sayings to silence children: ''why? because it's a letter in the alphabet.''  the daughter works at home. she knows her 14-year-old daughter's taste in food, clothes and books and loves shopping for her.  the mother works in an office -- once an assistant to the late milton petrie, the renowned women's clothing retailer, she is now president of westco, her retail fixture business. the mother was too busy working to go with the daughter to pick out a wedding dress and sent her mother-in-law, the grandmother.  for years the mother and daughter had a guarded relationship. many of the daughter's best friends are women who aren't close with their mothers.  the mother was too consumed by work to make women friends. ''i liked to talk business, and not many women did,'' she says. ''even as a kid, i was a loner. i began to see myself as not friendly or having social skills. i'd say, 'so what, i make a million dollars a year.' ''  but in the last few years, things changed between mother and daughter. they grew close. there was no epiphany, they agree. the mother's quippy saying for this is: ''i suppose it's an accumulation of two-way streets.'' each woman realized she'd fallen into the same trap.  ''i strove to be the opposite of my mother,'' the daughter says.  and the mother? ''i grew up hungry to be different from my mother.''  seeing the problem helped break the cycle.  the mother grew up poor in dallas. she says her father, a traveling salesman, was a ''brutal'' bully. ''i saw my mother being pushed around. i myself was. my mother, poor thing -- any friends she had were losers in life. so i had to figure out for myself what kind of woman i wanted to be. no one was going to push me around. i saw very quickly a woman couldn't have a voice without economic independence.'' her first glimpse of what she wanted came during an after-school job at a dallas department store. ''those neiman marcus women, that was the life i wanted. it stoked the fire.''  even though her husband, sanford edelman, is a successful businessman, she has never lost her fear of being dependent and has never slowed in her career. she continues to work when most her age would retire. this is how she explains her unrelenting morning workouts: ''a pretty woman has a better chance in business. i used anything i had at my disposal to get the job done.''  when she worked with milton petrie (estimated at his death in 1994 to be worth nearly a billion dollars), she says: ''my viewpoint consisted of myself as a career success. it never occurred to me i could ask to get out early for my kids. having my mother-in-law go for the wedding dress with lynn worked for me. i realize now it's a pretty narrow way to live.  ''if you never had a fur coat, you never had a two-carat diamond or made $100,000, it seems like a big deal.''  what changed? ''once you get those things, it's not a big deal. i didn't have a good relationship with my mother. i didn't want to die feeling i didn't have a good relationship with my children. i didn't want to perpetuate a legacy. where does it stop?''  for a while, the daughter says, she wouldn't let her mother back in: ''she saw i had something with my children. she'd say, 'i probably wasn't as great a mother as you' and i'd let it hang there.''  and then, several years ago, the daughter began writing a novel for young adults and realized the mother character she'd created -- nicknamed the captain -- was too harsh to be believable. as she rounded out the character, she grew to have empathy for her mother's hard life.  they disagree about who reached out first. ''i threw the baton out, and she grabbed it,'' the daughter says.  says the mother: ''i worked on being a more accepting mother. if i want to say something, i let it go a day or two before bringing it up. like negotiating in business.''  over christmas, the two families went for a week to buenos aires to celebrate the mother's secret milestone birthday. ''the day after we flew back, mom was in the gym at 7,'' the daughter says. ''i couldn't move.'' asked what she loves about her mother, she says: ''it took a lot of guts for my mom to change. there's not a thing she wouldn't do for me.''  as for the mother, she has a quippy saying to cover her half: ''sometimes the chicken can learn from the egg.''  parenting  