showing young skiers that 'really cool' athletes wear helmets   five years ago, dr. robert williams, a vermont pediatrician and critical care specialist, lay in his own hospital's intensive care unit after a nasty mountain biking accident. dr. williams had a variety of serious injuries, including internal bleeding, but he had not sustained a head injury.  like almost all mountain bikers, he had been wearing a helmet during his accident.  ''as i recovered, i started to think about why helmets are universally accepted in sports like mountain biking but not in skiing or snowboarding,'' dr. williams said. ''these are sports that are very similar in demographics and in the risk of serious trauma. both are actually quite safe, but clearly safer with a helmet.''  a longtime skier who is now an avid snowboarder, dr. williams had attended to ski fatalities both in his pediatric intensive care unit and on local mountains as a medical adviser to ski patrollers.  ''i was in a unique position as someone who works every day to keep children healthy and safe, but given the problems we're having with obesity in children, i also knew one of the best things for kids is to be out there skiing and riding,'' dr. williams said. ''it's a lot safer for them to be on the mountain than spending the day on the couch with the computer staring at myspace.  ''a helmet was just a logical choice, but i didn't want to scare anyone into wearing one. i wanted them to see, that just like in other sports, the really cool, expert athletes always wear a helmet.''  with the help of some colleagues and sponsors and the support of local ski areas, dr. williams started a campaign to increase helmet use in children. four years later, the program appears to be succeeding, and dr. williams has also come across more reasons to wear a helmet as ski areas evolve and expand into new territory. that goes for adults as well as children.  the fact is that, although recent studies suggest that only one in three skiers and snowboarders wears a helmet, the percentage of helmet wearers is climbing every year. moreover, unlike adult skiers and riders over 35 years old, most younger skiers and snowboarders grew up wearing a helmet.  in a generation, it is likely that it will be as rare to see someone skiing or riding without a helmet as it is now rare to see someone playing hockey or riding a road bike without a helmet -- two things people routinely did without helmets just a generation ago.  dr. williams thinks that the exploding popularity of terrain parks and backcountry forays only makes a helmet more essential these days. for years, one of frequent excuses for not wearing a helmet was, ''i don't ski that fast.''  there are two holes in that way of thinking. one, studies with radar guns have indicated that many people do actually ski quite fast, with the majority on intermediate groomed runs reaching speeds of 25 miles an hour and higher. just the impact of falling down and hitting the back of your head at that speed is hazardous.  the other truth is that you don't need to be going very fast to sustain a serious head injury. dr. williams's group -- whose project has been named phat, an acronym for protect your head on all terrain and protect your head at all times -- took radar guns into the terrain parks and gladed tree runs at smugglers' notch, a renowned family-oriented vermont mountain. they discovered that 79 percent of the people maneuvering through the trees were going slower than 15 miles an hour and that 94 percent of the people in the parks were moving that slowly.  ''i realized that with so many people coming off groomed runs to ski in the glades or play in the parks, a helmet may be even more effective at preventing a head injury than people thought,'' dr. williams said. ''obviously, even at a slower speed, it's a good idea to have a helmet on if you're negotiating through rocks and trees. the same is true if you're jumping on metal rails or doing tricks in the halfpipe. the packed, sculpted walls of halfpipes are very hard.''  to help get the message out, phat, which is a partnership of vermont children's hospital at fletcher allen health care and the university of vermont college of medicine, has promoted helmet use with posters and brochures and during daylong events on busy days at the base of smugglers' notch and other state ski areas. phat has also tried to persuade more ski patrollers and ski instructors to wear helmets, in recognition of their influence as role models.  the vermont ski areas association has helped support the project, as have six other vermont ski areas: bolton valley, bromley, jay peak, ascutney, sugarbush and okemo. during the just concluded national ski safety week, some areas were discounting lift tickets, lessons and rentals by 50 percent with the purchase of a helmet.  when phat began charting helmet use in vermont children four years ago, more than half were in helmets, with the highest rates among skiers. last winter, more than 80 percent were wearing helmets, with some of the most significant gains among snowboarders. the percent of helmet-wearing riders who were girls jumped from 55 percent to 91 percent.  dr, williams believes the phat program could be replicated nationwide, especially if it promotes helmet use as the choice of the most dedicated, loyal skiers and riders.  ''a helmet is not a pass to act irresponsibly,'' dr. williams said. ''there used to be a worry that people would think they can behave like superman because they're wearing a helmet. there's no medical evidence of that happening. but what we have seen is that the most devoted or accomplished skiers and riders have helmets on.''  phat's research, for example, revealed that season-pass holders were more than twice as likely to wear a helmet than the nationwide average. that led to another phat campaign with a poster and sticker that reads: ''ski like a local, wear a helmet.''  ''we were trying to make it o.k. to wear a helmet for the entry level or intermediate skier or rider,'' dr. williams said. ''it's a way of saying: 'look, you're not going to look like a nerd. this is what the locals wear.' you know, it's a cool thing.''  ski report  