sap plans new venture for serving small clients   sap, the biggest maker of business management software, said wednesday that it would invest as much as $520 million over two years on an organization aimed at smaller business clients.  some analysts said the plan for the investment showed that the company had exhausted its lucrative focus on large global corporations.  the move, which sap said would trim its profit margin to 26 percent to 27 percent this year, from a previously announced 30 percent, sent shares of the company plunging as much as 6 percent.  investors focused on the cost of the initiative, even though sap reported that profit rose 29 percent in the fourth quarter, to $1.03 billion, as sales rose 7 percent, to almost $3.9 billion.  analysts said the focus on smaller clients showed that sap's business was maturing and that its days of rapid growth might be coming to an end.  ''basically i think the financial markets are going to have to adjust their perception of sap,'' said john segrich, a software analyst at jpmorgan in london. ''in the past, the markets have become accustomed to turbocharged growth rates from sap, but their core business is changing.''  in two of four quarters in the last year, sap failed to meet analysts' expectations. for 2006, sap had predicted that software sales would rise 15 to 17 percent, but sales rose only 11 percent from 2005. analysts tied the slowdown to reduced business spending on corporate software, the rise of niche competitors nibbling at sap's market and the saturation of sap's traditional pool of clients, the large multinational companies.  sap's chief executive, henning kagermann, said sap was accelerating efforts begun a few years ago to cater to smaller businesses, which were not a priority when the company was expanding to become the biggest software maker in germany and the third-largest in the world after microsoft and i.b.m.  mr. kagermann said sap would aggressively serve smaller clients with its all-in-one business software suite in 2007.  in an interview, the company's president, leo apotheker, disputed the notion that sap's profit and sales prospects were dimming, saying that sap's accelerated focus on small and midsize clients was expected to produce 10,000 new customers and $1.3 billion in new sales revenue by 2010.  ''we don't know where this feeling is coming from,'' mr. apotheker said. ''we have produced double-digit growth for the third straight year. we doubled our software revenue in the u.s. in three years. we said today that we believe our traditional business will grow at double-digit rates for the considerable future. we just want to accelerate that growth.''  but theo kitz, an analyst at merck finck, a private bank in munich, said sap's growth prospects peaked a few years ago.  the company, founded in 1972, equips 38,000 businesses with software for internal functions like accounting, personnel, sales and executive controls. in a sense, sap is becoming a victim of its own success, mr. kitz said.  serving smaller businesses is more costly for companies like sap because there are many of them and their needs tend to be more varied, requiring bigger sales and support teams, mr. kitz said. smaller businesses typically also take longer to make buying decisions and require more intensive sales advice than larger enterprises.  