a hostage who stayed a few steps ahead   the birthday party  a memoir of survival  by stanley n. alpert  306 pages. g. p. putnam's sons. $24.95.  on the night of jan. 21, 1998, stanley n. alpert was heading home in greenwich village with pleasant thoughts on his mind. the next day he would turn 38. by chance, he had struck up a conversation with an attractive woman on the subway, and it looked as if a date were in the cards. as he walked, he mused, and as he mused, he failed to notice two armed men closing in on him from behind. before he knew it, he was in the back seat of a new lexus, about to experience the most terrifying 25 hours of his life.  ''the birthday party'' is mr. alpert's harrowing, often hilarious reconstruction of what should have been a garden-variety new york street crime. he gives a taut, hour-by-hour account of a simple robbery that became a kidnapping and then, by a quirk of fate, a ghetto version of ''the ransom of red chief,'' as mr. alpert, by all appearances grade a victim material, turned into a colossal headache for his captors. precisely how this nebbishy brooklyn boy, partial to peach-flavored snapple iced tea and chocolate chip cookies, induced reverse stockholm syndrome and maneuvered his way to freedom makes ''the birthday party'' one of the most exhilarating, improbable new york stories ever told.  the original plan was simple: drive the victim to an a.t.m. and force him to withdraw money. when lucky, the gang's ringleader, discovered that mr. alpert had $110,000 in his savings account, the plan changed. after a quick visit to the a.t.m., mr. alpert found himself sitting blindfolded in an apartment somewhere in brooklyn, watched over by three armed men, three prostitutes employed by lucky and one very nervous landlord.  in the morning, lucky informs him, he will be driven to his bank to withdraw $50,000 that lucky, in a telephone transaction, has shifted from savings to checking. there is nothing to worry about, one captor insists: ''you got your fine education, your good job. it don't matter to you if i get your money. you'll just make it again.''  at this point it has not quite dawned on the gang exactly what mr. alpert meant when he informed them that he was an assistant federal attorney and that they might have made a small miscalculation in choosing him.  the ordeal of captivity is horrific yet ridiculous, like a demented episode of mtv's ''real world.'' mr. alpert himself wavers between the two points of view. all around him, a chaotic scene unfolds, as ren and sen, the two henchmen, play with their guns, philosophize, smoke marijuana and have sex with the prostitutes. occasionally lucky, attending to pressing business concerns in the outside world, pops in to restore order and refine the crime plans.  mr. alpert concentrates, very hard, on exuding a cooperative spirit and winning the sympathy of those around him, all the while filing away small bits of information that will help convict everyone in the room if he ever gets out alive.  there are many tense moments. sen, without warning, begins raving, screaming out sick, violent fantasies of murder and mayhem. ''i remained frozen in sheer terror, silent and unflinching, hoping he would not act,'' mr. alpert writes. gradually, he realizes that sen is singing along to a busta rhymes rap on the radio.  when the gang offers mr. alpert free sex with one of the women, he calculates feverishly. a refusal might be interpreted as racism. on the other hand, the loss of dignity might make him seem less sympathetic, easier to inflict pain on. he says no, very politely.  mr. alpert and his captors inhabit different worlds. the men laugh at mr. alpert's $49 florsheim shoes. they examine his watch and ring with contempt. they cannot understand why, at his age, he is not married with children. mr. alpert tells them that his parents wonder the same thing. his money earns him a measure of respect, and, as the hours drag on, ren and sen ask for free, much appreciated legal advice.  a bond develops. ''yo, stanley, you should join our gang,'' sen tells him. ''you could recommend friends that we could kidnap.'' after a moment's reflection, sen amends his suggestion ''naw, i mean you could recommend your enemies for us to kidnap.'' mr. alpert decides a cryptic smile is the best response.  eventually lucky decides that going into a bank with mr. alpert might be a high-risk operation. further, he has come to realize that he is holding a hot potato. mr. alpert is bundled into the lexus late at night and driven somewhere eerily quiet. with good reason, he suspects that his luck has run out. rather than spoil one of the book's most bleakly funny moments, let me just note that few sounds have quite the sensory impact of duct tape being ripped from a roll.  mr. alpert may be no hero, but he survived his kidnapping by remaining extraordinarily cool under pressure, and keeping his lawyerly wits about him. observant and shrewd, he amassed a dossier's worth of evidence to present to the police, who were, in fact, deeply impressed by what they heard: they judged his story to be the biggest pack of lies ever bundled together by an unaided human being.  only after crucial details panned out did the chase begin in earnest. the pursuit and capture of lucky and the rest of the crew, an operation successfully completed in about 48 hours, make a rousing conclusion to a crazy adventure.  new yorkers enjoy playing one-upmanship when it comes to crime. i'll see your mugging and raise you two break-ins and a carjacking. mr. alpert suffered terribly, but he does have something to show for the experience. for the rest of his life, no one will ever beat him in this little game.  books of the times  