at sundance, art and journalistic ethics on trial   amir bar-lev sat on a bench at the art is in, a gallery in park city, utah, looking at a series of very energetic acrylic abstract paintings with titles like ''ocean'' and ''lollipop house.'' mr. bar-lev, who knows and likes the artist, chatted with mark weiler about their respective favorites in the showing of six pieces that was held during the sundance film festival.  but underlying the exchange about aesthetics was one about process, a continuation of a discussion that dominates ''my kid could paint that,'' a documentary directed by mr. bar-lev that had its premiere at the festival to immediate acclaim and was bought by sony pictures classics for $2 million.  the painter, marla olmstead, was 4 years old when her work, with its vivid swirls of colors and dynamic brush strokes, began selling for thousands of dollars. she became a news media cat toy, with writers and camera crews parachuting into binghamton, n.y., from all over to cover the prodigy, a term her parents, mark and laura olmstead, have never used. as often happens, the coverage crested, then curdled, and it was alleged by charlie rose on ''60 minutes'' that her father, a night shift manager at a frito-lay plant and an amateur painter, was helping her with the work.  back in 2004, mr. bar-lev, a filmmaker who directed the documentary ''fighter,'' an intimate, hilarious portrait of two holocaust survivors, read a commentary about marla by michael kimmelman, chief art critic for the new york times, and thought it would serve as the basis for a good film about the subjectivity of expression in the context of modern art. (mr. kimmelman also appears in the film.)  the documentary gradually became a meditation on truth instead, one that manages to explore and sometimes indict the motives of all the adults who have swirled around marla: her parents, gallery owners, reporters and, eventually, the filmmaker.  mr. olmstead and his wife, laura, a dental hygienist and a mother of two, are not simple country folk. they are bright, articulate people, but were unprepared for the firestorm of coverage that engulfed them after outside attempts to film marla painting something from start to finish proved difficult. (the family believes that the process of filming prevents marla, who is shy, from focusing.) over the film, mr. bar-lev begins to have misgivings and finds his role as family familiar and advocate morphing into something darker. the movie is a transparent rendering of the journalistic process, and the picture is none too pretty.  ''this is a film about adults; it is not about a little girl painting in her house,'' mr. bar-lev said, sitting in the cafe at the yarrow hotel in park city last week. ''in the end, i had to choose between my affection for the family and my concern for the truth of the storytelling.''  ''i had to try and figure out if they were lying to me,'' he said, recalling the months he spent in intimate quarters of their home. ''in order to do that, i kind of had to lie to them, to not be straightforward about my misgivings. i told myself that it was o.k. because i truly held out hope until past the end that they were not lying and that the allegations were completely unfounded.''  it can be brutal to watch. in a talk with ms. olmstead, mr. bar-lev reveals that he has doubts about the agency of marla's work -- his effort to film her working have produced paintings that don't resemble the other finished work. ms. olmstead stares directly into the camera.  ''i need you to believe me,'' she says.  he does and he doesn't. mr. bar-lev has his share of misgivings, but does not make a conclusion in the film about what exactly happened when marla painted.  ''amir did not set out to use the family in the course of making his film,'' said elizabeth cohen, a reporter for the binghamton press and sun-bulletin, who figures prominently in the documentary. ''the film makes us confront the realities of the media process, the predatory aspects of journalism, filmmaking and storytelling. there is a constant need to feed a 24-hour news cycle, but what about the people we write about? what happens to them?''  more often than not, the apparatus unpacks, gets what it needs and then leaves town, leaving the subjects to try and reassemble their lives. speaking on the phone, ms. olmstead was friendly, but understandably reluctant to re-engage with the press. it was not the first time she had heard something along the lines of, ''hi, i'm from the media and i'm here to help you.'' she then sent a statement that had been read on her behalf at sundance at a question-and-answer session:  ''when we met amir bar-lev three years ago and he expressed interest in our daughter's work, we welcomed him into our home and lives. but we are heartbroken by some of the choices he made in his portrayal of our family in the editing of the film,'' the statement read in part. the olmsteads feel betrayed and, at the very least, had asked him not to organize a show, drawn from private collectors, as an adjunct to his premiere.  the film raises questions about the custody of a given story. very often regular people are enrolled in the effort, but in the end, the author, not the subject, is the owner of the narrative. the choices are his -- in the editing, in the framing, in the end.  ''marla's paintings are like a rorschach,'' he said. ''some people see a kind of divinity when they look into them and others see a hoax. i wanted to do a david and goliath story, one that exonerated the family. that story didn't turn out.''  