a toy that sends grown men into orbit   in the 1960s, when a toy inventor named sol friedman used to wake up at night with ideas that sent him running to what his family called his ''mad scientist's lab,'' he could not have predicted the effect his actions would have on a generation of men.  my husband, for example, still hankers for a certain flying toy he played with as a child.  for years, i have heard stories about this lost talisman of youth, an almost mythical toy that had an inflated balloon that could be launched into the air and propelled through a room by a whirring fan.  but my husband could never remember its name -- until the other day.  ''i found it! i finally found it!'' he wrote in an instant message that popped up on my computer.  ''found what?'' i typed warily.  ''the flying balloon.''  ''you mean the toy you got when you were sick and it was so fun that after you got well you still pretended to be sick so you could stay home from school the rest of the week to play with it?'' i typed.  ''it's called the johnny astro.''  johnny astro. with a name like that, a name that evokes rocket ships, moon walks and the glory of the technological future hurtling our way, you can see why such a toy would linger in the memory of a boy who grew up in the 1960s.  ''get me one for my birthday,'' he typed. ''please.''  how could i refuse?  at the outset, it sounded like a simple request. i had a solid lead to go on.  my husband had stumbled across a web page dedicated to the toy, johnnyastro.com, a site with detailed photos of the toy's box cover -- ''johnny astro,'' ''really flies,'' ''no wires,'' ''no connections'' -- as well as comments from visitors who felt as passionately as my husband did about good old johnny.  ''this was far and away my favorite toy -- i'm now 42, and nothing you can own has ever given me more pleasure,'' wrote one site visitor.  another wrote: ''red control panel, black stick to power fan which was yellow. i remember all this but can't remember what i did last week!!'' a third added, ''i've been searching for another johnny astro all my adult life.''  the site also has links to stores. i visited a number of online stores that specialized in vintage toys, including bobbystoys.com, toysthrutime.com and timewarptoys.com, but none of them had a johnny astro set in stock.  i phoned one to ask. ''it's one of the top favorite toys that people are looking for,'' said joyce grant, who owns timewarptoys.com.  ms. grant, who said she stumbles across a few sets every year, sells them for $85 to $125 a set, depending on the condition.  ''some toys from that era have been reproduced,'' ms. grant said. ''but johnny astro, never. it was manufactured by topper toys.''  topper toys bought the idea from mr. friedman, who died in 1997.  i phoned mr. friedman's son, miles friedman, because by now i was eager to know what kind of a person could invent a toy that sends grown men into paroxysms of nostalgic longing decades later.  ''my dad was amazing, one of the top toy inventors back in the days when all the big toy companies would still deal with freelance inventors,'' mr. friedman said. ''he cordoned off a section of the garage at our house in rockland county for his workshop, which looked like a mad scientist's lab, and when he got an idea in the middle of the night, i'd hear him running down the hallway in his pajamas and robe to his workshop.''  mr. friedman said that his father invented many well-known toys, including the operation orbit space toy.  sol friedman got inspiration for the johnny astro set from his two sons.  ''we always wanted a toy that could really fly,'' miles friedman said.  ''so did my husband,'' i said.  ''so did every boy in america,'' he said. ''then one day we were in a hotel in the catskills, and i was trying to stick balloons to a wall using static electricity. i was sitting on a heating unit, and the air from it would blow the balloons off the wall. my father was staring at me. i said, 'what, am i an idiot because the balloons don't stick?' he said, 'no, you're a genius.' ''  back home, sol friedman built a model, using a controlled column of air from a fan to fly a balloon.  ''do you still have an original set?'' i asked. ''and an extra, maybe?''  ''no, but there's this guy in massachusetts who is an engineer who bought an old one, analyzed it, designed a blueprint for making it and had the boys in his son's scout troop build some from scratch,'' mr. friedman said.  ''he did what?'' i asked.  ''built identical replicas,'' mr. friedman said. ''he sent one to me. his name is, let me look it up here.  his name is bob lansing.''  i phoned mr. lansing, a 48-year-old electrical engineer very close in age to my husband.  ''we built 14,'' said mr. lansing, who lives in newburyport, mass. ''the kids made all the molds, did the casting. hundreds of parts had to be made. it took 15 months.''  ''you were able to hold the boy scouts' interest for 15 months?'' i asked.  ''you've never seen a johnny astro operate?'' mr. lansing asked. ''it's mesmerizing. it's hypnotic. there was nothing else like it ever made. you can take off, you can land it, you can land it on an elevated surface, fire the propulsion unit at it, knock it off the surface, capture it, fly it again. you can point the fan unit at the top of the balloon, turn it to high ''  ''i don't suppose you have any extra sets?'' i asked.  ''no, nine went to the scouts, one to miles, a couple of others to kids locally, a nephew, a niece,'' mr. lansing said.  lucky kids.  i turned to ebay. a set was for sale with seven bidders so far, with a high bid of $76. an hour before the auction closed, i placed a bid authorizing ebay to go as high as $207 on my behalf. (i calculated i would get the set for a much lower price, however, given ms. grant's price range.)  in the last minutes of the auction, the number of bids climbed to 21. but in the end i got the set -- for $204.49.  my husband acted shocked.  ''you paid how much?'' he asked.  ''you said you wanted it for your birthday,'' i said.  he thought about it for a minute.  ''if i got two,'' he said, ''we could fly them together and exchange balloons in the air.''  online shopper  