randolph gets expensive as expectations rise   coffee, gasoline and real estate cost a small fortune in new york. and now, the mets have learned, so does a manager with two years of experience.  in the days leading up to willie randolph's signing a new three-year, $5.65 million contract yesterday, general manager omar minaya surveyed the salaries of the 29 other managers. he kept coming back to terry francona of the red sox and ozzie guillén of the white sox, who work (and have won the world series) in intense baseball towns with passionate fans and constant scrutiny. new york certainly fits that description, and then some, and randolph's contract reflects the premium of winning in such a demanding environment.  randolph's deal, which takes effect immediately, doubles his salary to $1.4 million this coming season, placing him between francona ($1.65 million) and guillén ($1.1 million). randolph becomes the 10th-highest-paid manager over all, behind one longtime manager, houston's phil garner ($1.5 million), and ahead of another, seattle's mike hargrove ($1.3 million). randolph will make $2 million in 2008 and $2.2 million in 2009, and the mets hold a $2.5 million option for 2010.  ''respect to me isn't dollars and cents,'' randolph said. ''they feel that i'm going to move this organization forward. that's respect to me.''  randolph, nattily dressed in a suit and a red tie with the mets' insignia, brought his wife, gretchen, to yesterday's news conference at the sportsnet new york studios in manhattan and glowed as he described how pleased he was to be on board through what should be the opening of the mets' new stadium in 2009.  ''we've made the transition so quickly,'' randolph said of his first two seasons in charge. ''we came together a lot quicker than i thought. everyone wants to win, but i'm excited to be with players who really want to win. these guys feel it.''  extending randolph's contract was always on minaya's off-season agenda, and minaya often said he expected to complete a new deal before spring training. still, with randolph having another year remaining on his original three-year, $1.875 million deal, minaya concentrated on roster issues instead. the two sides finally reached an agreement last friday, according to the mets' senior executive vice president, jeff wilpon, and spent the first part of this week completing the pact.  even so, unresolved on-field issues intruded into yesterday's news conference, with minaya announcing that the mets had signed the 36-year-old right-hander aaron sele to a minor-league contract, making him the ninth pitcher who will compete this spring for the three open spots in the rotation.  sele went 8-6 with a 4.53 earned run average for the los angeles dodgers last season. his best seasons were years ago. it is also possible the mets might add another pitcher to the rotation free-for-all by re-signing víctor zambrano, who had elbow surgery last may and was a disappointment before he was injured.  in two seasons as manager, randolph has invigorated the mets, earning the respect of the players with his winning background, calmness and confidence.  ''he changed it from a country club to a working environment,'' wilpon said of the clubhouse mood with randolph in charge.  randolph made the mets relevant again in his first season in the dugout, keeping them in playoff contention through early september. last season, randolph impressed people throughout baseball, not only for presiding over a team that coasted to the national league east title, but by the way he improvised his way to game 7 of the n.l. championship series with a piecemeal rotation and a versatile bullpen.  his defining moment probably came during the first game of the division series against los angeles, when he aggressively pulled starter john maine in the fifth inning with the mets leading, 2-1, and then used five relievers to win the game.  ''winners don't panic, winners take a chance,'' minaya said. ''when you go into a game and pull the starter in the third or fourth inning, that's taking a chance.''  randolph will face added pressure this season in a division that should be tougher than it was in 2006. for now, he was savoring the final weeks before spring training as he searched yesterday for a vintage year of a favorite wine.  sometimes, it's good to be the manager.  inside pitch  more than 10 weeks after having elbow surgery, carlos delgado said he had begun hitting soft-toss pitches and would soon resume his normal workout routine. ''i don't anticipate any problems from now to spring training,'' he said in a conference call. ''i have to get stronger. the muscles haven't been used for 10 weeks.'' delgado added that the mets were aware that he and his wife, betzaida garcía, were expecting their first child april 1, the date of the mets' opening game in st. louis, and that he planned to be in puerto rico when she gave birth. they already have their son's name picked out: carlos antonio, the same name as their fathers. ''we can't lose,'' delgado said.  baseball  