dallas suburb amends its ban on renting to illegal immigrants   the city council of a dallas suburb has revised its proposed ban on renting apartments to illegal immigrants to allow landlords to rent to families with mixed citizenship or residency status.  but the proposal in the suburb, farmers branch, is being challenged in court and requires the approval of voters in may before it takes effect.  the council voted, 5 to 0, on monday night for the revised ordinance after more than two hours of public testimony. it allows landlords to rent to families with a head of household or a spouse who has legal residency or citizenship, and it exempts minors from mandatory document checks.  the proposal has prompted emotional debate in farmers branch, with advocates of either side accusing the other side of being un-american.  councilman ben robinson said the ordinance was necessary.  ''if we permit this kind of invasion to continue,'' mr. robinson said, ''we'll be no different than iraq, with various factions owing allegiance to their group.''  the ban was to take effect earlier this month, but a judge issued a restraining order after city officials were accused of violating a state open-meetings law. other lawsuits say the effort is unconstitutional. opponents also say the ordinance has hurt local businesses by driving hispanics from the city.  councilman tim o'hare, who introduced the ban, said lawyers had recommended the revision to strengthen the city's legal position. mr. o'hare said he had proposed the idea because residents had told him that illegal immigration was causing a ''huge problem'' in the city.  ''people are upset that the law is not being upheld,'' mr. o'hare said.  elizabeth villafranca, 43, and other volunteers with the group let the voters decide said they were starting a voter registration campaign to try to defeat the ordinance.  ''they're trying to send a message that minorities aren't welcome,'' said ms. villafranca, adding that she had been told to ''go back to mexico,'' even though she was born in the united states.  mayor bob phelps said that although his city was taking steps to curb illegal immigration, the effort should begin with the federal government. ''walls, fences, that's not going to solve the problem,'' he said. ''it's got to start from washington.''  