smoking ban at casinos may be eased   smokers will still be able to light up at atlantic city casinos if a compromise measure introduced in the city council last night gets final approval in two weeks.  the council was supposed to vote last night on an ordinance to ban smoking entirely at casinos, but after casino executives complained that a total ban would make gamblers who smoked travel to other states, several lawmakers came up with a compromise that would allow smoking in 25 percent of the space of a casino's gambling floors, restaurants and bars.  because of the concern about gamblers going to other states to bet, the casinos were exempted from a 2006 state law that prohibits smoking in most public places, including restaurants and bars. bar and restaurant owners in atlantic city protested the exemption, saying that smokers would abandon their establishments to eat and drink in casinos. since the state law allowed atlantic city itself to ban smoking, several council members, siding with the restaurant owners, introduced an ordinance in november to ban smoking in casinos as well.  during a 90-minute public comment period at the city council meeting last night, joseph a. corbo jr., the president of the new jersey casino association, spoke in favor of the compromise ordinance, even though the association had originally opposed any ban on smoking in casinos. the ordinance will come up for a final vote at the next council meeting, on feb. 7.  regina carlson, executive director of new jersey gasp, an antismoking group, said she believed that she and others opposed to any smoking in the casinos had been blindsided by the new compromise.  ''they say there will be ventilation, but you would have to have a tornado to get all the smoke out,'' said ms. carlson, who noted that delaware did not allow smoking in casinos, and that the owners of proposed slot machine parlors in philadelphia have said they plan to ban smoking.  correction:  january 29, 2007, monday  an article on thursday about a compromise bill that would ban smoking in most areas of atlantic city casinos referred incorrectly in some copies to gambling establishments in massachusetts. the state is considering allowing casinos, but has none yet.  