st.-barthélemy   like aspen and st.-tropez -- this tiny island in the french west indies, better known as st. barts, remains a preferred playground of the rich and famous.  for years, models, music moguls, and corporate tycoons have flocked there for its elite hotels, water-side restaurants, unspoiled beaches and laid-back attitude. david letterman and diddy, a k a sean combs, are among the regulars. in november, the pop star usher was spotted on the island. so was paul mccartney. jon bon jovi was there just after christmas. and the fashion designer and former model kimora lee simmons spent the holidays on the island -- an annual family ritual.  want to join them? be prepared to pay. demand is high at the two-dozen hotels on the island, which pushes room rates up. during high season, which runs from november to april, it's not unusual to find prices for basic rooms starting around $600. one-bedroom villas, which are more plentiful, can often be had for less.  there are plenty of restaurants. with views of the harbor and sunsets beyond, maya's is one of the most popular for dinner. la mandala, perched high on a hill, is another favorite spot that serves thai-influenced dishes. for a break from the glitterati, head to le select, one of the island's oldest and most laid-back bars.  the main dock in gustavia harbor is the place to see the big wigs and their big boats. ron perelman's 187-foot yacht ultima iii was among the megayachts parked there at the end of december.  among the newest options for travelers: the eden rock hotel st. barths has just completed a $25 million renovation. five new beachfront villas and eight beachfront rooms have been added bringing the total to 32. scheduled to open later this year is a four-bedroom villa dubbed the rock star heaven house that will feature a 14-seat dining table, a garage stocked with cars and motorbikes and a media room with sound and film editing capabilities.  partied out? saline beach is said to be the island's best stretch of sand.  where to stay -- the eden rock, st. jean bay, st.-barthélemy. prices start at 650 euros (about $840 at one euro to $1.29) a night in the high season, which runs through april 15 (590-590-29-79-99, www.edenrockhotel.com). hotel guanahani, on the northeast side of the island, overlooking marigot bay; rates start at 565 euros including breakfast (590-590-27-66-60, www.leguanahani.com). le p'tit morne, about a 10-minute drive from the beach, offers 15 basic rooms starting at 170 euros a night (590-590-52-95-50, www.timorne.com).  the 10 point caribbean escapes plan: for the celebrity-starved michelle higgins, a staff reporter for the travel section, writes the practical traveler column.  