official proposes 'drafting' poll workers to ease problems   the chronic shortage of election workers in ohio could be solved by requiring residents to work at the polls the way they fulfill jury duty, the newly elected secretary of state says.  the official, jennifer l. brunner, a democrat who won the office vacated by j. kenneth blackwell, a republican, is asking lawmakers to require conscripted workers to have two days of training and then work eight-hours on election day.  if the legislature approves the plan, ohio would be the first state to force people to be election workers.  the system has been troubled by too few workers struggling with electronic machines and changes like the new requirement for voter ids.  ''under ohio law, we're supposed to have equal numbers of poll workers from both parties at each polling place, but we don't always,'' ms. brunner said.  the workers' average age is 72, and states and advocates around the country are grappling with a shortage of workers, according to research by votetrustusa, a nonpartisan group.  ''we are now facing a small crisis,'' said curtis gans, director of the center for the study of the american electorate at american university in washington. ''most of the poll workers are older people, and they're dying off.''  the problems here have been compounded since 2000 by accusations of mismanagement. this week, two cuyahoga county election workers were convicted of misconduct for rigging a recount of the 2004 presidential election.  the communications director at votetrustusa, susan greenhalgh, welcomed the effort to compel workers but stopped short of endorsing it.  ''we need to see where the opt-out provisions are,'' ms. greenhalgh said. ''the last thing you want is somebody who really, really doesn't want to be there working the polls.''  ms. brunner, a former judge in franklin county, said poll workers would fall under the same rules as jurors and would be drawn from registered voters. conscripted workers, who would receive a stipend, would supplement the 48,000 poll workers in the state. they are paid $95 a day.  officials could replace defiant workers who refuse to work.  ms. brunner said she hoped to have the system in place for the 2008 election but would not rush it. she said that she had not estimated the cost, but that it was likely to be more than the current system.  candice hoke, a professor of election law and the director of the cleveland state center for election integrity, praised the plan for allowing people who want to work at the polls to serve without fear of losing their jobs as a result of missing work.  ''the downside is it takes a good deal of training, particularly with the complexity of the systems we have today,'' ms. hoke said.  advocates of an election overhaul prefer maintaining a pool of workers who voluntarily return, to limit training.  ''it's almost become a specialized job,'' said dan seligson, editor of electionline.org, which monitors reform efforts. ''in a perfect world, you would have the same group of young people come in, do it for five years and then bring in their friends to do it for five years.''  r. doug lewis, executive director of the election center in houston, would prefer the ohio initiative on a smaller scale along the lines of tests in small, medium and large counties.  ''i think we need to keep an open mind but realize that some of these ideas may not be as convenient as they appear at first blush,'' mr. lewis said.  douglas county, neb., is one of the few counties with such a conscript system. its election commissioner, dave phipps, said the system had worked brilliantly for 20 years.  half the county's 2,000 poll workers are ''draftees,'' required to work in four elections, resulting in fully staffed polls for the 300,000 registered voters.  a drawback is higher absenteeism, mr. phipps said, a hurdle overcome by recruiting slightly more workers than needed. technology-savvy younger people have lowered the average age of poll workers to 52.  the leaders of the democratic minority in the ohio legislature, senator teresa fedor and representative joyce beatty, will consider the proposal and other changes, including mail-in ballots for elections that involve just issues.  ''we need to put more attention into our elections system than we have in the past,'' ms. fedor said. ''it's time to update it.''  the senate president, bill harris, a republican, declined to comment before receiving a detailed proposal.  representative jim hughes, a republican who is seeking reappointment as chairman of the election and ethics committee, said: ''elections are a symbol of freedom in this country. off the cuff, it kind of seems a little bit oppressive making service mandatory.''  