in the tennessee senate, a historic shift of power   over the last year, members of the tennessee legislature have witnessed a number of updates. plasma televisions that broadcast legislative sessions now line corridors in legislative plaza, where many lawmakers have their offices. smoking has been banned from the building although the two activities it used to cloud, lobbying and political arm-twisting, remain.  but a sign of perhaps the most significant change can be found outside room 1, the office of the senate speaker, where the nameplate on the wall has been replaced for the first time in 36 years.  earlier this month, senators voted out john s. wilder, an 85-year-old democrat who had been speaker since 1971, choosing instead ronald l. ramsey, the first republican to lead the body since reconstruction. in tennessee, the powerful senate speaker is also lieutenant governor, and next in line for the governorship.  back-room politicking and shifting loyalties played a role in the ouster of mr. wilder, who comes from a wealthy west tennessee cotton family and who flew his own plane to the capital. until he was voted out, he was the nation's longest serving state legislative leader, according to the national conference of state legislatures.  the change reflects a reality in the south: rising republican strength in state politics, said prof. merle black of emory university, a co-author of ''the rise of southern republicans.''  since barry goldwater's campaign for the presidency in 1964, the south has reliably voted republican in presidential races, except for 1976 and to a lesser degree in 1992, but democrats maintained power in state and local elections.  ''it's really only been in the 1980s and accelerating in the 1990s, that white voters in the south have identified themselves more as republicans than as democrats,'' professor black said, adding, ''mr. wilder represents the persistence of democratic strength in states like tennessee.''  as recently as the early 1990s, democrats controlled every southern legislature. that changed in 1994, when voters in north carolina and south carolina elected republican majorities in their houses, and florida elected a republican majority in its senate, according to the national conference of state legislatures. today, republicans control both houses in florida, georgia, south carolina, texas and virginia, while democrats control those in alabama, arkansas, louisiana and north carolina. in mississippi and tennessee, democrats control the house and republicans the senate.  beginning in 2005, republicans held a one-vote majority in the tennessee senate, which temporarily grew to two votes when a democrat switched parties last year and then lost his seat last fall. but the republicans were denied the leadership two years ago when two republicans, micheal r. williams and tim burchett, voted for mr. wilder. mr. wilder then named mr. williams to the no. 2 leadership post in the senate. this time around, both senators voted for mr. ramsey, and it was a democrat, senator rosalind kurita, who played the pivotal role in mr. wilder's leadership defeat when she startled colleagues by voting for senator ramsey. ms. kurita said her decision was a ''vote of conscience'' because republicans had been undemocratically denied the leadership in 2005. although she said it was not a reward for her vote, this time it was ms. kurita who received the no. 2 position, speaker pro tem.  mr. wilder's exit from the speaker's chair is the end of an era of sorts, said mark byrnes, a political science professor at middle tennessee state university.  ''i think it does mark a close of a chapter of tennessee history,'' professor byrnes said, ''that more of the old-style, less partisan -- if not bipartisan -- politics is on its way out.''  professor black predicted that as older democrats left the southern political landscape, ''republicans will probably pick up more seats as we proceed through this decade.''  mr. wilder won his first senate race in 1959, served one term, then returned in 1967 to a political career that has continued uninterrupted. when first elected speaker, he pledged to shun ''petty'' partisanship, according to a newspaper account at the time. he fended off later challenges by enlisting the loyalty of republicans, who received plum committee assignments.  in recent years he seemed not to care about his image or the fact that politics is increasingly media-driven. he referred to himself in the third person and was known for his befuddling speeches. he ruminated regularly about ''the cosmos,'' and in 2002, famously rambled about ''bed devils'' during a speech.  but there has never been any doubt that he was a crafty politico who reveled in his position.  ''you've got to figure that he's wily as all get out if he's survived in this position for 36 years,'' said john g. geer, a vanderbilt university political science professor. ''he probably knows every nook and cranny of the state legislature.''  mr. ramsey praised his predecessor, but said the republicans' time had come in tennessee.  ''john wilder had done a good job for 36 years,'' he said, ''but leadership needed to change, and i think both sides would agree with that.''  last week, movers carted furniture from mr. wilder's former offices and stacks of boxes filled his new, more modest quarters, which he shares at least temporarily with another senator.  as mr. wilder walked slowly down the hall after a meeting, he waved off questions about his ouster and its meaning.  ''i'm a state senator,'' he said, one finger raised, ''and i'm going to be the best state senator that i can be.''  