room to improve   q. what can i do to disguise an ugly steel door?  a. in a word, accessorize.  that's what kerry beauchemin, a dealer in 20th-century furniture and lighting, did. when he moved into the tiny former warehouse on east 12th street in manhattan, it had been a while since the entry had been updated. and the rusty front door had to serve as the entrance to both his ground-floor shop and the living quarters upstairs, which he shares with lars nord, a fashion designer.  mr. beauchemin began by calling aaa glass plus, a local glazier, who replaced the ancient cracked transom with clear laminated security glass, top left, so mr. beauchemin could remove the window bars. (replacing the glass cost about $120, including installation; 347-219-1837.)  when the prehung steel door was installed, its frame was cemented in place, so there was no way to replace the door, despite the architectural mismatch. mr. beauchemin compromised by applying wooden strips along the frame to the top of the transom, to help marry the elements. he used pine scribed to fit snugly against the uneven adjacent bricks. (if he had wanted to make the frame look historically accurate, he could have added 1 1/2-inch-wide maple split rope molding; $32.99 for four feet from rockler, 800-279-4441 or rockler.com.)  to break up the plain painted-steel skin of the door, which had been covered with graffiti, mr. beauchemin imagined decorative panels. he researched victorian doors on the web with a google image search. with masking tape, he blocked out layouts of rectangular panels on the metal door, settling on a squat horizontal rectangle on the bottom and two slim victorian-inspired rectangles on top.  the panels could have been made with wood moldings, but wood seemed too delicate a material to withstand the nonstop parade of tables and chairs going in and out of the shop, to say nothing of street life in alphabet city. inspired by tricarico architecture and design's decorative metal moldings on the doors of astor wines & spirits, mr. beauchemin spent about $400 on 20-foot lengths of brass and aluminum moldings from the elevator cab components catalog of julius blum & co. (800-526-6293 or juliusblum.com).  in the company's new jersey warehouse, where he went to pick up the moldings, he used a hacksaw to cut them in half and carried them home on the train. (a friend with a car ferried him between the station in new jersey and the warehouse.) back in the east village, a contractor cut them to the proper lengths, then mounted them and primed and painted with ultra-high-gloss wine red from fine paints of europe. (janovic sells  3/4-liter tins for $34.99; www.janovic.com.)  the polished heritage house numbers on the left side of the door frame are from horton brasses ($3 each; 800-754-9127 or horton-brasses.com). they are the same as those seen on many west village town houses. but in a process that mr. beauchemin termed ''reverse archaeology,'' he made his new numbers look old by removing the lacquer and brushing them red to match the door frame.  the tiny old-fashioned-looking doorknob from baldwin hardware has an oil-rubbed bronze finish. a matching 13-inch letterbox plate from the same company covers the original mail slot, although the opening had to be enlarged. (both were purchased through kraft; 212-838-2214 or kraft-hardware.com.)  even after watching the whole process, which took about two months, some neighbors still asked if the revamped 1980s door, top right, was new. others assumed it must be antique, since it looked the very picture of the 1880s, with nary a swipe of graffiti to spoil the illusion.  