red sox owner close to a deal to join roush racing   a deal that would make john henry, the boston red sox' principal owner, a key investor in roush racing, a top nascar team, is nearing completion.  the nascar team owner jack roush said that henry's company, fenway sports group, could own up to 50 percent of the race team when the agreement, which he said was in the hands of both sides' lawyers, was done.  roush racing has scheduled an announcement to be made at a baseball park in daytona beach, fla., on feb. 14, four days before the daytona 500, which opens the nextel cup season. but roush did not say if that announcement would involve henry.  ''john henry is a great guy,'' roush said wednesday during a session with reporters at his team headquarters. ''anybody's that watched the red sox has been i think impressed with their tenacity and the way they've dealt with their frustration over a period of time, and they've been able to eventually prevail. he's behind that.''  roush has won two cup championships and has five teams competing in the premier series, including one led by the driver matt kenseth. roush said the partnership would give nascar and his team sponsors a greater presence in the lucrative but still untapped northeast market. he also said the infusion of cash would help roush racing compete with the arrival of toyota and the money he believes it will pour into the sport.  ''nobody is frightened,'' roush said. ''we're going to go to war with them, and they should give us their best shot because we'll be back and giving as good as we take.''  parcells surprises gibbs -- washington redskins coach joe gibbs said he was caught off guard by dallas cowboys coach bill parcells's decision to retire this week.  ''i have a lot of respect for bill,'' said gibbs, who was in concord to discuss prospects for the 2007 season for his nascar team, joe gibbs racing. ''i was surprised just mainly because i kind of felt like he had done a lot there, built a real good football team, but i think he probably made a good statement. they say he went in there and said, 'hey, this is 12 months a year,' which is true. it's every day.''  gibbs, who is coming off a 5-11 season, said he had no immediate plans to leave the game. he has two years left on his five-year contract he signed in january 2004.  ''i better not go 5-11 again, or we'll know where i'm headed,'' gibbs said with a laugh.  ford pulls out of champ car -- ford motor company said wednesday that it had withdrawn as a champ car world series sponsor.  ford had participated in champ car and its predecessor, cart, since re-entering open-wheel racing in 1992, first providing engines, then sponsorship.  ''we evaluate all of our racing programs on an annual basis and have decided that this sponsorship does not align with our current business objectives,'' said dan davis, director of ford racing technology.  davis said ford's withdrawal from champ car would not affect the other racing programs the company supports, including nascar's three major national touring series, the n.h.r.a. powerade drag racing series, the grand-am rolex sports car and koni challenge series, as well as several united states auto club-sanctioned series.  champ car uses engines made by cosworth, once a ford subsidiary but now owned by kevin kalkhoven and gerald forsythe, two of the four series co-owners. (ap)  auto racing  