jets along the hudson   turning stewart international airport in new windsor into the new york metropolitan area's fourth major air hub is a bold proposition that sets the mind racing at the grand possibilities, though it can also prompt a sinking feeling when one remembers the many ways that big ideas can fall flat.  for now, though, things look far more promising than ominous. gov. eliot spitzer was elected on a platform of change and with ambitious promises to bring jobs and growth upstate. a plan that would ease chronic delays and congestion at newark, laguardia and kennedy airports while stimulating economic growth in the hudson valley is a natural fit for the spitzer agenda.  the idea of expanding stewart airport has been talked about for years, but went nowhere in the pataki administration. new yorkers are lucky that the opportunity lingered long enough to be seized last week by the port authority, which plans to acquire the airport lease from the british company that put it up for sale last year.  stewart international is a fancy name for what is now a sleepy hub 60 miles north of new york city. but the site, a former air force base, is bigger than newark international. it is near two interstate highways, the new york state thruway and i-84, and the metro-north railroad. while stewart handles only a few hundred thousand passengers a year, the port authority expects that it could serve more than three million a year in about five years. most of these would be travelers living north and west of new york city, which would mean huge relief for the people and planes now using the three big-city airports, which have reached the bursting point and cannot expand any more.  stewart's vast promise carries many perils. in nearby newburgh, the economic activity spurred by the airport can be seen in a profusion of big-box stores and strip malls. growth is clearly better than stagnation, but the hudson valley region needs to manage its growth wisely, with particular attention to how an expanded airport might strain the transportation grid and encourage the deadly spread of sprawl.  governor spitzer wisely couples the words ''smart growth'' with his calls for spurring economic development. these principles -- which envision sensible, human-scale development not fatally wedded to the automobile -- must apply to the changes envisioned in new windsor.  as ned sullivan of the environmental group scenic hudson has warned in these pages, the unmatched beauty and peacefulness of the hudson river valley are more than a precious aesthetic resource. they are the region's economic mainstay. as long as it is done carefully, stewart international airport should be able to expand to its potential as a vital regional transportation hub, linked to the metropolitan grid by improved rail service and existing in harmony with its neighbors.  westchester  