2 face charge of murder in deaths of 5   one week after a couple and their three young sons were killed in their home here, the new york state police announced on friday that they had arrested two men, one a close family friend, and charged them with second-degree murder.  the arrests were the first major breakthrough in a case that has stunned fishkill, a quiet dutchess county town that before last week had had only two murders since 1978. on jan. 19, firefighters discovered the bodies of manuel a. morey; his wife, tina; and their three sons as they battled a blaze in the two-story house on route 82. investigators have said they believe that the fire was set to cover up the killings, but for days, the motive and the suspects had remained a mystery.  william v. grady, the dutchess county district attorney, said the two men were charged with second-degree murder, but only in the killing of mr. morey. officials said that mr. morey, 33, and the two men -- mark s. serrano, 29, of fishkill, and charles w. gilleo jr., 31, of hopewell junction -- were involved in drug dealing. the three had known each other for years and sold cocaine and marijuana, officials said.  ''the defendants' and the victim's relationship was through a drug connection,'' said capt. keith corlett of the state police at an evening news conference at troop k headquarters in millbrook.  captain corlett and other state police officials would not discuss a motive or any other details of the crime.  mr. grady said a grand jury will be presented with all the evidence from the case next week and may decide to charge them with the murders of the other family members.  mr. serrano and mr. gilleo appeared on friday before judge harold epstein in fishkill town court and were taken to the dutchess county jail.  ''this was certainly not your average homicide,'' said maj. william t. carey, commander of troop k. ''the morey family was attacked and viciously murdered within the confines of their home.''  major carey said investigators had no indication that anyone else was involved in the crime.  on friday morning, the police searched mr. gilleo's trailer on oak drive in hopewell junction. the residence is less than two miles from the moreys' home. neighbors said mr. gilleo, a roofer, has lived there for about a year and a half with his 3-year-old son, kenny. the white trailer with light-green trim was surrounded by state police vehicles and two black vans, and throughout the morning and afternoon investigators, who had obtained a search warrant, went in and out of the trailer.  neighbors said mr. gilleo and mr. morey, known as tony, had grown up together and had both attended john jay senior high school in hopewell junction. they were so close that mr. morey's sons called mr. gilleo uncle charlie.  ''charlie's family and tony's family were like family to each other,'' said jim parsons, 41, who lives on oak drive. mr. parsons and other neighbors said mr. gilleo was known for having raucous parties with loud music and for driving four-wheel all-terrain vehicles on oak drive with mr. morey. they would yell and scream on their a.t.v.'s, annoying neighborhood residents. ''he'd act whacked out,'' a neighbor, charlie barger, 40, said of mr. gilleo. ''every weekend.''  mr. serrano was arrested on thursday night, and mr. gilleo was arrested on friday morning. mr. serrano has no criminal record and mr. gilleo had been arrested a few times on minor offenses, officials said.  the fire at 203 route 82 was first reported at 3:15 a.m. on jan. 19 by a motorist who saw the flames. about 15 minutes later, a resident reported a car on fire on nearby lomala lane. the car, a 2003 kia, was registered to mr. morey's father but used by mr. morey, the state police said. mr. grady, the district attorney, said the police were led to mr. gilleo as a suspect in part because he lives a half-mile from the burned vehicle.  mr. morey was shot in the neck, according to the dutchess county medical examiner. tina morey, 30, had gunshot wounds in her head and chest. the youngest child, ryan, 6, died of head trauma. the other children, manuel, 13, and adam, 10, died of multiple stab wounds.  mr. morey was a self-employed fencer and mrs. morey had worked as a cashier at nearby gas stations. they appeared to have been financially struggling in recent months, neighbors said. they had not paid rent since nov. 1, and their landlord had begun eviction proceedings. peggy gersch, 47, a gas station clerk who had worked with mrs. morey, said mrs. morey told her about a week before the killings that she was leaving her husband and taking her children to virginia.  the two-story white house that the moreys had rented for about a year was cleared as a crime scene on thursday. later that evening, a yellow bulldozer began demolishing the home. nothing was left but a large pile of rubble.  a memorial service for the moreys is scheduled for noon on feb. 3 at fishkill baptist church.  