state leaders agree on plan to merge 2 ethics commissions and tighten lobbying rules   gov. eliot spitzer and legislative leaders announced a package of sweeping changes to state ethics policies on wednesday, but the measures were greeted with a mixed response from civic groups that have long pushed for even broader changes.  in addition to banning gifts and honoraria for public officials, the leaders proposed merging the state ethics commission, which has jurisdiction over the executive branch, and the temporary state commission on lobbying, which oversees lobbying, into a new commission on public integrity.  ''in one bold action, lawmakers have set new york on a path toward true integrity in government,'' mr. spitzer said in a statement.  but the new integrity commission will not include the legislative ethics committee, which is widely viewed as the weakest of the three existing entities, though changes are in store for it as well. and there was criticism that negotiations on the package were conducted largely in secret by mr. spitzer and the two legislative leaders, sheldon silver, the assembly speaker, and joseph l. bruno, the senate majority leader.  approval of the proposals by the full legislature is considered virtually certain.  under the plan, the new commission and the revamped legislative ethics body will be required to issue annual reports disclosing their investigations. currently, the legislative body, which will be renamed the legislative ethics commission, is prevented from disclosing much of its work. and for the first time, nonlegislators, appointed by the legislature, will serve on the legislative commission's board, where they will hold the majority of votes.  the announcement left open the fate of the lobbying commission's executive director, david grandeau, who is widely seen as one of the few aggressive investigators of government corruption in albany. mr. spitzer, who has had differences with mr. grandeau, said the merger was ''absolutely not'' an effort to remove him, and the governor's top spokesman, darren dopp, said he believed mr. grandeau would be the front-runner to lead the new commission.  ''i think he has been a maverick, i think he has been an affirmative force on many occasions, but on some occasions we have had sharp differences with him on the merits,'' mr. dopp said. one of those disagreements occurred in 2004, after mr. grandeau said state lobbying laws were so flawed that he would support throwing them out, a position mr. spitzer, then the attorney general, rejected.  blair horner, legislative director of the new york public interest research group, said the package contained ''things we've been seeking for years.'' but he said that he was ''very troubled'' by the merger of the two commissions. ''we think the lobbying commission does a good job, and if you're going to be tinkering with them doing a good job, that could be a problem,'' he said.  the measures announced on wednesday included rules that the governor has already applied to the executive branch, including bans on gifts of more than nominal value from lobbyists to public officials; on gifts from nonlobbyists if they are meant to influence officials; and on virtually all honoraria for statewide elected officials, agency heads and legislators.  the package also includes an antinepotism policy; prohibits nonlegislative employees from using their offices to solicit political contributions; requires that agency heads resign before becoming political candidates; bars elected officials or candidates from appearing in taxpayer-financed ads; and places new restrictions on lobbying by public officials who have left office.  the maximum penalty for violations will increase to $40,000 from $10,000.  the new integrity commission will have a 13-member board, with 7 members selected by the governor.  ''i believe that the governor -- i was elected for this purpose -- is uniquely accountable for the ethics and the function of the state agencies, the state authorities,'' mr. spitzer said.  