blogging for property sales   just as web listings transformed international real estate a decade ago, new internet tools are making even more information available -- and not just from real estate agents.  increasing numbers of potential buyers and investors are exchanging information in online forums, downloading video and audio reports and reading blogs for property news and opinion.  web activity by international real estate professionals and laymen started picking up only last year. sam taliaferro, an american developer in panama, now spends three hours a day on a half-dozen blogs that range from events in his development to general investment trends and life in the country.  ''i am reading anyway, and it only takes a few minutes to add commentary and post,'' he said.  mr. taliaferro is working with the national association of realtors in north america and with overseas property professionals in europe to expand his marketing and blogging activities throughout central america and mexico in the coming year.  kunle campbell started blogging from oxford, england, almost two years ago while researching his master's thesis at warwick university.  mr. campbell's study -- carrying out an online marketing strategy for property frontiers, an international real estate consultancy -- led him to set up an international property blog, www.overseaspropertymall.com, a kind of news diary, to help himself understand market dynamics.  after graduating from oxford, he began a more specialized blog -- bulgarianproperptyblog.blogspot.com .  ''i was priced out of the u.k. and looking for a bulgarian ski apartment as a first step on the property ladder, and also as an investment vehicle to jump-start my entry into the u.k. property market,'' said mr. campbell, 26, who was born in nigeria.  he found a place, but then decided it was not a good investment. now he is looking for a leaseback arrangement in france or an apartment in berlin, but he remains bullish on bulgarian real estate.  his blogs only recently started earning money, what he describes as ''a pittance'' from google advertising, but he is redesigning them this month to make room for banner advertising. he also plans to include commentary from a real estate researcher.  podcasting, a format that has skyrocketed in the past couple of years thanks to the popularity of apple's ipod, also are proving popular for information related to real estate.  ''podcasts are a huge medium at the moment for many media consumers who like to digest their information in other ways than reading,'' said felicity quigley, property editor at buy association, www.buyassociation.co.uk/property. the site was started in september as ''an impartial buying guide,'' with fact sheets, articles and surveys as well as podcasts.  ''a podcast, being audio, is quite personal. you can do other things on our site whilst listening or take it away to listen at your convenience,'' said ms. quigley, an australian journalist who ventured into international real estate herself six years ago, buying and reselling a florida condo to pay for her wedding.  ''it's about gaining your information the way you want it, when you want it, all to suit your needs, rather than the needs of the media provider,'' she said.  podcast topics range from cyprus to south africa and run for 30 to 45 minutes.  the host is adrian mills, a british broadcaster who owns property in thailand and dubai. he interviews international property experts, often agents or developers, but ms. quigley said topics are based on consumer demand rather than plugging advertisers.  the audio programs also are syndicated in an online network that includes aol.co.uk, tiscali.co.uk, rightmore.co.uk and propertyfinder.com.  ms. quigley said the site plans to add forums, blogs, competitions and polls in the next few months; video will be added during the summer.  video has started appearing on some real estate web sites, offering virtual walk-throughs, but many people around the world are excluded from making or from playing such videos by a lack of technical resources and english proficiency, according to tony grey, a former microsoft group manager.  for some months now, he has been developing software to make narrated videos available in several languages and to expand a multilingual web site called forsalebylocals.com, which he bills as a ''new real estate approach.''  ''we are building a web engine that can create personalized user experiences in multiple languages across dozens or hundreds of web sites,'' he said on a blog associated with the site.  the number of videos narrated in english, portuguese and spanish on for sale by locals has been increasing steadily since the beta version of the site was started in october.  the downloadable videos often have a home-video quality to them, but the accompanying commentary lets visitors know about the neighborhoods, whether a house roof can support a second floor, what amenities are included and agent contact information. few of the residential properties on the site cost more than $100,000 and some are priced as low as $20,000.  to date, most of the featured properties are in bolivia, where mr. grey owns property, but the site is to expand to costa rica this month. anyone can post interviews and narrated videos on the site, which does not charge for video titles, digitalization and conversion to internet format.  ''we're not trying to be agents,'' mr. grey said in a telephone interview. ''it's really about building community.''  