a strong run leads williams to the finals in australia   after two years of waiting and not much playing, serena williams is back in a final, and it happens to be in a grand slam tournament.  williams continued the most surprising run of her career thursday by defeating the 17-year-old czech nicole vaidisova, 7-6 (5), 6-4, in the semifinals of the australian open, which she won in 2003 and 2005.  in 2003, williams was the overwhelming favorite, having won the three previous grand slam tournaments. in 2005, she was still on the short list of contenders. this year, she was a true underdog, arriving here with a world ranking of 81, having played in only five tournaments in the last year.  now, after beating five seeded players, including the 10th-seeded vaidisova, she has put herself back at the center of the sport and guaranteed herself a place in the top 20.  ''i can't believe it; that's awesome,'' said williams, whooping it up on court in her postmatch interview. ''that was so fast.''  speedy indeed, but it took her more time than she would have liked to close out the powerful but erratic vaidisova, a 6-foot blonde who left europe to train at nick bollettieri's tennis academy in bradenton, fla., as a youngster, occasionally sneaking peeks at williams's training sessions there.  down by 1-5 in the second set, vaidisova closed the gap to 4-5, saving five match points, before williams finally closed out the 1-hour, 46-minute victory with a forehand volley winner.  williams will face the winner of thursday's second semifinal between top-seeded maria sharapova of russia and no. 4 kim clijsters of belgium, neither of whom has won this title.  as williams walked through the corridors of rod laver arena, minutes before walking on court, she saw her agent, jill smoller, who greeted her by clenching her fists and striking a muscle-beach pose and then giving her a roundhouse smack on the rear.  it was a sign of what makes williams tick. this surprising run in melbourne has been much more about desire than thorough preparation, much more about muscle memory and competitiveness than hard-won fitness.  once on court against vaidisova, it took time for williams to bare her teeth. despite the power being produced on both ends of the court, the pace was slow, almost reflective between the points, and the early games were long.  vaidisova's game plan was clear early: attack williams's second serves and try to move her -- not just side to side but back to front with the occasional drop shot. at the start, vaidisova applied these principles well, breaking williams's serve in the opening game after two deuces and then holding her own serve to go up, 2-0.  but williams, who looked sluggish at times early, began moving and serving more convincingly -- she would finish with 10 aces -- and adjusting to vaidisova's big returns.  vaidisova, taking huge risks, began to produce more errors than winners with her forehand, with its huge backswing and relatively low margin for error. williams broke her in the sixth game to get back on serve, but vaidisova would still get her chance to win the set when she broke williams again to go up, 5-4, and then served for the lead.  after saving a break point with an ace to get to deuce, she failed to put another first serve into play in the game, as williams saved a set point with a big forehand that vaidisova could not handle. it was soon 5-5 and then 6-6, with williams jumping out to a 5-1 lead in the tie breaker and then holding on to win the set after vaidisova rallied to 5-5, with williams serving consecutive double faults at 5-2..  vaidisova's pride and power in the tie breaker was foreshadowing for the second set when, apparently out of contention, she roared back, saving four match points on her serve at 3-5 and another on williams's serve at 4-5 before she closed it out.  ''almost did a gagarooni there,'' williams said. ''basically that means gagging. but she played some incredible points on match points, just got relaxed. she reminded me a little bit of myself.''  in late matches on wednesday, tommy haas and fernando gonzález took radically different paths to their upset victories.  haas had to win arguments with himself as well as win rallies, and had to fight through rough patches, swooping pigeons and even a match point before finally closing out nikolay davydenko of russia, the world's third-ranked player, in five sets.  gonzález, once again, could do little wrong, coming up with clutch serves and huge forehands on points big and small. he also kept the unforced errors that were once his trademarks to a minimum as he overwhelmed rafael nadal of spain, the second-ranked player, in straight sets.  though their methods and moods were disparate, the 10th-seeded gonzález and the 12th-seeded haas share a healthy perspective. they are both middle-aged for tennis stars -- haas is a 28-year-old german, gonzález a 26-year-old chilean -- and both have had to wait their turn for the sort of breakthrough that prodigies like nadal understandably take for granted.  now these two flashy players with one-handed backhands will share the spotlight with each other in the semifinals friday night at rod laver arena. in the other semifinal, top-seeded roger federer was to face andy roddick on thursday. sharapova, seeded no. 1, and clijsters, seeded fourth, both struggled yet prevailed on wednesday. clijsters, who has announced that this will be her last australian open, failed to control her power for significant stretches of the first and second sets, finishing with 62 unforced errors and 47 winners against the three-time champion martina hingis.  the last time haas was in the final four of a grand slam was here in 2002, the same year he topped out at no. 2 in the rankings, the same year his right shoulder failed him, requiring two surgeries and knocking him out of the game for more than a year and out of contention for the major prizes until now.  haas was the only man to push federer to a fifth set in any grand slam last year, doing so here in the fourth round. he later lost to davydenko in five sets in the quarterfinals of the united states open, paying the toll for the two five-set victories that preceded the match.  he could have gone down swinging again this time if davydenko had managed to return haas's kicking second serve on his one and only match point at 4-5, 30-40 in the fifth set. but davydenko went for too much and missed a backhand into the net.  haas missed his first chance to close out the match when serving at 6-5, 40-15 when davydenko successfully challenged a line call on a forehand that had been called out. but haas converted on his next match point, moving to his left and hitting his signature running backhand down the line. that left the baseline-hugging davydenko, usually the master of the full-swinging half volley, to lunge and miss as haas won, 6-3, 2-6, 1-6, 6-1, 7-5.  gonzález has become a familiar presence in the second week of grand slam events, but only early in the second week. he reached the quarterfinals at the 2002 united states open, the quarterfinals of the 2003 french open and even the quarterfinals in 2005 at wimbledon.  but it has taken until now for the huge-hitting, soft-spoken gonzález to take the next step into the semifinals, and he has done so in great style despite a meaty draw that required him to face lleyton hewitt in the third round and the supposedly red-hot james blake in the fourth. then came nadal, the tenacious left-hander.  ''i'm delighted, but it's not over,'' gonzález said after his 6-2, 6-4, 6-3 victory in which he never lost his serve, finishing with 41 winners, including 10 aces, and just 16 unforced errors.  nadal has been the best player not named roger federer for the last two seasons, but he was not at his best wednesday, finishing with seven more unforced errors than winners and failing to play the same sort of spectacularly effective defense that, along with his whipping forehand and combativeness, has defined him.  the reasons, according to nadal, were gonzález and the aftershocks of his marathon match with andy murray in the fourth round: a late-night five-setter that left him feeling soreness in his legs and pain in his upper left leg.  ''it was taking a lot of effort for me to run; i couldn't keep up with the rhythm of the match,'' nadal said.  tennis  