comforting cuisine, with a swiss touch   when i last had fondue, it was at a bustling place in geneva, where the supercilious waiter knew we were tourists and treated us accordingly. i declared then that i wouldn't be craving bread dunked in melted cheese for a very long time.  a very long time turned out to be 16 months. but this time i didn't have to endure an all-night flight and navigate a foreign language. pheasants landing, which has a swiss chef, andre gross, serves a fine fondue and several other tasty dishes as well.  the restaurant is owned by heinz keller, who closed his auberge swiss in berkeley heights in 2001 to open this party-friendly place in hillsborough the following year, according to vicky starace, the manager. set well off the road and surrounded by lawns, it is brightly lighted and easily seen from a distance. parking is plentiful, but first-timers are left wondering how to get in, because there are no signs directing diners to the entrance, in the back.  inside, the mood warms considerably. floors are honeyed wood, lighting is hearthlike, and rooms are home-scale.  a cheese fondue seemed equally cozy, and it was. spiked with kirschwasser (a cherry liqueur) and white wine, it was served with bread and apples for dipping, and did double duty as food and conversation piece. there's a proper way to stir fondue, with a queenly wave, a figure-eight motion, to keep it from sticking on the bottom, said one member of our party. then there was the discussion of etiquette surrounding the retrieval of food gone missing in the depths.  appetizers, which lent themselves to less social interaction, were successful anyway. they included a duck pâté with its fruity cumberland sauce and accompanying salad of celery and walnuts; roasted red peppers over fresh mozzarella, drizzled with a basil vinaigrette; and swiss onion soup, topped with emmenthal cheese.  the caesar salad was more compelling than the greek version, possibly because the parmesan used in the caesar was more noticeable than the feta in the greek. crab cakes were overly seasoned and overworked, with no visible chunks of meat; house-made spinach dumplings were delicately flavored, once they had been fished from their sea of sauce. the pasta encircling a pheasant filling in the ravioli special, however, was less than tender.  main dishes were more consistent, particularly the european specialties: the slab of tender sauerbraten, marinated steak, in brown gravy, accompanied by a heap of steaming hot spaetzle and marinated red cabbage; the hunter schnitzel, a tender disc of fried veal served with a typical burgundy-mushroom sauce, again with cabbage and spaetzle; and the wiener schnitzel, the fried veal without the gravy.  there were a few standouts among the game specials, which are offered in winter and change weekly. venison stew was delicious, the meat made tender by a red wine marinade and braising with mushrooms, pearl onions and bacon and served with more of the spaetzle. a close second was the game sampler, which included a sweetish smoked duck sausage infused with apple brandy, a tender venison loin and wild boar medallions wrapped in bacon.  a new york strip steak was nicely cooked as well, though the garlic mashed potatoes seemed rote next to the beautiful, golden-brown, crisp-on-the-outside, tender-on-the-inside rösti, a swiss version of hash browns that was enriched with bacon and onions. pheasant, however, was a disappointment, overcooked and dry on two separate visits.  among the many menu items i didn't try, the fish and chips, made with cod in a beer batter, is atop my list. the best bet for dessert is not the house-made apple strudel, which had a floppy crust and steaming filling, but mr. gross's walnut and caramel-fudge tart. order it when you place your meal order and ask the server to allow your piece to sit out of the refrigerator during dinner. that way the flavors enhance each other -- just the way the satisfying food at pheasants landing complements a winter evening.  pheasants landing  311 amwell road  hillsborough  (908) 281-1288  www.pheasantslanding.com  good  the space intimate and cozy, with room for large and small groups. complete wheelchair access.  the crowd convivial and casual; friendly, helpful servers; few children were seen, but they would feel at home here. tuesdays, wednesdays and thursdays in january and february are fondue nights; there is a strolling accordion player on thursdays.  the bar small wine list with solid choices, $21 to $70 a bottle; glasses, $5 to $6.50.  the bill lunch, about $9 to $10.50. dinner entrees, $10 to $24. all major credit cards accepted.  what we like swiss onion soup, roasted red peppers with mozzarella, caesar salad, wiener schnitzel, sauerbraten, hunter schnitzel, cheese fondue, swiss-style hash brown potatoes, venison stew, wild boar medallions, smoked duck sausage.  if you go lunch: tuesday to friday, 11:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. dinner: tuesday to thursday, 4 to 9 p.m.; friday and saturday, 4 to 10 p.m.; sunday, 4 to 8 p.m. reservations recommended on weekends. plentiful parking next to the building.  reviewed jan. 28, 2007  dining/hillsborough  