is dividing iraq our best way out?   to the editor:  in ''breaking the clinch'' (column, jan. 25), david brooks recognizes what most commentators still do not: that the source of civil disorder in iraq is not religion, politics or ethnicity. it is psychology.  when social order breaks down, the most brutal elements in society emerge and can be exploited by ''charismatic'' leaders to turn neighbor against neighbor in a seemingly endless cycle of atrocity and revenge.  but mr. brooks doesn't draw the obvious conclusion from his insight: that our staying in iraq, surge or no surge, is never going to ameliorate the violence. the best we can do is get out. and after withdrawal, concentrate on confining the violence within iraq by diplomatic means.  eventually, the death squads and suicide bombers will exhaust themselves, and then we should support the emergence of social order by providing aid for reconstruction.  alfred b. lewis, m.d.  new york, jan. 26, 2007  the writer is emeritus professor of clinical psychiatry, weill medical college of cornell university.  to the editor:  i believe that david brooks is helping to lead mainstream opinion to the only solution to the iraq war that all americans might embrace.  there will not be the military victory that the president still believes is possible. there will not be the political reconciliation that many democrats are calling for.  iraq is irretrievably broken, in part by the mismanaged american occupation following the invasion. our troops should risk their lives only to separate the warring tribes and prevent the ultimate genocide.  an american policy of soft partition of the shiites, sunnis and kurds combined with international guarantees for a limited central government is the only way forward.  irwin jones  sarasota, fla., jan. 25, 2007  to the editor:  the call by david brooks and others for a ''soft partition'' of iraq that would roughly divide the country into ethnic and sectarian enclaves faces two insurmountable obstacles.  except for the relatively homogenous kurd-dominated north, iraq's most populous cities and provinces are so heavily integrated between sunnis and shiites that even a soft partition of the country would take an impossible degree of logistical and motivational support among iraqis.  any attempt to divide the country along ethnic and sectarian lines would revisit some of the most shameful episodes of the 20th century: forced displacement and relocation of people on a huge scale and the ''ethnic cleansing'' of iraqi neighborhoods, towns, cities and provinces.  stability and prosperity are achievable in iraq only through creating and maintaining a durable iraqi national identity that cannot be sundered by competing sectarian and ethnic identities.  richard maher  providence, r.i., jan. 25, 2007  to the editor:  david brooks claims that the democrats are not acting in a humanitarian fashion when they request that we simply withdraw our troops quickly. he says that the united states would be responsible for endless sunni-shiite violence.  yet during the eight-year war between iraq and iran in the 1980s, the united states and other western countries covertly sold arms to both countries. this fueled many sunni and shiite war casualties.  if we are going to remain in iraq, we need to be told what it is that we hope to accomplish and how the extra soldiers will meet this goal.  jack fruchter  lawrence, n.y., jan. 25, 2007  to the editor:  david brooks asks, ''does the party that still talks piously about ending bloodshed in darfur really want to walk away from a genocide the u.s. is partly responsible for?''  the difference is that in darfur, we would come with clean hands and, one hopes, be welcomed. in iraq, our hands are bloody, so our continued presence there only intensifies the carnage.  irving feiner  nyack, n.y., jan. 25, 2007  