in new batch of 9/11 calls, confusion and courage   the city yesterday released 19 recordings of telephone calls made to 911 operators from the world trade center on the morning of sept. 11, 2001.  while the calls included a rich example of the valor of the day, they also showed that the emergency response agencies worked as separate fiefdoms, with callers having to tell their stories multiple times as they were transferred from police operators to fire dispatchers or to emergency medical service.  and no one in the 911 system passed along what could have been a life-saving order that had been issued by fire chiefs on the scene: to evacuate the buildings.  among the recordings was a phone call from the lobby of the south tower by a building employee, trying to get medical help for people who had been injured. the employee, larry boisseau, called 911 about six minutes before the building collapsed. in a calm voice, he gave explicit instructions to the operator.  ''yes, 2 world trade center, we have injured people in the lobby of the building, they need medical attention,'' mr. boisseau said. ''they're on the south side of the building. however, they're not going to be able to come in that way. they'll have to figure another way in here. because we've got debris all over the outside of the building.''  mr. boisseau worked as a fire safety director for o.c.s. security. as with just about everyone dialing 911 for help, after he explained the situation once, the first operator, a police department employee, tried to transfer his call to a dispatcher with the emergency medical service, a fire department employee.  while all calls come into the police department, the city has separate dispatchers for police, fire and medical response. each agency has its own computer system, and they are not integrated.  as mr. boisseau waited on the line, the emergency medical phone rang and rang. finally, the police operator stated the obvious: ''e.m.s. is not picking up.''  mr. boisseau replied, ''o.k., well, maybe you can keep trying. i gave you my information. i kind of got to get going. this is my job, fire safety.''  the operator signed off, wishing him luck. mr. boisseau, 36, died in the collapse of the tower.  the 19 recordings -- said by city officials to be the last that will be made public -- were released in response to requests made five years ago by the new york times under the freedom of information act. both the police and fire departments denied the requests, and the times sued the city. in 2005, the state's highest court ordered that the tapes be made public, with the voices of civilian callers edited out. last march, the fire department released its tapes. city officials initially maintained that the police department's portions of the tapes were not covered by the court order.  most of the tapes released yesterday were electronically edited to block the callers' voices. the full content of mr. boisseau's call was released because he was working as a fire safety officer, city officials said.  