episcopal leader taking over newark's flock   when the rev. mark beckwith becomes the 10th bishop to lead the episcopal diocese of newark on saturday, parts of the service will be read in english, spanish, french, korean and malayalam, an indian language, to reflect the tongues spoken by the diocese's 27,600 parishioners.  mayor cory a. booker of newark will read from the rev. dr. martin luther king jr.'s ''letter from birmingham jail.'' there will be gospel music, and a native american flute. katharine jefferts schori, the first woman to serve as presiding bishop of the national episcopal church, will give the sermon.  among those participating in the traditional laying on of hands will be a former newark bishop, john shelby spong, who found himself at the center of controversy when he ordained an openly gay man to the priesthood in 1989.  in an interview last week, mr. beckwith invoked aquinas, saying: ''diversity is the perfection of the universe, and this diocese approaches that. i like to think i'm pretty fierce in honoring diversity and the giftedness of everyone.''  the post is a homecoming of sorts for mr. beckwith, 55, who served 11 years in episcopal parishes in morristown and hackensack before leaving in 1993 for all saints church in worcester, mass.  the newark diocese, which includes 113 northern new jersey parishes, created a stir in the fall when nominees for bishop included a gay priest, who finished fifth in the voting.  the anglican communion, the worldwide body that includes the episcopal church, is deeply divided over the issue of gay bishops and the blessing of gay unions; the communion's nominal leader, the archbishop of canterbury, suggested a plan in june in which the episcopal church could choose to renounce gay bishops and the blessings of same-sex unions or risk losing full membership in the communion.  the rev. canon v. gene robinson, who is gay, was elected bishop of new hampshire in 2003.  in replacing bishop john p. croneberger, who is retiring, the newark search committee said it was looking for someone who could help its congregations grow, since its membership has decreased by almost half since 1970. mr. beckwith's church in worcester grew to 900 members from about 700 in his years there.  ''the average episcopalian invites someone else to church every 26 years,'' mr. beckwith lamented as he settled into his corner office at the episcopal house on mulberry street, a few blocks from the new jersey performing arts center, where the saturday ceremony will be held. ''we're quick to tell people about a movie or a restaurant we've enjoyed, but we're very hesitant in this part of the country to tell others where our souls get fed.''  newcomers to episcopal churches are often confused, he said, by crossword puzzle words used on sundays like chancel, narthex and undercroft; his former congregation provided a glossary for unfamiliar terms or avoided them. visitors also often worry during the service that they are standing when they should be sitting or sitting when they should be standing, mr. beckwith said, adding, ''it's a wonderful dance, and each congregation has its own dance.''  in his years in new jersey, mr. beckwith was known for social service work: he was a co-founder of a homeless shelter in morristown, and his church in hackensack held a monthly healing service for people with aids in the early days of the epidemic. in worcester, his parishioners held vigils after drive-by shootings.  ''i've always been deeply enriched by walking the streets and talking to people,'' he said.  the rev. geoffrey curtiss, the rector of all saints parish in hoboken, has worked with mr. beckwith for 20 years on developing urban ministries.  ''i think he's going to be able to address many of the issues our diocese is struggling with,'' mr. curtiss said. ''i think mark will bring a vision to the diocese that will help us look at fighting for the life of a congregation,'' by encouraging strong leadership and helping even small churches be strong participants in their communities.  the rev. sandye wilson, rector of the church of st. andrew and holy communion in south orange, called mr. beckwith ''a man of passion and compassion.''  ''my hope and dream is that he will bring that same passion and fervor for justice and fairness and peace to his work,'' she said, ''and that passion will be contagious, and he will ignite new fervor in our diocese for excited worship that transforms us and takes us into the world to transform the world.''  ms. wilson added, ''he takes the work we're given to do seriously, and he doesn't take himself seriously at all.''  