federer finds new ways to torment roddick   when the reinvigorated andy roddick stepped onto the court thursday to face his longtime tormentor roger federer, the consensus was that it was going to be a special evening at the australian open.  that turned out to be true, but not in the way that roddick, the 15,000 fans in rod laver arena or even federer would have imagined.  instead of an extended duel between federer, the world's top-ranked player, and roddick, one of his principal rivals, this hotly anticipated semifinal turned into an 83-minute ode to the brilliance of federer, and only federer.  by the end of the second set, it felt much less like a match and much more like a demonstration, as the top-seeded federer continued to break roddick's huge serve at will and found new and exciting ways to pass roddick, who was pushing forward to the net, with rapidly dimming conviction.  it was hardly a surprise that federer beat the sixth-seeded roddick. he has won 13 of their 14 matches, including all 5 of their grand slam matches, but he has never defeated him with this much ease or this much style on a big occasion. in comparison, federer's four-set victory against roddick in last year's united states open final was a cliffhanger. and when this 6-4, 6-0, 6-2 rout was done, the debate had been resolved on whether roddick's recent surge and recent exhibition victory against federer had closed the gap between the players.  ''look, it's just unreal,'' said federer, a swiss, who will face tommy haas of germany or fernando gonzález of chile in sunday's final. ''i'm shocked myself. i don't know what to say. the tournament is not even over yet. let's not get carried away. let me try to do it one more time.''  roddick, an american, was once more left to explain how it feels to face tennis greatness, and he did it with much more deftness than he demonstrated between the lines: offering mea culpas and compliments and, roddick still being roddick, quips. ''it was frustrating, you know it was miserable,'' he said. ''besides that, it was fine.''  it actually was fine until 4-4 in the opening set. after losing his serve in the opening game of the match, despite putting 5 of 6 first serves into play, roddick recovered to break federer back in the fourth game. but with roddick serving at 4-4, something ineffable clicked in federer's mind and game. at 30-15, federer hit a tremendous backhand passing-shot winner. at 30-30, roddick, just a little edgier, sliced a backhand approach shot into the net, and at 30-40, they both ended up at net, and federer won the battle of reflexes and touch to complete the break.  roddick did not know it then, but the match had turned for good. federer held serve at love to close out the set and proceeded to win 11 games in a row and 24 of 27 points at one particularly lopsided stage.  there were shots from the classic federer repertory: forehand flicks that dipped just out of roddick's reach, running one-handed backhand blasts that zipped down the line and sharply cut volleys that hit the rubberized green surface and quickly bounced twice. but there was also some exotica, none more memorable to those who take note (or notes) than the shot produced on the opening point of the fourth game of the second set.  roddick was behind, 0-3, when federer gave him a rare short ball. roddick moved forward and channeled all the frustration of the match's first 40 minutes into a forehand that landed near the baseline. most players would have gotten out of the way, but federer sprung to his left and hit a backhand reflex half volley on the move that traveled cross court for a clean winner while roddick stood gaping at the net as the crowd roared with a mixture of surprise and aesthetic delight.  but such sounds soon gave way to nervous laughter and anticipatory groans as it became clear that roddick had no answers to the tennis riddles that federer kept posing. roddick's frustration eventually gave way to anger, and he could not even get that quite right. he smashed a ball into the stands after losing his serve to fall behind by 0-5. he accidentally lost his grip on the racket in the process, sending it hurtling toward a photographer courtside and earning him a code violation for unsportsmanlike conduct.  even the new electronic line-judging system that federer dislikes was seeing things federer's way. he challenged four times and was correct four times. he even managed to transform a missed serve into an ace with a challenge while serving at 2-1, 15-0 in the final set. roddick, who was convinced the ball had been out, flipped his racket over, stuck the butt against his temple and pretended to pull the trigger.  it was that sort of evening, and it stayed that way as statistical marvels piled up, with federer converting on all seven of his break points against one of the world's most feared servers and with federer reaching his seventh consecutive grand slam final, tying a record set in 1934 by the australian jack crawford.  ''there is nothing you can really do against someone like that; you just have to shake his hand and say, 'too good,' '' said the australian great rod laver, who attended the match in the arena that bears his name and congratulated federer in the locker room afterward.  tennis  