paid notice: deaths   rubin, leonard   rubin--leonard. our cherished friend, mentor and leader, what a difference your life has made to the community, the world and to our class of 25! we treasure the many memories we share with wife and true partner syril, adoring children, loving family, and a multitude of admiring and appreciative friends. with heartfelt sadness we will ever miss lenny's unique and generous spirit, courageous leadership and exceptional wisdom. love always, eleanor and ed epstein, sandra and arnold gold, bill lippman, barbara and norman seiden  $(6$)rubin--leonard. it is with profound sadness that the jcc on the palisades mourns the loss of leonard rubin, a great friend and remarkable man, who was one of the visionary founders of the jcc and epitomized the very essence of a world jewish leader. a man of many passions, mr. rubin demonstrated extraordinary devotion to jewish education and to jewish continuity. he initiated important efforts that touched the lives of people around the world. a man of intellectual vibrancy, practical wisdom and deep ethical commitment, lenny was an extraordinary leader, and for more than half a century, he was dedicated to promoting jewish scholarship, identity and culture. he accomplished everything he set out to do with far-reaching and innovative results. a leader of heroic magnitude, leonard served the jcc in many capacities. he was a founding member, president from 1966-1970, chairman of the board of trustees, an active board member for decades and a driving force behind many jcc programs. his generous philanthropic support has been immeasurable and will never be forgotten. when the jcc sought to build its current facility in tenafly, leonard led the capital campaign which transformed a vision into reality. believing that jewish education was paramount, he established the first judaic-scholar-inresidence program at our jcc which now serves as a model for jccs across the nation. other programs that lenny and his wife, syril, generously established and supported include the nursery school, which bears their name, the adult reach center for seniors with alzheimers and dementia, a teen scholarship to israel and the annual jcc rubin run. leonard was also instrumental in countless jewish organizations. he served as president of the world confederation of jewish community centers, as a board member of the jcc association, where he received the prestigious community builders award. he also served on the board of directors of shalom hartman institute in jerusalem, as chairman of the board of the jewish home and rehabilitation center, as president of the jewish home at rockleigh, as a president of uja of englewood and he was a driving force for the establishment of what is currently known as the uja nnj. he was a recipient of numerous awards, including the brotherhood award of the national conference of christians and jews, the appeal for human relations award from the american jewish committee, the nj y camps harry s. feller memorial award, and the anti - defamation leagues torch of liberty award. our dear friend lenny, will be remembered for his extraordinary generosity and commitment to the jcc on the palisades, the jewish community, the community at large and for inspiring generations of leaders. he possessed the rare gift of greatness and left an indelible mark on all our lives. we send our sincerest condolences to his wife syril, his children, daniel, the current president of the jcc on the palisades, robert, toby, leslie and mark, his 12 grandchildren, jed, jamie, tali, sharon, rebecca, rachel, julie, alison, sadie, samantha, dora, jacob and one great-grandchild, judah. he was deeply loved and will be sorely missed. may his memory be for a blessing. funeral service will take place sunday, january 28, at 11:00 am at the jcc on the palisades, 411 east clinton avenue, tenafly, nj. 201-569-7900. eleanor epstein, chair, board of trustees avi lewinson, executive director  $(6$)rubin--leonard. the board and staff of the arnold p. gold foundation mourn the loss of our former trustee, leonard rubin. lenny was a man who cared about repairing the world and bringing greater compassion to medicine. we extend our condolences to syril and the rubin family. jordan cohen, m.d. chair sandra o. gold, edd president  $(6$)rubin--leonard. the officers and members of the board of governors of the jewish home at rockleigh, russ berrie home for jewish living, note with profound sorrow the passing of our past chairman of the board, past president, long standing board member, devoted supporter and very dear friend, leonard rubin. lenny was a critical driving force in the development of the jewish home. his foresight, counsel, and ability to involve others in our mission of providing for elders in our community resulted in the creation of our home. an extraordinary man who exhibited a profound commitment to countless organizations and causes in the local, national and international jewish communities, he will be missed by many. we extend our deepest sympathy to his beloved wife, syril, his children, daniel, robert and leslie, his grandchildren, great-grandson and his entire family. lenny's legacy includes the many fine institutions he conceived, help found and stewarded, along with his tireless philanthropy. may his memory be for a blessing. angelica berrie, chairperson of the board ary freilich, president charles p. berkowitz, executive vice president  $(6$)rubin--leonard. the ultimate gentleman, our idol, our travel partner and our leader who taught us so much. lenny, our community still needs you and will always be with you. you made a big difference to so many and made the world a better place. charles and lynne klatskin  $(6$)rubin--leonard. the officers, trustees and staff of uja federation of northern new jersey mourn the passing of leonard rubin, whose visionary leadership and philanthropy helped to found and build our jewish community's leading institutions, including the jcc on the palisades, the jewish home at rockleigh, and the uja federation. everyone who had the privilege of knowing lenny will miss his leadership, activism and wise counsel. we are comforted in knowing that we live in a thriving jewish community because of him. we extend our deepest sympathy to his wife, syril, his three children, daniel, robert and leslie, and the entire rubin family. dan silna, president. howard e. charish, executive vice president.  