redemption in australia   it was the morning before serena williams's most unexpected grand slam final, and she was sitting in a chair in the australian sun for an interview, speaking slowly, laughing frequently and enjoying the sharpest turn for the better in a career full of switchbacks.  there have been dark moments aplenty in the decade since she became the second member of her family to become a tennis star: the divorce of her parents, the murder of her half-sister yetunde price, the injuries and trials, both literal and figurative, that have helped take her eye off the ball and the game's most prestigious trophies.  she concedes, without offering details, that she has had to wrestle her way through depression during the two years since she won her last major title at the australian open in 2005.  ''i was down and out, four feet under, almost six, but came back fighting,'' she said.  that is the way, with rare exceptions, that she plays the game, too, and over the last 12 days, she has given the tennis world a six-round reminder of what made her one of the most dominant figures in the history of the sport.  despite arriving here ranked 81st, she has beaten five seeded players, ripping past some, like jelena jankovic, in straight sets and inching past others, like nadia petrova and shahar peer, by shrieking and clawing her way through inconsistency to play the big points better.  ''i just feel definitely more calm, and i think being no. 81 helps,'' she said. ''i have no pressure to win any of the matches, from my first match to this match, and i think the moment i put pressure on myself is when i get a little nervous. but i'm still able to come through.''  williams, 25, has saved the toughest opponent for last. none of the six players she has beaten here thus far has reached a grand slam final. but the woman looming across the net on saturday afternoon will be the top-seeded maria sharapova, who stunned williams in the 2004 wimbledon final, when sharapova was only 17. she is the reigning united states open champion as well.  ''i am a true underdog this time and regardless of what happens, this is not the end of the story,'' said williams, who has split her four previous matches with sharapova. ''there is so much more that is going to happen this year and in the years to come.''  williams and the unexpected go hand in racket, and thursday's hitch came not only from the result. there were allegations from an australian television station that a young friend of hers in her box was using his wrist watch to reflect light in the eyes of her opponent, nicole vaidisova. but vaidisova said she had noticed nothing, tournament officials said they were not investigating and after repeated questions and denials, williams said she had had her fill of the topic. ''it's just completely outrageous,'' she said at news conference friday. ''as of now, i'm not answering any more questions about a god-dang watch.''  she has not played sharapova since the semifinals of this tournament in 2005. it was one of the better matches in recent memory, and williams won it, on her way to the title, by saving three match points, including one that was saved when sharapova missed an ace by no more than an inch.  ''obviously i hope that never happens again; once was enough,'' sharapova said on friday about squandering match points. ''we've always had pretty good battles, exciting matches, but i definitely enjoy the fight against her.''  unlike most in melbourne and elsewhere, sharapova said she was unsurprised by williams's revival. ''sometimes people play their best tennis when they don't expect their best tennis to come out,'' she said. ''it's happened to me.''  what makes a sharapova-williams matchup intriguing is not just all that combined star power packed onto one green rectangle; not just the fact that it matches the game's once-dominant personality against the game's now-dominant personality. what is really intriguing is the clash of wills.  ''i've always been mentally strong; i think probably mentally stronger than a lot of players on the tour,'' williams said.  sharapova, 19, is the only player in the sport who projects the same sort of need to win as williams. like williams before her, that grunt-punctuated desire, combined with her phenomenal baseline power, has not helped tennis spectators warm to her worldwide.  though logic dictates that sharapova is a strong favorite based on her body of recent work, she has not been at her most imperious here. she was two points from defeat in the heat of the first round against the unseeded camille pin of france, and she has struggled with her serve, double-faulting twice on game points against anna chakvetadze in the quarterfinals and finishing with eight double faults in her otherwise impressive straight-set victory over kim clijsters in the semifinals.  williams will surely attempt to apply plenty of pressure on saturday with her returns, but the bigger questions are whether williams can maintain her clutch serving (she has smacked 57 aces here) and minimize the mistakes against the depth and pace that sharapova generates from the baseline. williams actually feels she was playing better at the united states open last year, where she was beaten by amélie mauresmo in the fourth round in a three-set match in which she was oddly muted down the stretch.  but instead of building on her form with more tournament play, she did not play an event the rest of the season. she said she was distracted by an impending court case, in which she, her sister venus and father, richard, had to defend themselves against a breach-of-contract lawsuit.  despite playing only four tournaments in 2006, she said she needed to focus on training, not competition. it has worked despite a lapse in her regimen caused by the trial, which ended after more than five weeks on dec. 21. but even in less than optimum shape, she has proved that her game is still a major factor in a major, and she re-emphasized that one of the moments that helped lift her spirits was her first visit to africa, in november, when she traveled to ghana and senegal.  ''i saw things there that people were going through and had been through and saw a lot of things my ancestors went through,'' she said. ''and it couldn't be worse than that, literally. i thought about that, and i think that helped me out a lot.''  tennis  