taking another global step, minaya leads group to ghana   on a continent teeming with untapped potential, on a sandy field that doubles as a soccer pitch, a cadre of baseball officials and former players hope to discover the next breeding ground for major league talent. but first, they have to teach its children how to play.  as a yankees contingent travels to china next week to establish a new stronghold for baseball, another group, headed by mets general manager omar minaya, will travel to ghana, a west african nation, for a four-day goodwill tour.  there, they will donate baseball equipment, survey land for the future construction of fields and inaugurate a four-team little league, the precursor, george ntim hopes, for an academy to serve as the center for baseball development for african nations.  ''not everyone's going to play soccer, not everyone's going to play tennis, so there has to be another sport for them,'' ntim, the president of the african development foundation, which organized the tour, said in a telephone interview. ''why not baseball?''  baseball enjoys a nice presence in the far east, a burgeoning one in europe and strong footing among caribbean nations, but it is in the early stages of increasing visibility in africa. in the past two years, it has sent coaches to 10 countries to instruct players, develop fledgling leagues and help to build fields. south africa was the continent's sole representative at last year's world baseball classic, going winless in three games, and it is by far the most advanced african baseball nation.  but ghana enhanced its image as a world-class sporting competitor during last summer's soccer world cup, its first. favoring a free-flowing, athletic style, ghana defeated the united states and advanced out of pool play. minaya watched that game and recalled wondering whether that athleticism could transfer to a baseball field.  ''just look at the athletes and you can see the talent they have there,'' minaya said last night. ''this is about giving kids the opportunity to play baseball and to see if they'd like to continue playing.''  for ntim, a ghana native who moved to the united states in 1982, organizing a trip to his homeland was a natural inspiration. through his job as the director for guest services and relations at the marriott marquis in manhattan, ntim has befriended scores of baseball players and officials. he began discussing the trip with minaya in july and started ironing out the details in december. ntim said the ghanaian government had made strides recently in allocating additional funds and resources to baseball.  ''not much attention has been paid to baseball in the past, but there's baseball fever in ghana right now,'' ntim said.  the contingent, which also includes bob watson, baseball's vice president for on-field operations; the hall of famer dave winfield; the former manager dusty baker; and the former pitcher dave stewart, is scheduled to arrive in accra, the capital, on feb. 2. the next day, it will distribute balls, bats and gloves; conduct a clinic; and introduce the little league. major league baseball will ship the equipment, and the mets will send t-shirts, caps and bobblehead dolls.  from sending nine players from their 40-man roster to the world baseball classic to playing regular-season games in japan and mexico, the mets have long fashioned themselves as champions of globalizing baseball. if all goes well in ghana, minaya and ntim want to visit other african nations, including perhaps uganda and liberia.  ''we have to gauge the talent and gauge the appetite and then go from there,'' minaya said. ''we don't know what to expect, but it's exciting for us to take the first step.''  baseball  