china says its economy grew by 10.7% in 2006, with little inflation   in the last 30 years, no major economy in the world has grown at the speed of china's, and no other country has been able to do it year after year, for over a decade.  and on thursday china did it again, saying that its economy grew by a whopping 10.7 percent in 2006, the fastest pace in more than a decade, with only modest signs of inflation.  ''this is pretty impressive,'' said shen minggao, an economist in beijing for citigroup. ''i'd say 2006 was about the best year in a decade -- fast growth and low inflation.''  the 10.7 percent growth recorded in 2006 was the fourth consecutive year of double-digit economic growth and china's strongest year since 1995, when the economy grew 10.9 percent.  the economic miracle -- fueled by soaring exports and huge investments in buildings, roads and cities -- goes on even in the face of frequent warnings from government officials and private specialists about asset bubbles, excessive bank lending and an overheating economy.  ''right now, the economy is growing at the upper limits of what is acceptable,'' said li lianfa, an economist at peking university. ''the government is facing a lot of challenges.''  chief among them are balancing the supersize growth and heavy investment, and trying to distribute the riches as evenly as possible.  analysts say the government is determined to keep the economy revving, but is also wants to prevent anything from spoiling the party before 2008, when beijing is to play host to the olympic games.  to help cool the economy, beijing has raised interest rates and pressured banks to temper lending, with some results. fixed-asset investment slowed in the latter part of last year, for instance, and economic growth in the last months of 2006 slowed from a feverish second-quarter pace of 11.5 percent.  many economists are now forecasting that beijing will take additional steps, possibly raising interest rates again early this year.  beijing is also under pressure to allow the chinese currency, the yuan or renminbi, to appreciate more quickly against the dollar, in the hope of easing the country's trade surplus with the united states.  the yuan has strengthened somewhat against the dollar, climbing to about 7.8 yuan to the dollar, from 8.26 yuan in 2005.  economists have warned that if the yuan does not continue to appreciate against the dollar and other major currencies, china could face protectionist action, which could pose an even more serious threat to economic growth.  these are the trials of a country where everything is red hot -- foreign investment, trade, real estate and stock prices, which climbed more than 130 percent last year and have soared even higher in the opening weeks of this year.  although inflation, driven largely by higher food prices, jumped to 2.8 percent in december, from 1.9 percent in november, analysts say they are not overly concerned about inflationary pressure. the core inflation number, excluding volatile items like food, was modest, with inflation rising just 1.5 percent in 2006.  but other economists say that accelerated growth often leads to higher prices, and that there could be a lag before stronger signs of inflationary pressure are seen.  among the government's chief worries has been overinvestment in certain sectors of the economy, like real estate. stock prices are another concern. after dipping to their lowest level in six years in mid-2005, stock prices in shanghai have nearly tripled in a record-breaking run.  the central bank said that last october, for the first time in five years, the bank savings of chinese citizens slid from the month before as more money went into the stock market. an abrupt change in the market, analysts say, could create havoc.  while the stock run-up means that chinese companies can once again raise money with stock offerings in the domestic market rather than relying on the hong kong stock market, huge risks remain. analysts have long derided the chinese market as a gambling den crowded with companies using suspect accounting.  in yet another effort to tame the economy, the government raised the banking reserve requirement ratio last month, to help restrict lending. and several economists say they expect interest rate increases in the coming months.  but not all specialists share the view that china's booming economy is in any jeopardy. one such contrarian is jonathan anderson, an economist at ubs, who says his firm's internal figures show that china's economic growth has actually moderated over the last few years. those figures show that the chinese economy was growing even faster, at closer to 12 percent, not the 10 percent the government reported.  so the new numbers, he says, are not so alarming.  ''this really shouldn't be an issue for the authorities,'' he said. ''what you're seeing is a very stable economic situation with very little inflation.''  