seeing future of britain, and blair, in the snow   as a subplot to the annual rite here of the world economic forum, there is what might be billed as the little britain show, or, perhaps more diplomatically, britain's big picture writ small in the snows of switzerland.  here, for instance, is david cameron, the conservative opposition leader, projecting himself for the first time on to this particular world stage of tycoons, politicians and power brokers as a spokesman on global issues as varied as climate change and terrorism. his appearance, unusual for british opposition leaders, was part of ''preparing for government,'' he said thursday.  if he sees himself as a national leader in waiting, so, too, does gordon brown, the chancellor of the exchequer and presumptive heir to tony blair, here to talk about youth and education, though not in the same rooms as the prime minister himself.  then there is the question of whether mr. blair, due in davos on friday and saturday, will find a niche to enable him to return here in the future in something resembling the postpolitical mode of bill clinton -- a player for the prestigious proscenium where big-bucks philanthropy and private foundations mingle to address the plight of africa and the struggle against aids.  ''he might not find it as easy as in the united states,'' said a british banker who spoke on condition of anonymity because he did not wish to give offense. ''there is not the same culture or money in britain for that kind of foundation or that kind of philanthropy as there is in the united states.''  mr. blair has said he will leave office sometime this year, but he has not said when. the latest betting is that it could be midsummer, with an announcement of his intentions sometime before that.  the post-blair era, of course, is not something that will be decided at davos, although the prime minister will share a stage on friday with such luminaries as bill gates, president thabo mbeki of south africa and bono, the politically active rock star -- all potential partners in his postpremiership career.  but mr. blair is not giving any clues about where he will be circulating his résumé. ''he gave the impression of someone who is not planning to go anywhere for some time,'' said an influential british executive who met mr. blair recently. indeed, the official policy of 10 downing street, as articulated by mr. blair's aides, is that he is too busy being prime minister to start job hunting.  when he does, though, he will be contemplating the kind of work that will pay off a big mortgage on a $7 million house in central london and maintain a globe-trotting existence. ''that will be no problem,'' the banker said. ''the american lecture circuit and a book advance should take care of things.''  but mr. blair is expected to seek something beyond money. at 53, he is not contemplating retirement. the assumption is that he will seek a global role at the intersection of private money and public policy. there have been rumors -- unconfirmed -- that he could also seek a high-ranking position in the energy industry.  mr. blair has cast himself in office as a champion of africa and a foe of global warming, though not everyone back home is quite prepared to grant him the kind of status that mr. clinton and mr. gates -- and certainly bono -- have carved out for themselves on the international circuit.  consider, for instance, alistair beaton, a british playwright whose feature-length drama was broadcast on british television this month, portraying a mr. blair who is reluctant to leave office, snubbed by his former friends and finally facing deportation to the hague to face trial on war-crimes charges.  was that not perhaps a little cruel a portrait, mr. beaton was asked in a telephone interview in london. ''it's not as cruel as the invasion of iraq,'' he replied. mr. beaton has spoofed other politicians and does not find his actions at all in poor taste. ''wars are in bad taste, not satire,'' he said. he acknowledged that mr. blair's destiny was not likely to resemble his play, titled ''the trial of tony blair.'' ''in the real world i'm sure blair is lining up a job that is influential, full of prestige and worth a lot of money,'' he said.  there is no shortage of contacts here at davos. mr. cameron pointed out at a meeting with reporters on thursday that in less than 24 hours, he had met the prime ministers of pakistan and egypt and mohamed elbaradei, the chief of the united nations' nuclear regulatory agency.  mr. cameron promised a departure from mr. blair's approach, not just from his military policies, but also his dealings with the united states. ''it is good that tony blair has had a special relationship'' with america, he said. but in the prime minister's encounters at the white house, ''it has been questionable whether he asked the right questions and put forward the right views.''  memo from davos  