business of fun is transacted on the convention floor   wandering the teeming halls of the san diego convention center on friday afternoon, the former professional surfer peter king said of the goings-on at an action sports trade show, ''i'd say it's a lot more fun than a dell computer convention.''  it is easy to see why. on thursday and friday, scores of bikini-clad models, tattooed and scarred skateboarders and tanned surf bums plied their wares or promoted their sponsors' brands. from thursday to sunday, more than 18,000 people are expected to pass through the convention center's doors for an event that helps shape the future of the billion-dollar industry.  to some, like king, the 26-year-old show is a ''bro-fest'' that offers a chance to catch up with old friends and talk about future video or broadcasting projects. to others, like tina novak of freestyle audio, it is a chance to share business cards and sell the waterproof billabong soundwave mp3 player.  ''it's got 40 hours of battery life and can go 10 feet underwater,'' she said, demonstrating a line of wet-suit and life-preserver tops that hold the music machine.  when asked why a surfer would want a music player, she said that runners have been listening to their headphones for years. ''it's like starring in your own surf video,'' she said.  a few booths away, jeff kelley, founder of the sanuk sandal company and a lifetime san diego surfer, showed off a new line of shoes from an elaborate booth, along with pictures from celebrity magazines showing his company's sidewalk surfer shoe being worn by julia roberts's husband, danny moder, and brad pitt.  sanuk made a splash a few years ago with a turf-covered shoe. ''it's the ultimate white-trash sandal,'' the shoe's sales tag read. ''made outta real indoor-outdoor carpet. just like your lawn.''  ''that's our flagship,'' kelley said. ''people were like, 'what the heck are you thinking?' but folks like fred siegel and louis boston picked it up.''  in addition to surfers and professional climbers, kelley also sponsors the ultimate fighting champion jason miller, known as mayhem.  ''he text-messaged me today,'' he said, pointing to his cell phone, ''and said that his girlfriend told him, 'look honey, brad pitt's wearing your shoes!' ''  in the skateboarding corner, a series of ramps and rails beckoned new-school pros who skated alongside old-school heroes like tony alva.  near the halfpipe, the entrepreneur jim bell showed off his skateboard ramp kit. ''my dad told me, 'i can't believe you're making a living doing this,' '' he said. ''next week, i'm going in to hook up with the guys from the 'pimp my ride' tv show. we're going to build a skateboard ramp off the back of a hostess bread truck.''  out among the surfers, the most obvious change to the sport has been the new surfboard designs and materials since the 2005 closure of gordon clark's clark foam surfboard blank factory -- a day the surf journalist ben marcus termed blank monday.  in the absence of clark's low-cost and reliable blanks, which were rough polyurethane foam boards later shaped and sanded, traditional surfboards have become more expensive. but a myriad of new materials -- like carbon fiber, epoxy and a portable inflatable model by c4 waterman of hawaii -- are rapidly filling the void. matt biolos, founder of san clemente's lost, proudly displayed new epoxy blanks, which cost several hundred dollars, and new machine-molded carbon fiber shapes that sell for $1,200.  ''since the loss of clark foam there's been some confusion,'' biolos said. ''some surfers don't really know what to buy into. but there's so much that the cream is going to rise to the top in the next 24 months.''  in the hobie booth, robert august, 61, a surfing legend, said he had shaped more than 30,000 boards in his lifetime. covered with foam dust, he said there was still something special about the hand-shaped polyurethane and fiberglass surfboards.  ''the surftech is a great product,'' he said, ''but you get a nine-foot robert august model and there are 245 other guys riding exactly the same board. it's got no personality. with a hand-shaped board, no two machines are ever the same.''  action sports  