council panel interrogates kelly on police treatment of blacks   city council members questioned commissioner raymond w. kelly yesterday for more than three hours on diversity in the police department, standards for undercover operations and perceptions of the police's unequal treatment of black new yorkers.  the questioning came at a hearing, the first in a series scheduled after the shooting of sean bell, an unarmed black man who was killed in queens in a hail of police bullets on his wedding day in november.  ''there remains a problem with treatment of african-americans in this city,'' councilman david yassky said. ''too many african-american new yorkers feel that they are at risk or that their family members are at risk of mistreatment, whether it be to be stopped without reason or to be victimized by excessive force.''  mr. kelly, whose appearance before the council panel was billed as a hearing on the department's training of specialized and undercover officers, said the department is more diverse than ever because of the hiring of thousands of recruits in recent years. he also said that he had been meeting with diverse communities citywide to build stronger relations. he acknowledged the need to deal with the perception of mistreatment.  ''it's something we have to continue to train for,'' he said.  mr. kelly said the department's training program is ''among the best that there is,'' noting the police academy's recent accreditation by the commission on accreditation for law enforcement agencies. new york, he said, is the only big city police department to have received that recognition.  in the hearing's most stinging remarks, councilman charles barron again called for mr. kelly's resignation while asking the commissioner about several police shootings.  ''i ask that you do the graceful thing and resign; i say that because you have allowed this to happen,'' he said, referring to the death of mr. bell, 23, on nov. 25.  of the five officers involved in the shooting, two are white, two are black and one is black and hispanic.  councilman peter f. vallone jr. and others distanced themselves from mr. barron's remarks. ''you have our support and the support of the speaker,'' he said to mr. kelly, remarking on behalf of speaker christine c. quinn, who had left the meeting after about an hour.  a queens grand jury continued hearing evidence yesterday in the bell case to determine whether the officers involved will face criminal charges.  philip e. karasyk, a lawyer for one officer involved, a 28-year-old undercover detective who fired first, criticized the council's decision to hold the hearing.  ''the timing of today's city council hearing as well as the so-called town hall meetings is an unprincipled and pernicious attack on the integrity of the grand jury process,'' he said. ''the sole effect is to deny these police officers a fair and impartial grand jury investigation.''  also yesterday, joseph guzman, 31, one of the two men who was wounded in the shooting that killed mr. bell, left jamaica hospital medical center, where he had been undergoing rehabilitation.  he traveled to harlem from the hospital by limousine to be a guest on the rev. al sharpton's nationally syndicated radio program, ''keeping it real,'' where he described the chaotic moments surrounding mr. bell's death.  mr. guzman said that he and his two friends were inside a nissan altima, and he wound up on top of mr. bell during the shooting. ''s, i love you,'' he recalled telling mr. bell, after the shooting stopped. ''he said, 'i love you, too.' but he stopped moving. he stopped talking. i called out to him: 's! s!' ''  mr. guzman also said: ''we thought we were getting robbed. that's what we thought all the time. they started shooting immediately. immediately. nobody said they were the police.''  mr. guzman called mr. bell's death a murder. ''i'm not anti-police; i don't believe all police are bad,'' he said. ''but the police that night were wrong. they committed a crime. let them be accountable for it.''  