the irish, young in 'old europe,' strain schools and housing   moving to a newly built seaside housing development north of dublin seemed an obvious decision for katrina dooley and her partner.  fast-rising property prices in the center of the city allowed them to trade their one-bedroom apartment for a three-bedroom, red-brick house in laytown, a coastal enclave near here, within earshot of crashing waves. central to the couple's calculation was being able to concentrate energy and attention on their child, ella, 5.  the problem was that hundreds of other people had the same idea, leaving a local school scrambling for space, to the point of using a basketball court as a classroom.  while many countries in europe grapple with the difficulties associated with aging populations, ireland and a few others face the opposite problems -- and advantages -- from an excess of youth.  crowded schools, a labor crisis in child care and strained infrastructure in new commuter areas like laytown are among the burdens faced by ireland and other european countries at the young end of the age range.  relatively low health care costs and a quick transition to a high-technology economy have proved to be blessings.  ''younger countries face different pressures from the rest of europe,'' said claude giorno, an economist in paris who monitors spain at the organization for economic cooperation and development, a group of 30 relatively prosperous nations based in paris. ''common themes are things like a shortage of educational facilities and the doubling of housing prices, like we have seen since 1998 in spain.''  europe, despite something of a gray-hair image, is in reality a demographic patchwork. ''europe is definitely an aging continent, but there are a few pockets of youth,'' said antonio missiroli, chief policy analyst at the european policy center, a research organization in brussels.  in the past, a country's dominant religion was a strong indicator of its birthrate. now, he said, government policies are more important in determining the age makeup.  of some 4.2 million people in ireland, about 36 percent were under the age of 25 in 2005, according to eurostat, the statistical office of the european commission. its birthrate of 15.3 per 1,000 residents in 2004 was the highest in europe. other west european nations with relatively large populations in their 20s included spain, greece and portugal.  among european nations notable for policies that try to encourage births are france and the nordic countries, which offer financial incentives and generous maternity leave, mr. missiroli said.  encouraging high birthrates may help individual countries buck the continent's aging trend, but ireland shows that even young countries face their own difficulties.  they might take some lessons from ireland about what not to do. property prices have increased in ireland for more than 50 consecutive quarters, the longest property boom recorded in o.e.c.d. nations. the irish central bank has warned that rising interest rates may provoke a sharp downturn in prices.  while women contributed greatly to the irish economic boom, the lack of child care will limit further growth, an o.e.c.d. report warned.  ''the higher participation of young women could actually go into reverse as generations are renewed,'' it said. ''many of the young mothers who have been able to work can do so because they can rely on free or low-cost help from older women.''  in concrete terms, this has brought an explosive growth of pupils at ella's school in laytown. four years ago, the entry class had 10 pupils. this year, 183 children began school, and more than 300 have signed up to start next year.  when the school year began, pupils sat in a series of temporary buildings, some without electricity.  ''the arrival of my daughter should have come as a surprise to nobody,'' said ms. dooley, 43, who has joined other parents in pressing the national and local authorities for a new school. ''i guess you could call the situation part of the national growing pains.''  demographically, the births creating the irish age bulge reached a peak 27 years ago, roughly nine months after the september 1979 visit to ireland of pope john paul ii.  the 74,064 births recorded by the central statistics office in 1980 was the largest number in ireland in more than 80 years.  ''ireland hit a perfect demographic storm,'' said david mcwilliams, an economist in dublin and author of ''the pope's children: ireland's new elite,'' published in 2005. ''the post-pope bulge combined with a booming economy to bring irish home from overseas and attract even more young people from poland.''  in the 12 months ended in april 2006, ireland reached the highest level of immigration in more than two decades, with a large portion of the 86,900 immigrants coming from poland. a vast majority of them were below 40, according to the statistics office.  the native population's age has helped immigrants integrate more readily in ireland than in other european countries, mr. mcwilliams said.  ''since the overall irish population and the immigrants are both young,'' he said, ''there is less of a confrontational attitude. young irish see young immigrants as a dating opportunity more than the employment threat a 50-year-old would see.''  economically, the young irish population has helped the country shift quickly from agriculture and low-cost manufacturing to high-tech industries, said dave rae, an economist in charge of monitoring the european union and ireland at the o.e.c.d.  ''ireland has been able to go through a structural change in the economy without the normal phase of high unemployment while you retrain the work force,'' mr. rae said. ''the youth of the population coincided with technology's arrival to make ireland one of the most flexible economies in europe.''  the computer and pharmaceutical industries show the transformation most, he continued, with their contribution to the gross domestic product increasing to $19.7 billion in 2004 from $9.6 billion in 1998.  another economic dividend of youth is relatively low health care and pension costs. ireland has the lowest share of people 80 and older -- 2.5 percent of the population -- of any o.e.c.d. member, according to the organization.  ''ireland makes tremendous savings on health care costs relative to older countries,'' mr. rae said. ''you can see the savings compared across the o.e.c.d.''  irish health spending accounts for 7.1 percent of the gross domestic product, compared with an o.e.c.d. average of 8.9 percent. germany, france and belgium are all above 10 percent.  demographics also have an economic effect on consumer spending. ''ireland was a good place to invest in nightclubs over the last few years,'' said john fitzgerald, an economist at the economic and social research institute in dublin, which is supported in part by the irish government. ''but when you look at the demographics five years out, the people going to those nightclubs will be looking for bouncing castles and baby-care goods.''  such demographics have downsides. a transition to more and larger cars for growing families would further aggravate pollution levels in ireland that are already worsening quickly. emissions from transportation in ireland have risen 143 percent, the most in europe, and car ownership has more than doubled, both since 1990.  in politics, the young population has pushed tradition-bound parties to start breaking with longstanding structures.  ''organized politics are just not so relevant to people's everyday lives now,'' said sean dorgan, general secretary of fianna fail, the leading party in the nation's governing coalition. ''young people have less time to volunteer for general party work, and they tend to focus more on an individual candidate or issue that affects them personally.''  to ms. dooley and the group of parents from laytown, pushing for a new school has thrust them into the spotlight as the national media followed their plight and vocal protests.  ''i have never and still do not have any interest in politics,'' said ms. dooley, whose group was invited in november to meet with mary hanafin, the minister for education and science, about the school's situation. ''we are just among the many mothers in ireland looking to get enough school space for our children, but perhaps a little louder about it.''  