group settles health sales conflict case   under pressure from the connecticut attorney general, a consulting group owned by some of the country's most influential hospital executives agreed yesterday to stop selling marketing advice to vendors who do millions of dollars in business with nonprofit hospitals across the nation, including their own.  connecticut's attorney general, richard blumenthal, said the group, the healthcare research and development institute, had undermined competition among hospital suppliers through ''undue and improper influence.''  known as h.r.d.i., the group is owned by about three dozen hospital executives, but it is underwritten by 40 or so of its handpicked corporate members who sell drugs, medical devices and financial services to hospitals.  according to a settlement agreement signed by h.r.d.i. and the state attorneys general in connecticut and florida, hospital members may no longer accept consulting fees and free trips to resorts from hospital suppliers. the agreement did not include any admission of wrongdoing by h.r.d.i. or its owners.  the agreement, mr. blumenthal said, ''shatters an anticompetitive, secret society, an elite and exclusive club of premier hospital executives and select hospital supply businesses that restrained competition to the detriment of patients and providers.''  the settlement, he said, did not end his investigation of hospital vendors.  h.r.d.i., which was founded five decades ago as an educational group, will change from a profit-making company into a nonprofit group financed only by hospitals or their executives. supply companies may not initially join the new group, called the health education network, nor will they be permitted to have any financial links to it.  the settlement, under which the group agreed to pay a $150,000 fine, ends a two-year investigation by mr. blumenthal, who found that some suppliers had increased their sales at hospitals run by h.r.d.i. members after paying consulting fees to those members, investigators said. the names of those vendors and hospitals were not included in the settlement agreement, which applied only to h.r.d.i. and not individual members.  based in pensacola, fla., h.rd.i. has long maintained that its sole purpose was to improve products and services in health care.  ''h.r.d.i. never has and does not now buy, sell or encourage the purchase or sale of products or services,'' said diane appleyard, the group's president and chief executive. ''after more than 23 months of investigation, no wrongdoing was found and no charges were filed.''  h.r.d.i.'s owners are among the most influential members of the hospital industry. they have included executives of group purchasing organizations, which negotiate millions of dollars in supply contracts on behalf of nonprofit hospitals across the country.  despite its elite membership, h.r.d.i. has maintained a low public profile. its meetings were not open to the public or to vendors who were not members. according to h.r.d.i. rules, only two vendors in any product line could belong to the group.  last summer, the new york times reported on an h.r.d.i. meeting in may at the broadmoor, a colorado springs resort, where 40 health care companies sought advice from hospital executives. market leaders like eli lilly, johnson & johnson, morgan stanley and citigroup attended, along with many smaller companies.  the companies paid the travel expenses for hospital officials and their spouses and sponsored golf and tennis outings, among other events.  according to the settlement agreement, vendors paid $40,000 annually, mostly for two private consulting sessions a year with hospital officials at resorts like the broadmoor.  h.r.d.i.'s rules prohibited vendors from using its meetings to sell products. in one instance, the group expelled a company for violating that rule. but over all, state investigators said, the rules were either ineffective or not enforced.  suppliers, for example, lobbied h.r.d.i. employees for consultations with executives at hospitals where they wanted to make sales, connecticut officials said. one vendor, after consulting with an h.r.d.i. hospital executive, went from zero sales at the executive's hospital to $3.6 million in annual sales, investigators said.  ''various vendors identified membership in h.r.d.i. as an important, if not their most important, 'relationship builder' in the health care industry,'' the agreement states.  last year, health care executives received average annual compensation from h.r.d.i. of $20,000 to $25,000, though individual compensation has been high as $50,000.  under the agreement, hrdi's successor group, the health education network, may readmit vendors after three years, but only under certain conditions. hospital executives cannot serve on a vendor's board or receive more than $2,500 annually for work on behalf of the nonprofit group. the health education network also cannot limit the number of vendors in any particular product line.  