women pay for a chance to play   they certainly looked like professionals, even if they weren't.  the minnesota whitecaps of the western women's hockey league, with three united states olympians and three others with national team experience in the lineup, took the ice last saturday night in dazzling white uniforms with gold trim. they defeated the british columbia breakers, 3-1, at the university of minnesota's ridder arena with brisk and disciplined play.  afterward, the entire team gathered at a long table at the top of the stands to sign autographs.  so what's wrong with this picture? the ''professionals'' part. none of the women earned a dime for playing. on the contrary: whitecaps players paid up to $1,000 each to play this season, and they also had to pay for their equipment. no one in the organization, from general manager rick albrecht to the players to the team doctor, draws a salary.  the team never practices because there is no money in the budget for the ice time. players bunk four to a room on the road. many have full-time jobs, and the coaches never know from night to night who will show up.  the whitecaps' situation is not unique in the six-team w.w.h.l., or the more established national women's hockey league in eastern canada. minnesota is the only united states franchise in either league. most teams struggle along, playing before meager crowds and scrambling to make ends meet.  that, says whitecaps forward and three-time united states olympian tricia dunn-luoma, is the price for establishing a place for women to play high-level hockey after college.  ''it's fitting pieces together,'' she said, ''and we make it work.''  neither usa hockey nor hockey canada, the olympic governing bodies, offers direct financial support to the leagues. julie healy, hockey canada's director for female hockey, also coaches the w.w.h.l. team in strathmore, alberta. she said her players contributed $500 each to play.  even the calgary oval x-treme, with the two-time olympic gold medalist hayley wickenheiser heading a roster of canadian national team veterans and hopefuls, has trouble drawing fans in its home rink, which was the 1988 olympic speedskating site. healy said that a wednesday night game between her team and the x-treme attracted 70 people. strathmore has had better luck sharing sunday bills with a men's midget aaa team. those dates, she said, can bring in 250 people.  ''we want the leagues to be successful,'' healy said in a telephone interview from calgary, alberta. ''i would very much like all the teams to provide enough revenue and sponsorships so the players don't have to pay anything to play.''  the whitecaps, who have a 13-7-0-1 record this season, were formed more than three years ago by jack brodt and dwayne schmidgall, hockey parents whose daughters and their friends needed a place to play after college. jenny schmidgall potter, a three-time olympian, and winny brodt played together on the united states national team and briefly at the university of minnesota. jack brodt is the whitecaps' coach.  although some americans have played in the n.w.h.l. -- whitecaps forward kristin king, a united states olympian, was in that league for two years -- the situation is not ideal.  roster spots are limited; teams can carry only four players from outside their province. one year, king said, sponsorships covered the players' fee.  but canadian labor laws make it nearly impossible for americans to be hired. americans of lesser financial means live hand to mouth.  ''my first year, i lived in six different places,'' king said. ''i slept on an air mattress in a lawyer's office.''  sensing a need for a united states-based team, brodt and schmidgall stepped in. they were among 10 investors who contributed $2,000 in each of the first two seasons to help cover the whitecaps' expenses.  brodt said the team's operating budget was about $45,000 a season. with 25 or so players chipping in shares, the team broke even the first two years, brodt said.  but this season, five investors dropped out, leaving the team $10,000 short of operating capital. so brodt and schmidgall became creative. instead of securing a home rink, they solicited youth hockey associations around the state to sponsor games as fund-raisers.  the associations keep the gate receipts and the concessions but also pay for the ice time, saving the team a major expense.  the minnesota wild has helped with two fund-raising events, brodt said, and usa hockey provides referees.  ''we need all the help we can get,'' brodt said. ''when we spend the stockholders' equity, that's not a good thing.  ''we'd love to have usa hockey give us $10,000 or $20,000, but it hasn't happened yet.''  it probably will not. michele amidon, usa hockey's newly hired director for women's hockey operations, said the organization preferred to help individual players in the national development program rather than teams. the united states olympic committee gives stipends to such players.  ''it's kind of a tough situation,'' amidon said. ''we need to put our resources where it can help the most players.  ''i think what the whitecaps are doing is great. it gives opportunities for girls to compete at a high level after their college eligibility. there are probably four or five girls on the roster in our elite group. i think if we got in a situation where they were taking 15 players, that's another thing.''  king, a dartmouth graduate and a 2006 olympian, lives in columbus, ohio, and flies in for selected weekend games. the whitecaps pay her airfare. if not for this, she said, she would be playing pickup men's hockey in columbus. but she wants to make the olympic team for the 2010 vancouver games, and playing for the whitecaps is the best way for her to improve.  ''i can't say that if i wasn't training for the national team, that i would be doing this,'' she said.  schmidgall concedes that the team will probably never make money. so he recently registered the whitecaps as a nonprofit group, which he hopes will better attract potential sponsors.  the 150 or so fans who turned out for the whitecaps last saturday, saw a spirited game. natalie darwitz, a united states olympian, scored two spectacular goals, one an unassisted short-handed breakaway. the whitecaps unloaded 63 shots at the british columbia goaltender jenny luna, a high school senior reportedly being recruited by minnesota and wisconsin.  many preteenage girls in hockey uniforms, who got in free as part of a promotion, leaned over the glass and high-fived players entering and leaving the ice between periods.  those girls are why amber hegland, a 30-year-old physical education teacher and the girls' hockey coach at suburban wayzata high school, skipped dinner and came to play saturday night.  ''the main reason is for the kids,'' she said. ''we're trying to create something so they have an opportunity to play past high school and past college.''  an opportunity that, perhaps one day, they will not have to pay for.  hockey  