a shift in power, starting with 'madam speaker'   the first two words of the evening on tuesday were evidence of how much has changed here: ''madam speaker,'' boomed congressional escorts, ''the president of the united states.''  even mr. bush acknowledged the transformation, setting off a wave of applause. ''tonight, i have the high privilege and distinct honor to begin a speech with the words 'madam speaker,' '' he said in a nod to representative nancy pelosi, the first woman to be speaker of the house.  but all the courtesies and flourishes of the evening could not paper over the reminders of how power has flowed away from the president in the new washington.  not just because for the first time mr. bush delivered his address with a democrat staring down his back. not just because his poll numbers are dismal. not just because the mayor of the nation's capital rejected the white house's invitation to sit with the first lady, laura bush, in her box and instead came as ms. pelosi's guest. even republicans, while noting that it was ''the president's day,'' as senator john w. warner of virginia described it, yielded only a share of the spotlight.  mr. warner and others were working with democrats, whom six months ago they derided as defeatocrats, on resolutions opposing mr. bush's proposal to increase the number of troops in iraq. they unveiled their resolutions in the days before the speech and were planning to take them up the morning after.  the boxes on either end of the chamber -- ms. pelosi's on one, the first lady's on the other -- were a tableau of change.  in some years past, mr. bush invited iraqis to make his case for the war, including ahmed chalabi, the exile-turned-advocate for the war who has now fallen from favor, as well as ordinary iraqis with ink-stained fingers to prove that they had cast their ballots in their first democratic elections. this year, the only reminders of iraq were a few soldiers; the box was mostly filled with educators, entrepreneurs, an energy researcher and those with heartwarming 9/11 stories.  the democrats, meanwhile, invited people who symbolized the legislation they have passed in their first two weeks in office: advocates of embryonic stem cell research, those who fought for national security reforms after the sept. 11 attacks, and labor leaders who backed an increase in the minimum wage.  in preparation for the president's address, ms. pelosi of california had been coached by her staff to keep a neutral face. they warned that any raised eyebrow or pursed lip would be captured by the cameras trained on the president.  but while ms. pelosi emphasized that she would be ''respectful,'' her very choice of words earlier in the day signaled the new dynamic. ''we always give the president a warm welcome as our guest in the chamber,'' she said, with the operative word, ''guest.''  democrats had decided it not in their interest to look churlish during the speech. lawmakers were advised to take their cues on when to stand, sit down and applaud from ms. pelosi. she sat on the dais next to mr. cheney, her junior by several months, but an emblem of a generation of white male politicians. they exchanged few words as they waited for the parade of lawmakers to assemble. at some points during the speech, ms. pelosi beat mr. cheney in jumping to an ovation.  her caucus said that they expected ms. pelosi to, in the words of representative john b. larson of connecticut, show ''poise, dignity, comity.''  appearances were obviously important to ms. pelosi, who changed from the brown suit she had worn earlier in the day to a soft green one, which offered more contrast to her dark leather speaker's chair.  the noise level in the chamber seemed more muted, as democrats exercised their new majority by sitting on their hands and staying off their feet during many applause lines. republicans, who had promised to be ''boisterous'' to make up for their diminished numbers, greeted mr. bush with a series of ''ho's!''  democrats, in turn, shouted, ''hey!'' and ''yeah!'' when the president introduced ms. pelosi as the first female speaker. the president's congratulations to the ''democrat majority'' won only polite applause from both sides. the chamber erupted most unanimously and loudly for wesley autrey, the man who leapt into the tracks of a new york subway to save a fellow passenger. (the only ones not clapping, it appeared, were mr. autrey's two young daughters, who napped beside him in their bubblegum-colored dresses.)  democrats leapt to their feet with the republicans when mr. bush said he wanted to balance the federal budget, provide affordable health care, leave medical decisions to doctors and patients rather than bureaucrats, reduce gasoline consumption and increase alternative fuels.  but the applause was more republican-only when mr. bush said he could balance the budget without raising taxes. almost no democrats clapped when he said his candidates for federal judgeships should get quick ''up or down votes.''  and there were lines that got little support from mr. bush's own side of the aisle. when he pledged to uphold the ''tradition of the melting pot,'' the republican house leader, representative john a. boehner of ohio, grimaced and clapped just once. when mr. bush went further and vowed ''comprehensive immigration reform'' -- code words for the plan the house rejected the senate approved last year -- two top house republicans, roy blunt of missouri and adam putnam of florida, stayed seated, hands quiet.  and when the president addressed the issue that has dominated discussions on capitol hill in recent weeks, his proposed increase in troops in iraq -- there was little unanimity between the parties, or within them. most democrats remained seated as the president urged the chamber to ''find our resolve.''  senator charles e. schumer of new york cast a disapproving eye on those who stood, including senators joseph i. lieberman and john kerry. and while secretary of state condoleezza rice sat forward in her seat and nodded as he described the increase in troops, republicans who have criticized the plan, including mr. warner, stayed off their feet. senator olympia snowe of maine sat stone still. across the aisle, senator tom harkin of iowa shuddered and shook his head, and representative charles b. rangel of new york tipped his head back and stared at the ceiling.  perhaps the most poignant commentary on the war and the plan to increase troops came in the democratic response to the speech, given by senator james webb of virginia. he had been chosen because, as senator harry reid, the democrats' leader, said, he understood what it meant to go to war. a former secretary of the navy and ex-marine, his son is serving in iraq.  in his speech, he held up a photograph of his father serving as an air force captain in germany. he had carried it with him for most of his life, he said. and as a child, he had taken it to bed for three years as he prayed for his father's safe return.  state of the union  correction:  january 25, 2007, thursday  a front-page article yesterday about events surrounding president bush's state of the union speech misquoted his opening remarks. he said, ''and tonight i have the high privilege and distinct honor of my own as the first president to begin the state of the union message with these words: 'madam speaker.' '' he did not say, ''tonight, i have the high privilege and distinct honor to begin a speech with the words 'madam speaker.' ''  