paid notice: deaths   scheuer, emily malino   scheuer--emily malino, died comfortably at home in washington, dc, among the loving members of her family after a short and valiant battle with leukemia. for over 57 years the beloved wife of the late congressman james h. scheuer, emily shared with him a lifetime commitment to the arts, the environment, and social justice--and the success of the democratic party. while a full partner in jim's 40-year political career, emily was a nationally recognized commercial interior designer and a pioneer in bringing a design aesthetic to institutional settings. born in new york in 1925, emily was a devoted alumna of the ethical culture fieldston school, where she met jim, and of vassar college. after nursing jim's recovery from polio at the warm springs foundation, emily launched a career which included interior design of major hospitals, libraries, and other institutional spaces as well as a nationally-syndicated consumer home-decorating column. her professional career led her to partnerships in several major international architectural firms. however, emily maintained her passion for democratic party politics, which began with an involvement with the democratic reform movement in new york city in the 1950s. she ran for district leader in chelsea in 1959, losing the primary the day before her fourth child was born. in more recent years, emily served as an officer of the shakespeare theatre in washington, dc; she was also appointed to the presidents committee on the arts and humanities, and was a former commissioner of the national fine arts commission. after her husbands retirement, emily returned to graduate school, earning an ma in american literature from george washington university in 2001, where she became a willa cather scholar, subsequently delivering several papers at conferences and symposia. emily is survived by her four children: laura, elizabeth, james jr. and john; their spouses: peter joseph, lorna scheuer, and robin scheuer; 10 grandchildren: damella and laurella dotan, eleanor, nicholas, anna and katherine joseph, james william, david, sarah and thomas (buster) scheuer and a large and loving extended family, including james, amy, and thomas wilentz, the children of her beloved sister jacqueline. funeral services will be held at frank e. campbell, 1076 madison avenue (81st st) on sunday at 1 pm. in lieu of flowers, the family requests that contributions be made to the shakespeare theatre in washington, d.c. or vassar college. the family will be receiving visitors on sunday from 3:00 to 8:00 pm at 4730 fieldston road, riverdale, ny, and on monday and tuesday from 5:00 to 9:00 pm at 610 west end avenue, new york city.  