anchor's ties to citigroup attract scrutiny   late last year, an executive from citigroup phoned an official connected with cnbc, the cable business news channel. according to people with knowledge of the call, the citigroup executive made it clear that maria bartiromo, the popular cnbc anchor, would not be permitted to fly on citigroup's corporate jet again.  shortly before that, todd s. thomson, the head of citigroup's global wealth management group, arranged for ms. bartiromo to speak to some citigroup clients in hong kong and shanghai. ms. bartiromo had flown home with mr. thomson on the corporate jet, bumping several company bankers from the plane.  executives at cnbc deny receiving a phone call telling them that ms. bartiromo would be barred from further flights.  mr. thomson was let go by citigroup this week amid concerns over his judgment, his expenses and the way he handled some of his interactions with the cnbc anchor, including his decision to have citigroup put $5 million into a multiyear sponsorship of a program on the sundance channel cable television network that would have ms. bartiromo as a co-host.  ms. bartiromo, by contrast, has the strong support of her employer. cnbc, which had said that her flight was pre-approved and that citigroup was compensated, issued a statement yesterday that said she had not violated any of the channel's ethical standards. it called her ''one of the most prolific and well-respected financial journalists in the industry.''  despite cnbc's blessing, it is unusual for a financial journalist to make a public appearance on behalf of a major advertiser. that incident and other associations with mr. thomson have raised questions about ms. bartiromo's judgment in getting too close to the people and organizations that she covers.  cnbc executives dismissed any suggestion of an ethics breach in any of ms. bartiromo's activities involving citigroup. neither mr. thomson nor ms. bartiromo would comment for this article.  the episode comes at an awkward time for cnbc. having endured a long ratings and advertising slump after the last bull market, the network has been on a run, becoming a growing profit center for nbc universal. at the moment, the channel has no competitors in the field of 24-hour business news coverage on television, but the news corporation, controlled by rupert murdoch, has been promising for almost three years to start a business channel.  as cnbc's most visible asset, ms. bartiromo, who is married to jonathan steinberg, son of the financier saul steinberg, has become something of a celebrity. she has written two financial books and has a regular column in businessweek magazine. and she is often seen at corporate or political events: she is spending this week leading the network's coverage from the world economic forum in davos, switzerland.  some of the events put her in close proximity to citigroup executives. according to one of last year's guests at davos, ms. bartiromo made the trip back to the united states on the citigroup private jet on that occasion as well. she appeared at a citigroup-sponsored awards event in london in 2005, as co-host of the event with another cnbc anchor, simon hobbs. mr. thomson represented citigroup at the event.  one executive representing cnbc said that ms. bartiromo had made ''no more than two'' trips on the citigroup jet. cnbc executives would not agree to be quoted by name because they said they did want to be seen as adding anything to what they considered an illegitimate inquiry.  cnbc also denied that ms. bartiromo had involvement with citigroup more so than other businesses. in its statement, cnbc said, ''in 2006 alone, she made 46 public appearances on behalf of cnbc.''  the cnbc representative said that as the on-air figure most closely associated with the channel, ms. bartiromo routinely made promotional appearances at corporate events. many of the corporations advertise on cnbc. citigroup is among the biggest advertisers, a cnbc spokesman said.  of the 46 appearances ms. bartiromo made in 2006, the cnbc representative said, only three were on behalf of citigroup. the list of other companies with events at which she appeared last year included google, schwab and dow jones.  in no case was ms. bartiromo paid for speaking at the events, the cnbc representative said. the channel defended ms. bartiromo's travel arrangements. the statement said, ''her travel has been company-related and approved, and involved legitimate business assignments.'' the cnbc representative added that the awards event in london was a routine appearance for ms. bartiromo.  cnbc also dismissed any connection between citigroup's sponsorship in the sundance channel program and ms. bartiromo's participation.  the cnbc representative noted that cnbc's parent company, nbc universal, owns more than 50 percent of the sundance channel; so ms. bartiromo, an nbc employee, was a logical choice as host of a sundance program. her selection for the program came long before citigroup's decision to invest, the representative said. she has since ended her participation in the program.  there are other connections between ms. bartiromo and mr. thomson. in 2004, she was named to an advisory board for the wharton school of the university of pennsylvania. a wharton news release then reported that mr. thomson -- who, along with his wife, had made a gift of $500,000 to the wharton center to support leadership and change management -- had led the formation of the advisory board, which included ms. bartiromo.  in june 2005, she and mr. thomson were co-hosts of a leadership conference at wharton. a wharton spokeswoman did not return phone calls yesterday seeking comment.  ms. bartiromo has drawn criticism before. in 2003, she disclosed during an interview with citigroup's chief executive, sanford i. weill, that she owned 1,000 shares of stock in his company. many journalistic enterprises consider it an ethics breach for reporters to own shares in businesses they cover, and cnbc tightened its guidelines soon after the interview. in 2006, she reported off-the-record comments by the federal reserve chairman, ben s. bernanke.  but cnbc remained supportive. ''her record and reporting speak for themselves,'' its statement said.  correction:  february 2, 2007, friday  an article in business day last friday about maria bartiromo, the anchor on the business channel cnbc whose relationship with todd s. thompson, the former head of citigroup's global wealth management group, has come under scrutiny, attributed an erroneous distinction to cnbc. bloomberg tv is a 24-hour business news channel; cnbc is not the only such channel.  