in kiffin, a tough job gets a young face   at 3 months old, pressley kiffin already looks to be in the market for silver makeup, metal spikes and a darth vader mask.  her father, lane kiffin, visited the oakland raiders' ticket office yesterday to buy seats for next season. considering that kiffin is the raiders' new head coach, he probably could have arranged for a luxury box.  but because kiffin was getting tickets for his family, he wanted something more appropriate, in a section where his wife and two daughters could really feel comfortable.  ''in the black hole,'' he said.  with that, kiffin might have alarmed anyone at child protective services, but he endeared himself to raiders fans everywhere. starting in september, pressley kiffin could be sitting in the end-zone stands, where fans play dress up and one man is known as the violator.  everything about the raiders' job is a little bit dangerous. the team just posted a 2-14 record. it has not won a division game in almost three years, does not have a legitimate starting quarterback, and is working on its fourth head coach in five seasons.  kiffin is just young enough, and bold enough, to proceed undaunted. at 31 years 8 months, he is the youngest head coach in the n.f.l.'s modern era, depending on where historians mark the start of his tenure.  harland svare was 31 years 11 months old when he was hired by the los angeles rams in 1962, younger than kiffin would be for his first game as raiders coach. regardless, kiffin and svare are the youngest in their field since the 1920s and '30s, when players often did the coaching.  ''thirty-one years old,'' said al davis, the raiders' 77-year-old owner. ''wow, that's young. but you don't have to be old to be great.''  davis coached the raiders when he was 33. then he hired john madden, who was 32. his last winning coach, jon gruden, was hired at 35. davis has an obvious affinity for young people -- and for people from the university of southern california.  kiffin spent the past six years at u.s.c., most recently as offensive coordinator, presiding over a group with arguably more offensive talent than the raiders. in kiffin's first season calling plays, 2005, he had the heisman trophy winners reggie bush and matt leinart at his disposal.  davis, who watches the raiders on sundays and the trojans on saturdays, wanted someone affiliated with u.s.c. coach pete carroll's offense. he tried to hire the u.s.c. quarterbacks coach, steve sarkisian, last week. when sarkisian withdrew from consideration, davis called kiffin.  at the introductory news conference yesterday, davis sounded as if he might break into the u.s.c. fight song. he spoke with nostalgia about his own tenure as a trojans assistant coach, which he said was ''some 30 years ago.''  in fact, davis was the u.s.c. defensive line coach nearly 50 years ago, from 1957 to 1959, and he still laments a particularly painful loss to u.c.l.a. ''of all the coaches on that staff, only one is here today,'' davis said. ''and that's me. and i'm not going anywhere.''  coaching the raiders comes with many challenges, most of them interpersonal. davis is famous for his meddlesome ways. receivers randy moss and jerry porter and defensive tackle warren sapp are outspoken and controversial. the fans like to throw objects when they are angry.  kiffin is younger than nine players on the current roster, but he says he knows what he is getting into. his father, monte kiffin, is the defensive coordinator of the tampa bay buccaneers, meaning he works side by side with gruden, the raiders' last wonder boy.  ''i remember how lane would stay up with me and watch tape when he was a kid,'' monte kiffin said. ''he loves the x's and o's. he loves to attack.''  kiffin was a quarterback at fresno state, but he spent most of his time with the coaches. he became the youngest assistant coach in the n.f.l. with the jacksonville jaguars in 2000, and he was the youngest coordinator in the pacific-10.  he is back in the pros largely because davis cannot stand to have a bad offense. davis wants to see big plays, long touchdown passes and high scores. he wants, in essence, leinart and bush, even if they are not available.  ''i will bring an explosive, powerful offense to this franchise,'' kiffin said. ''we will utilize our big-time players in the best way. we will get them the football. they will play happy and they will play hard.''  now they just need a quarterback. the raiders have the first pick in the draft, with louisiana state's jamarcus russell and notre dame's brady quinn on the board.  regardless of what the historians conclude, kiffin's clock is already ticking.  pro football  