yankees are hoping to get a good jump in china   the yankees are coming, the yankees are coming. that's what the chinese are shouting in china today because the yankees are heading there in their latest international exploration. vasco da gama and magellan had nothing on them.  the yankees have scheduled a news briefing today to tell about their plans, but all they said yesterday was that it was about an international venture. with the yankees, an international venture means international intrigue.  larry lucchino, the boston red sox president, didn't call them the evil empire without a good reason.  a baseball official, not a travel agent, disclosed that the yankees were going to china next week. no, the yankees team isn't going to china. alex rodriguez and derek jeter aren't going to china to sign autographs or hold clinics or hit fungoes to wide-eyed chinese kids.  this will be an executive journey -- randy levine, the yankees' president; brian cashman, the senior vice president and general manager; and jean afterman, vice president and assistant general manager.  they are not expected to bring back any signed players. china hasn't developed any players who would be capable of playing in the major leagues or even the minor leagues. the chinese clearly demonstrated their shortcomings in losing all three of their games in the inaugural world baseball classic last march by a combined score of 40-6.  so why are they going? they will explore opportunities, both baseball and business. they will establish contacts. they will determine the most likely source of future talent and very likely initiate conversations about future working agreements, like the one they have with the yomiuri giants in japan.  after spending a week or so in china, they will visit japan and their japanese partners. they are making the trip with the blessing of and under the supervision of major league baseball.  by visiting japan, the yankees will enhance the globalization of their brand. they already are one of maybe the five best-known teams in the world, and china is untapped territory for major league baseball.  by enhancing their brand in china, the yankees won't directly benefit financially because revenue from any merchandise sold in any country goes to baseball's central fund, whose proceeds are divided among all 30 teams. but chances are that more yankees merchandise will be sold in china than caps and shirts of the devil rays or the royals.  in other words, all teams will benefit from the yankees' trip.  the yankees have aggressively pursued international interests. they have fared especially well in signing foreign players. foreign players have more likely heard of the yankees and want to sign with them over other teams. it doesn't hurt that the yankees also usually offer more money.  it was after the yankees beat out the red sox in the competition for josé contreras, a cuban defector, four years ago that lucchino called them the evil empire. probably the primary reason the red sox bid $51 million for negotiating rights to the japanese pitcher daisuke matsuzaka in november was that they wanted to take no chance on losing him to the yankees. if they had, lucchino and other red sox executives would have been using harsher words than evil and empire.  the yankees have singled out china because it could be the next plush source of talent.  players from latin american countries, who are collectively the most talented players outside the united states, have dominated the major leagues with increasing frequency. but everyone knows about those countries, and the competition for players has become fiercer.  give the chinese time and teaching, and their country could become the next baseball outpost. the country certainly has enough people from whom the majors can develop players.  that's the yankees' thinking, and they could be the first major league team to open an academy in china, the kind of academies that have proliferated in the dominican republic and venezuela. somewhere in china there may be a town that some day will turn out shortstops the way san pedro de macorís has in the dominican.  the kids in the dominican play baseball and ride motorbikes. it can happen in china, too, and the yankees want to be the first to oversee the project. marco polo might have beaten them to china, but he didn't go home with a shortstop to replace jeter.  on baseball  