what's on tonight   8 p.m. (13) oprah's roots: an african american lives special -- when ''african american lives'' was shown on pbs last year, one of the most successful moments was the discussion between the show's host, professor henry louis gates jr., and oprah winfrey (above) about the struggles and accomplishments of ms. winfrey's ancestors. this new special builds on those conversations by using genealogical and historical research and dna analysis to explore ms. winfrey's formative years in mississippi, milwaukee and nashville and delve into her family legacy -- including a grandfather's involvement in the civil rights movement, a greatgrandmother's achievements in education, and the story of her great-great-grandfather constantine winfrey, a former slave who acquired 80 acres of land through backbreaking labor, and then used the income from his farm products to add to his holdings.  8 p.m. (11) beauty and the geek -- this week, the five remaining teams journey to mission beach in san diego, where the women study electronics and the men design fitness routines. but things get a little ugly when a when a beauty lashes out as a geek for sending her team to the elimination room.  8 p.m. (abc) george lopez -- change is afoot in the lopez family, and with it not a few growing pains, as george (mr. lopez, left) and angie prepare for carmen's departure to college -- and a little freedom as empty nesters. but wait just a minute. tonight, in the sixth season premiere, angie makes a discovery, george's job is in jeopardy, benny faces jail time for a crime he committed in a previous life, and vic wants to marry a much younger woman.  8:30 p.m. (abc) according to jim -- the men learn that cheryl and dana bared their, uh, souls in a ''chicks gone wild'' video. oh, yeah.  9 p.m. (ovation) andras schiff plays chopin -- mr. schiff, who spent years mastering the subtleties of bach and then beethoven, brings his impeccable technique to chopin's 24 preludes, op. 28.  9 p.m. (13) the magic flute -- julie taymor, perhaps best known for bringing the african continent to life through the use of puppetry in ''the lion king'' on broadway, takes her unique vision to the metropolitan opera in this german-language production of mozart's 1791 fairy-tale masterpiece. among the creatures living in ms. taymor's mystical world: dancing bears, flying birds and a giant serpent. the mortals include nathan gunn as papageno, erika miklosa (above) as the queen of the night, rené pape as sarastro and ying huang as pamina; james levine conducts.  10 p.m. (food network) dinner: impossible -- create a menu for 200 wedding guests in under 10 hours? it can be done, as robert irwin proves in this new series that tests chefs's skills with seemingly insurmountable culinary tasks.  kathryn shattuck  