italian romanticism from a rarely heard source   riccardo muti's streamlined readings of the russian and german repertory are an acquired taste (though one worth acquiring), and his relatively rare forays into american repertory have been well meaning, if unpersuasive. but there is no one to touch him in italian music, and that was what he brought to the new york philharmonic on thursday evening, the start of his second week of subscription programs with the orchestra at avery fisher hall.  mr. muti's message was that there is more to italian romanticism than opera -- although he touched on opera as well -- and to that end he devoted the first half of his program to giuseppe martucci's enormous piano concerto no. 2 in b flat minor (op. 66), with gerhard oppitz as the soloist. martucci has been scarce in new york: the philharmonic last performed this concerto in 1911. but mr. muti recorded it (along with martucci's evocative ''canzone dei ricordi'') for sony classical in 1995, and he has kept it in his repertory, perhaps betting that accidental encounters will win this composer a new audience.  he is on to something. this is a virtuoso concerto (martucci was, not surprisingly, a pianist), so solidly packed with explosive, daredevil keyboard writing that it isn't until well into the 20-minute first movement that the orchestra has much of substance to offer. when the orchestra does take its stand, its contributions are currents of lyricism or subtle but ear-catching shifts in color, to contrast with the showiness of the piano writing.  still, it's the piano that rivets the ear, and if you look past the layer of surface bluster you'll find magnificently detailed and at times almost brahmsian keyboard writing.  mr. oppitz was an ideal soloist. he attacked the work with all the vigor it demanded, and played with muscularity, clarity and, in the central larghetto, a poetic touch. he and mr. muti made a powerful case: this concerto may not be the beethoven ''emperor,'' but it makes a welcome change from, say, the tchaikovsky first.  after the intermission, mr. muti led a taut account of the ballet music from verdi's ''macbeth,'' a fine warm-up for the real business of the second half, respighi's ''feste romane.'' pictorialism runs deep in italian music as far back as monteverdi, and respighi reveled in it. here the orchestra evokes everything from the roaring lions at the ancient circus maximus, to parades of chanting penitents, to sloppy inebriates, all vividly.  mr. muti had the philharmonic playing at full throttle, with no loss of either tone or precision. this orchestra's brasses, which got a thorough workout, have rarely sounded better.  riccardo muti, gerhard oppitz and the new york philharmonic repeat this program tonight at avery fisher hall, lincoln center, (212) 721-6500.  music review  