sights set on title, meissner is all smiles   watching kimmie meissner practice her long program friday afternoon, it was impossible to tell that she was less than a day from the finale of the united states figure skating championships. she glided through her program, fell trying a few jumps, but picked herself up and skated back to her coach with a smile.  after she won the short program thursday night, meissner acknowledged that skating as the favorite had made her nervous, but those nerves were nowhere to be found friday, even with the long program looming saturday.  meissner's coach, pam gregory, said of the short program: ''it's a lot of pressure. you can't win with the short, but you can lose in the short. it just sets you up for the long program. it just relieves a burden off of her, and she's just excited now.''  meissner, 17, is trying to win her first national title -- despite already having won a surprise world championship last year -- in a field vacated by the old guard -- michelle kwan and sasha cohen. her competition here comes from emily hughes, who finished third in the short program, and beatrisa liang, who finished second.  meissner said: ''it's really different because there is no national champion here, so it's really up in the air. that's why it's really exciting for me.''  meissner has had a year full of excitement after finishing sixth in the olympic games in turin, italy, then winning the worlds. a trip to the espy awards provided a chance to meet one of her heroes, lance armstrong. she threw out the first pitch at the philadelphia phillies' home opener. she has done a national television commercial for subway. she raises money for and spends time with young cancer patients at johns hopkins and the university of maryland medical centers, not far from her hometown, bel air, md.  but on the ice, she remains a kid at heart. ''it's very rare for her to have a mopey day,'' gregory said. ''i hardly ever see it. it's just not in her nature.''  so even after a few spills in practice, meissner kept smiling and laughing. she worked on all the jumps she missed and hit them easily later in practice.  the level of meissner's jumps is higher than her competitors here, even though she will not try a triple axel, which she landed in the 2005 nationals. but meissner has also made great strides in the artistic side of her skating. she skates her long program to flamenco music, a nod to her great-grandparents who were from spain. she has two lace shawls owned by her great-grandmother, and she brought them here for luck.  figure-skating fans have watched meissner grow up since she burst on the seniors scene in 2005. but friday, they watched hughes celebrate a birthday. she turned 18, and the day kicked off with her coach, bonni retzkin, singing to her at breakfast in the hotel restaurant. the restaurant did not have a candle, retzkin said, so she had to go to the gift shop.  ''it was kind of funny,'' hughes said. ''the whole restaurant started to sing.''  hughes's performance in the short program was celebrated by the crowd at spokane arena with a standing ovation. but that ovation only set the stage for meissner to top her score handily.  meissner said it was the loudest ovation she ever had to follow. the hardest part of that was trying to warm up while dodging all the stuffed animals being thrown onto the ice for hughes.  ''i've had it before where people have actually thrown stuff and someone's getting off, i'm getting on and it hit me right in the head,'' meissner said. ''i'm like, 'that's great, i have to skate now.' but yesterday, nothing hit me, i didn't trip or anything.''  from third to champions -- the pairs competition at the united states figure skating championships got a surprise champion friday when brooke castile and ben okolski rose from third after the short program to capture the title by less than a point. the best the pair had done in a previous national championship was finishing seventh two years ago.  ''it feels great,'' okolski said. ''although it really hasn't sunk in yet.''  their rise was made possible after the top two teams faltered in their long programs. rena inoue and john baldwin, the two-time champions, fell twice. baldwin fell on a side-by-side triple toe loop, and inoue fell trying to land a throw triple axel. that opened the door for castile and okolski, although their program was technically not as difficult.  inoue and baldwin qualified for the second spot at the world championships, which will be in tokyo in march.  ''we thought for a minute we might not make worlds, but we did not do our job tonight, so whatever happened, we have to accept it,'' said inoue, who was born in japan.  naomi nari nam and themi leftheris had a chance to grab a world team spot after inoue and baldwin stumbled, but nam fell to a knee trying to land a throw triple salchow and also fell on the next throw, a triple loop.  figure skating  