preparations set, giuliani now faces a big choice   rudolph w. giuliani, who developed a national reputation for decisive and reassuring leadership after 9/11, now faces the odd challenge of having to reassure some supporters that he can be decisive about a very different issue: running for president.  even as his fellow republican john mccain and fellow new yorker hillary rodham clinton have all but formally declared their candidacies, mr. giuliani has proceeded more cautiously.  since last month, he has formed an exploratory committee, more aggressively recruited a campaign staff and moved to divest himself of one of his companies. and he is now visiting new hampshire, home to the first primary, for the second time in three months. but he has studiously avoided making a public commitment to run.  asked recently in delaware about his political plans, he offered an ambiguous reply: ''i think the biggest question you have to ask is, 'can you really lead the country?' if i believe that i can do it, then i will, and if i don't, then i'll support somebody else.''  he ducked the question again yesterday, telling reporters in bretton woods, n.h., that he would not be rushed by contenders who are already entering the race. ''you should do it when you feel it's the right time,'' he said.  despite the delay, his aides argue that the accelerated pace of early primaries next year actually benefits a well-established figure like mr. giuliani -- much, they say, as his national stature will enable him to close whatever gaps now exist in fund-raising and organization.  frank luntz, a republican consultant who is not now working for any of the presidential campaigns, described mr. giuliani as ''the only candidate who can set his own timetable, because he is so established in the minds of the voters.''  nonetheless, doubts have been raised about the proverbial fire in his belly. some new yorkers in particular recall his decision to quit the senate race against mrs. clinton in 2000 after running for months and raising millions of dollars but never formally declaring his candidacy.  mr. giuliani, already hobbled then by a messy separation from his wife, withdrew after finding that he had prostate cancer. but he was also ambivalent about the prospect of being a legislator.  wrestling then with which course of medical treatment to pursue, he said on the day he withdrew: ''and about the decision to run: i was almost in the same position, not being able to make it, which has never really happened to me. i've always been able to make decisions.''  david garth, a media consultant who helped steer the giuliani mayoral campaigns, said that while he had no reason to doubt a candidacy this time, ''it's a question of where his head is, as it was in the senate race.''  michael r. long, chairman of the new york state conservative party, voiced uncertainty.  ''he called me before thanksgiving just to touch base and said he'd like to talk, and i haven't heard from him since,'' mr. long said. ''we went through this in the united states senate race. whether he pulls the trigger or not, i don't know.''  fred siegel, a cooper union historian and giuliani biographer, dismissed the analogy to 2000. ''the question is there in washington,'' mr. siegel said, but ''i think it's mistaken.''  mr. giuliani's aides maintain that he is being held to a standard different from that of other prospective candidates who have not formally declared. and anyway, they say, his ambivalence, whether real or merely perceived, may well vanish soon. mr. giuliani, who will address the republican state convention in new hampshire today, is to travel to california and south carolina next month, and supporters in new jersey are preparing to announce endorsements next week.  california and new jersey are two of a number of populous states that are expected to shift their 2008 primaries to february, very early in the campaign season, and south carolina's comes even earlier, a week after new hampshire's.  ''folks who believe he is not running do so at their own peril,'' said michael duhaime, former political director of the republican national committee, who is heading mr. giuliani's exploratory effort.  ''there is a spin out there that the campaign is further behind than it is, that rudy may not be serious, and that is being done deliberately to keep us from certain fund-raisers,'' said mr. duhaime, a native new jerseyan who begins working for mr. giuliani full time next week.  kieran mahoney, a republican consultant in new york who is working for another presidential prospect, former gov. james s. gilmore iii of virginia, said he had been unconvinced of a giuliani run until recently, when the former mayor stepped up the pace of hiring a campaign staff and reports emerged that he had taken steps to sell the biggest division of his consulting business.  ''stop listening to what they say and look at their behavior,'' mr. mahoney said of potential candidates in general. ''giuliani is, in fact, an active participant in the marketplace in terms of scooping up talent and making business decisions that are economically injurious and politically positive. i have been a skeptic. i am now a believer.''  even mr. giuliani himself, though continuing to demur, did drop a hint or two in new hampshire yesterday, saying at a chamber of commerce dinner that he might return later this year to play golf, or for other reasons.  some consultants to mr. giuliani's rivals, and even some of his supporters, say that given the campaign's relatively late start, his inner circle may be overconfident about his ability to build a respectable war chest by march 31, the first of the deadlines for reporting campaign contributions. a poor sum then would make it all the harder to attract further donations, and, with more candidates now choosing not to participate in the federal campaign financing system, the importance of fund-raising has increased, as has competition for the millions at stake.  already, mr. giuliani is being measured against a 140-page game plan drafted by a member of his campaign staff last fall. that document, which giuliani advisers say was stolen from them, set a fund-raising goal of at least $25 million by the end of march, but some potential fund-raisers and donors whom it identified have already enlisted in support of other candidates.  asked about the $25 million figure, mr. duhaime, who did not join the campaign until after the document was drafted, replied: ''what is important to us is we have a strong number in that first period, and i'm not going to put the number out there publicly. we're certain we're going to have enough money to be competitive.''  in new jersey, where two fund-raisers have been scheduled and a spectrum of local politicians are expected to endorse mr. giuliani next week, one supporter, steven e. some, said that he had worked in five presidential campaigns and that ''selling rudy is the easiest sell i've ever had in my life.''  ''i have no doubt whatever that he's in this for the long term,'' said mr. some, a veteran political consultant. ''i've never had anyone come up to me to raise any doubt about whether he's going to go the course.''  still, an underlying perception exists, and is being stoked, that mr. giuliani has not committed himself to a campaign, in part because he is reluctant to relinquish the lucrative consulting business that he founded after he left the mayor's office five years ago. referring to mr. giuliani's exploratory activity, harold m. ickes, a longtime adviser to mrs. clinton, said, ''i thought he was just advertising so he can increase his fees.''  mr. mahoney, the republican consultant, acknowledged that one challenge facing mr. giuliani would be determining how to expand his political base rightward.  ''in order to become the mayor of new york city,'' mr. mahoney said, ''you have to do things that are not wholly consistent with being the republican nominee for president.''  