weight and diabetes are focus of health foundation grants   a health foundation created by new york state announced its first grants yesterday, devoting considerable attention to obesity and resulting problems like diabetes, and to asthma. it also addressed other ills as disparate as alcohol abuse and lack of dental care.  after sifting through more than 600 proposals, the new york health foundation made 23 grants totaling $5.7 million. it plans to give away $20 million of its $250 million endowment in a second round later this year, said james r. knickman, president and chief executive.  state lawmakers created the foundation five years ago, with a mandate to aid people who lack health care or insurance and to improve the quality of treatment, but the money was tied up in legal battles until about a year ago. it has focused on relatively small-scale, innovative projects that, if successful, can be replicated elsewhere.  the grants, ranging from less than $50,000 to almost $1 million, went to hospitals, to well-known charities and to tiny community groups.  four grants deal with obesity, nutrition and physical fitness, the largest number devoted to any subject -- a decision that mr. knickman said was influenced by a series of articles over the last year in the new york times on the growing toll of diabetes. the most common kind of diabetes, type 2, is closely linked to obesity, lack of exercise and poor diet, as well as heredity.  ''the times series has helped elevate public awareness about diabetes, such that there are many more people ready to act on it,'' mr. knickman said. in the future, the foundation will be ''more focused on a few areas,'' he said. ''and diabetes is likely to be one of our primary areas.''  one grant recipient, mosholu montefiore community center, plans to enroll obese high school students in the bronx in an intensive, 12-week program of fitness, nutrition and counseling. phipps community development corporation will teach bronx residents nutrition and try to improve their diets, in part through work in a community garden.  two winners, in syracuse and in niagara county, will work on obesity, nutrition and fitness in children.  three projects, all in new york city, won grants to combat asthma. one will try to prevent school buses from idling near schools. another will teach people about eliminating the factors in their homes that set off asthma attacks. the third aims to help patients develop plans to better manage their asthma.  other winners include a program to teach teenagers about the link between drinking and teenage pregnancy in far northern new york, and another to provide dentistry to the poor and uninsured on long island.  a group in the rochester area will use its grant to train deaf people as home health aides for deaf homebound patients. another grant winner will allow doctors and nurses to monitor people with chronic ailments in their own homes, at any hour, over the internet.  the foundation stems from a state law that allowed empire blue cross-blue shield to become a profitmaking company. that, in turn, allowed the company to sell stock for the first time. the law required that a small portion of the stock be devoted to a new health foundation.  