on your toes, you blokes. here come 2 highnesses.   it has been just over a year since their wellington boots last sloshed about on these shores, and it's not as though that trip -- billed as their first official overseas tour since being married in april 2005 -- came off so smashingly that they, or an adoring american public, ought to be crying out for another.  ''they'' would be their royal highnesses, the prince of wales and the duchess of cornwall -- charles and camilla. during that trip, in early november 2005, the new york post ridiculed charles for failing to make eye contact with his wife throughout a 9/11 memorial event in lower manhattan (''maybe they've just grown accustomed to sneaking around''); and in the washington post, tina brown, ostensibly praising camilla, wrote: ''she's smaller, prettier, more delicate than all those cruel horseface snaps would have you believe.''  even so, the royal couple haven't had enough of the united states, it would seem. they have arranged another american publicity tour and will be spending today, the first day of this jaunt, in philadelphia (liberty bell, commodore barry statue, national constitution center).  tomorrow, it's on to new york, where they will tour the harlem children's zone, a nonprofit educational organization in upper manhattan, and attend a black-tie reception at the harvard club in the prince's honor. at that event, al gore will present him with the global environmental citizen award, and charles, according to a schedule put out by the british consulate in new york, will deliver a speech ''on environmental issues.''  in and around greenwich village, where a good number of brits work in the fields of fashion, media and design (having taken glamorous and low-paying jobs from their american counterparts), the prince's countrymen viewed the royal visit -- not to mention h.r.h. himself -- with something less than awe.  ''i actually didn't know he was coming,'' guy chetwynd, the deputy general manager of the expat club soho house and a native of warwickshire, said the other day. ''i don't read the court circular as much as i did in london. that's the thing in the paper that tells you what the royal family's engagements are.  ''basically, i don't have anything against him,'' mr. chetwynd went on. ''he has some very strong beliefs that i personally don't feel that bad about. he's done a lot with the duchy of cornwall. he's made that area into sort of a thriving purveyor of organic produce. they make quite nice shortbread.''  rufus albemarle -- the 10th earl of albemarle, not to mention a fulltime resident of chelsea (the one in new york, not london) and an entrepreneur who is soon to launch a new line of men's dress shirts -- also chose to focus on the prince's agricultural experiment.  ''he's basically saying, 'why don't we produce our own lamb, instead of buying it from new zealand?' '' mr. albemarle said. ''we love organic. over all, i think he's doing a fine job.'' he proceeded to deliver a brief lesson on the organization of the house of lords, of which he is a former member.  back on the subject of charles, he added, ''my second cousin is married to him.'' camilla? ''yes, or is that first cousin? i can never remember.''  at the lower fifth avenue boutique of paul smith, the english clothier, clive williams, a sales clerk from tottenham who was smartly turned out in a getup that screamed reggie kray -- red shirt, slim black tie, high-lapel sports jacket -- said he found it easy to see charles as a tragic figure. ''he's a victim of circumstance,'' he said. ''it's not clear that he's going to be the next king -- you know, all that.''  ''i hope he comes in here,'' said michael hendricks, a young american clerk. ''because he's cute. and he's royal blood. we occasionally get people with english accents in here, but not with that royal blood.''  a stop at myers of keswick, the shop on hudson street that sells all manner of british food -- batchelor's bigga marrowfat peas, colman's bread sauce, traditional scottish haggis in a can -- did turn up somebody who was aware of prince charles's visit.  becca de beauport, originally from london, also said she sensed a poignancy in the prince. ''i think we should have let him marry this woman years ago, but we didn't because she was beyond child-bearing years,'' she said. ''he's better now he's happy.''  to much of the british public, charles, old-fashioned and aloof, has had little success in his attempts to present himself as a man of the people.  ''there was a horrible thing in the london papers in advance of this trip'' when it came out that he was considering flying a private jet to bring 20 people to new york with him, said nicky perry, who owns tea and sympathy, a british tea shop on greenwich avenue. ''they went on and on about the preposterous size of his carbon footprint. it was cruel.''  ms. perry couldn't help giggling. ''it was quite funny, actually. they called him 'chazza.' ''  charlotte nicholson, an english painter who lives in brooklyn, said that despite the debatable relevance of the monarchy in this day and age, she finds solace in the ventures to new york.  ''i have to say, every time they come, i feel a bit of, 'ah, england's here,' '' she said. ''also, i have had charles's bacon product. it's antibiotic free, as bacon gets. it's very good, actually.''  