paid notice: deaths   taylor, paul edward jr.   taylor--paul edward jr. i mourn the passing of my friend, mentor and partner of many years. i extend my deepest sympathies to his extraordinary family and many friends. harvey schulweis  $(6$)taylor--paul edward jr. we are deeply saddened by the passing of paul e. taylor jr., who served new yorkpresbyterian hospital as a trustee for 30 years. he lent his exceptional talent and energy to an impressive variety of hospital projects, helping to lead the institution through an important period of expansion and modernization, securing our future for many years to come. mr. taylor was instrumental to the establishment of what became the new york-presbyterian healthcare system. he served as vice chairman of the enterprise in its early formative period and played a major role with the first institutional member, new york hospital medical center of queens. mr. taylor's loyalty and leadership proved to be invaluable to the hospital as it modernized its physical plant and undertook major new construction, including the greenberg pavilion, completed in 1996. he also served for several years as the chairman of the hospitals endowment fund and as a member of its third century committee. mr. taylor is survived by his wife, anne alexis cote taylor, a national pioneer in patient advocacy who held leadership positions at new york-presbyterian/weill cornell for many years. he is also survived by six children and their spouses; 19 grandchildren; and his sister. to them and to his many friends, we extend our deepest condolences. john j. mack chairman board of trustees dr. herbert pardes president and ceo newyork-presbyterian hospital and healthcare system sanford i. weill chairman board of overseers dr. antonio m. gotto jr. dean weill cornell medical college  $(6$)taylor--paul e. the entire family of staff, physicians and trustees of new york community hospital mourns the loss of paul e. taylor, and expresses our heart felt condolences to his wife, and our friend anne alexis cote' taylor, a former board of trustee member of our hospital. paul was a man of tremendous love and compassion; he was always willing to help and contribute to the improvement of peoples lives and the strengthening of health care institutions. nych was the beneficiary of the tremendous good work accomplished by paul and anne. we will forever be grateful for paul's assistance and the contributions made by anne. we offer our condolences to the children, the grandchildren and the entire taylor family. george weinberger, chairman, board of trustees lin h. mo, president and chief executive officer  