meissner is alone on center ice   in some ways, the united states figure skating championships seem to be in a full post-olympic-year swoon.  missing are the two biggest names in women's skating over the past six years, michelle kwan and sasha cohen, and the men's stalwart timothy goebel has retired. so when the event begins today in spokane, wash., it will find itself with an unlikely star.  kimmie meissner will take the ice a year after her surprising victory in the world championships at age 16 following a sixth-place finish in the olympics. she was second at last year's nationals behind cohen. meissner was nearly forgotten in the attention paid to kwan's petition to be added to the olympic team after missing the nationals with an injury.  meissner, now 17, said she thought it was funny that she was trying to win a national title after capturing a world championship.  ''yeah, my winning worlds last year was a big shock,'' meissner said last week from her home in delaware. ''winning it before winning nationals is pretty funny. i changed it up.''  she will be the women's favorite at the start of thursday's short program, most likely vying for the title with emily hughes, who eventually took kwan's place in the turin olympics and was another skater who overshadowed meissner.  if last year marked the end of kwan's career -- she has not officially retired, but is not competing this season -- it also launched meissner's. she burst into the sport's consciousness two years ago when she became the first woman since tonya harding in 1993 to land a triple axel. meissner has not landed one since, but she has quietly gone about polishing the artistry of her programs to match the majesty of her jumps.  ''i've probably matured a little bit,'' meissner said. ''i'm doing my normal triple-triples. i can take on the biggest pieces of music, do different styles. i want to make everything in my program bigger.''  with the glamorous cohen taking a hiatus from competition, meissner and hughes give the top of the women's field a distinctly girl-next-door flavor. meissner and hughes are public-school students with a lot of regular-kid interests to go with their top-level skating.  hughes, who finished seventh in the olympics and eighth in the world championships at age 17, was trying to write a second chapter in the hughes olympic story, after her older sister sarah's gold-medal performance in 2002.  so far this season, hughes has finished as high as third, in the cup of china. meissner finished second and third in her two international competitions, skate america and trophée eric bompard.  meissner called the past year a whirlwind and said she still had not gotten used to people recognizing her. she said she was floored when her local phonebook arrived with her picture on the cover.  ''now when i go to look up a number, i have to look at my picture,'' she said, laughing. ''it's different, but it's something i definitely enjoy.''  the biggest question mark in the pairs competition, which begins tonight with the short program, is how well john baldwin will recover from injuries he sustained in a severe beating.  baldwin and his partner, rena inoue, are defending champions at the nationals, and they landed the first throw triple axel in the competition.  they were unsure they could even compete here after baldwin said he was kidnapped, robbed and beaten while in st. petersburg, russia, for a competition in december. he was left with a concussion and vertigo.  ''thank goodness for skating to help me get through some of the ordeal,'' baldwin wrote in an entry on the pair's web site; he added that they resumed training only two weeks ago. ''our skating is going well and we're performing the throw triple axel every day. i am getting better each day physically and emotionally.''  the men's field will again be led by johnny weir, the three-time national champion, who will probably vie with evan lysacek for the title.  and the ice-dancing competition will showcase tanith belbin and ben agosto, the three-time national champions whose silver medal in the 2006 games was the first olympic medal by an american dance team in 30 years.  figure skating  