no frivolity: davos tries fewer stars   snow was not the only thing in short supply as moguls and world leaders rolled into this ski resort town this week.  in addition to the slopes being unusually bare, the start of the world economic forum on wednesday was notable for its distinct lack of star power. where was angelina jolie, who was here a year ago waxing on about human rights? or sharon stone, who showed up in 2005 trying to tackle the aids epidemic?  the annual conference in davos, long known as a snowy playground where politicians, business leaders and celebrities socialize and talk big ideas, is devoid this year of the hollywood crowd and their pet causes that have previously given the event a bit of extra gloss.  this year, virtually all of the celebrities were told to stay home and take in the mountain views of the hollywood hills.  in an age when a celebrity's wardrobe can garner more coverage than geopolitics, klaus schwab, 67, the founder of the event, was worried that the conference, styled as ''committed to improving the state of the world,'' had lost its sense of seriousness and purpose.  ''i have great admiration for using celebrity status for good causes,'' mr. schwab said. ''we have given those people a chance to draw attention to certain issues. but those people have to be very careful not to go overboard.''  indeed, last year, the conference was perhaps better known for sightings of ms. jolie and her boyfriend, brad pitt, than for the comments of shimon peres of israel on the day that hamas was elected. ms. jolie attended as part of her role as a united nations good-will ambassador.  sharon stone took over the forum in 2005, when she stood up during a panel on poverty and started a fund-raising effort right then and there, pledging $10,000 to fighting malaria in tanzania and asking the audience to match her. ''could you please stand up?'' she asked the crowd.  more than 30 people did stand up with donations and by the end of the debate, the organizers announced that they had raised $1 million.  some business leaders, who can spend more than $100,000 a year supporting the forum, complained privately about the overflow of celebrities and the lack of attention they, the business leaders, were receiving.  besides ms. jolie and ms. stone, in recent years the forum has also drawn the actor michael douglas pushing gun control, richard gere pressing solutions to the aids epidemic and the entertainer bono on africa. (bono, who has been a longtime attendee, was invited this year because mr. schwab did not consider him simply a musician with a cause, but a true philanthropist. peter gabriel, who has also attended for more than a decade, is also here.)  the lack of hollywood star power this year, however, may have left some of the attendees, and perhaps even the conference organizers, wanting.  ''the no-celebrity thing was a big mistake,'' said one of the world's largest financiers at a party sponsored by forbes -- he asked for anonymity for fear of losing his own invitation to next year's forum. ''the celebs added a sense of energy and spice to the forum. who doesn't like to look at angelina? it was always a great story to tell when you went home.''  and while hordes of journalists are attending the conference, the amount of coverage and the attention on the conference seem to be decreasing this year.  ''it may cause us a big disappointment publicly with the media,'' mr. schwab acknowledged.  he said he was not sure how long the celebrity ban would last. ''we decided to have a one-year time out,'' he said, not ruling out the chance for more celebrities next year.  as the week went on, davos did eventually get a coating of snow as well as a dose of glamour.  the latter came when the supermodel claudia schiffer showed up on wednesday night at a party for focus magazine of germany. she was at the event on behalf of the investment promotion agency of germany, a federally financed organization that is called, not subtly, invest in germany. ms. schiffer also appears in an ad campaign with the tagline ''invest in germany, boys,'' a joint initiative of the german government and industry.  captains of industry, politicians and the media all clamored to chat her up and have pictures taken with her. while she may be a spokeswoman for her country, she was not that talkative.  