the best place for middle schoolers   to the editor:  re ''taking the middle schoolers out of the middle'' (''the critical years'' series, front page, jan. 22):  yes, students of middle school age are hard to place. but before we dismantle middle schools, let's first see if we even gave them a chance.  middle schools were designed to provide a place between the self-contained classroom of elementary school and the fragmented world of high school.  a middle school is built around teams, where the same teachers teach the same students, with opportunities to meet during the day to collaborate about curriculum and student progress, providing effective communication with parents, counselors and administration.  i have taught in such a program in both new york and here in california. but such programs are holding on by a thread. it takes district-led vision and commitment to design and support these programs.  a well-structured middle school can make a real difference in these crucial transitional years.  steve carson  san francisco, jan. 22, 2007  to the editor:  the middle grades are not about what grade levels occupy a building, but what happens in any building to meet the learning needs of children ages 10 to 15.  i appreciate that you've highlighted the current restructuring trends. but to really gauge what is happening in the two schools, k-8 or 6-12, we must look critically at student achievement and adjustment levels and what program elements contribute to student success.  in new york city, as elsewhere, we need academically rigorous, developmentally appropriate and socially equitable schools for students ages 10 to 15. we need to stop thinking of grade restructuring as a silver bullet and start addressing what's going on inside.  in order to provide adolescents with the tools they need to succeed, policy makers must work with educators to use research-based practices to transform what's happening inside our nation's middle grades and not be satisfied with superficial fixes.  deborah kasak  exec. dir., national forum to  accelerate middle-grades reform  champaign, ill., jan. 23, 2007  to the editor:  your jan. 22 article about middle schools reports that some middle school experts see ''smaller classes, an engaging curriculum, personalized attention and well-prepared teachers'' as effective responses to the challenge of teaching young adolescents.  this is correct.  we need to address the developmental needs of young adolescents, regardless of whether they are in a k-8, 5-9 or 6-12 configuration. this is what the middle school movement advocates.  ross  m. burkhardt  las cruces, n.m., jan. 22, 2007  the writer is a past president of the national middle school association.  to the editor:  closing middle schools and moving the students into k-8 schools may or may not improve outcomes for former middle schoolers, but such a shift is not likely to benefit the youngest children in the building.  in research for my recent book, i visited schools in more than a dozen states and concluded that young children are best served in schools that concentrate on constructing a learning foundation for them from pre-kindergarten through third grade.  the focus -- without the distraction of catering to older students -- should be on providing them with the academic skills, understanding, habits and dispositions that will serve them throughout their education.  this kind of grounding is not apt to occur in today's k-8 school, which inevitably gives greatest attention to the test scores of older students and preparing them for high school.  if k-8 schools grow more prevalent, then they should create a school within a school for the youngest children with their own assistant principal, a separate support staff and separate professional development for teachers. they should also have their own wing of the building, an area where everybody is ''primary minded,'' as a second grade teacher in glen ridge, n.j., put it to me.  gene i. maeroff  edison, n.j., jan. 22, 2007  the writer is a senior fellow at teachers college, columbia university.  to the editor:  as the parent of two seventh graders in middle school and one ninth grader in her first year of high school, i read the jan. 22 article about middle schools with interest.  nowhere was the issue of drugs and alcohol mentioned. the article notes that some educators argue that ''11-, 12- and 13-year-olds thrive in the presence of older role models and reminders of concrete goals, like playing varsity sports and getting into college.''  but these older students can also provide easy access to drugs and alcohol -- access that most probably would not be found if students remained longer in middle schools.  felice kobrick  east hills, n.y., jan. 22, 2007  to the editor:  as parents of three sons -- 11, 14 and 16 years old -- who have changed schools twice in recent years, my wife and i have a few insights into the middle school debate.  for one, middle school presents a host of challenges regardless of the model, and the best way to meet them is by communicating regularly with your child's teachers and, most vital, with your child.  our sons are happily enrolled at frederick douglass academy in harlem, and its success in nudging its middle school students toward adulthood while nurturing them with the care appropriate to their age (why should the two goals contradict each other?) is indeed laudable.  but that success is hardly the simple outcome of a particular model. it is the result of a tireless principal with high expectations, and a dedicated teaching staff determined to meet them.  christopher m. zimmerman  new york, jan. 22, 2007  