nymex abandoning plans for british futures market   nymex holdings, parent company of the new york mercantile exchange and a lonely champion of open-outcry trading, is cutting its last ties to an ill-fated plan to set up a trading floor in britain.  the commodities market has quietly applied for ''derecognition of exchange'' with british regulators, traders in london said. markets that trade here are required to certify to the main regulator, the financial services authority of britain, that they are ''recognized investment exchanges.''  with the request for ''derecognition,'' nymex's presence in london reverts to a marketing office, a far cry from the ambitious expansion plans it undertook less than two years ago.  ''we've had to adjust our business model,'' a nymex spokeswoman, anu ahluwalia, said tuesday, confirming the application. ''we were very ambitious and went in and built a trading floor, and that is not the way that business is going, so we adapted very quickly.''  since nymex went public last november, investors and analysts have wondered how the company might expand internationally and take advantage of the worldwide boom in commodities. nymex's british foray could provide a good road map of the wrong way to do so.  the movement across the atlantic started after the international petroleum exchange in london went fully electronic in april 2005, following 25 years of open-outcry trading. that market is part of the intercontinentalexchange, or ice, nymex's big rival. the new york exchange had already tested an open-outcry exchange in dublin, which it opened in 2004.  but nymex was not able to move quickly, and it took five months to get the trading floor up and running, a result in part of regulatory snarls. nymex spent millions trying to encourage traders to use its london floor, and on the first day of trading, in september 2005, 12 companies and 76 traders showed up. nymex was expected to start open-pit exchanges in dubai, singapore and possibly tokyo or shanghai.  but the british initiative proved short lived, and appears to have discouraged plans for open pits elsewhere. by march 2006, nymex in london was trading fewer than 20 contracts a day for brent crude futures, the most common oil contract here, compared with about 200,000 on ice futures.  executives at other exchanges and commodity traders said that nymex's five-month delay in opening gave the international petroleum exchange time to learn how to trade electronically, or time to drift into another business. the ipe's electronic exchange was also faster than some critics expected.  nymex's foray also inspired ice to start trading an important nymex product, west texas intermediate crude oil. by june 2006, nymex had closed its london open-outcry floor and transferred trading of european commodity contracts onto an electronic and an over-the-counter exchange.  open outcry in london ''never took off the way that we hoped,'' ms. ahluwalia said. ''this is by no means an end to our global growth.''  nymex holdings also includes the comex metals market in new york. it has offices in singapore and tokyo, and is working with the dubai government to open a mercantile exchange there, which will be electronic. ''we're going to expand our brand globally,'' ms. ahluwalia said, ''just not through a trading floor.''  though nymex failed in london, some open-outcry exchanges still exist here. the london metal exchange does the bulk of its trading by open outcry, and had record volume in 2006.  open outcry ''is still the most efficient and most popular method of trading,'' a spokesman for the london metal exchange, adam robinson, said.  