art from russia with love (c'est français, naturellement)   the british have long conceded that the french invented the art of love. london, then, might offer the most receptive audience for ''the triumph of eros: art and seduction in 18th-century france,'' a show that demonstrates through paintings, engravings and sculptures how the french turned loving into an amusing pasttime.  in truth, though, not only britons were impressed by the french imagination. this exhibition, being presented through april 8 in the hermitage rooms at somerset house, is here because most of the 100 works on display were collected in the early 19th century for the private pleasure of czar nicholas i of russia.  and even czar nicholas was hardly alone.  ''the emancipation of the emotion of love in 18th-century france marked the beginning of the assertion of sexuality in the european consciousness,'' notes one of the show's curators, dmitri ozerkov of the state hermitage museum in st. petersburg. ''its echoes can be heard in the moral emancipation of the late 19th century and sexual revolution of the 20th century.''  so perhaps the british were right: all credit (or blame) to the french.  of course, no one is claiming that the french actually invented erotic art. it existed in egyptian, roman, pre-columbian, indian and african cultures. there is no shortage of sexual charge in paintings by, say, botticelli, michelangelo, raphael, titian, rubens or velázquez. even religious art was frequently sensual as well as solemn.  the case for 18th-century france is that the death of louis xiv in 1715 set in motion a social revolution marked initially by licentiousness and then by intellectual liberation and philosophical inquiry. and it was in this context that love -- and, yes, sex -- came to be closely re-examined in art and literature.  even the french needed an excuse, and this was provided by cupid, or eros, the god of love, who in france was known simply as amour, or love. thus in visual art venus's plump little son, with his mischievous eyes and his ever-present arrows, came to represent all the passion speeding through the veins of 18th-century frenchwomen.  the show includes paintings by boucher, watteau, natoire, fragonard and lancret, as well as a dozen engravings inspired by other oils by fragonard. the large number of artists involved in saucy printmaking confirms that in the age of enlightenment love became something of an entertainment industry.  was all this male fantasy? certainly the artists and writers who were expressing female yearning for love or more were men. in his catalog essay mr. ozerkov quotes from a 1746 discourse by luc de clapier de vauvenargue that ''suggests that a man falls in love not with a real woman but with an image he creates of her.''  still, the central work in this show, ''menacing cupid,'' a marble statue by Étienne-maurice falconet, was originally made for madame de pompadour, louis xv's mistress. (the version displayed here is one of several copies by falconet.) no less than today, women were the main consumers of romantic fiction.  one section of ''the triumph of eros'' is unabashedly voyeuristic: it shows women in their boudoirs. yet more interesting than the occasional bare breast is the emotional intimacy on display as young women write love letters under cupid's guidance or read novels, like jean-jacques rousseau's ''julie, ou la nouvelle héloïse,'' that set them dreaming.  these novels had an additional function. with letter-writing playing a key role in the early stages of seduction, correspondents would borrow phrases and sentences from popular fiction. ''the love letter,'' an engraving by claude-augustin-pierre duflos, shows a young woman reading a letter delivered by a servant; above her is a painting of leda kissing a swan.  several sexual metaphors were repeatedly used in art. cupid, for instance, was shown playing with a quill beside an inkwell. a caged bird, in turn, represented virginity: one engraving portrays a woman examining a bird outside its cage; another shows a man holding a bird cage in the folds of a woman's skirt.  the swing also features prominently, with the physical excitement of flying through the air a symbol of sexual arousal. gérard vidal's ''secret swing'' shows a naked woman swinging through a pond. fragonard's ''swing'' is still naughtier: as a priest swings a young woman high in the air, she raises her legs to show herself to a hidden lover.  other images are more explicit, notably among czar nicholas's private engravings, which include a number of original prints portraying naked women before drapery was added to them to allow wider publication. pierre-laurent auvray's etching ''jets of water'' captures the moment when three naked women are sprayed with water by their lovers.  does any of this seem shocking today? hardly. brian sewell, the art critic of the evening standard in london, was thoroughly disappointed, although he added, ''i admit, however, that while i cast my jaundiced eye over these examples of genteel bawdy, the muted shrieks and titters of a middle-aged woman or two echoed through the rooms.''  certainly exhibitions of far more explicit erotic art have become routine, with france again frequently leading the way, from ''feminin-masculin'' at the georges pompidou center in 1996 and ''amours'' at the cartier foundation for contemporary art in 1997 to ''picasso Érotique'' at the jeu de paume in 2001 and ''figures of eros,'' now at the musée rodin.  even if ''the triumph of eros'' is tame by comparison, the show makes its point. whether sentimental, unrequited, passionate, frustrated or sexual, romantic love as we know it today had its cradle in 18th-century france.  