kerr-mcgee is found liable in lawsuit over oil royalties   a federal jury in denver agreed tuesday with a former top auditor for the interior department that the kerr-mcgee corporation had cheated the government out of millions of dollars in royalties on oil it produced in publicly owned coastal waters.  the decision, reached by the jury after deliberations of about four hours, is a vindication for the auditor, bobby l. maxwell. he became a whistle-blower and sued kerr-mcgee as a private citizen after top officials at the interior department ordered him to drop his audit findings.  it is also a potentially big embarrassment for the interior department, which dismissed mr. maxwell in a ''reorganization'' and which had insisted that his case against kerr-mcgee had no merit.  the minerals management service, an interior department agency that collects more than $10 billion a year in royalties on oil and gas pumped on federal territory, is now the subject of numerous investigations by congress, as well as its own inspector general, over its enforcement of royalty rules.  interior department officials did not return e-mail messages on tuesday night requesting comment on the decision, the word of which arrived shortly before 7 p.m. in washington.  in addition to mr. maxwell, three other auditors in the royalty program have filed their own lawsuits as whistle-blowers against more than a dozen other oil companies. like mr. maxwell, those auditors have said the interior department blocked them from pursuing what they viewed as valid cases of underpayments.  the jury in mr. maxwell's case decided that kerr-mcgee had underpaid the government $7.5 million, accepting mr. maxwell's estimates.  under the false claims act, a law that was intended to encourage whistle-blowers, kerr-mcgee could be forced to pay more than $30 million -- double or triple the original amount it owed, as well as penalties of up to $11,000 for each of 1,200 false statements that the company is accused of making in its royalty reports to the government.  mr. maxwell could be entitled to as much as 30 percent of that, though the judge has considerable discretion in deciding the reward.  ''i'm just ecstatic,'' mr. maxwell said in a telephone interview shortly after the jury announced its verdict. ''it's an incredible vindication, and it also shows the tremendous failure in management at m.m.s. in having companies follow the rules and regulations.''  kerr-mcgee, which was acquired last year by anadarko petroleum, steadfastly denied that it had underpaid its royalties and insisted the government had agreed with it.  ''the government prepared two audit reports of the facts in this case and found no fraud,'' scott barker, a lawyer for kerr-mcgee, told jurors in closing arguments on tuesday, according to bloomberg news.  ''there was a difference of opinion about how to calculate royalties,'' mr. barker said. ''a difference of opinion is not an untrue statement and does not constitute a false claim.''  many of the nation's biggest oil companies took a keen interest in the case, warning the tenth circuit court of appeals in a friend-of-the-court brief last year that mr. maxwell's lawsuit would ''open the floodgates'' to lawsuits by what it said would be other disgruntled federal auditors and investigators.  kerr-mcgee is almost certain to appeal the verdict. for more than two years, it tried to block the trial on the ground that mr. maxwell was not entitled to sue under the false claims act because he was using information obtained from his work.  