urging teenagers to rein in careless drivers   driving with passengers is generally safer than driving alone, at least for adults, studies have found. but if the driver and passengers are teenagers, the risk of a fatal crash rises. add more teenagers and the risk goes up more.  highway safety specialists are trying to change that with a series of public service television ads, starting today, intended to persuade teenagers that it is o.k. to complain if the driver is going too fast or being too wild.  ''most teens are wary of expressing their discomfort, for fear of seeming uncool,'' said joe depreta, partner and executive managing director of north castle, an agency in stamford, conn., that produced the spots for the ad council. his firm has done previous campaigns for products used by young people, including apparel, acne cream and snack foods, and also produces ads aimed at motivating teenagers to study math and science.  young people, mr. depreta said, are ''concerned about being confrontational or insulting.''  ''they certainly don't want to be labeled the mom, or put a bad vibe on the dynamic,'' he said.  paradoxically, he said, teenagers are far quicker to accept guidance from peers than from older people.  social reluctance to raise a safety issue is not limited to cars. airlines spend hours training their captains and co-pilots to backstop each other in formal training called cockpit resource management. still, studies show that captains are more assertive in challenging co-pilots than vice versa, because of what specialists call an authority gradient, in which an underling hesitates to criticize a supervisor.  studies show that teenage drivers are at higher risk of being in fatal accidents to start with, and that risk goes up as the number of passengers rises. a study by david f. preusser, susan a. ferguson and allan f. williams, published in 1998 in the journal accident analysis and prevention, found that 16-year-old drivers who were alone in a car were slightly more than twice as likely to have a fatal crash as middle-aged drivers. but if there were passengers, they were nearly five times as likely to have a fatal crash.  ''teens like to have a moving party in the car,'' said penny wells, president and executive director of sadd, which was also involved in developing the new campaign. the organization was founded as students against drunk driving but is now known as students against destructive decisions. she said seeing ads that encourage teenagers to speak up would help them envision themselves intervening.  the national transportation safety board has advised states to limit the number of passengers that young novice drivers can carry. many states have done so, using a graduated license system in which limitations are imposed on rookie drivers, who gain privileges with experience. still, many crashes occur when young people have full licenses.  mark v. rosenker, the board chairman, said it was ''gratifying to see this approach to promote responsible decision making by both young drivers and their passengers.''  safety specialists have tried before to encourage positive peer pressure, with campaigns like ''friends don't let friends drive drunk.'' some of those are explicitly aimed at teenagers.  philip w. haseltine, president of the automotive coalition for traffic safety, which is financed by carmakers and related companies, said that teenagers' attitudes could be changed, but not by ads alone.  ''it might be a good starting point,'' he said. ''that message is going to have to be reinforced on multiple occasions, from multiple sources, if we expect it to have any effectiveness.''  in one of the ads, two young men in the front seats are bantering as the car careers down a dark road; in the back is a third young man, looking nervous. the driver takes his eyes off the road to hunt on the car floor for the cellphone he has dropped. suddenly, a slightly older man in a coat and tie steps into the back seat and begins a sales pitch, in tones like the one used on late-night tv for wonder products not available in stores.  ''how would you like to save your life from an ugly reckless-driving death?'' he asks.  ''don't answer yet, there's more,'' he continues. ''act now, by slowing down, and we'll guarantee you complete satisfaction.'' he gives a toothy grin.  a sober-voiced narrator says, ''in the real world, there is no spokesperson to prevent reckless driving, there's only you. speak up.''  in a second ad, three young women are in a car. as the front-seat passenger waves and calls enthusiastically to someone on the sidewalk, the driver sinks down beneath the dashboard to avoid being seen. the third young woman, sitting in back, looks terrified. the same salesman appears.  ''do you have a problem with your friends driving recklessly?'' he asks. ''with your friends endangering your life? i'm here to tell you that reckless driving is the no. 1 cause of teenage deaths. but with new and improved slow down, you don't have to die.''  his delivery is a parody of salesmanship, making ''slow down'' sound like the bonus provided free for ordering a ginsu knife now.  in the end, the young woman in back says to the driver, ''kim, pay attention!''  and a radio spot mockingly offers a new product, ''car windshield.''  ''it slices, it dices, with razorlike edges that never need sharpening,'' says a hyped-up announcer. and all you need to do to experience it, he says, is to say nothing when the person behind the wheel is driving recklessly.  yet another ad says, ''interstate highway ditch can be yours.''  the media business: advertising  