making car of tomorrow with robotics of today   for all the technology that goes into stock-car racing, nascar remains a labor-intensive competition, as each race car chassis is welded together by hand. that will change this year when evernham motorsports becomes the first nextel cup team to use robotics to aid in building racecars.  ray evernham, the team owner, said thursday that he would spend about $250,000 to $350,000 to purchase automated equipment that would assemble small parts and ultimately be used to weld the frame of the ''car of tomorrow,'' a racecar that nascar will introduce this year.  ''in theory, we can now start to make jigs and fixtures and use robotics to weld, which will stop me from having to increase the number of people i have and put people on things like making the car go faster,'' evernham said during a preseason news conference. ''it will cut the costs.  ''we're following the manufacturing process of most industries. we're a sports team, but we're really a small manufacturing company now. we build probably 30 cars a year, and it will go up.''  evernham said that he hoped to build complete racecars for other teams, like petty enterprises, to use in competition.  evernham motorsports is the only dodge team to attempt this approach. officials at toyota, ford and general motors said they have also considered adding robotics for their race teams. but they have decided against the move so far.  ''we looked at completely automating it, putting a tremendous amount of science in it and basically taking all the hand labor out of it: an assembly line kind of thing, highly automated, robots,'' dan davis, the director of ford racing technology, said earlier this month. ''and obviously, that would take all those welders and fabricators, put them out of a job.  ''when it got all said and done, it was pretty much a wash in terms of the labor cost to put these things together. it turned out to my surprise the hand-labor approach is going to be or was as good as a robotic approach.''  test track coming -- the team owner roger penske said he planned to build a racetrack on about 70 acres next to his race shop in mooresville, n.c.  the track will be three-quarters of a mile, complete with soft walls and facilities to operate a racing school. the price will depend on the amenities and the building construction around it, and could run as high as $10 million, said don miller, penske racing's president.  penske said it cost more than $1 million a year to travel to racetracks and use other facilities for testing. he also said he believed that other teams would rent the track for their own practices. mooresville is just north of charlotte and is a hub for major race teams in nascar.  hall construction to begin -- a groundbreaking ceremony was held thursday in downtown charlotte, where the nascar hall of fame and a 19-story office tower will be built as part of the nascar plaza. the hall of fame is scheduled to open in 2010. among those putting the first shovels in the ground were the seven-time champion richard petty; nascar's president, mike helton; the team owner rick hendrick; and mayor pat mccrory. many legends of the sport were also on hand for the ceremony.  charlotte's proposal beat out atlanta; richmond, va.; daytona beach, fla.; and kansas city, kan., for the hall.  las vegas versus new york -- bruton smith, chairman and chief executive of speedway motorsports, inc., and one of the major track owners in nascar, is pushing racing officials to move the annual awards ceremonies to las vegas.  the champions week festivities, including a banquet at the waldorf-astoria, have been held in new york since 1981.  smith, who owns las vegas motor speedway, is hoping for a move in 2007, although it appears unlikely that a switch will be made that quickly.  nascar's sister company, international speedway corporation, recently opted against building a racetrack on staten island.  smith said he considered building a track on staten island as well, but opted against it years ago.  ''i determined it would take 10 years,'' smith said. ''you get less sentences sometimes for murder, and i just decided i didn't want to do that.''  auto racing  