man dies in fall, second fatality at brooklyn shipyard in january   a shipyard worker died yesterday after falling at least 25 feet in a fuel barge at the brooklyn navy yard, the police said, the second fatality this month at a work site operated by gmd shipyard corporation.  the man, arturo medina, 36, of brooklyn, was climbing down a 50-foot ladder into the dry-docked barge's hull when he fell just after 10:30 a.m., fire officials said. the hole is the only way to gain access to a work site in the barge, officials said.  firefighters and emergency crews used ropes and a pulley system to lift him out of the 18-inch-wide hole about an hour later. mr. medina died yesterday afternoon at brooklyn hospital center, the police said.  michael cranston, president of gmd shipyard, said mr. medina had worked for a subcontractor intermittently for three years.  on jan. 6, christopher g. thomas, 51, an ironworker, was crushed by a large metal plate at another dock run by gmd shipyard.  both accidents are being investigated by the federal occupational safety and health administration, according to an agency spokesman, juan chavez.  mr. cranston said it appeared that mr. medina had slipped while climbing down the ladder. ''we are going to audit the whole safety operation of the company, but it appears to be two completely unrelated incidents,'' he said. before the jan. 6 accident, osha last inspected gmd shipyard in march 1998, then it was doing business as fce industries, he said.  after that inspection, the company paid $5,625 in fines for five violations, mr. chavez said. he did not have details yesterday, but said the violations included a welding violation and the lack of competency or oversight of at least one employee.  correction:  january 27, 2007, saturday  an article on wednesday about the death of a shipyard worker at the brooklyn navy yard misstated the given name of a spokesman for the federal occupational safety and health administration who said the accident was being investigated. he is john chavez, not juan.  