balancing act: wins and fatherhood   the latest phase of tiger woods's life has brought him to a new and unfamiliar place, where the quest for titles on the pga tour has been joined by the anticipation of his first child.  during an off-season that included skiing in colorado and golfing in japan, woods spent part of his break studying the shadows of his wife's sonogram. as he played in a pro-am wednesday at the buick invitational at torrey pines golf course, he alternated between hitting shots and listening to tournament volunteers offer everything from congratulations to diapering tips.  ''i know what you'll be going through,'' said a volunteer wearing a straw hat and high knee socks as woods stood by the sixth fairway of the south course and listened.  woods smiled at all of the interruptions a day before he begins his 11th full season on the pga tour. when he started his season at torrey pines a year ago, his father, earl, was dying of cancer.  this year, woods is riding a wave of happier thoughts -- a streak of six pga tour victories in six starts, a spate of new television commercials, impending fatherhood.  ''i'm looking forward to the year and what's going to transpire,'' woods said during a news conference. ''last year, i was not looking forward to the year and what was going to transpire. two totally different mind-sets: one is just praying and hoping, and the other is just pure excitement and enjoyment.''  despite not playing in a pga tour event since october, woods hit tee shots wednesday that rarely ventured from the middle of the fairway. he has won four times at torrey pines, which has often served as the kickoff point for historic seasons.  many of the plot points that woods left behind in 2006 will be waiting for him when he begins the first round thursday on the 10th hole of the north course.  a victory would give him seven consecutive pga tour wins -- one more than the six straight achieved by woods in 1999-2000 and by ben hogan in 1948 -- and put him four behind byron nelson's record 11 straight victories in 1945.  the calendar may change, but woods's storyline rarely does.  ''it's amazing,'' john daly said. ''eleven in a row, 12 in a row, would definitely be a lot harder than what byron did because there are so many more great players now. every guy that tees it up has a chance to win.''  david duval said: ''i'm sure the players get tired of being asked about tiger, but he and his golf and how he's playing and what he's doing is the story. you're talking about somebody who's come along who's quite exceptional at what he does, and a lot of people have crowned him the best player there's ever been. it would be hard to argue that point.''  after missing the cut at the 2006 united states open at winged foot golf club -- his first start after the death of his father in may -- woods shot a combined 165 under par in 42 rounds the rest of the year, including titles at the british open and the p.g.a. championship that put him 6 behind jack nicklaus's record 18 victories in majors.  woods has built his career around the majors, but his preparation may be altered this year. with his wife, elin, due to give birth in july, and the british open at carnoustie golf links scheduled for july 19-22, woods said he would skip the tournament if the due date fell the same week.  ''if she's going to have it during the week of the open, i just don't go,'' woods said. ''that's the most important thing, not another golf tournament.''  woods's competitors have had various reactions to his pending fatherhood, but none said it would lessen his focus or hunger for titles. they expect the woods of the past decade to continue hoarding trophies of all sizes.  ''you look at nicklaus, having so many kids at such a young age, he only got better and better,'' phil mickelson said. ''with tiger, he's always been able to balance so many different areas of his life that i think this will just be another area that he adds into the mix, and a very rewarding part of his life.''  daly agreed with mickelson, but he took an entirely different view of woods on the verge of fatherhood.  ''i wanted to be his child,'' daly joked. ''if i was his child, i wouldn't play golf anymore. i'd be sitting in a boat somewhere spending all dad's money. i've been trying to get him to adopt me for the last five years, but he wouldn't do it.''  golf  