nets take two steps back after a big step forward   the nets squandered double-digit leads in the fourth quarter and lost each of their first two games of their trip out west, a reflection of their inability to maintain a steady course this season.  the letdowns, 1-point defeats to the sacramento kings on monday night and the golden state warriors on wednesday night, came on the heels of a four-game winning streak that had the nets at .500 for the first time in two months. they have followed each apparent turning point this season with a misstep.  with their season past the midway point, the nets (20-22) were still trying for their first road victory against a western conference opponent when they played the los angeles clippers (20-21) on thursday night.  after the game against the warriors, ''the mood was not good,'' rod thorn, the nets' president, said thursday morning. ''if you're a competitor, as a player or as a coach, you're very upset about that, about losing two games like that, games that you had in hand.''  perhaps most disheartening for the nets is that their five-game trip was getting more difficult. they play the denver nuggets on saturday night and the utah jazz on monday.  ''virtually every game, we're playing a better team,'' thorn said. ''we've got our work cut out for us.''  against the kings, the nets held a 20-point lead in the third quarter, only to have it evaporate at the hands of sacramento point guard mike bibby, who capped a strong fourth quarter by making the winning shot with 10 seconds remaining.  ''we just quit playing,'' thorn said. ''we just stood around in the fourth quarter.''  the nets led the warriors by 11 points with a little more than four minutes remaining, but golden state finished the game on a 17-5 run, capped by guard monta ellis hitting the winner at the buzzer. it was the seventh time this season the nets had lost after squandering a double-digit lead.  ''it is hard,'' nets forward bostjan nachbar said after the game. ''it is not easy. we had both games won. we thought we were the better team, at least most of the game. we lost the game down the stretch, and the next couple games will show how tough we are.''  the nets' grit will have to start with their two stars, jason kidd and vince carter. that is especially true with their third top-flight player, richard jefferson, out for about six weeks after he had arthroscopic surgery on his right ankle monday.  kidd has been stellar all season, playing some of the best basketball of his career, but he had eight turnovers against the warriors.  carter, after leading by 214,000 votes the last time they were counted, was surpassed in the all-star voting by the washington wizards' gilbert arenas for an eastern conference starting spot thursday. arenas beat out carter by 3,010 votes, the smallest margin in 17 years. carter has been voted a starter six times.  before thursday night's game, carter pretended to have thought he had beaten out arenas. after sarcastically acting as if his feelings were hurt, carter said he would not be disappointed to go the game as a reserve.  ''it's still an honor to be involved in it,'' he said.  for now, carter has more pressing things to think about. he scored only 8 points against the kings. despite having 23 points and a career-high 13 assists against the warriors, he did not dominate down the stretch.  the injuries to jefferson and center nenad krstic, who is out for the season with a torn anterior cruciate ligament, have probably affected carter more than any other player because he faces more double-teams.  as the nets have struggled this season, carter has seemed to be the most likely candidate for a trade if thorn chooses to make drastic changes. carter can opt out of his contract at the end of the season, meaning the nets may try to get someone in return for him if they feel he may leave.  but with the nets' recent success -- they had won 9 of 11 games before losing to the kings and the warriors -- much of the trade talk seemed to have settled.  the nets' ability to make any significant trades by the feb. 22 deadline could be hampered by the fact that two of their biggest assets, jefferson and krstic, are injured.  ''when you're talking about trading, you trade from assets,'' thorn said. ''if you don't have a lot of assets to trade, it's difficult to make anything but a minor trade.''  basketball  