strike a pose: a show pony choreographs his obsession   last year the choreographer trajal harrell was hit with an intense dose of post-performance depression. it wasn't that his dance, ''before intermission,'' was badly received (it wasn't), but that after months of rehearsal and a two-night run at the kitchen, it was over. around the same time he also observed how his nondance friends were progressing in their lives: getting married, having babies, buying homes.  ''i thought: 'what do you have? you have a show.' '' he said after a recent rehearsal in the east village.  to mr. harrell, 38, a show is his own ''little temporary real estate.'' in his new piece, ''showpony,'' which opens tonight at danspace project, mr. harrell addresses the value of shows and performing, and the implications of selling your body.  ''i'm a show pony,'' he explained. ''for lack of a better term, there are people, like myself, who are obsessed with being in shows and doing shows. that's a show pony. i'm being funny, but i'm also quite serious. i like to show off, and i like to be seen.''  ''before intermission'' featured many exits and entrances. ''i was onstage, total, for about 16 minutes,'' mr. harrell said. ''i decided that if this performance culture is really what i've committed my life to, i don't want to miss a minute of it next time.'' in ''showpony'' he remains onstage throughout the work.  in past works mr. harrell, inspired by the novels of bret easton ellis and james baldwin, has explored the point where voguing, with its angular movements, meets postmodern dance of the 1960s and '70s, as well as the concept of ''cool.'' his dances exist on the perilous edge between authenticity and posing, driven by carefully timed tension and a heightened sensitivity, created through lighting and music, that relies on live performance. on videotape mr. harrell's dances don't stand a chance.  in ''showpony'' he loosens his choreographic structure but still uses the configuration of a fashion show, which he has been drawn to before, to romanticize the idea of glamour and the potential cool of contemporary dance. the theater has been rearranged, and the seats reduced to only 46, in two rows facing each other. the long, narrow space in between -- a runway -- serves as the stage. throughout the work, mr. harrell and the other dancers, katy hernan and christine vassiliou, frequently blur the boundary between performers and audience.  the dancers don't mimic models to the extent they have in mr. harrell's past works; here they strike poses reminiscent of gymnastics, dressage and dog shows. ''i'm using the runway in 'showpony' for its intimacy,'' he said. ''i also wanted a certain level of immediacy. what i like is the way it shows the scale of the body as it passes by you when you're seated. in this piece, i wanted to exploit that sensation.''  the dance flows into a slide show inspired by nan goldin's ''ballad of sexual dependency,'' a photography book that originated as a slide show with music, documenting downtown bohemianism in the 1980s. in mr. harrell's version, a collaboration with the berlin-based photographer david bergé, experimental choreographers in new york and europe are captured in candid moments.  music, selected from some of mr. harrell's favorite dances, accompanies the slide show. it includes ''jesus' blood never failed me yet'' (used in william forsythe's ''quintett''), ''been on a train'' (alvin ailey's ''cry''), ''come together'' (jérôme bel's ''show must go on'') and ''baker street'' (sarah michelson's ''daylight'').  ''i'm a sentimental person,'' mr. harrell said. ''i love nothing better than to cry at a movie. it makes me feel transformed and purified. i'm southern, so when i see these pictures, i'm happy to be among this group of people. they make me feel strong.''  born in douglas, a small city in southeast georgia, mr. harrell started out in gymnastics. he discovered theater later, when he walked off the field during a baseball game one day. (his father made him play.) ''it so happened that i was riding my bicycle by this college theater, and there were all these kids and they were auditioning for 'the music man,' '' he said. ''theater saved me.''  he attended yale university, where he majored in american studies, and after graduating in 1990 he moved to los angeles to pursue an acting career. ''i had a serious agent,'' he said. ''i was going out for 'boyz n the hood' and 'the fresh prince of bel-air.' i was up for that gig -- not will smith, but the other kid on 'fresh prince.' '' with some prodding, he added with a giggle, ''the cousin.''  mr. harrell soon gave up acting to study dance and composition in providence, r.i., san francisco and finally new york. in 1997 he was granted a residency at movement research, where he became acquainted with the performers he pays homage to in his slide show.  ''i'm not trying to be nan goldin, but i do think that the pictures bring the audience into a different world,'' he said. ''i've realized that i've made this life choice, and with that there is a limit: you can't have everything. i don't know what the future is going to bring, but i'm doing this piece because i want to create something that no one can take away from me. it feels like a historical moment. that's the thing: i'm in this with other people, and this piece is my touchstone.''  ''showpony'' will be performed tonight through sunday night at danspace project at st. mark's church, 131 east 10th street, east village; (212) 674-8194.  