an america where much was left unsaid   there's an autumnal air surrounding ''the cocktail hour,'' a. r. gurney's 1988 play, and not just because of the necklace of orange and brown leaves encircling the long wharf stage. the play deals with a waning world. two, in fact.  mr. gurney still writes wonderfully thoughtful and witty plays that range widely in theme and subject matter. but his best-known works are those that chronicle the withering of what we must call, for lack of a better term, wasp america. it's an america well known in connecticut, where it's easy to imagine the prescott bushes saying things like ''don't be unattractive'' to one another as they sip scotch before dinner, their living room filled with antiques and the piano topped with family photos.  long wharf's first-rate revival takes place in just such a living room (courtesy of michael yeargan, the set designer), and while the family having drinks includes neither senators nor presidents-to-be, mr. gurney deftly conveys the way america's ruling elite maintained its place at the head of the social, political and economic pecking order through much of the 20th century. sons who might have preferred to build boats went into business instead. daughters who might have preferred to go to work stayed instead to tend the home fires. wives aching for adventure doused their desires with alcohol.  and everyone followed the rules: you didn't use a word like ''penis'' in the living room; you avoided self-scrutiny of any kind, especially the kind abetted by psychiatrists; you didn't sell your blue chips, ever; and you didn't sully the graceful flow of conversation with anything as jarring as a fact.  similar rules applied in the theater you went to. but like john, whose visit home is the occasion for the cocktails in ''the cocktail hour,'' mr. gurney has lost patience with the rules. so he bends them: john has returned to ask his parents, bradley and ann, for permission to mount the play he has written about them -- a play that sounds suspiciously like the one we're watching.  so there are two narratives unfolding here. one is mr. gurney's gently acerbic take on bradley and ann; their docile daughter, nina; and their not-so-docile son john, who will use the word ''penis'' in the living room. the other is mr. gurney's slyly amusing commentary on the play he has written -- the script sits on the coffee table throughout the performance -- and on theater itself. and both are very well served in this production, directed by long wharf's associate artistic director, kim rubinstein.  ms. rubinstein gets special credit for hiring john cunningham to play the old-school dad -- a poseur who's also the real deal, a skinflint who's also ready to write a $20,000 check to get his son to do what he wants. mr. cunningham, mixing drinks at the crystal-laden bar cart in tweed jacket and plaid tie, embodies these contradictions with ease. never losing his cool, he reveals bradley's shifts in feeling with tiny alterations in body language and inflection. it is a commanding performance by an actor perhaps born to play this character.  matching him nearly stroke for stroke is mary beth peil as ann. the role was played off broadway by the imposingly grand nancy marchand. ms. peil's ann is more delicate, still ravishingly pretty and something of a coquette. in a navy blue twin set accented with a rope of pearls, her hair in an elegant french twist, she folds herself neatly into a chair, the picture of a proper lady. but her eyes sparkle with something hidden, a possibly naughty secret that john is determined to pry from her.  at first glance, it looks as though the production's impeccable casting goes awry in the younger generation. rob campbell and ann talman don't really look like they could be the children of this bradley and ann. he's too swarthy and scruffy (the rumpled jeans don't help) and she's too blunt and prickly. but they so completely inhabit their characters -- he with an exquisitely aware irony, she with an emphatic heartiness -- that you soon wonder why you ever thought they weren't family.  mr. gurney's wonderful ear for dialogue keeps the play rippling along, like one of those flowing conversations bradley prizes. and the bifurcated structure adds a layer of double entendre that sharpens even the more mundane exchanges about the play-within-the-play.  with a golden blush outside the living room windows, the dimmer, contrasting hues of the interior and the leanly upholstered furniture, ms. rubinstein, mr. yeargan and their lighting designer, pat collins, have given the play a chekhovian melancholy that feels very right but doesn't detract from its many laughs.  and its many laughs don't detract from its ultimate truth -- a truth that's been underlined in the years since mr. gurney wrote it. john tells his father that the play he has written looks at their family with ''warmth, respect and an abiding affection.'' what he can't say, because it's only 1988, is something that struck at least one viewer: that the father-son struggle in the play can shed some unexpected light on father-son relationships everywhere -- including those with wider implications.  ''the cocktail hour,'' by a. r. gurney, is at long wharf theater, 222 sargent drive, new haven, through feb. 4. information: (203) 787-4282 or www.longwharf.org.  theater review  