a tv family bound by blood and a band   ''the naked brothers band,'' an ebullient mock documentary about a kids' rock band, is both a movie and a new series on nickelodeon and a tween fantasy in which no one over 18 has much sense. the brothers have a classic bubble-gum sound, live in a very 21st-century video world and are the real-life offspring of entertainers from two television shows that had baby-boomer appeal.  polly draper is the mother and michael wolff is the father of the telegenic team: the singer-songwriter nat wolff, 12 (''the girl magnet'' is his shy character's nickname), and alex wolff, 9, who plays a flamboyant drummer in a do-rag. the two play the stars of the six-member band. the film has its television premiere on saturday, and the series begins feb. 3.  ms. draper, whose ''naked'' movie and series credits include creator, executive producer, writer and director, will be forever etched in many memories as ellyn warren in the 1987-91 show ''thirtysomething'' on abc, considered a ground-breaking look at yuppie angst. the boys' real-life father and ms. draper's husband, mr. wolff, is a musician and composer who was the bandleader and musical director for ''the arsenio hall show'' from 1989 to 1994. in ''naked,'' mr. wolff plays a geeky, accordion-playing tv father to his real-life sons. he is also the music supervisor and co-executive producer of the series.  ''this thing had a life of its own,'' ms. draper said during an interview on the set of ''naked,'' a cavernous studio in the greenpoint section of brooklyn. she was watching a scene in which the band makes a video. nat and alex were very young when they climbed out of the bath one day, ms. draper recalled, and both announced, ''we're the naked brothers band!'' as they danced around the apartment. in preschool, nat formed a band with his best friends.  ''nat decided he wanted to film his own sitcom, so we did a film called 'don't eat off my plate,' '' ms. draper said. ''i pretended to interview his friends and do a documentary.'' and that was the beginning of the naked brothers movie, roughly a five-week adventure in 2004 using mostly friends and family members, with a budget under $1 million. (''we would sneak into locations and run,'' ms. draper said.) the movie won a family feature film award at the hamptons international film festival in 2005. it then came to the attention of nickelodeon, which acquired it for broadcast with minor changes and developed the series.  ''at first we were intrigued by the idea, but we weren't sure that kids would understand the vague tongue-and-cheek of it,'' said tom ascheim, executive vice president and general manager of nickelodeon. ''then a bunch of us took it home to our own children, and they loved it.''  ''naked brothers'' also appeals to adult stargazers. look for cameos by the ''thirtysomething'' cast in the film, as well as by mr. hall, uma thurman, julianne moore, cyndi lauper and other stars. snoop dogg pops up in the first episode of the series. after all, in ''naked brothers,'' the band is world-famous.  that tv family lives in a colorful apartment in new york city, where the boys attend amigos elementary school and alex eats peanut butter for breakfast -- when they're not hopping into limousines, having food fights and shaking it in front of screaming fans. the real-life family lives in manhattan, where the boys attend private school and -- so far -- lead much quieter lives, despite a recent rash of attention as the publicity machine cranked up.  ''it's got a lot of irreverence and a lot of reality,'' ms. draper said of the family's creative venture. while the ''naked'' series and movie are her first shots at directing, her screenwriting debut was in 1999 with ''the tic code,'' a theatrical film starring gregory hines that was informed both by her husband's childhood struggles with tourette's syndrome and by his passion for jazz.  for the series, ''i write him like a kid,'' ms. draper said of mr. wolff, ''and the kids like the adults. the adults make total fools of themselves, and the kids love it.''  nat, who has his mother's enormous eyes and has been writing music since he was 5, is ''his own man when it comes to music,'' his father said. ''it's art, so we don't interfere.''  the film tells the story of the band's origins and introduces most of the main characters. the series features cooper (cooper pillot), a boy manager in a suit and big glasses; rosalina (allie dimeco), the electric bassist and nat's crush; and their spacey, miniskirted baby sitter and tutor, jesse (jesse draper, polly draper's niece).  rounding out the band are the guitarist, qaasim (qaasim middleton), who favors jim hendrix-like afro wigs; the cellist, thomas (thomas batuello); and the keyboardist, david (david levi, who has known the wolff brothers since preschool).  alex and nat seem pretty much the same in real life as they are on television: chatty, guileless, fun-loving. in a giant room in the studio, they shot hoops with their friends after filming an episode in which nat does not want to kiss his leading lady for a video because of rosalina. nat goofed during the shoot and kissed her, though, explaining to his mother that he thought he was following directions.  ''it's good,'' alex said when asked how it was to work with his mother.  ''it's better than working with anyone else,'' he added. ''she's your mom; she's not an authority. you don't have to behave.'' alex aspires to be a professional skateboarder.  for nat, music is the big attraction. he has performed off broadway in ''getting into heaven'' and ''the heart of baghdad'' and was a regular at the improv comedy club. he figures he has written about 150 songs. ''i always loved it,'' he said. ''i love the beatles. i know every beatles song. i wanted to be like them.''  ''it's all based on reality,'' nat said of the story lines. ''it's not like work. it's things we might say or do or want to say or do. i like the feeling of creating something that wasn't there. if we have another season, i'm totally getting ideas.''''nat and i are going to get a camera and make a film.''  ''we have actually become way better friends working together,'' nat offered.  ''we have?'' said alex.  albie hecht, the other executive producer of the series, said he thought the brothers would be big after he saw the enthusiastic audience reaction to the film at the hamptons international film festival.  ''they're just real: real brothers, real friends; it's all the stuff kids do when they're hanging out on the playground,'' mr. hecht said. ''the idea that you're watching a documentary is so much fun. then you put them into that fantasy of being a world-famous rock band, and that's the sauce that makes it work.''  