curfew is lifted in beirut after rioting wanes, but tension lingers   lebanese army soldiers reinforced checkpoints and maintained a heavy presence in tense neighborhoods in beirut on friday, lifting a rare nighttime curfew that had been imposed to stop the worsening violence between pro- and antigovernment crowds.  if there was any optimism in this beleaguered city, it was framed around the hopeful notion that all sides had become so frightened by the violence that perhaps they would be willing to find a compromise to end the nation's internal political standoff.  ''the opposition will think about escalating maybe 10 times before doing it again,'' said osama safa, director of the lebanese center for policy studies, a research group. ''i think, if anything, it proved that this can be very, very costly.''  the curfew, lifted early friday morning, was imposed after a fight at a university cafeteria grew into rioting and gunfire that left four people dead and 200 injured.  slowly, this weary city came back to life as cleaners removed piles of debris, broken glass and bullet castings from the streets around beirut arab university, in tariq jadide, a sunni neighborhood on the southern edge of the city.  dozens of smashed and burned cars were towed away.  there was a veneer of calm yet deep uncertainty as the shiite muslim group hezbollah and its allies held funerals for two of their activists who had been shot near the university campus.  leaders on all sides, as they have from the beginning, called for unity to prevent lebanon from sliding toward civil war.  ''we urge all religious figures, christian and muslim, and all sensible people in lebanon to shoulder their responsibility before it's too late,'' sheik mohammed yazbik, a senior hezbollah official, told mourners at one of the funerals.  several thousand mourners turned out for the funerals. gunmen fired shots in the air while others carried portraits of the deceased. the calm was fragile. ''death to siniora, death to jumblatt,'' shouted mourners in one procession, referring to prime minister fouad siniora and the pro-government druse leader walid jumblatt.  at the same time, the christian pro-government leader, samir geagea, said that he held the hezbollah-led opposition responsible for the violence and warned that any moves to topple the government by force would lead to civil war.  ''some parties are trying to overthrow the government and the regime by force,'' said mr. geagea, the leader of the lebanese forces party. the government, he said, ''will not fall under pressure, and if you continue, there will be civil war.''  on tuesday, a nationwide strike called by the hezbollah-led opposition shut down the city and much of the nation, with roadblocks and crowds of supporters who took to the streets, burning tires and cars.  hezbollah has demanded that mr. siniora step down or form a government of ''national unity'' that would give the opposition veto power and hold early parliamentary elections.  mr. siniora has refused to resign, insisting that the opposition end the protests and negotiate.  