today in business   influence of hedge funds -- hedge fund executives are playing an increasing role in presidential politics, not just for the money they donate, but also for the access they offer to other donors. [page a1.]  federal deficit forecast -- the nonpartisan congressional budget office predicted that the federal budget deficit would shrink again this year and could actually swing into a surplus in 2012 -- but only if president bush's tax cuts expire in 2010. [a21.]  the power of an incentive -- hospitals participating in a medicare experiment that pays them more to follow medical recommendations have steadily improved the quality of patient care. [c1.]  to cover the uninsured -- how to tackle the problem of 47 million americans without health insurance? start with the eight million uninsured children, say corporate executives and policy experts. [c1.]  hospital executives back off -- a consulting group owned by some of the country's most influential hospital executives agreed to stop selling marketing advice to vendors who do millions of dollars in business with nonprofit hospitals across the nation, including their own. [c1.]  a future in going small -- sap, the biggest maker of business management software, said that it would invest as much as $520 million over two years on an organization aimed at smaller business clients. sap's chief executive, henning kagermann, left, said sap was accelerating efforts begun a few years ago to cater to smaller businesses. [c5.]  forgotten energy lab -- the 30-year-old national renewable energy laboratory in colorado, is more frayed than high-tech. americans may have a growing love affair with renewables, but as the laboratory demonstrates, it's a fickle one. [c1.]  conoco profit declines -- conocophillips posted its first profit decline in four years after fuel prices dropped. [c6.]  bank theft by computer -- in sweden there is talk that a $1 million online banking theft has been traced to a russian hacker known as ''the corpse.'' [c7.]  recipe for an upturn -- the president of mcdonald's said the restaurant chain's turnaround had less to do with the food than with efforts to improve restaurants by focusing on everything from cleaner lobbies and fresher food to more genuine greetings from servers. [c2.]  speak up, arrive safely -- highway safety specialists have produced a series of public service television ads that are intended to persuade teenagers that it is o.k. to complain if the driver is going too fast or being too wild. [c3.]  profit up at ebay -- ebay, the internet auction giant, reported fourth-quarter earnings that seem to represent at least a temporary victory over the mounting pressures facing its business. [c3.]  dow reaches another high -- wall street soared, sending the dow jones industrial average to a new high, and new profit reports restored the confidence of investors in the technology sector. [c13.]  the youthful face of ireland -- much of europe is facing the difficulties of an increasingly aged population, but not ireland. it is must grapple with the problems -- and advantages -- that stem from an excess of youth. [c6.]  music on deck -- music-themed cruises are growing in popularity as promoters and cruise line executives seek to capitalize on large fan followings with the time and cash to spend on a vacation with their favorite musicians. [c4.]  starting young -- with the news full of 20-somethings who are making millions of dollars with ideas hatched on their laptops, more teenagers are hoping to become c.e.o.'s of their own companies, without leaving their bedrooms. [f1.]  ex-booz hamilton leader dies -- james b. farley, an executive who moved seamlessly between the worlds of management consulting and corporate america, died on saturday. mr. farley led booz allen hamilton before becoming head of what was then the mutual life insurance company of new york. [a23.]  online  oscar nominees -- photos of some of the films and actors nominated for the 2007 academy awards are in a slide show at nytimes.com/multimedia.  times square memories -- the times photographer librado romero chronicles times square, then and now, in photographs every wednesday. you can see the series at nytimes.com/multimedia.  believe in magic? scientists are trying to figure out why even the skeptics among us cling to lucky numbers, special game-day clothing and other odd rituals. an article and readers' comments are at nytimes.com/health.  talking to m dot strange -- m dot strange's first feature, ''we are the strange,'' came to sundance with a huge youtube audience. david carr of the times sits down with him in a video available at nytimes.com/style.  business briefing  articles on these developments are at nytimes.com/business.  the fight over us airways' proposed $9.8 billion takeover of delta air lines moved to capitol hill, where lawmakers questioned the top executives of both companies about what the deal would mean for travelers. (reuters)  