dear graydon ...   to: graydon carter  from: frannie von furstinshow  first, dear, a quibble: demi? on the cover? back when she was large (and naked!) with a child destined for a nutty celebrity-spawn name, it made sense. but if ''bobby'' is a comeback, i went to a state university.  now, applause: waverly. love it. i laugh when i hear it called a restaurant, as if it were anything so mundane and (apologies to demi) pregnable. how can they call it a restaurant when the official phone number yields a recording that doesn't take messages or even acknowledge that the place has opened? of course, we've all been eating there since early november. it just isn't open to anyone and everyone.  someday it will surely have to be. someday the people who know you and the people who know your key staff members and the recognizable or attractive people who take the trouble to stop in, willing to submit to a visual once-over and try to make a reservation in person -- someday there won't be enough of these people to fill the seats, and you'll have to take all callers and comers, and it will all be so much different.  but for now, well, we have a toots shor's of our own, a stork club without the plumage. i think back to that night in london at the groucho club (remember how everyone was trying not to stare at martin amis's new teeth?!) and how we agreed that new york needed an english gentlemen's club that didn't take english gentlemen as members.  you could write the book on playing coy. or at least a key chapter in the annals of playing coy. the big red letters saying ''preview'' on not only every page of the menu but also on every page of the wine list? the constant public nattering about the edward sorel mural not being done? (looked good to me.) the refusal to let newspapers and magazines take pictures beyond the front bar area, as if there were still dropcloths and paint cans scattered about?  brilliant. just brilliant. i heard you even held your ground with the times, denying the photographer access to the dining rooms. how in the world will they get around that?  i dropped in the other night. my eleventh visit, i think. (is there some kind of frequent flier program? kidding! but if there is.  ) that front bar area was poignant: all those strivers with blackberries but without reservations, waiting for a tap on the shoulder that would never come. i heard a woman who did have a reservation -- her table wasn't ready -- tell her companion that they should sell it on ebay. there's a traitor in our midst.  no wonder so many want in so badly. if our house up in rhinebeck had the coziness that waverly does, i wouldn't make herbert go up there alone as often as i do. the quaintly uneven wood floors, the low ceilings, the four fireplaces, the red banquettes: waverly is like a rumpled, wrinkled dowager who found some late-in-life glamour, who got a great tailor and the best laser peel money could buy.  what was it before? ye waverly inn? graydon, ye somehow managed to keep the sense that it dates back to the 1920s while losing the mustiness. everything about it, and everyone in it, glows. i even like the rear garden, with its high glass ceiling, handsome brick walls and forest of plants. siberia was never so verdant.  i've dawdled in getting to the food, because i hate to complain. but does it have to be this good, graydon? isn't that a strategic blunder?  when word gets out that your chef, john delucie, is doing some of the best tuna tartare in town (all that creamy avocado and zingy heat!), plus a hefty and juicy pork chop, a classically blissful dover sole, an addictive clam chowder, a gorgeous fillet of wild salmon (with those adorable little beluga lentils) and such feloniously fatty short ribs, won't there be even more lemmings tumbling down the steps from bank street and through the door?  won't we have some of the little owl and august crowds on top of the folks who'd mow down their grandmothers for invitations to the vanity fair oscar party?  sure, this isn't attention-getting cuisine. it doesn't take much to steam an artichoke or whip up chicken liver mousse. the world could do without one more frisée aux lardons, one more blizzard of goat cheese (yes, i saw, humboldt fog goat cheese) on one more landscape of crimson beets. apple crisp and crème caramel aren't paths to epicurean glory.  but i've been to cafe cluny, and it doesn't pull off a similarly modest menu of comforting favorites as well. except for the dull chicken pot pie and the humdrum crab cakes and the functional strip steak, waverly is like the cooking i'd do at home, if i had the time and, well, o.k., if i could cook.  and it's not just me who thinks so. i heard this drone at a nearby table prattling to his hostages -- excuse me, friends -- about the crispness of the amish free-range chicken's skin and how the bird had real flavor and how the moist meat was a barometer of a conscientious kitchen. what was he? a restaurant critic?  he actually asked if the $55 macaroni and cheese with shaved white truffles could be ordered without the truffles. he didn't get it. the whole point is the comedy of getting -- and being seen getting -- something so absurdly costly. no truffles, no deal.  no kidding, graydon, waverly is sweet. it's not just about an a-list daisy chain of writers, actors, models. it's not just about ringside seats to the latest perelman-barkin smackdown.  it's about the ease and privilege of being among people who reflect your brainiest, prettiest sense of self. and it's got manners: the bartenders stand on their toes and peek over the front row of revelers to try to take drink orders from the bleachers, no matter who's there. the waiters smile as they deliver those wonderful biscuits, even if the recipients don't have boldface names.  it's like a gracious nightly party, graydon, that you host in spirit even when you're not there in person, though you often are. it's just a few steps from your home to the waverly, to this vision of greenwich village as it's often been romanticized but probably never really was.  i don't have to read your answers to a proust questionnaire to know how good that must make you feel.  xoxo frannie  the waverly inn & garden  * [rating: one star]  16 bank street at waverly place, greenwich village; (212) 243-7900.  atmosphere -- ye waverly inn, a nearly century-old tavern with a series of cozy rooms below street level, has lost the ''ye'' and gained some polish, a warm glow and a retro glamour.  sound level -- loud.  recommended dishes -- clam chowder; tuna tartare; beets with goat cheese; wood-grilled mussels; short ribs; wild salmon with lentils; dover sole; pan-roasted amish chicken with wild mushrooms; burger; fries with truffle oil; apple crisp; bananas foster.  wine list -- international, with an emphasis on france, a much shorter list of whites than reds and many bottles in the $40 to $65 range.  price range -- appetizers, $8 to $14; entrees, $14 to $55; desserts, $7 to $8.  hours -- 6 p.m. to 11:45 p.m. sunday and monday and to 12:45 a.m. tuesday through saturday.  reservations -- not being accepted over the main telephone line. walk-ins can request reservations.  credit cards -- all major cards.  wheelchair access -- street-level side entrance from waverly place into the back garden. entire restaurant on one level. accessible restroom.  what the stars mean: ratings range from zero to four stars and reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. menu listings and prices are subject to change.  past reviews from the times, with additional capsule reviews by times critics:  nytimes.com/dining  restaurants  