spitzer names 2 members of his environmental team   gov. eliot spitzer nominated assemblyman alexander b. grannis of manhattan yesterday to be the new commissioner of the state department of environmental conservation, a sprawling agency that in recent years has lost hundreds of employees who handle critical matters like dam safety inspections and pollution permit reviews.  mr. spitzer also announced the appointment of judith enck as deputy secretary for the environment, serving as the governor's senior adviser on environmental issues. she held a similar position during mr. spitzer's eight years as new york attorney general, when he vigorously pursued litigation against polluters.  in an interview, mr. spitzer said that his new environmental team faced many challenging issues. among them, he said, are ''reforming statutes that have been passed but that have not worked as well as intended,'' like those for developing tainted building sites known as brownfields.  mr. spitzer also listed the need to complete work on a plan to find places for new energy plants, an expanded deposit program for refreshment bottles and cans, and ''smart enforcement'' of environmental review laws, to keep them from being used ''as a pretext for miring a project in endless litigation.''  new york must also ''address the mega issue of climate change and clean air and water,'' mr. spitzer said. ''that is a big agenda for an agency that, to a certain extent, was permitted to atrophy over the last couple of years.''  in the last 12 years, the number of employees in the department has declined to about 3,300 from just over 4,000 in 1995, according to a critical report by environmental advocates of new york, a nonprofit group.  the cuts demoralized the agency and left important areas of enforcement and review badly understaffed, said eric a. goldstein, senior lawyer for the natural resources defense council.  mr. spitzer said he did not foresee adding a significant number of state employees. but he said mr. grannis and ms. enck would energize the agency.  mr. grannis, a democrat from the upper east side who had been a candidate for the vacant state comptroller job, has a long history of involvement in environmental issues dating to his work helping to organize the first earth day celebration, in 1970. he played a central role in the passage of many major environmental bills in the last three decades, including the original bottle deposit bill and environmental review regulations for construction projects -- the rules that mr. spitzer is concerned might be misused.  mr. grannis, whose nomination is subject to confirmation by the state senate, concedes that he has no experience running an organization as large as the department of environmental conservation. as chairman of the assembly's insurance committee since 1992, he showed he was willing to stand up to business interests to protect the public. in one of his biggest battles with the industry, he forced big insurers that changed from mutual companies to public firms to share resulting windfalls with their policyholders.  ''at the end of the day, the insurance industry, while i may not have been their favorite guy, we worked very collaboratively and constructively,'' mr. grannis said in a telephone interview. ''we tried to fashion solutions, and that's what i see doing at this agency.''  his more than 30 years in the assembly and his long involvement in environmental issues have made mr. grannis, 65, fairly well known in the industries that come under the environmental department's regulations. gavin j. donohue, president of the independent power producers of new york, a trade group representing electricity-generating companies in the state, said mr. grannis had a reputation for being tough but fair.  ''my only request is that he keep an open mind on issues,'' said mr. donohue, who was a deputy commissioner in the department during the administration of gov. george e. pataki.  mr. grannis said his priority would be to ''follow through on the governor's commitment to restore this agency to the prominence it once held among environmental agencies around the country.''  as attorney general, mr. spitzer filed suits against many power plant companies to force them to reduce smokestack emissions. his new environmental team will complete the drafting of regulations carrying out the regional greenhouse gas initiative, a multistate pact to reduce pollution using market incentives and the auctioning of pollution credits.  robert j. moore, executive director of environmental advocates of new york, said that staff cuts at the department had had serious effects on the health and safety of new yorkers. no more than 15 people review thousands of water pollution permits, when there should be twice as many doing the job, he said. similarly, 11 people are responsible for inspecting more than 5,500 dams in the state, far fewer than is necessary, mr. moore said.  ms. enck, 47, also has a long history in environmental matters. before joining the attorney general's office, she was a senior associate with the new york public interest research group, where she handled environmental issues. earlier, she was executive director of environmental advocates of new york.  ms. enck said that she would focus on improving regulations covering the redevelopment of brownfields and expanding recycling programs.  she said the administration planned to work closely with attorney general andrew m. cuomo ''to have an integrated environmental enforcement strategy'' on pollution from power plants. other priorities include an expanded bottle bill that would cover water and juice bottles and redirect to the state's environmental protection fund the $180 million a year in unclaimed nickel deposits that bottlers and distributors now keep.  land preservation, a pataki administration priority, will continue, ms. enck said, but ''with a greater urban emphasis.''  ''our work in the catskills and adirondacks will undoubtedly continue,'' she said, ''but we want to make sure there is more open space available to people who live in cities.''  