big question unanswered in scandal   for the fourth time in less than two years, clarence norman, the disgraced former head of the brooklyn democratic party, sat in a courtroom yesterday, watching prospective jurors file in to sit in judgment of him.  much about the scene was familiar -- the figures at the prosecution table, the presiding judge and a set of charges that do not quite allege what the brooklyn district attorney has spent five years trying to prove: that judgeships were for sale in brooklyn and that mr. norman was the man who sold them.  in this case, rather, the accusations are that mr. norman strong-armed democratic judicial candidates into hiring the party's favored political consultants.  but even as mr. norman went through what has become for him a courtroom routine, hunching his tall frame forward or shrugging a suit sleeve to check his watch, there were fresh allegations of judge-selling in the air.  one came from a sitting judge who, law enforcement officials have said in recent days, told a brooklyn grand jury that he believed that more than $40,000 was delivered to mr. norman by a supporter to secure his appointment to state supreme court in 2001.  the other came from the ex-wife of an ex-judge, who was quoted yesterday as saying that she saw her ex-husband hand a party official $5,000 to help clinch his spot on the ballot.  mr. norman has long said such allegations are false. but if determined to be true, they would provide a new measure of vindication for district attorney charles j. hynes, whose investigation has sparked a campaign to overhaul the way judges are selected in new york but has not yielded hard proof that lawyers could buy their way onto the bench.  mr. hynes's chief of investigations, assistant district attorney michael f. vecchione, said during a break in mr. norman's case yesterday that the latest accusations would also be pursued.  ''any allegation, we'll follow up on,'' he said.  for now, though, mr. vecchione's next few weeks will be taken up with trying to convict mr. norman yet again. so far he has won two out of three rounds. mr. norman, a former 12-term assemblyman, remains free on bail but is facing two to six years in prison after being convicted at separate trials of soliciting illegal contributions and pocketing campaign funds.  in a third trial, he was acquitted of unlawfully billing the assembly for mileage on his car.  the current case stems from a 2002 campaign when, prosecutors say, mr. norman and another party leader, who has since become a prosecution witness, laid down the law for two civil court candidates who were running in the democratic primary.  the candidates, prosecutors say, were told that if they wanted to ensure the party's robust support on primary day, they had to hire the party's favorite printer to design their campaign mailings. the candidates, karen b. yellen and marcia j. sikowitz, were also told, prosecutors say, that they had to hire a party fund-raiser, and close associate of mr. norman's, to recruit street workers and get out the vote.  judge sikowitz hired one of the consultants and judge yellen hired both, investigators say, but both women lost in the primary to upstarts who ran against the machine. judge yellen now sits in family court. judge sikowitz, a housing court judge at the time of the primary, remains one.  the witness list for the trial in supreme court in downtown brooklyn includes sitting judges from four different courts -- family, civil, housing and surrogate -- each prepared to testify to the gantlet of democratic pockets they were asked to line on their way up to the bench.  ''that's what this whole trial is about,'' mr. hynes's spokesman, jerry schmetterer, said. ''coercion, extortion, the methods they used.'' mr. norman is charged with grand larceny. mr. norman, through his lawyers, does not deny that candidates were prodded to run their campaigns by the party's rules, using the party's trusted vendors, but says that that is simply the way retail politics is conducted.  steering candidates and their money to favored consultants is also at the heart of accusations that surfaced yesterday from the ex-wife of a former state supreme court justice, reynold n. mason.  the ex-wife, tessa abrams mason, told the daily news that when mr. mason was running for civil court in 1994, he was told that to join the democratic team he would have to hire a campaign manager, election lawyer and law clerk of the party's choosing. at one point, ms. mason said, mr. mason, acting on party orders, also gave $5,000 cash to a party official for no specified benefit.  mr. mason, who was removed from the bench in 2003 for dipping into an escrow account and now sells real estate in atlanta, did not return a telephone call yesterday. ms. mason could not be reached.  five thousand dollars is a small fee compared to the $40,000-plus that one man is said to have given on behalf of howard a. ruditzky, whose ascension to the supreme court has been something of mystery in the world of brooklyn judicial politics.  in 2001, justice ruditzky, then a lower-court judge with an unremarkable reputation, made a bid for re-election to his post but finished last among four candidates in a primary. but he was then chosen by mr. norman to fill a supreme court vacancy.  many political veterans were puzzled. justice ruditzky, they said, was neither a loyal party soldier nor a rising judicial star and yet he had somehow leapfrogged over a senior party apparatchik.  law enforcement officials, however, say that much light was shed on the mystery at hearings of a grand jury that was recently convened to hear allegations against mr. norman. there, the officials said, justice ruditzky corroborated an account offered by his cousin and chief political sponsor, who had already outlined for investigators what efforts he made to elevate the judge.  the cousin, an owner of medical clinics named norman chesler, told grand jurors that he gave mr. norman more than $40,000 cash and several thousand more in postage stamps on behalf of the judge, said one of the officials, who was granted anonymity because the investigation was far from finished. justice ruditzky's alleged path to power was first laid out in detail last week in the village voice.  in the voice account, mr. chesler is quoted as saying that mr. norman said that the money would be used to further their private business relationship. but, he said, he continued to believe it would further his cousin's judicial career.  one of mr. norman's lawyers, edward d. wilford, declined to comment on the payoff charges. ''there's nothing to address,'' he said last night, adding that he and mr. norman were focused strictly on winning his acquittal in the current case.  mr. chesler did not return several calls for comment. justice ruditzky's lawyer, sheldon eisenberger, said, ''i have no comment on anything you may ask me.''  while prosecutors could try to charge mr. norman in the ruditzky matter -- a prospect that the same law enforcement official called ''possible, but i don't want to say probable'' -- justice ruditzky himself will not be charged. he received immunity for his testimony, the official said.  the decision to offer him immunity may have been influenced by the clock that has been ticking on mr. hynes's investigation. the statute of limitations for elected officials is five years from the time they leave the office they held when an offense was committed. so if justice ruditzky ever had been a party to bribery, it would have occurred when he was a civil court judge, a post he left in 2001.  absent an indictment or a finding of wrongdoing by the state commission on judicial conduct, which can take many months,it is nearly impossible to remove a sitting judge.  so justice ruditzky continues in his position, which pays $136,000 a year, albeit in a limited capacity. he has not presided over trials since last summer because of what the state office of court administration called ''health issues.''  in the case of mr. mason, the statute of limitations on anything he might have done before he became a judge has long since run out.  whether the new allegations ever lead to criminal charges, they nonetheless seem likely to give further ammunition to those seeking to overhaul the system.  last year, a federal judge ruled that the system by which party leaders are allowed to handpick supreme court candidates violated voters' rights. he ordered state lawmakers to either fix the process or allow open primary elections this year.  deborah goldberg, a director of the democracy program at the brennan center for justice at the new york university school of law, which advocates for judicial reform, said that mr. hynes had already made his point.  ''the incentive to change is real without an indictment,'' she said.  but joseph l. forstadt, a lawyer for the state supreme court justices association, said that tales of money changing hands only reminded him that if there were open primaries for supreme court, candidates would be spending more to get elected, opening the door to further corruption.  correction:  february 26, 2007, monday  an article on feb. 3 about the corruption trial of clarence norman jr., the former assemblyman and brooklyn democratic party leader, misstated the profession of ernest lendler, who designed a campaign flier for a judge who ran on the party's ticket during the 2002 primary. mr. lendler is a political consultant, not a printer. (the error first appeared in an article on jan. 24 that referred to mr. lendler without naming him, and was repeated on feb. 2 in an article about the trial.)  an article on nov. 18, 2003, about the indictment of mr. norman referred incorrectly to mr. lendler's company, branford communications. it is a political consulting firm, not a printing company.  