as her world turns, lonelygirl15 seeks new thrills   lonelygirl15 wants a career. she's considering becoming a forest ranger but lacks the stomach for herd-thinning. teaching aerobics is another option, but she's worried she's too smart for that.  lonelygirl15 -- that's bree (jessica lee rose), the star of the hit online serial that clicks along at lonelygirl15.com -- also wants female friends, like, say, katharine mcphee, the ''american idol'' runner-up she met in the low-key but lively episode that made its debut last friday. that girl seems cool. she has a loud laugh, no manifest cult involvements and a song on the episode's soundtrack.  she even dares to pose a blockbuster question to bree and her two webcam-happy boyfriends: ''do you guys film everything?''  yeah, they do. as milowent, a longtime student of the series, observed on a fan site: ''the mcphee character rocked. she is the audience. she pointed out a lot of ridiculous things about the show.''  bree has plenty of reasons to take stock of her life right now. ever since she fled the luminous bedroom where she started her tantalizing video blog on june 16, 2006, and soon after seeing her authoritarian father murdered on new year's eve, our lady of youtube has been stuck in peculiar straits. the ''lonelygirl15'' phenomenon that initially teased viewers with its pseudo-reality has evolved into a vaguely supernatural thriller with hints of ''buffy, the vampire slayer.'' it's inventive, with highs and lows. on balance, it's entertaining. but devoted fans love to complain that it's not as good as it used to be, or as it could be.  bree is now shacked up with jonas (jackson davis), an alpha-dog rich kid who just wants to help her, and daniel (yousef abu-taleb), a beta-dog penniless kid who just wants to help her. both seem besotted. she seems freaked out.  and the presence of ms. mcphee, the anodyne pop star who is said to be the first of several guest stars on the series, has thrown into relief still more dimensions to bree's freakiness. that's what makes ms. mcphee's episode enlightening. it's called ''truth or dare,'' and at just under four minutes, it's one of the longest in the series.  in the episode ms. mcphee plays a nameless young woman who is recruited into a night of texas hold 'em, truth or dare and mild debauchery with bree's ménage. she also manages, in her innocence, to stumble onto some dark details of the plot, including daniel's careless mention of the order (the cult that bree escaped) and the watcher (a figure from the order who may be trying to get bree back).  ms. mcphee dexterously underplays her character, who in ratty hair and a t-shirt is presented in contrast to ms. mcphee's own public dazzle; she looks great. throaty, game, no-nonsense: something in the bright capability of ms. mcphee's character further makes bree look high-strung, a hothouse flower whose stuffed animals are not cute but creepily regressive.  in this clash of sensibilities too, ''lonelygirl15,'' the series, comes off as twee compared with the boisterous, puppyish ''american idol.'' (indeed, what doesn't?) in the midst of this introvert-extrovert collision, ms. rose, who has become a truly terrific actress, chooses to strangle bree's confidence and become childish, as when she faces ms. mcphee for the first time. ''who are you?'' she asks, sounding threatened, and meek.  if bree is jealous, the immediate reason is that ms. mcphee's character has come home with daniel, who has gotten drunk at a bowling alley and leaned on this new girl as he stumbled out to jonas's car for a ride home. though it struck some viewers as reckless, the mcphee character's willingness to hang out with these guys for the night seemed a typical nothing-better-to-do small town calculation.  but what is coolest about ''truth or dare'' is what's been admirable about the series all along: its deep familiarity with and integration of the conventions of online video. ''truth or dare,'' like a majority of the ''lonelygirl15'' installments, has an organic reason for being. it exists, in other words, not just to showcase katharine mcphee, nor to advance the adolescent farrago. rather, this episode is a stand-alone drunk-shaming video, one of youtube's many answers to the pillory.  in the drunk-shaming microgenre, videos show people passed out from drinking as they're decorated with magic markers, made to urinate or brought to consciousness with fireworks. (for the connoisseur, waytoomany.com offers a nicely sordid collection.) daniel is slurry or unconscious for the length of ''truth or dare,'' and the episode ends with jonas resolving to do something ''mean'' to him. we see the results in the next episode, when daniel appears with a mustache and beard in ink.  keeping together a rollicking plot with murder, a cult, imposture and teenage romance -- making it exciting but not ludicrous -- isn't easy. striving for continuity while relaying plot information in short bytes is an especially tall order. viewers are standing by on fan sites official and unofficial to play gotcha anytime they decide bree and company wouldn't have had enough time while on the lam, say, to make it to an internet cafe for video editing and uploading between chase scenes. they're a tough crowd. and this policing still goes on, even though fans know the series is fiction.  but in spite of this scrutiny, the team behind ''lonelygirl15''-- by and large, the same team that started the series, including ramesh flinders, miles beckett and greg goodfried -- has continued to produce regular videos, maintain an active fan site, spin off a lonelygirl15 alternative-reality game, line up guest stars and otherwise sustain the momentum they created.  as a serial drama too, ''lonelygirl15'' has kept its first unbeatable asset, the one that has nothing to do with new technology. it's the girl: jessica lee rose. as the series goes on, ms. rose continues to mix moodiness, charm and precociousness, and her witchcraft casts a serious spell. for every fan who's mad at her for jerking daniel around, there are 10 who are newly in love. and the fact that she's now out of her parents' clutches and in the wide world--à la lolita, in motels and guest houses--makes her suddenly more available.  but lonelygirl15 is formidable. though gawked at by fans worldwide, she looks back only through the palm-size porthole on our computers. no wonder she now says she wants a life in the latest episode. her story has always been about a girl looking into a camera, planning an escape. and surely she can dream. one day lonelygirl15 will shake off these guys, teach some aerobics, get her ranger badge, grab a gun and thin the thundering herds.  web review  