robinson's relevance spans the decades   since it is still football season, the eye could not help but notice a fleet, powerful running back from u.c.l.a. flickering on the video screen, accelerating down the left sideline and then instinctively veering back toward the middle, right past three hapless defenders rushing the wrong way.  seconds later up on the screen, jackie robinson stole home against the yankees in the 1955 world series, and yogi berra erupted. (yogi still erupts, for that matter, still insisting robinson was out, which maybe he was, but whatever.)  these images of jackie robinson the running back (his best sport) and jackie robinson the hall of fame baseball player would be enough to captivate an audience on a wintry night, more than a half-century later. but that is not the reason we were watching, out of the corner of our eyes, the video highlights of jackie robinson's short but magnificent life.  robinson, who reintegrated the major leagues on april 15, 1947, and spoke out for integration in the workplace, is very much a man of the present. at a news conference for the jackie robinson foundation on monday night, people celebrated that two black coaches, tony dungy of indianapolis and lovie smith of chicago, would face each other in the super bowl on feb. 4.  ''football has a lot of african-american players,'' joe morgan, the hall of fame baseball player and friend of the robinson foundation, said. ''football has been worse than baseball.''  in an interview monday night, morgan recalled being in the reds' dugout on oct. 15, 1972, before the second game of the world series, when robinson, nearly blind and shockingly aged from diabetes, threw out the first ball.  ''i am extremely proud and pleased,'' robinson told the crowd, adding, ''i'm going to be tremendously more pleased and more proud when i look at that third-base coaching line one day and see a black face managing in baseball.'' robinson died nine days later, at 53.  morgan is still sorry that in his only chance to meet robinson, as a young major leaguer, he became ''tongue-tied'' (if one can imagine that) and muttered only ''thank you.''  ''jackie wanted to be the first black manager,'' morgan said the other night. instead, morgan's other idol, frank robinson, had the honor, in 1974.  on monday night, willie randolph, an african-american manager, and omar minaya, a hispanic general manager, sat with fred wilpon, the owner of the mets, who has made sure robinson will be honored at the new mets ballpark and also in a projected museum downtown.  ''that's what i'm taking about,'' said della britton baez, the president of the foundation, nodding to the mets' contingent.  the foundation is as current as the 266 scholars from the jackie robinson foundation attending 93 different colleges in 33 states. five of the scholars were present at the conference monday. in a state of awe, i scribbled down some of their accomplishments -- premed, internship, meals for the elderly, nonprofit corporations, employment training, church services, low-cost housing, varsity basketball, journalism -- before i became exhausted. when do these kids sleep?  these activities are being done in the spirit of jackie and rachel robinson -- ''the queen mother,'' as morgan called her, a radiant and forceful presence in all our lives.  these are productive times for the jackie robinson foundation, established in 1973. the foundation has helped more than 1,100 students go to college, giving aid of up to $7,200 a year, through donations from corporations and individuals, including athletes like derek jeter, royce clayton, mo vaughn and michael jordan, and public figures like the author mary gordon and the activist dick gregory and in honor of john f. kennedy jr.  with a mentoring program and active follow-ups, the foundation has an amazing graduation rate of 97 percent, more than double the national average for minority students. the first graduate of the foundation's sports management program, elaine weddington steward, from st. john's university, is now a lawyer and an assistant general manager of the boston red sox, the team that gave jackie robinson a bogus tryout in 1945.  lately, the red sox' management has sought to make up for the slight to robinson. now the foundation is hoping that every major league team will sponsor a scholarship in jackie robinson's name.  ''jackie robinson is a role model,'' said adam franklin, a robinson scholar and a member of the basketball team at the university of pennsylvania, among other achievements.  a valuable new book, ''carrying jackie's torch: the players who integrated baseball -- and america,'' by steve jacobson, to be published next week by lawrence hill books, tells how major league players also adopted robinson as their role model.  in one of the most touching chapters, ed charles, the soul of the mets' 1969 championship, recalled being 13 years old in 1947 and rushing down to the yards in st. petersburg, fla., to see the dodgers' chartered train.  one glimpse of robinson, waving at the boys while playing cards with his dodgers teammates, heading north toward opening day and immortality, inspired charles through some troubled teen years and his long, bitter apprenticeship in the minors. the image of robinson inspired charles in his second career as a social worker with youths in new york city, where he lives today.  jackie robinson, the role model, continues to inspire people. the sight of him turning a corner with a football in his grasp isn't bad, either.  sports of the times e-mail: geovec@nytimes.com  