a call for $1 billion to cut city class size   the head of new york city's teachers' union implored state lawmakers on tuesday to reserve at least $1 billion of new state education spending to reduce class sizes.  the call, by randi weingarten, president of the 140,000-member united federation of teachers, was the opening salvo in the battle over how to finance city schools after the state's highest court ruled last year that albany must give those schools at least $2 billion in additional aid.  ''we need this more than anything else -- the only reform that has never been tried systemically in new york city, and that is a real lowering of class size,'' ms. weingarten said at a breakfast with state lawmakers. reducing class size would require hiring hundreds if not thousands of teachers.  a spokeswoman for gov. eliot spitzer said that in his budget message next week, he would propose overhauling the state's school aid formula, greatly increasing the dollars available for city schools, and would allow school districts to use the money to reduce class size but not require it.  the spokeswoman, christine anderson, did not indicate precisely how much money mr. spitzer would direct toward city schools. in his campaign, mr. spitzer repeatedly promised to spend $8.5 billion more a year on needy school districts statewide, including at least $4 billion a year for new york city.  those promises were made before the court of appeals issued its final ruling in a lawsuit over state education financing brought by a coalition of new york city parents, community school boards and advocacy groups. the court overturned a lower court ruling that at least $4.7 billion was needed to give city children the chance for a sound basic education.  since the ruling, the governor has not tipped his hand as to the exact sum he will allocate, but any effort to spend more than the court ruling requires will face opposition from many suburban and upstate legislators.  ms. weingarten's call that the money be earmarked for smaller class size also puts her in sharp conflict with mayor michael r. bloomberg, who wants maximum flexibility in how any new dollars are spent. he has already laid out his own priorities, including making changes to the school budget system and expanding prekindergarten.  a spokesman for mr. bloomberg declined to comment on ms. weingarten's request. but the city school system's chief lobbyist was in albany on tuesday to hear ms. weingarten speak, and the administration has been lobbying mr. spitzer heavily behind the scenes.  late last year, mr. bloomberg reached an unexpected and early contract deal with the teachers' union, and at the time he suggested that the union and the administration would work together to fight for more school aid from albany.  that truce appeared to be cut short by the mayor's announcement in his state of the city address last week that he wanted to make it harder for teachers to earn tenure. the city is able to introduce more rigorous teacher reviews under existing contract provisions and state law, but his comments infuriated ms. weingarten, who touched on the issue on tuesday.  ''that's something they've always had the right to do, and i was pretty shocked that he wanted to re-raise an issue that's not been raised for years in our contract negotiations,'' she said.  joseph l. bruno, the republican majority leader in the senate, and sheldon silver, the assembly speaker, also spoke at the breakfast with ms. weingarten, although neither took a firm position on the union's request. mr. silver said he was awaiting mr. spitzer's budget proposal, as did mr. bruno, who has previously suggested that the $2 billion required by the court of appeals would suffice for new spending on city schools.  ms. weingarten said the $1 billion she called for to reduce the size of classes in city schools was what class size advocates said it would cost to bring city class sizes in line with the state average.  ''it would take a billion to make class sizes in new york city the same size as class sizes in the rest of new york state,'' she said. ''it would make us similar to the rest of the state, where class sizes are smaller and graduation rates are higher.''  ms. weingarten's remarks on tuesday are only the union's latest effort to lock in a share of the new financing to reduce class sizes. twice in recent years, the union joined a coalition of parents and advocacy groups that have tried to get a referendum on the city ballot that would have required mr. bloomberg to devote one-quarter of the money to reduce class sizes.  mr. bloomberg was able to block the coalition's effort the first time by putting his own education initiative on the ballot, and lawyers for the bloomberg administration are still fighting the second effort in court.  the campaign for fiscal equity, the coalition that brought the school financing lawsuit, is among the groups hoping that mr. spitzer sticks with his original promises in the campaign to spend at least $4 billion a year on new york city schools. geri d. palast, the group's executive director, said yesterday that while the group supported spending some of the money to reduce class size, the final budget would also need to allocate sufficient money for other measures, including universal pre-kindergarten.  advocates for smaller class sizes said on tuesday that a strong commitment to smaller class sizes was necessary to bring the state into full compliance with the court ruling.  ''we believe that if we're going to take the court's decisions seriously, we have to reduce class size in all grades, and that means spending a substantial portion of this money on those efforts,'' said leonie haimson, executive director of class size matters.  