australian open: federer overwhelms roddick   melbourne -- when the reinvigorated andy roddick stepped on court thursday to face his longtime tormentor roger federer, the consensus at the australian open was that spectators were in for a special evening.  that turned out to be true, but not in the way that roddick, the 15,000 fans in rod laver arena or even federer himself would have imagined.  instead of an extended duel between the world's top player and one of his principal rivals, this hotly anticipated semifinal turned into an 83-minute ode to the brilliance of federer and only federer.  by the end of the second set, it felt less like a match and much more like a demonstration, as the swiss continued to break roddick's huge serve at will and find new and exciting ways to pass the american as he pushed forward, with rapidly diminishing conviction, to the net. the final line: 6-4, 6-0, 6-2.  it was hardly a surprise that federer beat the sixth-seeded roddick. he has now won 12 of their 13 matches and all five of their matches in grand slam events, but he has never beaten roddick with this much ease or this much style on a big occasion. in comparison, federer's four-set victory in last year's united states open final was a cliffhanger, and when this straight set roasting had been very well done, the debate had been resolved over whether roddick's recent surge and recent exhibition victory over federer had closed the gap.  "look, it's just unreal," said federer, who will face either tommy haas of germany or fernando gonzalez of chile in sunday's final. "i'm shocked myself. i don't know what to say. the tournament is not even over yet. let's not get carried away. let me try to do it one more time."  meanwhile, roddick was once more left to explain how it feels to face tennis greatness, and he did so with a more deft touch than he demonstrated between the lines: offering up mea culpas and compliments and, roddick still being roddick, quips. "it was frustrating, you know it was miserable; it sucked; it was terrible," he said. "besides that, it was fine."  it actually was fine until 4-4 in the opening set. after losing his serve in the opening game of the match, despite putting five of six first serves into play, roddick recovered to break federer in the fourth game. but with roddick serving, something ineffable clicked in federer's mind and game. at 30-15, the swiss hit a tremendous backhand passing shot winner. at 30-all, roddick, just a little edgier, hit a sliced backhand approach shot into the net. and at 30-40, they both ended up at net with federer winning the battle of reflexes and touch to complete the break.  roddick did not know it yet, but the match had turned for good. federer would hold serve at love to close out the set and proceeded to win a total of 11 games in a row and 24 of 27 points at one particularly lopsided stage.  federer relied on classic shots from his repertoire: forehand flicks that dipped just out of roddick's reach; running one-handed backhand blasts that zipped down the line; sharply cut volleys that hit the rubberized green surface and quickly bounced twice. but there was also some exotica, none more memorable than the shot produced on the opening point of the fourth game of the second set.  roddick was already down 0-3, and when federer gave him a rare short ball, roddick moved forward and channeled all the frustration of the match's first 40 minutes into a forehand that landed very near the baseline. most players would have gotten out of the way, but federer sprung to his left and hit a backhand reflex half volley on the move that traveled cross court for a clean winner. roddick stood gaping at the net as the crowd roared with a mixture of surprise and aesthetic delight.  but such sounds soon gave way to nervous laughter and anticipatory groans as it became abundantly clear that roddick had no answers to the tennis riddles that federer kept posing. roddick's frustration eventually gave way to anger, and he could not even get that quite right, smashing a ball into the stands after losing his serve and accidentally losing his grip on the racket in the process, sending it hurtling in the direction of a photographer courtside and earning him a code violation for unsportsmanlike conduct.  even the new electronic line-judging system that federer dislikes was seeing things federer's way. the swiss challenged four times and was correct four times, and when he managed to transform a missed serve into an ace with a challenge while serving at 2-1, 15-0 in the final set, roddick, who had been convinced the ball had been out, flipped his racket over, stuck the butt against his temple and pretended to pull the trigger.  it was that sort of evening, and it would stay that way as the statistical marvels piled up, with federer converting on all seven of his break points against one of the world's most feared servers. he also tied australian jack crawford's all-time record, set in 1934, by reaching his seventh consecutive grand slam final.  "there is nothing you can really do against someone like that; you just have to shake his hand and say, 'too good,'" said australian great rod laver, who was in attendance in the arena that bears his name and congratulated federer in the locker room afterward.  