man in family slain at home was drug dealer, police say   a man who was killed last week in his home here, along with his wife and three young sons, was a low-level crack cocaine dealer and user, state police officials said wednesday.  firefighters discovered the bodies of the family of five early friday morning as they fought an intense blaze that gutted the family's two-story white house on route 82. the police believe the fire was set to cover up the killings in this small dutchess county town.  the man, manuel a. morey, 33, and his wife, tina morey, 30, died of gunshot wounds, the authorities said. the youngest child, ryan, 6, died of blunt trauma to the head. the other children, manuel, 13, and adam, 10, were stabbed to death, according to the police.  sgt. robert hogan, with the state police troop k headquarters in millbrook, said mr. morey was a known drug dealer who had an arrest record for minor offenses. ''he has an arrest record, but it's short and none of it is drug related,'' sergeant hogan said. specific details about the offenses were not available wednesday, he said.  it remained unclear what role, if any, drug dealing might have played in the killings. the police had not established a motive and had not identified any suspects as of wednesday night. ''it's being investigated,'' sergeant hogan said of the possibility of a link between the killings and drug dealing. ''what sort of link it is, at this point -- your guess is as good as mine. but it's most definitely being explored.''  there were no signs of forced entry at the house, and investigators recovered many knives at the scene, though none have so far been linked with any of the children's wounds.  the fire was first reported at 3:15 a.m. friday by a person who was driving by and saw the flames. about 15 minutes later, a resident reported a car on fire less than a mile away on lomala lane. the car, a purple kia, had been taken from the morey home, the police said. it was registered to mr. morey's father but was used by mr. morey, sergeant hogan said.  investigators have been checking hospitals in the vicinity for anyone who recently sought treatment for what sergeant hogan called ''struggle wounds'' or burns or cuts to the hands or arms. anyone with information about the case was asked to call the new york state police at (845) 298-0398.  