news summary   international a3-10  heated debate on security disrupts iraqi parliament  iraq's shiite prime minister and sunni lawmakers hurled insults at one another during a raucous discussion in parliament over security for baghdad, with the prime minister threatening a sunni lawmaker with arrest and the sunni speaker of parliament threatening to quit.  a1  $10.6 billion for afghanistan  president bush plans to ask congress for $10.6 billion in aid for afghanistan, primarily to beef up the country's security forces, secretary of state condoleezza rice said. the request comes in advance of what is expected to be a spring offensive by forces linked to the taliban.  a6  riots again snarl beirut  violence erupted in beirut for the second time in three days, as an altercation at a university escalated into rioting and gunfire. the army declared a nighttime curfew throughout beirut amid fears that lebanon's two-month-long political crisis had entered a decidedly violent phase.  a8  more than 30 countries pledged $7.6 billion in reconstruction aid for lebanon, in a bold effort to try to prop up the government of prime minister fouad siniora.  a8  israeli's suspension approved  an israeli parliamentary committee approved president moshe katsav's request to suspend himself for three months as prosecutors prepare a case against him that could include charges of rape and other sexual misconduct.  a10  national a14-19  spy program procedures meet with resistance  the bush administration has employed extraordinary secrecy in defending the national security agency's domestic surveillance program from civil lawsuits. but now the procedures have started to meet resistance. the judges who will hear the first appeal next week expressed uneasiness about the procedures.  a1  hollywood gets a makeover  the hollywood neighborhood had fallen into miserable disrepair. but in a few weeks, ground will be broken for a luxury hotel and collection of $1 million condominiums at hollywood boulevard and vine street.  a1  education  colleges scramble to diversify  with michigan's new ban on affirmative action going into effect, and similar ballot initiatives looming in other states, many public universities are scrambling to find race-blind ways to attract more blacks and hispanics as diverse student bodies remain stubbornly elusive.  a1  science/health  new insight into addiction  scientists studying stroke patients are reporting that an injury to a specific part of the brain, near the ear, can instantly and permanently break a smoking habit. people with the injury found that their bodies ''forgot the urge to smoke.''  a1  new york/region b1-7  bloomberg projects surplus of $3.9 billion  mayor bloomberg projects that new york will have a $3.9 billion surplus to carry over into its $57.1 billion budget next year, thanks to a swell in the real estate market. the surplus will allow him to cut taxes $1 billion, reserve $500 million for retiree health benefits and set aside $1.4 billion for future expenses. b1  corzine may lease turnpike  gov. jon s. corzine of new jersey is considering leasing out the new jersey turnpike in hopes that it and two other toll roads could fetch as much as $30 billion and hold the key to solving some of the state's nagging fiscal difficulties. b1  neediest cases b2  business day c1-10  ford on a smaller wheelbase  alan r. mulally, chief executive of ford, has signaled that the bigger-is-better world view that has defined ford for decades is being replaced with a new approach: less is more. instead of insisting that ford reverse its slide, mr. mulally says that ford will become much smaller.  a1  death risk in anemia drug  amgen reported that its anemia drug aranesp increased the risk of death in certain cancer patients, a finding that is likely to raise questions about it and similar drugs.  c3  business digest c2  editorial a20-21  editorials: the president's risky health plan; more willful indifference; days of decision in ulster.  columns: paul krugman, thomas l. friedman.  crossword  e42  obituaries  c11  public lives  b2  tv listings  e36  weather  b8  