looking in the toolbox and seeing art   for four decades, john hechinger ran a hardware and home supplies chain founded by his father in 1911. in 1978, as part of an expansion, he moved the corporate headquarters to suburban washington, d.c. soon after, he began collecting art to humanize the somewhat sterile building. believing in the relationship between the tools his company made and the work that artists produced, he hoped the art would inspire his workers.  mr. hechinger died in 2004, but the collection he established has continued to grow through acquisitions overseen by international arts & artists, a washington-based traveling exhibition service that was given control of the collection after his death.  touring nationally since 2001, ''tools as art: the hechinger collection'' has touched down at the katonah museum of art, filling the museum's main exhibition galleries with 64 works by almost as many artists. it is surprisingly poetic, optimistic and intriguing.  tools have a small but appreciable place in art history, mostly in the context of labor imagery. prehistoric cave paintings in france and spain have schematic diagrams of primitive implements, evidence of the first stirrings of human tool making, and scenes of peasants working the soil are found throughout ancient art. farming returned as a popular theme in art, beginning with medieval paintings and prayer books, like the book of hours, and continuing on through the 19th century.  but it was not really until the 20th century that tools became the subject of artworks. as sarah tanguy, curator of the hechinger collection, points out in the exhibition catalog, depicting tools became for artists a ''means to bridge the gap between art and life, and to address the shifting definition of perception.'' she is right, though it may also have had something to do with questioning the traditional artistic process as an act of creation, an act of making.  art critics do not talk much about craftsmanship these days, preferring to dwell on ideas or the clever statements an artist seeks to convey. this is largely because of marcel duchamp, who was probably the first artist to make an artwork out of real tools. with his ready-mades, beginning in 1914-15, he claimed the right of anyone to become an artist by choosing an object and putting it in a gallery. among his early ready-mades was a snow shovel.  several artists in this exhibition share duchamp's anarchic values, like arman, the late french artist who made sculptures using mass-produced tools like wrenches, handsaws, pliers and paintbrushes. (he is also known for his public-destruction artworks, like dynamiting a sports car.) shown here is ''blue, red, brown'' (1988), something between a painting and a collage -- thick stripes of paint end in paintbrushes, stuck to the canvas.  similarly, tracy heneberger uses hardware-store materials like hinges to concoct adorably original, elegantly constructed sculptures, and the chicago-based, self-taught artist known only as mr. imagination makes shadowy, masklike portraits using paintbrushes and found materials. there is something very african about the paintbrush portraits, though the artist's sources of inspiration include christianity, world affairs, politics and popular culture.  in addition to paintbrushes and hammers, saw blades are popular, both as subject and material for artists. ken butler and donald lipski employ saw blades in assemblage sculptures that tend toward minimalism. several artists also use the blades as a painting surface, including jacob j. kass, howard finster, lou horner, oleg kudryashov, rico solinas, wim delvoye and john schlesinger. others make replicas of handsaws out of paper and wood.  mr. finster, who was born in alabama in 1916 and died in 2001, was one of america's best-known folk artists. the exhibition catalog tells us that he experienced visions from an early age and was later to become a revivalist baptist preacher. he ''heard the call'' to paint ''sacred art'' only in 1976, subsequently cranking out crudely evangelical paintings and sculptures, commonly linking words and images. shown here is a painted stanley handsaw from 1990, dealing with the history of tools.  there are also older, historical works of art, including a lush black-and-white photograph of a new york hardware store, a sign in the front window advertising a sale on tools. berenice abbott took the photograph in 1938 as part of a government-sponsored project to document the city and its inhabitants. it makes for a splendid period piece, the store's owner having lined the window and pavement outside the store with all manner of items and implements.  if abbott sought to convey a wealth of detail about the subjects she documented, walker evans, her contemporary, was interested in economical, precise images that conveyed elegance, simplicity and restraint. so it is with ''wrench'' (1955), part of a series of photographs titled ''beauties of the common tool'' that was originally published in fortune magazine. it is a chilly, no-fuss, front-on portrait, the tool stripped and reduced to its bare essentials.  evans introduced this series of photographs on the beauties of the common tool to readers of fortune with a brief essay, in which he stated what mr. hechinger seemed to know all along: ''almost all basic small tools stand, aesthetically speaking, for elegance, candor and purity.''  ''tools as art: the hechinger collection,'' katonah museum of art, route 22 at jay street, katonah, through april 8. information: (914) 232-9555 or katonahmuseum.org.  art review  