a healthy, well-regulated wall street   a healthy financial sector is crucial to the economic well-being of this country and to new york city in particular. and it is true that wall street is facing ever stiffer competition from financial markets like london's and hong kong's. but beware of the doomsayers who argue that american markets are in free fall and -- not incidentally -- contend that looser regulations are the only way to save them.  senator charles schumer and mayor michael bloomberg joined that chorus this week. in a new report, they warn that without changes to what they call america's ''stringent regulations and high litigation risks,'' this country's share of the lucrative finance business will decline further, at a cost of billions of dollars and thousands of jobs.  we certainly don't want american regulations to drive away good business. but it is first important to remember that when investors lose their shirts in huge frauds like enron, plenty of damage is done to markets as well. and any discussion about the health of our financial industry must be as honest and open as possible. this report at times seems to cull facts to prove predetermined conclusions.  for example, to support its argument that the united states markets are losing ground, the report notes that over the first 10 months of 2006, american exchanges managed barely a third of the overall share of initial public offerings that they did in 2001. it strikes us as odd that a report released in late january could not include data from the previous november. in that month, the securities and exchange commission registered 32 initial public offerings worth a total of $8 billion -- the highest monthly total in five years.  the report goes on to say that the number and cost of securities class-action settlements in this nation set an all-time high in 2005. that's hardly surprising, considering the many settlements in that year stemming from the enormous fraud at worldcom. but what about last year? the number of securities fraud class-action suits fell 38 percent in 2006, to the lowest level in 10 years. and in may, prosecutors indicted the nation's leading class-action securities law firm, milberg weiss bershad & schulman, for allegedly making secret payments to plaintiffs.  the report raises some valuable questions, and we agree with some of its conclusions. loosening restrictions on work visas for talented foreigners and visitor visas for dealmakers strikes us as essential. and efforts under way to reduce the costs associated with complying with sarbanes-oxley regulations -- for example, by focusing audits on the riskiest parts of balance sheets -- are a valuable recalibration of the law's most onerous provisions.  while some common-sense changes are needed, the rights of shareholders and the stability of our markets cannot be trampled in the headlong rush for competitive advantages. united states financial markets are still the largest in the world, and wall street just enjoyed a year of record profits. and while we're talking about reforms, financial firms might take a look in the mirror and ask whether lower underwriting fees and smaller bonuses could also contribute to their long-term health and the health of america's financial markets.  editorial  