follow the money all the way to the kitchen   ''i'm in utah, freezing,'' the chef michelle bernstein said over her cellphone.  she was in park city to prepare a dinner at a celebrity chef event during the sundance film festival, a long way from the warmer climes she is used to, in miami, where she is the chef at michy's. not that she spends all that much time there; her last stint in her restaurant had been a day long. before that she had been in tampa, fla., filming commercials for the shopping network hsn.  ms. bernstein is far from a household name, but the renown she received as chef at her previous miami restaurant, azul, paved her way into the network of consultancies, endorsement deals and book and television contracts that has been the symbol of success for a few dozen chefs who have been best able to market their names and images.  the deals can be potent sources of income for a handful of the best-known chefs, and a great way to develop name recognition for all. they're also a sign of how far the industry has come from the days when a chef earned his income by cooking, and doing that in one kitchen.  ms. bernstein is the consulting chef for jeffrey chodorow's social restaurants in miami and los angeles. she is also the consulting chef for delta airlines (she, like most chefs consulting for airlines, is paid in air miles). she was a spokeswoman for oster appliances for the last three years, and she has just signed a contract with houghton mifflin for a cookbook featuring food that explores her floridian, argentine and jewish heritage.  many of the 125,000 people that the federal bureau of labor statistics says hold the title of executive chef and head cook dream about those kinds of deals. but power varies, and while ms. bernstein may be in an enviable position, she is not at the same level as chefs like mario batali and bobby flay.  ''i'm not even upper middle class,'' she said. ''i've been supporting us from the consulting. basically holding together a family of two, with a house and a car.''  and even mr. flay and mr. batali say that with all of their other deals, their restaurants are where they make most of their money.  ''the restaurants are my foundation,'' mr. flay said. ''it's where i spend 90 percent of my time. they're my bread and butter.''  he estimated that his five restaurants -- mesa grill, bolo and bar americain in manhattan; mesa grill in las vegas; and bobby flay steak in atlantic city -- generate 80 percent of his company's income. his six books (with two in the works) and three television shows promote the restaurants. ''there's no magic to this,'' he said. ''you have to hand-sell the salmon every day.''  mr. batali has more pots boiling. in addition to the nine restaurants of which he is a co-owner (three more will open this year, two in las vegas) and the retail shop called italian wine merchants, he has helped copco design a line of cookware and the vic firth drumstick manufacturer to design salt mills and peppermills. (''we sold more than 10,000 units last year,'' he said of the mills, which sell for between $31 and $63, depending on size and finish.)  and he's working with progresso to bring out a line of frozen pasta entrees that don't require boiling. ''two years ago, there was no one,'' he said. ''now it's a $180 million category. if i can get a third of that, i'll be a happy man.''  chefs can typically earn between 4 and 10 percent of the sale price in such product deals. taking the most conservative view of mr. batali's mills, he would have received a royalty check of $12,400, or on the absolute high (and unlikely, end), $63,000.  ming tsai, a chef in wellesley, mass., has only one restaurant, blue ginger, but has invested much of his time in television -- the fourth season of his show, ''simply ming,'' is currently broadcast on pbs -- and in developing and marketing products. (i worked with mr. tsai on the pbs series ''cooking under fire.'')  he works with kyocera knives -- he sells 10,000 knives and sets of knives annually -- and trubambo cutting boards (750,000 at $9.99 to $900 each) to develop and promote lines of their products. soon he will introduce 40 food items to be sold at target stores.  even television projects are often of more promotional than monetary value for high-profile chefs, said laurie donnelly of wgbh in boston, who produces a number of shows, including mr. tsai's.  ''they're not doing it to make money,'' ms. donnelly said. some earn only the minimum allowed under the contract with the television actors' union. others may earn a couple of thousand dollars a show, although the top stars of the food network can earn 10 times as much.  cookbooks have been de rigueur for chefs over the past few years, but that market is cooling off, at least in terms of fat advances.  ''there are the tv food personalities and then everyone else, so far as money goes,'' said doe coover, a literary agent in boston, in an e-mail.  will schwalbe, editor in chief of hyperion, said that several years ago the market for chef books was hot. ''pretty much anyone with a successful restaurant could get a book contract,'' he said. ''a lot of books didn't live up to expectations in terms of sales or earning out.''  today, the business ''is back to pre-glut levels,'' he said. while a chef can earn as much as 15 percent of a book's cover price, mr. schwalbe said that with the exception of food network stars, advances for chef cookbooks range from $20,000 to $150,000, and much of that will pay for photography and other costs.  mr. batali said he received a nearly $1 million advance for his 2005 book, ''molto italiano'' (ecco), but he said, ''those days are gone.''  woody allen said that 80 percent of success is showing up, and popular chefs can pick up a healthy day's wage by doing public appearances.  this fall, eric german, a vice president of the international exposition center, a sprawling convention complex in cleveland, brought in paula deen, tyler florence and cat cora for cooking demonstrations.  ''anybody who's got a show on the food network is in the five figures,'' mr. german said, ''anywhere from $25,000 to $75,000 per day. and the untouchables'' -- emeril lagasse and rachael ray -- ''are above that.''  not surprisingly, las vegas has been the jackpot for chefs lucky enough to get in on the city's restaurant boom early.  in the 1990s name-brand chefs signed management contracts, in which they set up and managed a restaurant for a percentage of the sales, typically 3 to 7 percent. because restaurants there do such extraordinary volume, this can mean $300,000 to $700,000 a year or more. but people who work there say the deals have become more complex and the costs for operating the restaurants have increased.  ''i don't think anybody's crafting those deals that were made 10 years ago when we did bellagio,'' said elizabeth blau, who runs a restaurant consulting and developing company, and who worked with steve wynn to put together a fleet of star-chef restaurants. ''it's much harder to find a good deal, the casinos have a lot more leverage now.''  some casino operators want the chefs to build their own restaurants.  david burke, a chef who owns and runs several restaurants, works as a consultant and helps develop products, will lease space in the venetian hotel in las vegas to open a restaurant this spring.  ''we put up all the money,'' mr. burke said. ''we own it just like we lease space to build a restaurant in new york city. bigger risk, bigger reward.''  but before a chef has this kind of clout, in most cases he or she has had to make it in the restaurant business.  ''my guess is that less than 1 percent of executive chefs earn more than $250,000 a year,'' said adam block, an adviser to chefs and hoteliers. ''an executive chef of a high-volume new york restaurant would make between $100,000 and $120,000,'' a figure determined in large part by the restaurant's revenues.  a successful 150-seat restaurant doing high volume may make $5 million a year in manhattan, 15 percent of which can be profit, considered a good profit percentage in manhattan. if a chef is a 50 percent owner, he or she may well give up a salary for a share of the profits. if a chef is the co-owner of a restaurant with a backer and it makes $5 million in revenue, the chef would earn $375,000.  multiplying the restaurants multiplies the income.  along with restaurants in las vegas and atlantic city, michael mina, an owner of the restaurant that bears his name in san francisco, has opened eight fine-dining restaurants throughout the country with andre agassi, all of them in deals with hotels and casinos, with total revenues of $62 million. with all of these, as is customary in management deals, mr. mina's company will earn a percentage of the total revenues, plus a percentage of the profits.  ''my main focus has been to build a really strong corporate team,'' mr. mina said.  tom douglas, a well-known seattle chef, has opened five restaurants with his wife, jackie cross, which he said have sales of almost $30 million. ''i had to open more restaurants to increase my pay,'' he said.  and the ultimate payout -- or ''exit strategy,'' in contemporary chef argot -- is to take such a group of restaurants and sell it to a bigger company that wants to open more of them. the classic example is joachim splichal's 1999 sale of his patina group (eight restaurants, three catering units) to restaurant associates for around $40 million. or more recently, jean-georges vongerichten's deal to develop spice market restaurants with starwood hotels and resorts worldwide.  but before chefs can think of big deals, products with their names on them, books, television shows or management contracts, they must first show they can run a kitchen and a restaurant at a profit.  after 17 years in some of new york's finest kitchens, andrew carmellini, 35, is a chef of the moment. but what will he make of this moment, and how long will it last?  he is executive chef of and an equity partner in a voce, a manhattan restaurant that has received critical raves, including three stars from frank bruni in the new york times.  at this point his focus is on the kitchen and ''fiscal responsibility to my partner, the financial health of the business,'' he said. he earns what he says is a good salary and if the restaurant is profitable, he stands to earn big money -- one day. ''it's three, four, five years before you can see distribution of those profits,'' mr. carmellini said.  as for the opportunities that come to a chef who has risen successfully in the public's awareness, ''it's just started,'' he said. ''it's a matter of molding it to what i want to do. the bobbys and the marios exist on a whole other level than where i am.''  