kerry will not enter presidential race   senator john kerry, the massachusetts democrat who narrowly lost the presidency to president bush in 2004, announced wednesday that he would not proceed with a second bid for the white house, saying he preferred to use his position in the new senate majority to press for an end to american involvement in iraq.  ''we came close, certainly close enough to be tempted to try again,'' mr. kerry said, invoking his 2004 race, at the conclusion of a 30-minute speech attacking mr. bush's iraq policy on the senate floor. ''there are powerful reasons to want to continue that fight now. but i've concluded that this isn't the time for me to mount a presidential campaign. it is the time to put my energy to work as part of the majority of the senate and do all i can to end the war.''  mr. kerry's announcement, though it came in an unorthodox place, was not a surprise.  he was bowing to a democratic party that was clearly unreceptive and had turned its attention to new candidates, in particular senators barack obama of illinois and hillary rodham clinton of new york, who both got into the race this month. many democrats had said they expected that mr. kerry would decide not to run after assessing how much support he had in his party. already, most of his aides from the 2004 campaign have moved on.  still, his decision sent ripples across the political waters, answering one more question about what the final democratic field might look like.  more than that, it appeared to bring to completion a candidacy that for mr. kerry never truly ended after that election day in 2004 which began with exit polls showing him heading for a solid victory -- aides were addressing him as mr. president -- and ended with his making a concession call to mr. bush. that experience, friends said, left mr. kerry bitter and frustrated and eager for a rematch.  he used his time on the senate floor to recount his history as a vietnam veteran who returned from war nearly 40 years ago to become an opponent of the conflict. his voice cracking with emotion, he drew frequent comparisons between the two wars as he made a case against mr. bush's foreign policy in the middle east.  ''the fact is, what happens here in the next two years may irrevocably shape or terribly distort the administration of whichever candidate is next elected president,'' he said, adding, ''i don't want the next president to find that they have inherited a nation still divided and a policy destined to end as vietnam did.''  mr. kerry's speech drew tributes from fellow democrats, including the senior democrat from massachusetts, senator edward m. kennedy, who had been pushing mr. kerry to make a decision.  another democratic senator running for president, joseph r. biden jr. of delaware, said: ''my initial reaction to senator kerry's decision is one of extreme sadness. john kerry is a major voice in american politics, and the country would be much better off today if he were president.''  mr. kerry made his announcement at 3 p.m. in a senate chamber that, other than two senators -- mr. kennedy and harry reid, the majority leader -- was almost empty.  mr. kerry, 63, intends to run for a fifth term in the senate in 2008, an aide said.  the senator, in his travels around the country since the election, has argued that he came close to winning in 2004 and would be a better candidate, with extra experience, in 2008.  after being taunted in the 2004 race as being equivocal on the war in iraq, he had emerged as one of his party's leading opponents to the war, and had renounced his original support for the war resolution that caused him so many problems in the 2004 election.  but mr. kerry faced severe obstacles in trying to capture his party's nomination for a second time. for one thing, many of his supporters had made clear that they would not join him again, with many saying he had made mistakes in 2004 that cleared the way for mr. bush to win.  mr. kerry also faced an unusually strong and deep field of democratic contenders, including mrs. clinton, mr. obama and mr. kerry's running mate from 2004, john edwards, the former senator from north carolina.  but mr. kerry's hopes were probably most damaged by what he said was a botched joke he told while campaigning on behalf of congressional candidates in the final week of the 2006 election campaigns.  mr. kerry's prepared remarks called for him to say, ''do you know where you end up if you don't study, if you aren't smart, if you're intellectually lazy? you end up getting us stuck in a war in iraq. just ask president bush.'' in his delivery, he dropped the word ''us.''  republicans argued that he had delivered a joke at the expense of american troops fighting in iraq.  mr. kerry responded by getting off the campaign trail and out of public view.  for many democrats, the remark was a reminder of instances of ineptness by mr. kerry as a campaigner, including his often troubled efforts to explain his changing views on the war in iraq. most famously, he said that he had voted for an $87 billion war appropriation ''before i voted against it,'' a piece of videotape that republicans quickly turned into a defining caricature of him.  correction:  january 26, 2007, friday  an article yesterday about senator john kerry's announcement that he would not seek the democratic nomination for president in 2008 incorrectly described what he called ''a botched joke'' he told before the november midterm elections. in telling the joke, which was assailed as an attack on american troops fighting in iraq, mr. kerry not only dropped a word from his prepared remarks, but he also rephrased his opening sentence extensively and omitted a reference to president bush. mr. kerry's aides said that the prepared text read: ''do you know where you end up if you don't study, if you aren't smart, if you're intellectually lazy? you end up getting us stuck in a war in iraq. just ask president bush.'' what he actually said: ''you know, education, if you make the most of it, you study hard, you do your homework and you make an effort to be smart, you can do well. if you don't, you get stuck in iraq.''  