rookie ties course and playstation marks   it is a bold golfer who can upstage tiger woods in his first tournament round of the year, but brandt snedeker has vowed to make inroads into woods's television time.  in a round when woods shot a six-under-par 66 thursday at the north course at torrey pines, snedeker peeled away fans from woods's gallery and pulled them to his. near the end of snedeker's round -- an 11-under-par 61 which tied the course record and gave him a two-shot lead over charlie wi at the buick invitational -- many fans had left woods's side to take a look at snedeker, a 26-year-old pga tour rookie with a mop top.  ''i made a comment to my caddie, 'let's see if we can take some of tiger's crowd away from him because that means we're doing something pretty good,' '' said snedeker, who grew up in nashville, attended vanderbilt and made his living on the nationwide tour last year. ''sure enough, they started following the whole back nine. the crowd going into today, they probably didn't have a clue who i was. by the end of the day i had people cheering my name and telling me to shoot 59.''  although the vision of woods swinging hard and staring down flagsticks is not new, the sight of snedeker rolling in birdie putts from two groups behind woods is. snedeker's round was so superior that the television cameras, so often poised on woods, beamed snedeker into living rooms and sports bars.  even woods paid attention to snedeker's round, staring at a leader board with a new name on top of it and wondering how any golfer could be eight under par after the first seven holes.  ''we all said, 'o.k., that might be a misprint,' '' woods said. ''it came up again so, obviously, it was not a misprint.''  snedeker birdied his first four holes. on his next three holes he went eagle-birdie-birdie. after making a par on no. 17, his eighth hole of the day, snedeker birdied no. 18 to stand nine under after nine holes. his total of 27 tied the pga tour record for the lowest nine holes on a par 36.  ''the only time i've been nine under through nine has been playing tiger woods on playstation,'' snedeker said, referring to the video game where contestants pretend to be woods. ''i've never even sniffed being that low.''  snedeker said he became nervous as he headed for his final nine holes. when he tried to stick his tee into the ground on the par-5 no. 1, the ball fell out of his hand because he was shaking so much.  he made birdie at no. 1, a par at no. 2 and then lipped out a 2 1/2-foot putt for birdie on no. 3. the momentum from his start seemed to fade. he only made one birdie the rest of the way.  ''if i had made that short birdie putt, it would have been a little different,'' he said of chasing a score of 59. ''i never really got to the point where it was close.''  entering the tournament, snedeker would have been toward the bottom of a list of players who might outshine woods in the opening round. while woods was winning major championships in the chicago suburbs and english seaside a year ago, snedeker was making the nationwide tour rounds in byron, minn., and midland, tex.  in between his two victories on the minor league circuit, snedeker broke his right collarbone when he tripped over a tree root running to his car.  ''i wish i had a great story for you, that i did something exciting and broke it, but it's kind of a plain jane, clumsy way to break a collarbone,'' he said. ''i was running to dinner. i was running late. needless to say, i walk to my car now.''  snedeker said he understood that he was still some distance from his first pga tour victory, especially with so much talent in the field. woods, for example, put it together after a sluggish start, overcoming two bogeys in his first three holes with eagles on the par-5 no. 18 and the par-5 no. 9. he twice hit a 5-iron to about six feet, clipping the flagstick on his approach shot from the 18th fairway from more than 200 yards away.  ''it took me probably three or four holes before i got back into the flow of competition, back into the rhythm of the round,'' woods said.  on friday, snedeker and woods will play the longer, more treacherous south course, which played to an average of 72.9 on thursday compared with the average score of 68.2 on the north course.  ''i'm probably in a blur right now,'' snedeker said. ''i'm trying to slow down the best that i can. i can't help it. i've never been in this position before, never had this many cameras around me, never had this many people care about what i say.''  golf  