news summary   international  a3-16  senate panel denounces bush's new iraq strategy  one day after president bush implored congress to give his iraq strategy a chance to succeed, the senate foreign relations committee approved a resolution denouncing the plan to send more troops to baghdad.  a1  an iraqi official authorized to speak on behalf of field commanders for the country's most powerful militia has approached western military officials and laid out a plan to avoid armed confrontation, senior iraqi and american officials said.  a12  russia's nuclear market  the arrest and sentencing of a russian man who was caught attempting to smuggle enough refined uranium to make a nuclear weapon has alarmed georgian and american officials and suggests that the region provides a breeding ground for illicit commerce in atomic materials.  a1  israeli president asked to quit  prime minister ehud olmert called for president moshe katsav's resignation, after israel's attorney general announced his intention to indict mr. katsav on criminal charges.  a10  national  a18-22  four states considering changes in primary dates  california, florida, illinois and new jersey are likely to move their 2008 presidential primaries to early next february, forcing candidates of both parties to rethink their campaign strategies, party officials said.  a1  debate over gay sheep study  a researcher at the oregon health and science university set out to discover what makes some sheep gay but has drawn outrage from animal rights activists and advocates for gay rights, based on a bizarre misinterpretation of what the work is about.  a1  budget deficit to shrink again  the nonpartisan congressional budget office predicted that the federal budget deficit would shrink again this year and could swing into a surplus in 2012.  a1  kerry decides against '08 bid  senator john kerry, the massachusetts democrat who narrowly lost the presidency to president bush in 2004, announced that he would not proceed with a second bid for the white house.  a19  new york/region  b1-6  port authority to create fourth regional airport  the port authority of new york and new jersey plans to acquire a 93-year lease on stewart international airport in ulster county, 60 miles north of new york city, for $78.5 million and begin expanding it in the fall to create a fourth major regional airport, officials said.  b1  neediest cases  b6  business day  c1-14  hedge funds enter politics  during the 2006 election cycle, executives at the 30 biggest hedge funds made $2.8 million in political contributions.  a1  business digest  c2  editorial  a24-25  editorials: energy rhetoric, and reality; moment of opportunity in somalia; closing the revolving door; political meddling with justice.  columns: david brooks, bob herbert.  bridge  e11  tv listings  e14  crossword  e10  weather  d8  correction:  january 27, 2007, saturday  an entry in the news summary on thursday about plans by the port authority of new york and new jersey to create a fourth major airport in the new york region by acquiring a lease to stewart international misidentified the county where stewart is located. it is orange county, not ulster.  