israel to indict president on sex charges, justice ministry says   the attorney general of israel plans to indict president moshe katsav on charges of rape and other sexual offenses, the justice ministry announced tuesday, in what would be the most serious criminal case involving a senior israeli official.  mr. katsav, whose post is largely ceremonial, has denied any wrongdoing. he did not comment on tuesday, but planned to hold a news conference on wednesday, his lawyers said.  ''the president is convinced that he is a victim of false allegations and attempts to remove him from his office, and he will fight to prove his innocence,'' david libai, a lawyer for mr. katsav, said at a news conference in tel aviv.  the justice ministry announcement prompted more calls for the president to resign, which have been intensifying since the accusations surfaced last summer.  ''i think the president must announce his resignation at once,'' zahava gal-on, a member of parliament, told israel radio. ''i believe he should have taken this step a long time ago, but now, with the attorney general's announcement of such a harsh indictment, there should be no delay.''  through his lawyers, mr. katsav, 61, has indicated previously that he might suspend himself at some point, and would resign if indicted. though he has generally maintained a low profile, recently he has been more visible and has hinted he would rather contest the charges from office, israeli news media have reported.  if he chooses to remain in office, mr. katsav would be afforded a hearing before any charges are filed. but the public announcement by the justice ministry made it highly likely that attorney general menachem mazuz would ultimately issue an indictment. ''the attorney general, with the agreement of the state attorney, reached the conclusion that there is sufficient prima facie evidence to indict the president,'' the justice ministry said in a statement.  israeli law prohibits putting a sitting president on trial. but a trial is permitted if he resigns or is impeached by parliament, or after his seven-year term, which will end this summer for mr. katsav.  according to the justice ministry, mr. katsav could face a rape charge involving a woman who worked with him when he was tourism minister in the late 1990s. he also could be charged with sexual misconduct involving three women who have worked at the president's office since 2000.  mr. katsav, who is married and is the father of five, could also face charges of fraud and breach of trust, the justice ministry said.  because the authority of the president is limited, mr. katsav's case is not expected to have a direct impact on the israeli government led by prime minister ehud olmert. however, the case comes as many israelis have expressed deep disappointment with the country's leadership.  mr. olmert is the subject of two formal investigations. one involves the sale of his private home in jerusalem and the purchase of a new house. the second inquiry, announced last week, will seek to determine whether mr. olmert acted improperly to help friends before a leading israeli bank was privatized in 2005.  several other israeli politicians are at various stages of the legal process in cases involving improper political appointments, sexual misconduct and other issues.  also, mr. olmert and the country's military leaders have been roundly criticized for the handling of the war last summer in lebanon with hezbollah, and the prime minister's poll ratings have plummeted.  mr. katsav's case became public last july when he said he was the target of blackmail by a woman who had worked for him and accused him of sexual harassment.  however, an investigation by the police found the woman's claims to be credible, and several other women accused mr. katsav of sexual impropriety.  in october, the police recommended that the attorney general file rape and sexual harassment charges against the president. the attorney general has been studying the case since then.  ''there is a great sense of relief; the facts speak for themselves,'' kinneret barashi, a lawyer for one of the accusers, told army radio.  mr. katsav served in parliament and as a government minister for many years, representing the right-wing likud party. the parliament, or knesset, selected him as president after ezer weizman quit in 2000, amid a scandal of his own.  as a cabinet minister and a member of parliament, mr. weizman received hundreds of thousands of dollars in the 1980s from a french businessman with interests in israel. mr. weizman, who acknowledged receiving the money but was never charged, died in 2005.  