a rocky mountain road to happily ever after   the chamber of commerce of boulder, colo., should be over the moon about the portrait of that city presented by the warm and fuzzy romantic comedy ''catch and release.'' it appears to be a clean, prosperous bohemian paradise where everyone is happy 90 percent of the time; even visitors from big, bad los angeles quickly mellow.  there is great fly-fishing nearby (the title refers to that sport), and the scenery is to die for. the movie is so conscious of being on a rocky mountain high that one character remarks suspiciously that people in boulder seem ''unnaturally'' happy.  even when sam (kevin smith), the only overweight person in sight, makes a halfhearted suicide attempt with pills and vodka, he's in and out of the hospital in a jiffy, and no one gives his gesture a second thought. his attack of the blues has two possible causes: his weight and the fact that one of his best friends, grady, whose funeral opens the film, has just died in an accident.  the first feature film directed by susannah grant, the screenwriter of ''charlotte's web,'' ''erin brockovich'' and ''in her shoes,'' ''catch and release'' is a star vehicle for jennifer garner, who plays grady's nervous but plucky fiancée, gray wheeler, left stunned by his death on the eve of their wedding.  at least gray has no dearth of comforters: her fiancé's three best friends are all at the ready. besides sam, they include two dreamboats: sam's roommate dennis (sam jaeger), who is secretly in love with her, and fritz (timothy olyphant), a playboy director of television commercials who flies into boulder for the funeral from his spacious malibu beach house.  the moment mr. olyphant (lately of ''deadwood'') smolders into view, you know that he and gray are predestined to be lovers; the only question is how soon. they get off on the wrong foot at the funeral reception when gray overhears fritz having quickie sex with a curvaceous caterer. although gray is miffed, that doesn't stop the two from coupling in near-record time. once their chemistry is sealed with an impulsive kiss instigated by gray, they begin carrying on a secret affair.  their rapprochement is hastened by gray's discovery that grady had a million-dollar fortune of which she knew nothing, and out of which he was dispensing $3,000 a month to a massage therapist in santa monica. when she confronts fritz with this news, he tells her that the woman in california has a 7-year-old son. gray is doubly taken aback when the other woman, maureen (juliette lewis), and her child turn up in boulder, and the boy (joshua friesen) is actually 312.  at this point you are prepared for hair-pulling fireworks between the good girl and the designated floozy. but maureen turns out to be a warm-hearted if flaky devotee of chinese herbs and holistic cuisine, as well as a caring mother. before long, everybody is getting along famously.  ''catch and release'' is refreshing for what it doesn't have. there is no whiny princess-mongering, with a spoiled golden girl put on a throne and crowned amid oohs and ahs, while diamonds and dollars rain from on high. there is no baring of claws, and the words bitch and slut are never spoken by these nice people. the closest thing to a mean girl is grady's stern, grieving mother (fiona shaw), who pressures gray to give back her engagement ring.  ms. garner and mr. olyphant could pass as younger siblings of julia roberts and johnny depp, and you get the sense that the movie is a test of their romantic star magnetism. if ms. garner blends spunk and eternal girlishness in about the same proportion as ms. roberts, her screen wattage is about 40 to ms. roberts's 100.  mr. olyphant's fritz, meanwhile, oozes a slightly snaky sincerity. as much as the movie strains to make him mr. right, it leaves you with nagging doubts about his character; his grins are too wide, and he casts too many sidelong glances to be trusted.  although i find the term ''chick flick'' odious, i imagine that columbia pictures regards ''catch and release'' as exactly that, although there are signs that ms. grant was reaching for something more layered and subtle than the usual fairy-tale formula. if the compromise between one thing and another leaves the movie struggling for basic credibility, its affection for its characters doesn't feel cynical.  ''catch and release'' is rated pg-13 (parents strongly cautioned). it has sexual situations.  catch and release  opens today nationwide.  written and directed by susannah grant; director of photography, john lindley; edited by anne v. coates; music by b t and tommy stinson; production designer, brent thomas; produced by jenno topping; released by columbia pictures. running time: 124 minutes.  with: jennifer garner (gray), timothy olyphant (fritz), kevin smith (sam), sam jaeger (dennis), fiona shaw (mrs. douglas), juliette lewis (maureen) and joshua friesen (mattie).  film review  