arena fit for quinnipiac's ambition   last saturday, new haven coliseum, once home to the popular but long ago dismantled knighthawks of the american hockey league, was demolished in favor of downtown redevelopment.  but a week later, several miles to the north in hamden, a new chapter in connecticut's hockey history is being written. quinnipiac university, a private college with 7,400 students, will open the $52 million td banknorth sports center on campus.  the center has two arenas, one with 3,200 seats for hockey and another with 3,500 seats for basketball. and while the center's first event is a sold-out basketball doubleheader today, the men's hockey game tomorrow at noon against holy cross, also sold out and to be broadcast on espnu, is probably the weekend's main event.  for quinnipiac, the move from northford ice pavilion, a typical suburban rink a town away that they shared with high school teams and youth leagues, was well timed. in its second season in the eastern college athletic conference -- which includes cornell, harvard, dartmouth, colgate and yale -- quinnipiac began the weekend in first place with an 8-3-3 conference record (11-8-4 over all) and ranked no. 20 in the uscho.com/cstv poll.  last season, the team finished 20-18-1 over all and in ninth place in the league at 8-13-1. quinnipiac beat harvard and dartmouth in its first conference games.  coach rand pecknold, who took over a division ii program with midnight practices and barely enough players in 1994, said the team's offense was largely responsible for the turnaround.  ''we've got three lines with a lot of high-end players who can score,'' he said. ''we still need to improve on defense, but that's a good problem to have. there are a lot of college teams out there that are having trouble scoring.''  pecknold said that before talk of a new arena, he mostly had to settle for one-dimensional players. lately, however, he has been able to bring in premium prospects like brendan wong, who was first in the league with 17 goals and is considered one of the best freshmen in the nation; bryan leitch, who was last season's conference rookie of the year; and jamie bates, a junior forward.  ''it's been great to talk about this place, show kids pictures of it and bring them up here while it was being built,'' pecknold said of the new arena. ''but now we're going to have groups of recruits at these games this week. it's going to be a big sell for us.''  jack mcdonald, quinnipiac's athletic director, said he expected the other homes games this week, tuesday night against harvard and friday night against yale, would be sellouts, too. at least 2,500 tickets have been sold for each of the team's remaining eight home games.  mcdonald said the building's modern training areas, locker rooms, offices and 135-seat private reception room would draw not only fans, but also top recruits and the country's top teams from other conferences to play there.  ''it's going to allow us to host some of the biggest names in college hockey, like minnesota, boston college and boston university,'' he said. ''it's also going to allow us to be on televised games that will get us seen all over the world.''  steve hagwell, the conference's commissioner, said the new arena was partly why the league admitted quinnipiac two years ago. he also said he was not surprised the team was doing well.  ''they've won championships in other conferences, and they've been to the n.c.a.a. tournament,'' hagwell said. ''some people may have thought it would take them time, but their history said otherwise.''  rich coppola, the sports director at wtic-tv, the fox affiliate in hartford, said he thought quinnipiac has made great strides in a short period. ''in some ways, it's similar to the way uconn women's basketball grew,'' he said.  yale plays in front of good crowds at the 3,400-seat ingalls rink near its campus in downtown new haven. ''it will help develop the rivalry between yale and quinnipiac,'' said steve conn, a spokesman for yale's athletic department, referring to the new arena.  reid cashman, quinnipiac's captain and a senior defenseman from red wing, minn., said the buzz about the arena has energized the team.  ''the other day we were walking to class and we saw the students waiting in a line that went from the gym to the library to buy tickets,'' said cashman, a two-time all-american and a nominee for this year's hobey baker award, given to the best player in college hockey. ''we've been hearing about this all year.''  mcdonald said everything coming together was the result of good planning by the administration.  ''we'd like to be a national contender, and all of the pieces are in place,'' cashman said. ''and someday, when the puck bounces right and the penalties are at minimum, maybe we can get to the pinnacle of college hockey.''  colleges  