sharpton goes to washington to talk to party's '08 hopefuls   the rev. al sharpton, a man who says he knows a well-tailored suit from a fake, went to the united states senate on thursday to do some comparison shopping, meeting separately with four democrats who are seeking the 2008 presidential nomination to discuss civil rights.  one purpose of the visit, two new york advisers and confidants of mr. sharpton said, was to send a signal to senator barack obama, democrat of illinois and a fellow african-american, that he should not take for granted the political support of mr. sharpton, a power broker in new york politics and a presidential candidate in 2004.  indeed, mr. sharpton sounded far from sold on mr. obama on thursday night after their meeting in the senator's office, where mr. obama had them pose for a picture beneath a portrait of justice thurgood marshall of the supreme court.  ''i left the meeting a little curious, feeling that he was noticing our civil rights agenda, but i didn't understand what his civil rights agenda is,'' mr. sharpton said.  mr. obama and senator hillary rodham clinton of new york, with whom mr. sharpton also met, are expected to compete fiercely for black votes.  ''i'm not endorsing anyone at this point,'' mr. sharpton said, ''but she has more of a civil rights program laid out. and i always know where i stand with her. she is always accessible and welcoming.''  no candidate's schedule was too important for them to miss the meeting: mrs. clinton was waiting to speak at a senate armed services committee hearing on iraq when the time for her appointment with mr. sharpton came and went. so one of her aides escorted mr. sharpton to an office near the hearing room, and mrs. clinton left the discussion about troop levels in baghdad to meet him.  mr. sharpton and mrs. clinton met behind closed doors for 15 minutes, then emerged with big smiles. mrs. clinton seemed surprised to see a dozen reporters waiting; mr. sharpton had sent out two news releases, one at 2 a.m. on thursday, with his itinerary.  ''i'm delighted that reverend sharpton is here today to talk about issues that are important to our country,'' mrs. clinton said as they stood in a senate hallway. ''his commitment to the 21st-century civil rights agenda is one that i share.''  mr. sharpton said, ''i'm very happy my hometown senator is in the race.''  mrs. clinton declined to take questions and zipped back to the hearing, while mr. sharpton hung back with reporters for a few minutes.  asked who he favored among the democratic candidates, he said, ''we're talking.'' he said the conversations dealt with criminal justice issues and hurricane katrina, among other things.  mr. sharpton also met with senators christopher j. dodd of connecticut and joseph r. biden jr. of delaware, and plans to meet soon with former senator john edwards of north carolina and gov. bill richardson of new mexico, all of whom are seeking the presidency.  mr. sharpton also said he would decide this spring whether to run for president again in 2008.  