paid notice: deaths   klein, john a.   klein--john a., president and chief executive officer of people's united bank and its parent, people's united financial, inc. passed away january 25 at yale-new haven hospital. he was 58 years old. john leaves his wife and high school sweetheart, carla, to whom he was married for 37 years, and his two children and their spouses: kristen chiodo and her husband chuck and eric and his wife allison. he had been looking forward to the arrival of kristen and chuck's baby -his first grandchild -who is due to be born in february. he is also survived by his sister patricia and her husband daniel snow, of norwalk, his brother peter, of florida, and his mother-in-law almira salomonsen, of orange. john was born in bridgeport on march 19, 1949. he grew up in milford and graduated from jonathan law high school in 1967. he attended columbia university and graduated from the university of connecticut in 1971. john joined what was then known as people's savings bank, bridgeport in december, 1971 as a management trainee. later, while working full time at the bank, he attended the university of connecticut law school at night. following his graduation from law school in 1977, he became the bank's first in-house lawyer and was appointed its general counsel in 1984. over the next fifteen years, he served in a variety of positions of increasing responsibility at people's united, culminating in his appointment as chairman, president and chief executive officer of the bank in 1999. during his eight year tenure as chief executive officer, john focused his efforts on ensuring that the bank would be able to meet the challenges of banking in the twenty-first century, while maintaining its culture and community focus. he effectively steered the bank through the difficult economy of the early 2000s, and when the bank determined it was necessary to sell its credit card business, he successfully negotiated a sale that retained the jobs in bridgeport. last year, john led the bank's conversion to full public stockholder ownership. the bank's new holding company, people's united financial, inc., raised approximately $3.4 billion in the offering, making it one of the largest stock offerings in united states history. most recently under john's leadership, the bank completed the acquisition of chittenden corporation, expanding people's united to approximately $22 billion in assets and more than 300 branches in six states. john was also chairman of the board of the people's united community foundation, which he believed reflected the bank's ongoing commitment to community betterment. in addition to his involvement with the bank's outreach, john held leadership roles with a broad array of community and business organizations. these included: the board of directors of bridgeport hospital and yalenew haven health; the bridgeport regional business council; the greater bridgeport area foundation; and the business council of fairfield county. john also was a board member of the connecticut bankers association, the connecticut business and industry association, and a member of the connecticut bar association. inspired by the example of his wife carla, a longtime teacher, john was an advocate of the importance of education and, particularly, public education. he believed that a strong public educational system is critical to connecticuts long term success and prosperity, and, as a proud graduate of the university of connecticut (and a devoted huskies fan), he was an enthusiastic supporter of uconn. john was dedicated to supporting research aimed at making a difference in the fight against esophageal cancer. following his treatment at the university of michigan, john and carla worked with the university to establish the john a. and carla s. klein family research professorship in thoracic surgery to support a faculty member whose research focuses on diseases of the esophagus. calling hours will take place on monday, january 28, 2008 from 4-8pm in the abriola parkview funeral home, 419 white plains rd., trumbull, ct. a memorial service will take place on tuesday, january 29, 2008 beginning at 11am at the klein memorial auditorium, 910 fairfield ave., bridgeport, ct. in lieu of flowers, the family asks that donations be made to the university of michigan in support of the john a. and carla s. klein family research professorship in thoracic surgery. university of michigan, department of surgery, 1500 e. medical center dr., 2110 taubman center, ann arbor, mi 48109-5346. for travel directions and more information visit us at abriola.com.  