homegrown, and (partly) newman's own   one of the few times i have seen paul newman in person was at dinner at luna, on the grounds of the westport country playhouse. he was at the table next to mine -- and now he and a new chef run the place, which opened last fall, totally revamped and renamed dressing room.  the new look conveys sophisticated rusticity, with a roaring fire, vintage wood floors, and swags of dried magnolia leaves and gigantic sugar pine cones looped along the walls, interspersed with playhouse posters.  subtitled ''a homegrown restaurant,'' dressing room features the cooking of michel nischan, a co-owner and an experienced chef who once ran miche mache in south norwalk and north stamford. the menu emphasizes fresh, seasonal, mostly organic foods in wholesome dishes, usually with a modern twist, often made with local ingredients.  oysters, as a starter, are from connecticut. the feta cheese in the spoon salad is from sankow's beaver brook farm in lyme and the varied artisanal cheeses as a dessert choice are from cato corner farm in colchester.  in the hands of an imaginative chef like mr. nischan, wholesome is anything but boring. three delicious appetizers prove the point. fried calamari, lightly battered, are enlivened by soft cheese grits and cape gooseberries. kona kampachi, a farmed fish, forms a tartare with chopped oysters, shallots, fresh chives and extra virgin olive oil. best of all, though it sounds mundane, is the maryland crab cocktail -- attractive clusters of fresh crabmeat alongside tiny portions of pumpkin-seed frissée salad and rutabaga sauerkraut, with a cumin accent, in a tangy blood-orange dressing.  a really special dish, farro, a cereal grain similar to spelt, is available as an entree with butternut squash and truffles. i ordered it as a side, prepared risotto-style, with foraged mushrooms and a foam of mascarpone cheese. the farro's nutty flavor and firmness worked well with the mushrooms.  another pleasing combination was berkshire pig, consisting of three cuts of pork -- prime roasting cut, prime braising cut and seared pork belly, served with a pungent parsnip horseradish purée and large heirloom shell beans in natural pan juices.  accessories at dressing room are often unusual -- wilted kale, collard greens, brussels sprouts, parsnips, salsify. but sometimes they overwhelm the main attraction, like the simply grilled john dory fish, drowned out by the collard greens and salsify in ham hock stock that accompanied it.  a better combination was paper-thin slices of cox's orange pippin apples layered with pan-roasted trout, garnished with creamy scalloped potatoes.  desserts, a nischan specialty, make grand finales. especially rich was the chocolate bread pudding. sticky toffee pudding with red wine-soaked poached pear and maple ice cream was also memorable. my favorite was lemon meringue pie, a miniature individual tart with a piquant lemon-sour cream filling, mile-high meringue and a crust that looked commercial but was buttery, house-made and superb.  almost everything is made on the premises, from the ketchup used in the loose-textured dressing room meatloaf and the cured bacon on the p. l. newman burger to all the ice creams and sour cherry sorbet. but the excellent sourdough breads come from the sono baking company in south norwalk.  dressing room is off to a flying start and what promises to be an extended run.  dressing room  27 powers court  westport  (203) 226-1114  www.dressingroomhomegrown.com  very good  the space -- a houselike building of vivid-green clapboard with a front terrace, next to the westport country playhouse. the first of two handsome dining rooms has high ceilings, post-and-beam construction and a stone fireplace; the rear room has banquettes, oak barn-siding walls and an exposed-beam ceiling. wheelchair accessible.  the crowd -- casually well-dressed couples, foursomes and small groups make up the chatty, conversational crowd. the staff is friendly, unpretentious and eager to please.  the bar -- a full bar, slightly separated from the front dining room, with concise but well-chosen wine, beer and ale selections.  the bill -- lunch entrees, $14 to $20; dinner entrees, $20 to $34. all major credit cards.  what we like -- maryland crab cocktail, kona kampachi, fried calamari; farro, berkshire pig, meatloaf, pan-roasted trout; lemon meringue pie, sticky toffee pudding, chocolate bread pudding, cherry sorbet.  if you go -- lunch: wednesday to sunday, 11:30 a.m. to 2 p.m. dinner: tuesday to thursday and sunday, 5 to 9:30 p.m.; friday and saturday, 5 to 10:30 p.m. large free parking lot in front of the theater and the restaurant.  reviewed jan. 28, 2007  dining/ westport  