a safe landing, but a little bumpy   when the flying pig first flew into mount kisco's metro-north station house, the concept of a market-cafe emphasizing fresh local and organic products was laudable, and it still is. but those wings wilted as the ambitious owners tried to accomplish too many missions in a small, ungainly space.  in early december, the pig took off again, this time settling into roomier quarters last occupied by cafe antico. the basic architectural details remain intact -- the barrel ceiling of the upper floor and the glass walls wrapping the first-floor dining area -- but the new pig is a more sober affair. gone is antico's dazzle of ornate candelabras, strings of glittery pin lights and masses of candles -- an atmosphere that can't quite be replaced by the collection of pig figures and figurines. the new ownership's commitment to serving nutritious, chemical-free food is a serious one, and it may be that the pared-down décor better delivers the earnest message.  most of the flying pig's meat and vegetable products come from cabbage hill farm, a local supplier that, like the restaurant's other sources, is committed to the humane treatment of free-ranging livestock and the cultivation of pesticide-free vegetables. quality like this goes a long way but doesn't always guarantee the success of a dish.  during my recent visits, the cooking wasn't as vigilant as it could be and lacked consistency. at best, promised herbs were absent; at worst, much of a rib-eye steak was globby fat. but this new flying pig is still coming to terms with the responsibilities involved in running a full-scale restaurant. meanwhile, it makes a sunny destination for lunch -- perhaps a sandwich and a bowl of thick, puréed vegetable soup, delicious and warming. and dinner had some high points as well.  a couple of starters proved quite satisfying. although the promised rosemary was undetectable, grilled shrimp were still appealing under a light wash of lemony broth and on a bed of cannellini beans and shredded arugula; and the liquor from small, tasty mussels mingled with wine sauce and garlic into a broth that sopped nicely with good toasted bread -- a lusty dish.  chopped salad contained carrots, romaine, sweet red onions, maytag blue cheese and lentils (lentils and beans seem to crop up in most dishes). on one occasion the salad was dressed with a wine vinaigrette that was perfectly balanced; on another visit it was stingingly astringent.  a mountain of gorgeous fresh parsley and a scattering of pignoli and pomegranate seeds took grilled portobellos under a melt of parmesan out of the ordinary. but the sautéed bits of calamari in another appetizer were a tad tough.  an entree of flat maltagliati pasta (the name means badly cut) with meaty bolognese sauce was hearty and homey (a half portion as an appetizer can be arranged). other creditable dishes included salt-roasted salmon, the salt crust (removed before being served) capturing all the juiciness and flavor of the fish as it roasted. and hanger steak turned out to be a wonderful piece of meat. the two-inch-thick cut was grilled perfectly to medium rare; mashed yukon golds and strings of fried onion shared the plate. the excellence of this steak made the fatty rib-eye mentioned earlier all the more puzzling. this rib-eye was also cut in a wedge, the thin end overdone and dry. adding to the disaster were leathery outer leaves of onion and tough leaves of spinach.  the pig motif, most apparent on the upper floor, might make some diners uneasy, especially if they've ordered the pork loin. the fact is that this meat was fabulously tender, flavorful and juicy, a winner sided by a fluffy mash of potato and celery root.  for dessert. the sticky toffee pudding, lighter than most, was truly luxurious when served with a scoop of ice cream. or have the ice cream neat: vanilla, lovely; or calypso kahlúa, a personal favorite. showered with chocolate and charmingly presented in towers, banana cinnamon fritters also made a pleasing finish to the meal.  the flying pig  251 lexington avenue  mount kisco  (914) 666-7445  good  the space -- bright, sunny dining areas during lunch. contemporary main-floor dining area with glass walls. the pig motif is mostly in the otherwise characterless upstairs dining room. both areas are noisy at peak times. wheelchair accessible.  the crowd -- neat, casually dressed adults. cold welcome and no grateful farewell from the hosts; friendly, willing wait staff.  the bar -- small attractive bar at the entry of the main floor dining area.  the bill -- lunch and brunch: main dishes, $10 to $15. dinner: main dishes, $22 to $34; $14.50 for a burger. major credit cards accepted.  what we like -- vegetable soup, lemon shrimp, roasted mussels, maltagliati bolognese, salt-roasted salmon, grilled hanger steak, pork loin, sticky toffee pudding, vanilla and calypso kahlúa ice creams.  if you go -- lunch: tuesday to friday, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. dinner: tuesday to thursday, 5 to 9 p.m.; friday and saturday, 5 to 11 p.m. brunch: friday and saturday, 10:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. for lunch and dinner, reservations are always a good idea, especially for a table on the main floor.  reviewed jan. 28, 2007  dining/mount kisco  