series of sordid corruption charges nears its nadir in israel   prime minister ehud olmert called wednesday for president moshe katsav's resignation, after israel's attorney general announced his intention to indict mr. katsav on criminal charges including rape, abuse of power, obstruction of justice, fraud, sexual harassment and breach of trust.  ''there is no doubt in my mind that the president cannot continue to fulfill his position and he must leave the president's residence,'' mr. olmert said at the beginning of a speech at a security conference here. ''this is a sad day for the state of israel.''  mr. olmert devoted much of his speech to the threat to israel and the world from iran, but he said little new, and his aides said he understood that the accusations against mr. katsav would dominate headlines.  mr. katsav, 61, asked wednesday for a leave of absence to try to clear his name, rebuffing loud calls from legislators and cabinet members, including the foreign and justice minister, tzipi livni, that he resign immediately.  in an angry and caustic televised speech, mr. katsav strongly denied the allegations of rape, sexual misconduct and misuse of power, going back to his tenure as tourism minister in 1998. he castigated the police for earlier leaks to the news media, and said the news media listened only to his accusers, who he insisted were out to punish him for political and personal revenge.  mr. katsav insisted that ''there is no truth, no evidence of the accusations against me.'' but he also said that if the attorney general, menachem mazuz, indicted him, he would resign.  that indictment is considered highly likely, but a final decision will be made by mr. mazuz after a meeting with mr. katsav and his lawyers.  mr. katsav, who was born in iran, spoke to his constituency of sephardic, or eastern, jews, complaining bitterly of a plot against him supposedly led by the ashkenazi elite of israel, most of whom have european roots. ''the same elitist, egotistical clique born with silver spoons in their mouths, they alone feel they have the right to represent the state of israel,'' he said.  mr. katsav's rise from immigrant poverty to the presidency through the likud party has been a source of pride to israelis who came from the middle east or north africa.  ''the charges against me have nothing to do with reality,'' he said. ''when the truth emerges, the citizens of israel will be shocked.''  but many israelis just want the sordid case behind them, feeling that the scandal is tainting the country's reputation and the presidency, a ceremonial office meant to be filled by an unimpeachable symbol of the state.  mr. katsav's speech was billed as a news conference, but he took no questions, and instead sparred with a reporter from israeli channel 2, who tried to defend his coverage. ''i'm speaking now!'' mr. katsav shouted. ''you've said enough in the last six months!''  the speech, with its mixture of anger, accusation and self-pity, reminded some here of richard m. nixon's ''checkers'' speech of 1952, in which he insisted that he was innocent of charges of financial wrongdoing and that he should stay on the republican ticket.  mr. katsav, however, is likely to have to resign soon and try to clear his name. if convicted, mr. katsav would probably serve time in jail.  a committee in parliament has been asked to approve mr. katsav's request for a leave. the chairwoman of the committee, ruhama avraham, said the panel would vote thursday, but with a growing number of politicians and other leaders calling on him to resign, it is not clear whether a majority on the committee will vote to grant him leave.  the committee could instead decide to begin impeachment proceedings. under israeli law, the president can be indicted but cannot be put on trial while he is in office. but the immunity ends as soon as he leaves his post, whether through resignation or impeachment. and at any rate, mr. katsav's seven-year term ends in july.  dalia itzik, parliament's speaker, would become acting president until elections within the legislature for a replacement. she is reported to be interested in trying to become the first woman to be president of israel, as is colette avital, a longtime legislator from the labor party. mr. katsav, in a surprise, defeated the former labor leader shimon peres for the post in 2000 after ezer weizman resigned, following allegations that he had received some half a million dollars in gifts from a wealthy frenchman.  mr. peres, now 83, may try again for the presidency. a likud legislator, reuven rivlin, and a former chief ashkenazi rabbi of israel, yisrael meir lau, have also been spoken of as candidates.  mr. olmert himself faces an investigation into his actions in a bank privatization in 2005, and is awaiting the results of a commission that the government appointed to look into the failures of the war last summer against hezbollah in lebanon.  other corruption scandals include an investigation into influence-peddling in the tax authority.  in his speech, mr. olmert said the world was with israel in opposing iran's nuclear ambitions.  ''there is still time, while not unlimited, to stop iran's intention of becoming a nuclear power, which threatens its adversaries, first and foremost israel,'' he said. ''we are not complacent, we cannot be complacent, and we are responding to the iranian threats with the necessary seriousness. we are at the forefront of the fight to place this issue on the top of the agendas of world leaders and international public opinion.''  mr. olmert called for stronger action against iran's flouting of the united nations to continue with uranium enrichment, and said israel would prevail. ''no force in the world can destroy us -- and there will never be,'' he said. ''we refuse to be dragged into an atmosphere of collective self-induced fear.''  