the neediest cases; two who were in foster care make providing stable home a priority   stephanie robinson davis and randy davis are young parents just starting out. there can be a lot to learn, but in the davises' house, they already know that their children come first.  ''i try my best to give them everything i didn't have,'' said mr. davis, 27. ''i want them to have a stable home. i never really had a stable home because i was in and out of foster care.''  nyliyah, 2, danced around the coffee table. ''me comfortable,'' she said in a singsong voice.  ms. davis, 26, laughed at her daughter's energy, saying, ''it's got to be the froot loops.''  the couple's other child, shymell, 4, named for his quiet nature, even as a baby, watched the action from one corner of the immaculate living room, which ms. davis had carefully decorated and scrubbed to a shine.  as children, mr. and ms. davis both spent years in foster care. their cheerful home is proof of the new path they are making for their own children. the road has not always been easy.  mr. davis was born in 1980. he said drugs were booming then, and ''my mother, she was really on it hard.'' he was raised mostly by his grandmother, who died when he was 11. he was then placed in a foster home in the bronx.  meanwhile, ms. davis landed in foster care herself as her mother battled her own addictions and abusive relationships. still, throughout the nearly 12 years that she was in foster care, her mother fought to stay in her life. ''my mother always made sure that we was close, always,'' ms. davis said.  she is the oldest of eight children and fiercely protective of her siblings. ''i know what it's like to be a mother. it's easy to take care of my children because i know what it's like to be a mother since a very young age,'' she said.  throughout their tumultuous childhoods, both of the davises found an adult they could count on: jean marie de veaux, education coordinator at the family foster care program of the children's aid society, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund.  ''i've been knowing her since i was a itty-bitty little person,'' ms. davis said. ms. de veaux provided information about schools, scholarships, jobs and bill-paying. anything the davises needed to know, they went to ms. de veaux.  mr. davis said: ''if i needed help, she was there for me. i love miss jean marie de veaux.''  the couple met as young adults at a day care center where they were both working in jobs they got through the children's aid society. ms. davis had been hired full time after completing an internship, and mr. davis was working there during breaks from college at norfolk state university in virginia.  in may 2002, mr. davis left school about a semester short of graduation. ms. davis was pregnant with shymell, and mr. davis would not think of her going through pregnancy alone, nor of his child's life beginning without him. mr. davis hopes to complete his degree and says he misses college. ''i wanted to be a social worker; that's what i majored in,'' he said.  mr. davis ended up working in construction, even though the income was quite unstable and he found the work unsatisfying. ms. davis was a seasonal parks department employee.  their lives became even more of a struggle one day in march when ms. davis's mother died suddenly from a heart problem. ms. davis took on more family responsibility. her savings went to cover funeral costs and to help provide for her younger siblings.  her 3-year-old brother, malikk, is of the greatest concern. she is helping her oldest brother care for him now. ''we all have to decide what we're going to do right now to keep this family together,'' ms. davis said. her brother alfred robinson, 19, also sometimes lives with the davises.  ''i wouldn't trade it in for a minute, because they all give me some type of support,'' she said.  ms. davis's job came to an end for the season in march, coincidentally on the day her mother died. the aftermath has derailed her search for a new job.  the davises receive $345 in food stamps each month and $119.50 in public assistance. the $184 rent on their two-bedroom apartment in harlem is covered by public assistance.  by the fall, construction work for mr. davis had slowed and the family was struggling to keep up. they turned to ms. de veaux for help. she used $605.59 in neediest cases money: $300 for clothing vouchers for the children, $152 for two monthly metrocards for continuing job searches and $153.59 toward part of a phone bill.  the children's aid society also helped with employment. on nov. 14, mr. davis started working part time at the organization's p.s. 8 community schools program. ''i love it. i love working with kids,'' he said. he hopes to do more. ''if they put me full time, i'd jump and touch the sky.''  with a little help from neediest cases, and continuing help from ms. de veaux, the davises are making it.  ms. de veaux said, ''when they had each of their babies, i watched them trying to recreate the love and stability that they missed out on, in part. this is such a success story, i think, from foster care because they've been through a lot.  ''this is what marriage is. this is what commitment is. it's not what you see in the movies.''  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  previously recorded: $7,133,110  recorded tuesday: 80,591  total: $7,213,701  last year to date: $6,537,268  