bloomberg and council change arts financing   declaring that they had wearied of their annual dance over arts financing, mayor michael r. bloomberg and the city council announced yesterday that they would make more money available to arts groups, award it on a merit basis and widen a peer-review process to level the playing field.  beginning in the 2008 fiscal year, arts groups on land not owned by the city will compete for $30 million in financing from the department of cultural affairs, city officials said at a news conference. this year arts groups competed for a pool of just $3.8 million from the department, with an additional $20 million distributed through other budget channels.  the hope is that arts groups will find it less necessary to appeal to their council representatives for small amounts of financing, mayor michael r. bloomberg said at the news conference, in the fort greene section of brooklyn. ''what we're trying to do is make this a fair process, make it merit-based,'' he said, adding that the decision would affect some 1,000 cultural groups.  in addition, the 34 arts organizations in city-owned buildings, known jointly as the cultural institutions group, will be allotted $115.3 million in the next fiscal year, and an additional $4.4 million for ''new needs.'' (that group includes heavyweights like the metropolitan museum of art and carnegie hall, and smaller organizations like the staten island historical society.)  for the current fiscal year, those groups received $102 million, and an additional $22 million that was negotiated into the budget by the city council as so-called member items.  now that the baseline figure has increased to $119.7 million, the member items -- added in this year's budget negotiations, in which the mayor made cuts and the city council put the funds back -- are expected to be far less common, mayor bloomberg said.  ''there will no longer be any cut and restoration dance,'' he said.  ''they can stop all the lobbying,'' he added, ''and get back to what they're supposed to be doing.''  in the past some arts organizations not in the cultural institutions group received fixed allocations in the city budget, known as line items, and lobbied city council members for the discretionary or member items. the council speaker, christine c. quinn, said it was important to end political jockeying by cultural groups for council crumbs.  ''i am excited about no longer seeing all of those institutions on the steps of city hall,'' she said.  nancy umanoff, executive director of the mark morris dance group, said: ''i think it's wonderful that they're depoliticizing the process. it means that arts administrators can go back to running their institutions and not have to lobby politicians.''  arts organizations outside the cultural institutions group are expected to compete for the $30 million between march and june of this year, mr. bloomberg said. peer panels will evaluate the applications on a range of criteria, from education programs to management and financial stability.  ''what this does is tell groups, 'you're going to move forward, or we're going to take away funding and give it to groups that are moving up,' '' said dominic m. recchia jr., chairman of the city council's cultural affairs committee. ''it's a sign that you have to produce.''  organizations with large building programs will receive multiyear appropriations, the mayor said; smaller groups will have to apply on an annual basis. ''they'll have to keep proving themselves,'' he said, adding, ''it will give the city new ways to discover and reward excellence in our cultural institutions.''  members of the cultural institutions group will be reviewed under a new program called culturestat, modeled after the police department's performance-monitoring process.  kate d. levin, the cultural affairs commissioner, said the new system was adopted in response to longstanding complaints from arts organizations that the financing process was indecipherable, unpredictable and unfair.  ''for years, they've been saying it doesn't make sense,'' she said in an interview.  the agreement for the 2008 fiscal year, which starts on july 1, also establishes a base level of annual funding for the parks department ($14 million) and the administration for children's services ($10 million).  mr. bloomberg, known for his enthusiastic support for the arts, said yesterday that culture produced more than $5 billion in economic benefits to the city every year.  of course, this revamping of the cultural budget process does not preclude sparring between the mayor and the city council in other areas.  ''there will always be an irish jig left, as long as i'm on the other side of the building,'' said ms. quinn, the council speaker.  