delays limit robust sales at microsoft   microsoft yesterday reported strong sales for its latest quarter and a profit that slightly surpassed wall street estimates, but its financial results were muddled by the late arrival of important new products.  sales rose 6 percent in the quarter ended in december, to $12.5 billion. but the company said that showing would have been much stronger if it had not deferred $1.64 billion in revenue as a result of delays in the latest versions of its mainstay products, windows vista and office 2007. they will be introduced next week.  without the one-time move, sales would have been 20 percent higher than in the quarter a year earlier, the chief financial officer, christopher p. liddell, said.  the quarterly results ''exceeded our expectations across the board,'' including healthy sales of pc software, mr. liddell said.  in after-hours trading yesterday, microsoft's shares were up as much as 58 cents, at $31.03. in the regular session, they had slipped 64 cents, to $30.45.  microsoft's video game business surged in the quarter, as revenue grew 75 percent, to $2.96 billion, helped by strong year-end sales of its xbox 360 console and hit games like gears of war.  sales of server software used in corporate data centers also continued to sell strongly, with revenue up 17 percent, to $2.85 billion. operating profit rose 35 percent, to more than $1 billion. the server group -- operating systems, databases and back-end programs for e-mail systems -- has become a third strong business for microsoft, in addition to the lucrative windows and office.  ''this is a pretty strong quarter with nearly all of the businesses contributing,'' said charles di bona, an analyst at sanford c. bernstein & company.  net income fell 28 percent, to $2.63 billion, from $3.65 billion in the period a year earlier, with the fall-off attributable to the deferring of revenue.  to help the personal computer industry cope with the product delay, microsoft offered free or discount coupons for upgrades to windows vista and office 2007. that allowed pc makers to sell new computers late last year with the promise that users would be able to upgrade to the new microsoft products, and prevent pc sales from stalling.  microsoft did not recognize the windows or office revenue from those machines until users purchased the upgrade coupons or decided to use the older software.  the accounting treatment trimmed 11 cents a share from earnings in the december quarter, leaving them at 26 cents a share. that was 3 cents a share higher than the wall street consensus of 23 cents, as compiled by thomson first call. microsoft had announced the coupon program in october, and said that about $1.5 billion in revenue would be deferred. the higher $1.64 billion figure reflected stronger pc sales than microsoft anticipated.  the revenue deferred from the december quarter will be recognized this period. the deferral, analysts say, is simply an accounting shift from one quarter to the next, adding about 12 cents a share in the current quarter.  microsoft said it expected revenue this quarter of $13.7 billion to $14 billion, and earnings of 45 cents or 46 cents a share, in line with analysts' expectations. for the 2007 fiscal year, which ends in june, microsoft said its revenue would reach $50.2 billion to $50.7 billion, while profit would be $1.45 to $1.47 a share.  the company is betting heavily on the consumer electronics business for future growth, and late last year it introduced a digital media player, zune, which competes with apple's ipod. but microsoft's consumer entertainment and devices unit has contributes no profits yet, losing $289 million in the quarter.  microsoft's online business also remained a weak spot, struggling especially in internet searches. in the quarter, microsoft lost market share in searching, with google widening its lead against yahoo and microsoft. ''we're clearly not happy with that,'' mr. liddell, the chief financial officer, said. ''but we continue to take a long-term view and we continue to invest.''  online services revenue, which includes display advertising on the web and search-linked ads, rose 5 percent in the quarter, to $624 million. the unit reported an operating loss of $155 million.  