life or death? jurors hear about killer's past, and future   in a courtroom in brooklyn, a jury heard testimony yesterday on the primacy of maternal love, the duration of breakfast service in the federal prison system, the role of diligence in scholastic performance, the stature of the mexican mafia gang and a discourse on certain political trends guiding new york city social welfare policy in the latter part of the previous century.  from all that, among other pieces of information ranging from the trivial to the soul-crushing, the jurors in federal district court must decide whether to order a man executed for the murder of two undercover detectives on staten island in march 2003. the law prescribes a choice at once grave and subjective, irrevocable and arbitrary, and so lawyers are offering evidence of every conceivable factor to sway the vote.  prosecutors have rested their penalty-phase case after portraying the convicted murderer, ronell wilson, 24, as a neighborhood bully whose violence escalated. defense lawyers, who expect to complete their case this week, are depicting him as an abandoned, mentally deficient child. they need to persuade only one juror to spare his life. should they succeed, the sentence will be life without parole.  mr. wilson appeared at his most attentive as a former federal prison warden described what his life will entail if he is spared death. the warden, donald g. romine, a former marine who has retired to mountain home, ark., wore a goatee and a patriotic lapel pin. he described 60-acre facilities with twin chain-link fences set 20 feet apart and separated by rolls of collapsible concertina wire, with gun towers and fences rigged with alarms. he said mr. wilson would most likely live in a 58-square-foot cell with double steel bunk beds, metal lockers, shelves and a window. he would rise for work at 6 a.m. and leave work for the recreation yard by 3:30 p.m. he would never be allowed a conjugal visit.  inmates, mr. romine said, tend to shed violent impulses over time.  ''they have to somehow, in their mind, decide this is where i'm going to be for the rest of my life,'' he said, drawling. ''some of them, it takes longer than others.''  on cross-examination, mr. romine described weapons made from locks, soap, socks, kitchenware, plexiglass and food trays. when defense lawyers returned the focus to the consequences for unruly inmates, he turned philosophical.  ''we make our own decisions,'' mr. romine said. ''and we have to live with those decisions.''  then a child welfare worker described removing mr. wilson from his mother's custody in 1988. the lawyers questioned the witness on the meaning of terms like ''legally neglected'' and ''imminent danger.''  a cousin described mr. wilson's childhood demeanor.  ''he seemed to be sad a lot, withdrawn,'' said the cousin, lillian barnes. she described her mother's care for ronell as well-meaning: ''it's a different type of affection that you would get from your mother than you would get from your aunt.''  and a schoolteacher from a juvenile detention center displayed mr. wilson's educational records. the teacher, gail gilroy, who wore tartan patterns and an outsize brooch, appeared as some antipodal corrective to the image of the warden.  as she testified, the lawyers argued the relative significance of effort and intelligence on grades. it was noted that, in that long ago, mr. wilson once failed to sit properly in his chair, causing a teacher to trip.  for the consideration of the 12 men and women who must weigh the consequences of the murder of detectives james v. nemorin and rodney j. andrews, ms. gilroy offered that mr. wilson ''was kind of a big overgrown kid that i guess you just responded to.''  