g.i. gets 18-year prison term for killing 2 captive iraqis   an army infantryman received an 18-year prison sentence on thursday after pleading guilty to killing two unarmed iraqis during an assault northwest of baghdad last may.  the infantryman, pfc. corey r. clagett, 22, of the third brigade, 101st airborne division, also pleaded guilty to trying to kill a third unarmed man detained in the raid, and to conspiracy and obstruction of justice.  under the terms of a plea deal made with military prosecutors and approved by the division's commanding general, private clagett will be eligible for parole after roughly five years, his lawyers said.  private clagett is the third of four soldiers charged with premeditated murder in the case to plead guilty in exchange for a reduced sentence. his plea further strengthens prosecutors' case against the remaining soldier, staff sgt. raymond l. girouard, and increases the chances that sergeant girouard may also seek a plea arrangement to avoid conviction at trial, which would require a life sentence.  sergeant girouard, 24, the squad leader, is charged with creating a plan to free the three iraqi men from their plastic handcuffs, have private clagett and another soldier shoot them as they fled and then cover up the crime by telling investigators the men had attacked the soldiers and tried to escape.  military officials raised questions about the deaths after the bodies were removed and found to still have blindfolds and parts of plastic handcuffs on them.  in his plea, private clagett told the military judge, col. theodore dixon, that he had conspired with sergeant girouard and specialist william b. hunsaker to kill the three men after blindfolding and handcuffing them with plastic ''zip-tie'' handcuffs.  ''i cut the zip-ties loose, pulled the blindfold up on one of them, down on the other,'' he said, referring to two of the three iraqi men. ''hunsaker told them to run. i told them to 'yallah,' meaning to run faster.'' he said he and specialist hunsaker had sprayed the men with rifle fire, killing two and gravely wounding the third.  specialist hunsaker pleaded guilty to murder charges on jan. 11 and received an 18-year prison sentence. that same week, specialist juston r. graber, the fourth soldier charged in the case, pleaded guilty to aggravated assault for shooting the wounded man after an army medic had declared him to be beyond help.  sergeant girouard's trial is scheduled to begin march 5. if he does not end up pleading guilty, his lawyers said they would ask the judge to force the soldiers' brigade commander, col. michael d. steele, to testify at his trial.  several soldiers in private clagett's platoon have said in sworn statements that colonel steele told his men that they would be attacking a stronghold of al qaeda and ordered them to kill all men of military age they encountered during the raid.  colonel steele, in sworn testimony to army investigators that has not been made public, said he had not given orders using those exact words, but had warned his soldiers to expect a fierce battle. he was reprimanded by an army general last summer for issuing confusing rules of engagement that investigators said had contributed to the deaths of the three iraqi men and a fourth man killed during the raid.  private clagett's civilian lawyer, paul w. bergrin, said his client was sorry for killing unarmed men but was steadfast in his belief that the men, had they lived, would have gone on to kill american soldiers.  ''my client was 100 percent convinced at all times that the individuals that were killed were terrorists,'' mr. bergrin said outside the courtroom.  the reach of war  