'60s prejudice and capitalism as a big blond metaphor   ''dutchman,'' the poet amiri baraka's controversial 1964 race play, has always seemed an unwieldy and ineffective boxing glove jabbing at the malignancies of american capitalism, the kind of artless art james baldwin had in mind 15 years earlier when he derisively coined the phrase ''protest fiction'' in the partisan review. the white person who goes to see this is supposed to leave feeling like a viper sent off to repent; the middle class african-american is meant to go home regarding any embrace of prosperity as weak, self-negating and lethal, both politically and spiritually.  ''dutchman'' possesses a single objective: to produce guilt. but 43 years after it made its debut at the cherry lane theater -- where it is currently in revival -- it fails to do even that.  mr. baraka, who was still leroi jones when he conceived the play, wrote it while in thrall to black separatism, and it remains that movement's singular cultural emblem. a few months before ''dutchman'' was produced, malcolm x had delivered his famous speech ''god's judgment of white america'' (more commonly known as ''the chickens come home to roost''), in which he derided the work of civil rights leaders and warned that the white majority would suffer disastrous consequences, rained down from the heavens, if it did not atone for the crimes of slavery.  white america, in his speech, is a ''she.'' and so it is in ''dutchman,'' which compares racism and the ills of the consumerist mindset to a sexually avaricious woman. the entire tense, compact play takes place inside a subway car where an exchange between a flamboyantly loose blonde of about 30, lula (jennifer mudge), and a conservatively dressed young black man, clay (dulé hill), escalates from surreally unsuppressed flirtation to violence and tragedy as all of clay's efforts toward assimilation are shown to be for naught.  lula is all unmitigated repugnance and crude desire. she believes that she can have whatever is before her, and so her prejudicial attitudes become part of a broader problem. at one point in the angry tirade that consumes half the play, clay tells her, ''you don't understand anything but luxury,'' and this is in some sense the most damning indictment he makes. he is saying, in effect, that lula, no matter how ignorant and lewd, is luxury, a fair white woman, the culture's most desired possession. she is both buyer and bad goods -- the whole ugly cycle of the free market in one revealing black dress.  what emerging feminists in the audience must have made of all this four decades ago is something to wonder. the notion that a woman might embody all the power and evil of american empire when she still could not make her way out of the broom closet must have had the vague semblance of science fiction.  aggravating the trouble in the current production is that the director, bill duke, has sought to make lula more than an oversize metaphor. but no matter how noble the effort, it is impossible to draw gold from an empty cauldron. it is one of the play's few dramatic virtues that it makes lula's manipulation and cruelty immediately apparent.  under mr. duke's direction, she arrives onstage as if from a screwball comedy. he seems desperate to give her some kind of dimension but doesn't quite know what to do, so he has her wiggling and writhing, playing with her sunglasses and making a big, kooky mess. the audience is meant to leave the theater thinking that she is charles manson but starts out by likening her to mae west. in the end, lula is simply a character you will soon forget.  ''dutchman'' continues through feb. 10 at the cherry lane theater, 38 commerce street, west village; (212) 239-6200.  theater review  