at rice, a scorer's patience is starting to pay off   when morris almond chose to attend rice four years ago over such traditional basketball powers as indiana, notre dame and virginia, everyone seemed to have the same quip.  ''i heard more rice-a-roni jokes than you could imagine,'' almond said.  but after a breakout junior season in which he set a conference usa record for scoring and significantly bolstered his stock in workouts with n.b.a. teams before returning to rice, almond has those same impromptu comedians eating their words.  a likely first-round pick in the n.b.a. draft in june, almond was the third-leading scorer in n.c.a.a. division i entering friday at 27.7 points a game, despite being the focal point of opposing defenses that often double- and triple-team him. he trailed only the jackson state freshman guard trey jackson (29.9 ppg) and the virginia military institute junior forward reggie williams (28.1 ppg).  almond's play this season has been noticed by opponents and n.b.a. scouts, but it is often overlooked nationally and even locally. rice, an academically prestigious institution, is an unlikely place to find one of the nation's leading basketball talents. its most successful alumnus in the n.b.a. was the former milwaukee bucks star ricky pierce, whose career ended in 1998.  ''at a small school like rice, you fly under the radar,'' almond said.  a gliding scorer, the unassuming almond is often compared to allan houston, the former knicks guard, for his deft outside shooting touch and instant offense.  a 6-foot-6, 215-pound guard, almond is shooting 47.7 percent from the field, including a 43.1 percent average on 3-pointers, and 87.4 percent at the free-throw line, where he averages just over 10 attempts a game. he is also averaging 6.9 rebounds and 1.3 steals per game for the owls (10-8, 4-1).  ''he's got the total package,'' texas-el paso coach tony barbee said after his team surrendered 29 points to almond during a 73-67 loss wednesday night. ''he's got the size, the athleticism, the skill and the basketball i.q. those guys are in the n.b.a., and that's where he's going to be one day.''  conference usa's preseason player of the year, almond has scored 30 points or more five times this season, including a single-game league record of 44 points against vanderbilt earlier this month.  but before almond's breakout junior season, in which he averaged 21.9 points, he did not start a single game and averaged only 6 points a game.  after playing on the georgia stars, an a.a.u. team that featured eight n.c.a.a. division i signees, and also playing with atlanta hawks forward josh smith at mceachern high school in powder springs, ga., almond expected to make an immediate impact at rice.  but with three players who went on to score more than 1,000 points at rice when almond arrived in 2003, the owls were saturated with scorers, leaving little playing time available.  ''he never wavered,'' rice coach willis wilson said. ''i give him all the credit in the world.''  still, there were glimpses of almond's scoring prowess. during his freshman year, he scored 15 points in 14 minutes against san jose state. as a sophomore, he had 18 points in 12 minutes against louisiana tech.  ''people used to laugh, but i'd tell people, 'almond is the kind of kid that can lead the nation in scoring,' '' wilson said.  after his junior year, almond declared himself eligible for the n.b.a. draft. he played well enough in workouts with five n.b.a. teams to earn an invitation to the n.b.a.'s pre-draft camp in orlando, fla.  there, he excelled in front of general managers who had never seen him. but he was unable to get a team to commit to selecting him in the tier of players who receive guaranteed contracts, so he returned to rice.  almond is now projected as a mid-to-late first-round pick in this year's draft, which figures to be lean on guard prospects, said chad ford, an n.b.a. draft analyst for espn.com.  ''he's more n.b.a.-ready than some of the guys because he can shoot the ball, his age and his physical maturity,'' ford said in a telephone interview. ''a guy like almond could get minutes right away.''  ford added: ''the biggest thing that hurts him is that he's doing this for rice. if he was on north carolina or duke or something, we'd probably be talking about this guy as a top-10 pick.''  the success of almond has also garnered the attention of smith, who says he tries to watch his former teammate when rice is on television. ''i always knew he was a scorer,'' smith said in a telephone interview.  since their days in high school, smith, who skipped college and went directly to the n.b.a., said he has respected almond for his determination.  ''he was always the guy that was in the library,'' smith said. ''when everybody was out there kicking it outside, he was getting his studies. he's a real smart kid.''  almond, who has a 3.0 grade-point average, will graduate in may with a degree in sports management. earlier this season, almond learned how to cook from wilson's wife, vicki. under her guidance, he and another teammate prepared a lasagna dinner and a fruit pizza dessert that received raves from his coach.  ''morris has a lot of focus and discipline,'' vicki wilson said in a telephone interview. ''whatever he decides to do, he can.''  colleges  