after blowout loss, knicks go from the heat to the frying pan   on the afternoon that followed the most disturbing night of their season, only two developments could have soothed the knicks: a positive report on stephon marbury's knee or an n.b.a. edict canceling the rest of their games this week.  neither event materialized tuesday, leaving the knicks (18-25) to contemplate marbury's probable absence and the daunting sight of the phoenix suns and the miami heat.  marbury said his left knee felt better, but that was after a morning of treatment and an afternoon of rest. marbury called himself day to day. coach isiah thomas glumly called him doubtful for wednesday night's game against the suns at madison square garden.  marbury has tendinitis, and there is no cure except rest. the pain flares up when he bangs the knee or lands awkwardly, as he did saturday night in indiana. marbury said there was no plan for an extended rest; he will play if the knee feels right, or sit out if it does not. that is a decision he may be making daily for the rest of the season.  there is no good time for marbury, the knicks' starting point guard, to miss games. but this week ranks among the worst possible. the suns (33-8), who have the league's second-best record, have won 14 consecutive games after their 127-105 victory at washington on tuesday night.  ''they're the best team in the league,'' thomas said without prompting, ''and it definitely will be a challenging game for us, because they create so many mismatches for us. they're faster at a lot of positions, and their speed is really overwhelming sometimes.''  the knicks were routed in phoenix last month, 108-86. the suns raced to a 34-14 lead in the first 12 minutes, which ranked as the knicks' worst first quarter until this week. and marbury was generally healthy for that game.  marbury played just 16 minutes in monday's 101-83 loss in miami before bowing out because of pain in his knee. he was on the court for most of the first quarter, when the heat scored 27 straight points and took a 40-12 lead. miami performed these feats without its top two players, shaquille o'neal and dwyane wade.  it all prompted the harshest criticism thomas had dispensed since becoming coach last june. ''we didn't show up,'' he said. ''we did not come to compete.''  but by the time the knicks concluded a two-hour practice tuesday, thomas seemed ready to move on. he declined invitations to revisit his anger or to criticize his players further.  ''we're not going to dwell on it,'' he said. ''it happened, it's over, we lost and they won.''  thomas called the first quarter monday night ''definitely out of character for us'' and said his team ''responded today with a good practice.''  for the knicks' sake, it better have been their best of the season. they could get run off their own court by phoenix. on friday, the heat visits the garden and is likely to have wade and o'neal healthy and in uniform. the los angeles lakers visit next tuesday.  the knicks need a quick recovery by marbury. but they also need their two starting forwards to find themselves.  jared jeffries played just four minutes monday night, and channing frye played 14. they combined for zero points and zero defense. thomas waved off any concerns, however, and said he had no plans to alter his starting lineup or his rotation.  ''we definitely can't base anything on last night's performance of any of our players,'' he said. asked why he never put jeffries -- generally regarded as the knicks' best defender -- back on the court, thomas said: ''nobody was playing well. and the only reason why i played the guys that i played is because it's a rule that you had to have five people out on the floor.''  recent games suggested that the struggles of frye and jeffries are not an aberration but a trend. over the past two games, frye has logged just 24 minutes -- the fewest he had played in any two-game stretch this season. his production was dismal: 6 points, 3 rebounds and 8 fouls, including a disqualification against indiana. frye has scored in double figures just once in the past four games.  in the same span, jeffries has collected 10 points, 10 rebounds, 3 steals, 4 blocks and 7 turnovers. his defense has been spotty.  rebounds  there are indications that steve francis -- the knicks' other point guard with knee trouble -- may be ready to return soon. francis, who has been rehabilitating in houston, began running this week. ''he said last night that he felt as good as he's felt in a while,'' said his agent, jeff fried. ''there's definitely improvement.'' francis should be re-evaluated by doctors this week. if all goes well, it is conceivable that he would return to new york next week and continue his rehabilitation with the team. francis would still need time to regain his conditioning and practice with the team before returning to the rotation.  pro basketball  