paid notice: deaths   goldberg, lisa   goldberg--lisa the board of directors and staff of the children's defense fund acknowledges with profound sorrow the untimely loss of lisa goldberg. lisa was a person of great intelligence, compassion and integrity. she was a role model in her leadership as a philanthropist and person who believed in equality and justice for all people. we will miss her and send our deepest condolences and prayers to her family. marian wright edelman founder and president  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. a light has gone out in the world. a woman of extraordinary vitality, talent, intelligence and compassion who truly cared about making change in the world has left us, creating an enormous void. lisa's commitment to social justice and her leadership at the revson foundation forged positive change in our city, in our community and in the world. the board and staff of american jewish world service mourn her loss and extend our deepest condolences to her husband and children. jim meier, chair, board of trustees ruth messinger, president american jewish world service  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. we mourn the loss of an innovative and distinguished civic leader, who as president of the charles h. revson foundation, saw the need for an online citywide publication that would bring greater visability to the issues facing new yorkers and championed our publication, gothamgazette.com. our condolences to her family, friends, and colleagues. citizens union foundation richard j. davis, chair robert abrams, president dick dadey, exec. director jonathan mandell, editor  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. the board of trustees and staff of sesame workshop deeply mourn the loss of lisa goldberg, long-time friend and supporter of sesame workshop. through her work at the charles h. revson foundation she supported many important causes which have helped children around the world. our heartfelt condolences to her family and colleagues. vincent a. mai, chairman of the board of trustees sesame workshop gary e. knell, president and ceo sesame workshop  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. the rockefeller university deeply mourns the tragic passing of lisa goldberg, whose visionary and inspired leadership of the charles h. revson foundation has had and will continue to have a profound impact on the landscape of new york city. we note with particular gratitude that she immeasurably strengthened the quality of biomedical research and training in the new york area through the foundations program of fellowship support for young scientists. we are heartbroken for her family and her foundation colleagues, and we extend our deepest condolences on behalf of the entire rockefeller university community to her husband, john, her children, and all who loved her. russell l. carson, chairman paul nurse, president torsten n. wiesel, president emeritus maren e. imhoff, vice president for development  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. george and mary campbell, along with the trustees, faculty, staff and students of the cooper union for the advancement of science and art offer sincere condolences to john sexton, a highly valued and beloved colleague, and to his family on the death of his wife, lisa goldberg. we send our heartfelt condolences also to the entire new york university community on the occasion of this sudden and tremendous loss. george campbell, jr. president, the cooper union  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. dearest friend, life's companion, irrelaceable. love, susan, jessie, will, and adam  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. the new york regional association of grantmakers community mourns the sudden loss of our friend, colleague, and former board member lisa goldberg, whose intelligence, energy, and passion modeled the standards we all strive to achieve. with our profound sympathy to the revson foundation, to lisa's family, and to all who loved her, tamara kreinin, interim executive director karen l. rosa, chair, nyrag  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. facing history and ourselves has lost a good and wise friend and so has this world. margot stern strom, executive director and president  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. the sudden end of lisa's life has broken our hearts. at the revson foundation this media pioneer used the power of film to bring about social change. brilliant and beautiful, she was full of love and compassion and inspired ideas. she opened our minds and our hearts and now we open our arms to hug her family, the center of her incredible life. from all her friends at the meserve-kunhardt foundation.  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. we extend our sympathy at this moment of tragedy and deepest sorrow to our colleague and friend, john sexton, and to his family on the death of his beloved wife, lisa. our hearts and prayers are with them now. john brademas l. jay oliva president emeriti new york university  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. the rudin family and rudin management company express their deepest condolences on the passing of beloved friend, lisa goldberg (sexton). our thoughts and prayers are with john, his family and the new york university community.  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. the staff and board of the andrea and charles bronfman philanthropies are deeply saddened by the sudden death of our esteemed colleague. her vision, passion and leadership will be sorely missed. we extend our deepest sympathies to her husband john, daughter katie, son jed and all of her family. charles r. bronfman, chairman jeffrey r. solomon, president  $(6$)goldberg--lisa e. the board of directors and staff of the charles h. revson foundation mourn the heartbreaking loss of the foundation's brilliant and devoted president. lisa's exceptional leadership and enlightened grant making were owed to her boundless intellectual curiosity, her voracious reading, her effortless mastery of diverse realms of knowledge, her technical prowess, her prescient recognition of groundbreaking ideas, her delight in helping young people develop as leaders, her ardent commitment to women, her dedication to jewish history and culture, and her belief in the power of law to redress injustice. lisa was remarkable in her gift for friendship, her capacity to find humor in adversity, her ability to celebrate accomplishment and her unfaltering sustenance in times of sorrow, her adept problem solving, her immutable loyalty, her panache, her grace and profound compassion, her unique combination of tenderness and rigor, her ready laughter, and her attentive mentoring of every member of the revson staff. surpassing all was her love for her family--john, katie, jed and danielle, julia, ava, and natalie, donna and jeff and their children, and philip. incapable of small-mindedness, modest about her stunning talents, lisa released the generosity in every person fortunate enough to know her. she left the world immeasurably better. may her memory continue to bless us. charles h. revson foundation philip leder, m.d. chairman  $(6$)goldberg--lisa the board of directors, faculty and staff of the new york university child study center mourn the loss of lisa goldberg, wife of nyu president john sexton, mother of jed and katie, mother-in-law of danielle, grandmother of julia, ava and natalie and friend to many of us. she was a woman of great wisdom and grace, beautiful inside and out. we will miss her strength and her ability to help those around her to see what was truly important. our thoughts are with her family and all those who love her. brooke garber neidich, chair harold s. koplewicz, m.d., dir. nyu child study center  $(6$)goldberg--lisa e. taken swiftly by a massive cerebral hemorrhage suffered sunday evening, she died monday, january 22. every day of her life she lit the world with her intelligence, grace, generous spirit and concern for others. she was the lynchpin of her beloved family, which she nurtured and shaped with rare wisdom and inexhaustible love. as a leader in the world of philanthropy, ultimately serving as the president and ceo of the charles h. revson foundation, she was second to none as a force for understanding, progress and the common good. from her creativity, to her conceptualizing and supporting breakthrough documentaries, to her dedication to ending discrimination and empowering the poor, to her commitment to dialogue across race and religion, to her dedication to jewish heritage, lisa was, for all she touched, simultaneously leader, role model, dear friend and counselor. even as we, her family, long for her continued physical presence, we vow to carry her and her love with us forever. born may 1, 1952, in brookline, massachusetts, she graduated with honors from both radcliffe college (1973) and harvard law school (1979). after law school, she worked in the carter white house for the president's commission on an agenda for the 1980s, a prescient 12 volume exploration of the trends which have dominated the ensuing decades. in 1982, she became a program officer at the revson foundation, where over a 25 year career she built alliances with americas major foundations to produce some of the most effective initiatives of the period. she is survived by a cherished husband, john sexton, president of new york university; a treasured daughter and son, katie sexton and jed sexton; a beloved daughter-in-law, danielle decrette; three wonderful granddaughters, julia (five), ava (two) and nathalie (two); a sister, donna eskind and her husband jeff, of nashville and their three children, david, matthew and sara; and a brother, philip, presently the united states ambassador to bolivia. a memorial service will be held in late february. this week, the family will receive friends at 37 washington square west on wednesday and thursday, january 24 and 25, between 3:00pm and 5:00pm and between 7:00pm and 9:00pm; and on friday, january 26, between 2:00pm and 4:00pm. the family asks that in lieu of flowers contributions be made to the lisa goldberg fellowship fund at nyu's wagner school of public service. checks can be sent care of dean ellen schall.  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. to those who have known lisa and her husband john sexton, president of new york university, her sudden passing represents a deep loss for the university, the city of new york, the world of philanthropy, and many close friends and colleagues. in every aspect of her life, including her role as president of the charles h. revson foundation, she demonstrated grace, creativity, and a life-long commitment to improving the welfare of others. her contributions were extraordinary, and she will always be remembered for her wisdom, kindness and generous spirit. we extend our sincere condolences to our esteemed fellow, john sexton; to their children, katie and jed, and to the extended goldbergsexton family. leslie c. berlowitz chief executive officer american academy of arts and sciences  $(6$)goldberg--lisa. the new york university school of law mourns the tragic loss of lisa goldberg, the beloved wife of nyu president john sexton, our colleague and former dean. lisa was extraordinarily devoted to her family, whom she nurtured with boundless energy, grace, commitment, and humor. she was also an inspired and accomplished leader who quietly anchored our community through her unswerving love, sound judgment, and creative guidance. we all benefited from her generosity, wisdom, and warmth. our hearts go out to john and his family. lester pollack, chair of the board richard revesz, dean, nyu school of law  