building 'green' a luxury? not at all, habitat shows   the tan house with the welcoming front porch at 56 risley street on the north end looks a lot like the other new homes in this inner-city neighborhood. but because it was designed with energy savings in mind, its owners' utilities bill will be about $1,100 less a year than their neighbors'.  the builder, hartford area habitat for humanity, set out to create a healthier, cost- and energy-efficient residence and to dispel the belief that building ''green'' is only for the rich. from photovoltaic solar panels on the roof to engineered-wood joists, more efficient toilets and energy star-rated appliances, little has been overlooked in the effort to create a replicable, eco-friendly home.  ''this is probably the greenest house in hartford county right now,'' said adam ney, president of auctorverno, a marketing firm in bethany that promotes green construction and that helped habitat identify environmentally friendly products and supplies. each side of the duplex is 1,250 square feet, with three bedrooms and one and a half baths. habitat and united technologies, which sponsored the environmental upgrades, say they hope that aspects of the home will be copied by other habitat affiliates in the northeast as they build homes for needy families.  ''what we've learned here, we are already duplicating nearby,'' said shea hagy, the construction supervisor, referring to 16 other habitat homes going up in a two-block radius and four more in new britain.  while habitat follows standards for green design elsewhere in the country, it has not done so in the northeast because of the harsher climate and a reluctance to deviate from standard practice, mr. hagy said. ''it's easy to put up solar panels in san diego, where it's sunny all the time,'' he said. ''there's less payback here, but it still makes a difference.''  solar energy will provide 40 percent of the home's electricity, yielding a savings of about $360 a year, preliminary estimates show. conservation should reduce water and gas bills by at least an additional $700, the developers predict. ''the energy savings is one more leg up for our families,'' said julie donahue, executive vice president of hartford area habitat.  sunlight solar energy, of milford, the installer of the solar system, took advantage of a rebate program started in october 2004 by the connecticut clean energy fund, which typically gives back 55 percent of the installation cost. to date, 100 homes have qualified. new homes account for some installations, but most are in existing homes, said bryan garcia, the fund's director of energy market initiatives. interest in solar power is growing as electric rates skyrocket and fears of a fuel crisis loom, he said.  upfront costs are often higher in eco-friendly construction; in this case, materials added about 15 percent. but habitat anticipates that reduced electrical and water consumption, the solar panel rebate, durability and longer product warranties will make the home more cost-efficient in the long term.  the ''green'' effort extends to framing, furnishing and landscaping. using two-by-six studs spaced every 24 inches, instead of two-by-fours at 16-inch intervals, created deeper cavities for insulation. overall, mr. hagy said, wood use is reduced by about 30 percent.  household products and appliances were evaluated for air quality and environmental impact, mr. hagy said. linoleum won out over vinyl flooring and carpeting for the high-traffic first floor because it comes from renewable resources, is easy to maintain and emits fewer volatile organic compounds (v.o.c.s), which emit potentially harmful gases. low-v.o.c. paints were chosen, and on the second floor, low-v.o.c. carpet squares, rather than rolls of carpeting and padding, helped reduce construction waste. water-saving measures include restricted-flow plumbing devices, a front-loading washing machine and rain barrels to capture water for gardening and car-washing.  in terms of eco-building, ''we're only scratching the tip of the iceberg,'' mr. hagy said, ''but for us, it's a big step.''  environment  