spare times: jan. 26-feb. 1; 'serious games'   creativity gets hands-on tomorrow at exit art, the gallery known for its dedication to experimental projects. on the final day of the exhibit ''renegades,'' which celebrates 25 years of performance art, the group trickster theater will stage ''serious games,'' a series of interactive installations. since the works are meant to evoke child's play (albeit fairly thoughtful child's play), some are intentionally whimsical: near the entrance, visitors will encounter saeri kiritani, a petite woman in a traditional wedding kimono, playing basketball; if you do a mean lay-up, feel free to challenge her. (in another sports-inspired piece, ''touch and go,'' jodie lyn-kee-chow, above, lets the audience choose her swimming technique.) some are more somber, like rob andrews's piece, in which he, and members of the crowd, undertake the sisyphean task of refilling a sack of grain hanging overhead that has sprung a leak. mr. andrews quickly, and creepily, becomes more interested in the helpers than in the task. and some works bridge the gap between mischief and profundity, like rafael sanchez's ''target practice,'' which involves people throwing balloons filled with coal, oil and (fake) diamonds at him, an unlikely juxtaposition that's intended as a commentary on the state of contemporary africa and the coney island boardwalk game shoot the freak. just as in an amusement park, all the activities happen simultaneously; visitors can walk around and observe -- or engage in -- each piece. the idea, said papo colo, the troupe's director and a co-founder of exit art, was to involve the audience directly. ''you get bored in performance art in 10 or 15 minutes -- we all know that,'' he said modestly. ''this way, we have the participation of the public for two and a half hours. in performance art, this is a very long time.'' (tomorrow from 8 p.m. to 10 p.m., exit art, 475 10th avenue, at 36th street, 212-966-7745, exitart.org; $5 suggested donation.)  melena ryzik  