ex-officials testify they informed libby of the identity of a c.i.a. operative   prosecutors in the perjury trial of the former white house aide i. lewis libby jr. paraded a roster of former government officials before the jury on wednesday to testify that they had informed him about the identity of the c.i.a. operative valerie wilson, contrary to mr. libby's claim that he had learned about her weeks later from reporters.  mr. libby's lawyers spent their time cross-examining those witnesses in an effort to attack both their credibility and their memory.  mr. libby, former chief of staff to vice president dick cheney, has put the issue of memory front and center in his defense on charges of perjury and obstruction of justice. he is charged with lying to both a grand jury and to f.b.i. agents who were investigating the leak to reporters of the identity of ms. wilson.  mr. libby has sworn that he did not discuss ms. wilson's identity with reporters in the spring and summer of 2003. but two reporters, judith miller, formerly of the new york times, and matthew cooper, formerly of time magazine, have testified that mr. libby explicitly told them about ms. wilson.  one official to testify, robert l. grenier, a former senior official at the central intelligence agency, testified wednesday that he received an anxious phone call from mr. libby on june 11, 2003, asking about reports that a former ambassador had made a trip to africa to check on reports that saddam hussein had tried to buy uranium in niger for iraq's weapons program.  mr. libby, mr. grenier said, seemed irked by accounts that the former ambassador, joseph c. wilson iv, the husband of ms. wilson, was telling reporters that he had been sent on a fact-finding mission to niger at the behest of the vice president's office.  mr. grenier said he promised to look into the matter, but before he could speak with mr. libby again, he was summoned out of a meeting with the director of the c.i.a. by mr. libby seeking answers.  he said he told mr. libby that mr. wilson did indeed go on the mission to africa and he added, as an afterthought, that mr. wilson's wife, who is also known as valerie plame, worked at the c.i.a.  the purpose of mr. grenier's testimony from the prosecutor's point of view was to cast doubt on mr. libby's account that he did not remember learning about ms. wilson from officials when he testified that he learned about her from journalists.  but william h. jeffress jr., one of mr. libby's lawyers, quickly set about taking apart mr. grenier's account. he noted that in his first appearance before a grand jury and in an interview with f.b.i. agents, mr. grenier did not say he had told mr. libby about ms. wilson.  mr. grenier said he had not remembered that part of the conversation with mr. libby and only recalled it more than a year later when he went before a grand jury again.  with a generous dollop of scorn, mr. jeffress asked why mr. grenier had first told the grand jury that he had no recollection of telling mr. libby about ms. wilson, only to change his story later.  ''i was saying what i thought was true at the time, and i subsequently had a different recollection,'' replied mr. grenier, who held a high rank in the agency as iraq mission manager.  mr. jeffress asked, ''do you find that your memory gets better the further away from an event?''  mr. libby's lawyers seemed to have two agendas in mind. not only did they want to underscore the fragility of memory -- mr. libby has said that if he testified incorrectly about his conversations with reporters it was only because he simply remembered incorrectly -- but also to create a vexing, lengthy and complicated narrative for the jury.  the prosecution, in contrast, is aiming for a streamlined and simple case: did mr. libby knowingly lie to the grand jury and to f.b.i. agents?  mr. jeffress also quizzed mr. grenier about some of the ill-feeling between the white house and the c.i.a. over mr. wilson's trip. on tuesday, mr. libby's chief lawyer, theodore v. wells jr., startled the court when he said that his client had been made a scapegoat by white house officials to protect karl rove, president bush's principal political adviser.  craig schmall, a c.i.a. employee whose job was to brief mr. libby and mr. cheney, testified that his notes showed mr. libby had spoken to him on june 14, 2003, and that he was annoyed by mr. wilson's trip to niger.  on cross-examination, mr. schmall acknowledged that mr. libby's workday in that period was taken up with issues like iraq developments, an east african terrorist network and al qaeda.  mr. schmall's notes from a session with mr. libby show a comment about the actors tom cruise and penélope cruz, who had visited the white house and raised concerns about the treatment of scientologists in germany. ''he was a little excited about it, and i was a little excited about it,'' mr. schmall said of the celebrity moment in their day.  earlier, mr. libby's defense team went after the memory and credibility of marc grossman, the former under secretary of state. he had given statements that he had been asked on may 29, 2003, by mr. libby about the wilson trip. he said that after canvassing the state department he reported back that mr. wilson had made the trip for the c.i.a. and that his wife had played a major role in selecting him for the mission.  