pakistani premier faults afghans for taliban woes along border   pakistan's prime minister, shaukat aziz, acknowledged wednesday that people sympathetic to the taliban were active in the frontier regions near the border with afghanistan. but he insisted that the root of the problem was the afghan government's weak authority, not pakistani support of the taliban.  ''we believe the core of the problem is in afghanistan,'' mr. aziz said, in an interview at the world economic forum here in davos.  mr. aziz also said three million afghan refugees were crowded into quetta, peshawar and other pakistani cities close to the 1,700 mile-border between the countries. despite what he described as stepped-up pakistani efforts to root out extremists, the refugee population remains a recruiting pool for the taliban insurgency, mr. aziz said. but he dismissed allegations that his country was supporting the militants.  ''this notion that pakistan may be in some way or other supporting these people or giving them safe haven is ridiculous,'' he said.  as for suspicions that elements in pakistan's intelligence service, the i.s.i., might be acting independently in support of the taliban, he said, ''that's equally ridiculous.''  ''the pakistani intelligence service is a disciplined service, and they act in line with the government,'' mr. aziz insisted.  on sunday, a correspondent for the new york times, carlotta gall, reported that she had found anecdotal evidence in and around quetta to support charges by western diplomats and pakistani opposition figures that the pakistani intelligence agencies were encouraging the taliban insurgency in afghanistan.  while reporting in quetta, ms. gall was assaulted by plainclothes intelligence agents in her hotel room, and her photographer, akhtar soomro, was detained. their computers, notes and cellphones were taken, and since then pakistani agents have tracked down their sources. ms. gall said her visa to report in pakistan had no restrictions.  mr. aziz said ms. gall ''should not have been where she was, legally,'' and that she had violated the terms of her visa by visiting quetta without authorization from the government. he added that it was ''regrettable she got bruised in that interaction'' and said the government was investigating the matter.  ''we don't condone behavior that is physical harassment,'' mr. aziz said. ''that's not on.''  pakistan has come under increasing criticism from nato officials and western leaders for not doing enough to clamp down on terrorist networks. this month, in his most recent threat assessment, the american director of national intelligence, john d. negroponte, said al qaeda continued to operate from ''their leaders' secure hide-out in pakistan.''  mr. aziz said the pakistani government did not know the whereabouts of osama bin laden, al qaeda's leader, or of mullah muhammad omar, the leader of the taliban. but he said, ''certainly they are not in pakistan.''  on wednesday, president pervez musharraf dismissed allegations that pakistani officials were sheltering the head of the taliban, and said the united states-led war in afghanistan could not be won without pakistan's help, reuters reported from abu dhabi, capital of the united arab emirates.  ''the fight against terrorism and extremism, whether it is al qaeda or taliban, can never succeed without pakistan's cooperation and pakistan is the only country that has delivered the maximum on both,'' mr. musharraf said at a news conference in abu dhabi.  