bush, pressing modest agenda, insists u.s. must not fail in iraq   president bush tried to resuscitate his ailing presidency tuesday night, using his state of the union address to present a modest agenda of energy and health care proposals while warning an increasingly assertive congress against undercutting his new iraq strategy.  it was a speech that reflected mr. bush's difficult circumstances. it was limited in ambition and political punch at home, with no proposals to rival his call two years ago to remake social security, no mention of rebuilding new orleans and no allusions to limiting stem cell research or banning gay marriage.  and when it came to his plan to send additional troops to iraq, he was forced to plead with the democrats who now control congress -- and with a growing number of republican critics -- to ''give it a chance to work.''  in an admission that the united states now finds itself trapped in the cross-fire of a sectarian conflict, mr. bush said, ''this is not the fight we entered in iraq, but it is the fight we are in.'' while he insisted that america could not afford to fail, he also warned the iraqi government that ''our commitment is not open-ended.''  his freshest initiative was setting a goal of reducing projected gasoline consumption 20 percent over the next 10 years. this hit a theme tailored to his appeal for bipartisanship in a city where the balance of power has shifted markedly against mr. bush since the last state of the union address. although he did not propose any measures to deal with emissions from power plants and factories, the main sources of greenhouse gases, he spoke of ''the serious challenge of global climate change.''  the other main element of his domestic agenda, a package of proposals intended to improve access to health insurance, had drawn intense opposition from democrats long before mr. bush walked to the well of the house chamber on tuesday night, a scene he could not have relished but handled graciously. behind him sat a democratic house speaker, representative nancy pelosi, sitting alongside vice president dick cheney. in front of him was an audience of democrats growing increasingly comfortable with their new power, including quite a few who are jockeying to take his job and reverse the policies he has put in place.  mr. bush gamely ticked off other goals he would like to achieve before leaving office in three days short of two years. they included overhauling immigration laws, taking steps toward a balanced budget, dealing with the long-term financial condition of social security and medicare, and imposing tighter standards on schools.  yet the proposals were overwhelmed by the iraq debate.  ''many in this chamber understand that america must not fail in iraq,'' mr. bush said, ''because you understand that the consequences of failure would be grievous and far-reaching.''  while mr. bush has traditionally used these speeches to present a hopeful vision of iraq's future, he could not do so on tuesday night. his own nominee to take over the command of united states forces in iraq, lt. gen. david h. petraeus, told the senate armed services committee earlier in the day that ''the situation in iraq is dire.''  mr. bush started his speech 12 hours before the senate foreign relations committee was to begin working on a bipartisan resolution in opposition to his plan to send additional troops to iraq. despite his proposal of a bipartisan council to advise him on the battle against islamic extremism, democrats immediately assailed him, and members of his own party continued to show signs of edging away.  in the democratic response to his address, senator jim webb of virginia, whose son is a marine serving in iraq, said that mr. bush ''took us into this war recklessly,'' and that the united states was now ''held hostage to the predictable and predicted disarray that followed.'' mr. webb called for ''a formula that will in short order allow our combat forces to leave iraq,'' and said that if mr. bush did not change course in iraq and in his economic policies, ''we will be showing him the way.''  mr. bush got a polite reception, but one far more muted than in previous appearances. he waited until the end of his nearly 50-minute speech to deliver the assessment that typically opens these addresses, that ''the state of our union is strong.'' for a man who finds himself struggling to maintain public and political support, mr. bush delivered the speech in a confident tone, with easy and relaxed smiles.  seeking new ground for consensus, mr. bush reached back to a theme that marked the first days of his presidency, when he would regularly appeal for bipartisanship. ''our citizens don't much care which side of the aisle we sit on, as long as we are willing to cross that aisle when there is work to be done,'' he said.  but the power dynamic on tuesday night was completely different. in the six years in which republicans controlled one or both houses of congress, democrats said they saw little of that bipartisan instinct at work, and despite vows to behave differently, they have not shown much in return.  in fact, mr. bush's argument on tuesday night for embracing his iraq plan amounted to a reverse of the argument that he made from the same podium four years ago, when he contended that dealing with saddam hussein would help the united states bring other rogue states to heel. this time, mr. bush spoke of a ''nightmare scenario,'' of an iraq ''overrun by extremists on all sides.'' he said the violence in the country would turn contagious, spread beyond iraq's borders and inflame the entire middle east.  and he appealed to democrats to remember the votes many of them cast in 2002 to authorize the invasion, throwing some responsibility their way in the process.  ''we went into this largely united, in our assumptions and in our convictions,'' he said, recalling the days when his approval ratings were sky-high. ''and whatever you voted for, you did not vote for failure.''  mr. bush was careful in describing what many in his administration believe could be a coming confrontation with iran. while he vowed that the world would never allow iran to obtain a nuclear weapon, he made no threats, saying he was relying on diplomacy to deal with both iran and north korea, the two countries that, five years ago, he declared in a state of the union address made up an ''axis of evil'' with mr. hussein's iraq.  there were no such labels on tuesday, a reflection of the reality that with american forces tied down in iraq, mr. bush's options are limited.  but the effect of iraq extends to the domestic front. even his allies say the war threatens the prospects of the new initiatives he described.  ''iraq casts a huge shadow over anything in the domestic policy arena that the president talks about,'' said glen bolger, a republican pollster. ''the situation makes it very difficult for the president to get americans to pay attention to what he's saying on issues like energy and health care.''  dan bartlett, the white house counselor, argued otherwise. ''if you talk about the issues the public cares about, and you put forward innovative, bold ideas,'' mr. bartlett said, ''the american people, regardless of what the polls say that day, will say, 'this is worth study, this is worth engaging the democratic congress on.' ''  ms. pelosi and senator harry reid of nevada, the senate majority leader, said in a joint statement that mr. bush's goals on energy were ''commendable'' but suggested that they would seek to achieve them through different policies.  senator hillary rodham clinton, democrat of new york, speaking on abc news, said mr. bush would find ''a receptive audience'' for his energy and health care goals, though she later said she found the early details of his health care plan ''really troubling.'' the republican minority leader in the senate, mitch mcconnell of kentucky, said the two parties should find innovative ways to tackle the issues.  mr. bush's aides and allies argue that he could exert some leverage by accusing democrats of intransigence and ''do-nothingness'' should they flatly shoot down his proposals, as they were starting to do even before his speech.  ''the real question is not whether he can make it work; he's extended his hand several times now,'' said senator jon kyl, republican of arizona. ''the real question is how much do the democrats want to cooperate with him.''  but the democrats have been in control only a few weeks, and polls indicate that for now the public is more likely to side with them in a fight. and it is not clear that mr. bush's new proposals would do anything to reverse the political balance of power.  state of the union  correction:  january 25, 2007, thursday  excerpts yesterday from president bush's state of the union address misstated a word from the speech in some copies. mr. bush said, ''some in this chamber are new to the house and the senate, and i congratulate the democrat majority'' -- not democratic majority.  