in queens blackout, report finds some fault with regulators   the staff size at the new york state public service commission declined by nearly one-third under the pataki administration, and the reduction contributed to a failure by the agency to adequately monitor consolidated edison's performance, according to a report to be released today by a state assembly task force.  the 55-page report was in response to the nine-day blackout that crippled western queens last july. an advance copy of the report was provided to the new york times by an assembly member yesterday.  the commission, which regulates electric, gas and telecommunications utilities, issued a scathing report of its own on jan. 17. that report found that con edison had failed to adequately maintain and operate its network and that the failure was ''the overriding cause'' of the blackout, which lasted from july 17 to 25 and cut power to 174,000 people.  echoing the commission, the assembly report was highly critical of con edison, but it also struck a new theme, taking aim at the commission itself.  the report quoted a 1932 speech by franklin d. roosevelt, then the governor of new york, who said that the public service commission ''was created for the purpose of seeing that the public utilities do two things: first, give people adequate service; second, charge reasonable rates.''  the task force found that the commission had about 800 employees in 1995, when george e. pataki began the first of his three terms as governor, and now -- partly due to deregulation -- has about 550. nearly 40 percent of the staff is 55 or older and is expected to retire within a decade.  though the commission is officially bipartisan, some energy experts have asserted that the pataki administration mainly appointed political supporters to its board. mr. pataki named the four current commissioners, including the chairwoman, patricia l. acampora. gov. eliot spitzer has nominated angela m. sparks-beddoe to fill a vacancy and become the chairwoman. the task force also recommended that state law be changed to require commissioners to have a background in utilities.  the task force questioned whether con edison should have a monopoly ''of indefinite duration'' and recommended that the state review the monopoly every 10 years. in its draft report, the commission staff recommended a formal proceeding that could result in substantial penalties against con edison; the new report agreed with that recommendation.  con edison failed, according to the task force, to compensate residents and businesses for economic damages and to follow the recommendations of a 1999 report by the state attorney general after a blackout in northern manhattan.  the task force also recommended that con edison spend $20 million over three years to develop a state-of-the-art electrical grid in western queens that would use energy more efficiently and permit con edison to monitor the use of energy better.  spokesmen for the public service commission and con edison said they could not comment until the report was public.  the task force included three democratic assembly members from queens -- michael n. gianaris, margaret m. markey and catherine t. nolan -- who represent areas affected by the blackout.  the other members were karen s. burstein, a former member of the public service commission; francis j. murray jr., who was state energy commissioner under gov. mario m. cuomo; gerald a. norlander, executive director of the public utility law project, an advocacy group; fred zalcman, executive director of the energy project at pace law school; and rae zimmerman, a professor of planning and public administration at new york university.  