a free-market economist, up by his bootstraps   milton friedman, arguably the most influential economist of the 20th century, died in november at 94, and today the world is commemorating him. in celebration of what has officially been named milton friedman day, universities, political institutes and online discussion groups around the country will conduct debates and pay tribute to his legacy.  what this at least partly seems to suggest is that liberals do not sanctify their own with quite the same verve as their conservative counterparts. one of mr. friedman's greatest rivals, the harvard economist john kenneth galbraith, died about six months earlier, in april, and americans have yet to bear witness to a similar pageantry.  mr. galbraith makes a brief appearance in ''the power of choice: the life and ideas of milton friedman,'' a documentary on pbs tonight, as the only detractor to mr. friedman's free-market absolutism. the film is so unabashedly venerating -- it would credit mr. friedman with inventing the hubble telescope if it could -- that it ultimately does its subject a disservice, refusing the spirit of argument that was so obviously mr. friedman's lifeblood.  mr. friedman was an outspoken and lively man who relished his role in the real world as much as he did his stature inside the academy. he became a brand name for a certain kind of partisan politics, and as a public intellectual he seemed to have quite a good time, amused as he often seemed to be at the brilliance of his logic and the ready audience for it. in his pbs series, ''free to choose,'' over 25 years ago, he popularized his ideas with a child's sense of novelty. in it he has fun illustrating his theory of monetary policy by pressing the button that stops the printing of money at the united states mint.  the child of eastern european immigrants, he grew up in rahway, n.j., above a dry-goods store. his mother briefly worked in a sweatshop. ''intellectual ideas'' were not, as mr. friedman explains in the film, ''a live concept.'' but mr. friedman, an excellent student, found his way to rutgers university as an undergraduate, where he started a business selling ties and went on to graduate school at the university of chicago, the institution to which he would be inextricably linked for the rest of his life. it was there as well that he met his wife and lifelong collaborator, rose director, who says in the film of first meeting her husband, ''he was more intellectual than i was, but not too much.''  mr. friedman's rise to public prominence as the great anti-keynesian, the world's most impassioned champion of open competition and limited government intervention in economic affairs, was solidified during the reagan years, but was given its push by his involvement in barry goldwater's 1964 presidential bid. it was for goldwater that he developed a program of economic policy objectives that included not just the deregulation of major industries, but the folding of the federal reserve and the securities and exchange commission as well as the abolishment of national parks (matters overlooked in the film). nowhere in ''the power of choice'' is the downside of the massive deregulation that reagan eventually implemented given much attention. the savings-and-loan scandals, for instance, go undiscussed.  the filmmakers implicitly and explicitly credit mr. friedman with everything from the rise of the indian, chinese and estonian economies to the abolishment of the military draft. though mr. friedman's free-choice doctrine contributed to ending the draft in the 1970s, the film takes virtually no note of the cultural and political climate in which he was making his opinions known. nor does it address one result of the draft's elimination: a military not well represented by affluent men and women who have many choices, but dominated by comparatively disadvantaged ones with far fewer options.  mr. galbraith, in the film, denounces mr. friedman as a ''one-cause, one-cure man.'' ''the power of choice'' is just as reductive in its praise.  the power of choice  the life and ideas of milton friedman  on most pbs stations tonight (check local listings).  thomas skinner, bob chitester and larry arbeiter, executive producers; katherine anderson, producer; ms. anderson and mr. skinner, writers; david ogden stiers, narrator; michael o'brien, editor. produced by free to choose media.  television review  correction:  february 9, 2007, friday  because of an editing error, a television review on jan. 29 about ''the power of choice: the life and ideas of milton friedman,'' a documentary on pbs, misidentified the agency that prints united states currency. it is the bureau of engraving and printing -- not the mint, which makes coins. (in a series mr. friedman had on pbs many years ago, which, like the documentary, showed his enjoyment of being a public intellectual, he was once shown pressing a button to stop the printing.)  