jury agrees on death sentence for the killer of two detectives   a federal jury sentenced a 24-year-old staten island man to death yesterday for killing two undercover police detectives in 2003. it was the first successful federal capital punishment prosecution in new york in more than 50 years.  after the verdict was read, the defendant, ronell wilson, 24, rubbed his palms, looked at his mother, then stuck his tongue out at the families of his victims. his younger brother loudly cursed the jurors, while their mother cried out that they were ''the murderers now.''  the widows and other relatives of the slain detectives applauded briefly from the gallery, crying, ''and the lord rejoices.''  in december, the anonymous jury of seven men and five women convicted mr. wilson of shooting the two detectives, james v. nemorin and rodney j. andrews, in the back of the head in a car during a weapons sting on staten island on march 10, 2003.  they reached their verdict yesterday after nine hours of deliberations that started monday afternoon. they found mr. wilson devoid of remorse and directed judge nicholas g. garaufis of federal court in brooklyn to impose sentences of death by lethal injection on five counts.  three men have been executed in federal cases in the united states in recent decades, first among them timothy j. mcveigh, for the bombing of the alfred p. murrah federal building in oklahoma city. mr. wilson will join 46 other people on the federal death row.  but in the 20 years since a moratorium on federal capital punishment was lifted, prosecutors in new york have failed to win death sentences against at least 14 defendants, including violent gang members. federal jurors even refused to execute two terrorists involved in the bombing of united states embassies in east africa in 1998, after their lawyers argued it would turn them into martyrs. the last federal inmate to be executed in the state was gerhard puff, in 1954, a bank robber convicted of killing an f.b.i. agent.  but the murder of two undercover detectives, found bleeding on a staten island street in the aftermath of a botched gun transaction, resounded in a city still shaken by the terror attacks of 2001. they were the first two officers killed by gunfire on a single day since 1988.  working from 29 pages of questions, the jurors dissected a series of factors weighing for and against execution. affirming elements of their conviction, they found that mr. wilson had acted with the intent to kill. they endorsed all the prosecution's assertions, including that mr. wilson would remain a danger in prison.  the jurors, who declined interview requests conveyed by the judge, unanimously endorsed nearly all of the defense team's mitigating factors, finding that mr. wilson had grown up depressed, sick and trapped in a realm of poverty, deprivation, drug abuse and violence. they wrote in another factor weighing against the death penalty: ''ronell wilson was possibly subject to peer pressure.''  but they unanimously rejected the notions that he has adjusted well to federal prison, taken responsibility for his actions or ''has remorse for the murder of detectives andrews and nemorin.''  federal prosecutors vigorously sought the death penalty against mr. wilson, taking the case from state prosecutors in staten island after the new york death penalty was largely invalidated in 2004. they endorsed plea bargains with seven defendants, young men based around the stapleton houses project in northeastern staten island.  the group members had forged their camaraderie on admiration for a slightly older man, nicknamed keyo, who had been killed under unresolved circumstances.  ''i heard different stories,'' testified one group member, mitchell diaz, who has pleaded guilty to supplying the murder weapon.  bearing keyo tattoos and t-shirts, the men gave themselves nicknames like o and mal-g, evidence and testimony showed. between the humdrum stuff of growing up, community college courses, talent shows and outings to six flags great adventure, they mastered gang signs, sold crack cocaine and beat and robbed their rivals.  on that march night in 2003, the men sold a handgun to detective nemorin, 36, a haitian immigrant and father of three, admired by other officers for his ability to convincingly shed dapper silk scarves for the trappings of a street tough.  as his supervisor would later testify, detective nemorin arranged to buy a second gun, a tec-9 assault pistol, at a rendezvous by the stapleton houses a week later. for backup, he brought detective andrews, 34, a navy veteran and divorced father of two with a reputation for making tough arrests.  in a police-issued nissan maxima, the detectives approached the towering stapleton houses with a handgun for protection and a surveillance transmitter disguised as a pager. as detective nemorin drove, they exchanged goofy banter between calls for directions.  on the other side of the telephone line, plans for the transaction were shifting from sale to robbery, members of the group later testified. outside the housing project, mr. wilson climbed into the backseat with jessie jacobus, at 16 a 6-foot-3, 240-pound enforcer for the group.  as they circled the streets, mr. wilson voiced suspicions of a police presence in the neighborhood.  ''it's mad hot,'' mr. wilson said, according to a surveillance recording.  he also questioned the presence of detective andrews, who detective nemorin claimed was his brother-in-law. the detectives sought to reassure him with canny street talk and evasive driving, to little discernable effect.  on a dark dead-end street, with no apparent warning, mr. wilson fired a single .44-caliber bullet into the skull of each man, starting with detective andrews. gunpowder residue on detective nemorin's hand would later bear evidence of his efforts to survive. it was never proved whether mr. wilson knew his victims were officers, and an accomplice's recantation eventually prompted prosecutors to drop such charges.  but mr. jacobus testified that mr. wilson gave a reason for the shootings in the minutes after he pulled the trigger. he quoted mr. wilson as saying he did it because he did not care about anybody.  after losing their surveillance signal, police supervisors frantically searched staten island, only to find the blood-soaked bodies of their undercover detectives. they temporarily shut down traffic out of the borough, recalling departed ferries and closing bridges. they rounded up the crew within two days.  the prosecutors, colleen kavanagh, morris j. fodeman and jack smith, assisted by special agent thomas shelton of the bureau of alcohol, tobaco, firearms and explosives, presented three weeks of testimony and evidence from members of the gang, scientific experts, civilian witnesses, investigators and audio and video surveillance recordings that led to the conviction.  mr. wilson's lawyers, ephraim savitt, mitchell dinnerstein and kelley j. sharkey, sought to save mr. wilson's life by recounting the circumstances of his childhood. before the jury retired, mr. wilson read a brief, heavily edited statement of remorse.  and the prosecution, in proceedings that began two weeks ago, argued that mr. wilson did not deserve to live. they depicted a life of crime that started at 11 and included violent behavior in jail and out of it.  yesterday afternoon, the jury foreman, dressed in a suit and tie, gave the panel's answers in a loud crisp voice, glancing now and again at mr. wilson. he ordered the death sentence, in response to a question, with the word ''yes.''  from the victim's families came calls of ''god bless.''  as the jurors receded, mr. wilson kissed his forefinger and middle finger, then waved to his mother.  the case could be appealed to the second circuit court of appeals in manhattan, said russell neufeld, a capital defense lawyer who was not involved in the case. if a majority of judges upheld the sentence, it could ascend to the u.s. supreme court.  if the sentence is sustained on appeal, it will be carried out by lethal injection.  the appeal will be the second before the circuit under the modern federal death penalty. the first, from vermont, entered the appeals court about a year ago and has yet to be decided.  ephraim savitt, a lawyer for mr. wilson, predicted an appeal based on the jury selection process, among other issues. he lamented the sentence. ''it's a very sad day for the justice system,'' he said, ''when justice and vengeance become one and the same.''  michael palladino, president of the detectives endowment association, said that ''if any case screamed out for the death penalty,'' it was wilson's.  roslynn r. mauskopf, the united states attorney for the eastern district of new york, said, ''today justice has been served, and it has been served by a jury from this community. ''  in a statement, the police commissioner, raymond w. kelly, said, ''i want to commend the jury for their difficult and courageous work.''  when the courtroom was cleared, the prosecutors emerged to a sustained round of applause.  derek williams, a cousin of detective andrews who testified in the penalty phase of the trial, said: ''it is some measure of relief, but it is not full closure. it won't be full closure until the sentence is carried out.''  the relatives of mr. wilson walked away in the dark, under the glare of tv camera lights. he was removed from the courtroom through a different passage.  correction:  february 3, 2007, saturday  a front-page article on wednesday about a death sentence handed up by a federal jury for a man who killed two police detectives on staten island misstated the marital status of one victim, rodney j. andrews, and referred incorrectly in some copies to the federal trial of zacarias moussaoui, who was convicted of terrorism charges related to sept. 11 but did not receive the death penalty. detective andrews and his wife were separated, not divorced, and mr. moussaoui's case was tried by prosecutors in virginia, not new york.  correction:  february 17, 2007, saturday  because of an editing error, an article on jan. 31 about the federal death sentence for ronell wilson in the killing of two undercover police officers on staten island in 2003 was unclear about the sequence of events in the brooklyn courtroom. while the jury foreman was reading from the 29-page verdict form, relatives of the victims applauded and voiced their approval, and there were outbursts from mr. wilson's family. after the foreman finished, mr. wilson stuck out his tongue. the gesture came after the other reactions, not before.  