icahn seeks board seat at motorola   motorola, carl c. icahn is calling.  mr. icahn, the billionaire financier who has made a career of agitating for change at some of the nation's biggest companies, said yesterday that he planned to seek a seat on the board of motorola at the company's next annual meeting.  the move, a familiar tactic from mr. icahn's playbook and which he tried last year against time warner, is aimed at putting pressure on motorola to use its $10.5 billion cash pile toward a huge buyback of shares.  motorola shares jumped 6.9 percent yesterday, to $19.58, in a sign that investors hoped mr. icahn might force a showdown with motorola to make significant changes.  ''until his strategy becomes clearer, and his eventual intentions for the company's direction are known, we foresee the share moving up in anticipation,'' inder m. singh, an analyst with prudential securities wrote in a note to investors.  but in an interview yesterday, mr. icahn said that he did not plan to take on motorola's operational strategy and would instead focus on its balance sheet, arguing that the company should be doing more for shareholders.  ''they say the company is so undervalued,'' he said. ''i'm using my cash to buy it. why don't they have the faith to use their cash to buy it too?''  it is unclear how far mr. icahn will go -- and how successful he will be -- in pursuing his campaign against motorola, which produces the popular razr cellphone.  working in his favor is the 25 percent slump in motorola stock price dating from mid-october. the company has reported two consecutive quarters of disappointing earnings, as its profit margins have come under pressure from low-cost competitors.  motorola acknowledged mr. icahn's plans, but declined to comment beyond saying that ''motorola is reviewing the notice of nomination.''  the company has not yet set a date for its annual meeting.  with only a 1.4 percent stake in motorola, however, mr. icahn's influence with the company may be limited. at time warner, for example, he ended up backing down from a proxy fight, but was able to extract a bigger stock buyback than the company had originally planned.  motorola could decide against putting up a fight and offer mr. icahn a seat on the board, in part as a way to co-opt him. since mr. icahn won seats on the board of blockbuster in 2005, for example, he has lost his ability to bully the company publicly as he did as an outsider.  still, mr. icahn, who is 70, said he has never been muzzled. ''has anyone ever silenced me?'' he said yesterday.  mr. icahn's campaign could eventually become a referendum on the leadership of edward j. zander, motorola's chief executive. while mr. icahn has yet to denounce mr. zander's stewardship, his proxy fights often become personal.  when he went after time warner, he regularly complained about time warner's chief executive, richard d. parsons.  motorola has pursued a buyback before. the company bought back $4 billion of its shares in 2005 and 2006. it announced a new $4.5 billion buyback last year, though it still has about $3.8 billion outstanding to buy.  earlier this month, mr. zander announced plans to cut 3,500 jobs as he seeks to reduce costs. he also plans to bring new high-margin products to market, like its razr z6 phone. still, motorola faces growing competition, from the likes of apple and its iphone, coming in june.  mr. icahn's battle with motorola could culminate in a vote at the shareholder meeting, which is expected to take place in may unless the company reaches a settlement with him before then.  if mr. icahn is elected to the board, it is unclear how much influence he will have as only 1 of 13 directors.  people close to mr. icahn said he considered nominating a larger slate, but decided against it because he did not think he would succeed.  mr. zander will not be hard-pressed to find advice from executives who weathered campaigns from mr. icahn: the motorola chief was named to the board of time warner last week.  