one man's ode to indianapolis, indiana   one year in college, norbert krapf lived in halas hall, never giving much thought to the dormitory's being named for the great papa bear of chicago, george halas, or that large men inhabited the hall in july and august.  this was at st. joseph's college in rensselaer, ind., right off interstate 65 where chicagoland meets indiana, the epicenter of this year's regional super bowl. two midwest teams are going to miami to settle it.  krapf is a poet, recently returned from new york to the renascent downtown of -- whoever would have believed it? -- indianapolis. he recites his poems in jazz joints and coffeehouses in indy and is gaga over the colts, who are going to their first super bowl since settling in indiana in 1984.  after that glorious comeback against the patriots last sunday, krapf walked 10 minutes to monument circle, just to get the feel of the town. david letterman, a local boy, said things got so rowdy at the circle that people ''tipped over a thresher.'' in reality, thousands of fans, wearing mostly colts blue, celebrated for hours, noisily.  historically, the sporting energy of indiana has come mostly from notre dame football and indiana basketball and high school champions like crispus attucks in indy and tiny milan high, which won the state title in 1954 and inspired the movie ''hoosiers.''  krapf played left halfback at jasper high in the southwestern part of the state. one game, his pal mick stenftenagel threw him a perfect spiral that hit him in the worst possible place, his hands, and fell to the ground.  years later, krapf wrote a poem, ''the dropped pigskin,'' describing the rage of the crowd ''like the bay of a hound that's finally treed an ornery 'coon,'' and how the coach bellowed in his kentucky accent, ''you ever do that agin/i'm mo slit yore throat.'' george halas probably said the very same thing a time or two.  when krapf was a teenager, the pro football deity for much of indiana was jim brown of cleveland, another midwestern power. but krapf chose to go to college upstate, in bears country, at st. joseph's. (another southern indiana boy named gilbert ray hodges attended st. joe's for a few semesters before going off to fight at okinawa and later to try his large, supple hands at baseball in far-off brooklyn.)  st. joe's was only 85 miles from chicago, close enough to feel the rumble of the monsters of the midway, who trained there from 1944 through 1974.  ''the bears put us on the map,'' said john groppe, krapf's english professor, now retired in rensselaer, a bears fan by osmosis after all those years at the cusp. groppe remembers the bears mingling with the townspeople after sweaty workouts and in casual encounters in the small town, and also in sadness.  one of the bears' greatest losses took place in the summer of 1964, when the star running back willie galimore was heading back, with receiver john farrington, from the hospitality at the curtis creek country club to make 10 p.m. curfew at halas hall.  a warning arrow, noting a dangerous curve on rural bunkum road, had been knocked down. galimore's volkswagen beetle crashed into the woods, killing both men. services for the two black athletes were held at an all-white church in town.  ''i ride my bike down that road and think about galimore every time,'' groppe said. ''the curve is still there because it's hard to straighten out the road because of a drainage ditch and the cornfields.''  forty-two seasons is a long time. galimore and farrington have not come up much in the past week as midwestern newspapers talked to fans about the divided loyalties in northwest indiana. in the rest of the state, there is no such ambivalence.  ''in some ways, this is going back to the feeling of high school sports in indiana,'' said krapf, making it sound as if urban indy were still the underdog village in ''hoosiers.'' ''some people still have the inferiority complex.''  the only professional championships were won by the indiana pacers of the american basketball association in 1970, 1972 and 1973. if the colts were to win the super bowl, that would be much bigger, even in a basketball state.  indiana is hard to pin down because every hamlet seems to have a local option, whether to be on eastern or central time, fast time or slow time. the state ranges from the industrial north to the fabled brickyard of auto racing at indy to the excellent music department at indiana university and the hills of brown county to the modern architecture in columbus and the stately homes facing the sweeping ohio river and the fossil bed across the river from louisville -- and every few miles, a stone county courthouse hunkering down in the center of a town.  krapf remembers, as a boy in southern indiana, hearing warnings not to venture to the dangerous streets of indianapolis. but people say that about any regional center. he moved to long island, where he taught poetry at c. w. post college, but he continued to celebrate his german heritage and his roots in rural indiana. (i recommend his collection, ''the country i come from'' -- the title borrowed, yes, from another borrower, bob dylan -- published in 2002, or check out his web site, krapfpoetry.com.)  when it came time to retire from teaching, krapf and his wife, katherine, who is from louisiana, settled in a town house in downtown indianapolis, a few blocks from the rca dome. he has not yet made it to a colts game but enjoys watching the games at home.  their victory last sunday inspired krapf to write a poem that had been kicking around in his head for months. here is the first stanza of ''prayer to peyton.''  hey, hey, peyton manning,  please throw me a pass.  you know my moves by heart.  two sure hands are waiting.  we've taken so many steps  so well together, for so long,  we can do our dance in the dark.  if manning connects with marvin harrison, that will be fine with most of indiana, at least until the cusp, somewhere near halas hall.  sports of the times e-mail: geovec@nytimes.com  