100 hours   on a hot day in july last year, nancy pelosi, then the house democratic leader, took a gang of reporters to a gas station near the capitol. at that spot, with the gasoline pumps as a backdrop and the price of fuel skyrocketing, and with the democratic senator charles schumer and the congressmen rahm emanuel and ed markey in tow, the future speaker launched a campaign with a slogan that fizzled but a phrase destined to have a delayed impact.  ''democrats are proposing a new direction,'' she said, and the phrase was capitalized in the subsequent handout. i remembered that grand old wheeze from the hubert humphrey campaign against richard nixon, along with ''new dawn'' and a few other news that strained to evoke f.d.r.'s new deal and j.f.k.'s new frontier. in political sloganeering, no news is good news.  ah, but then -- like a cloud no bigger than a man's hand, as elijah's servant used to say in i kings 18:44 -- there appeared in the pelosi statement a phrase destined for a much later thunderclap. ''in the first hundred hours of a new congress if elected,'' she said, and then went off into a blast against ''obscene profits'' of big oil (may her diatribe increase).  now, six months later, in the aftermath of the tsunami of tsuris that swept republicans from the congressional majority, the phrase that seized every headline writer is the first 100 hours. atlanta's daily world: ''important domestic issues, including minimum wage, are on the front burner for the first 100 hours.'' time magazine: ''any close look at nancy pelosi's first 100 hours has to start with the obvious -- it's not really 100 hours. only in the u.s. congress . . . could 100 hours last two weeks -- as time stands still so members can take a day off to see the college-football championship game.'' (though most voters might have taken her pledge literally, to mean the first hundred actual hours -- four days and change -- it meant 100 hours in session. by that measure, six promised bills passed with 13 hours to spare.)  with the hours barrier thus broken, others jumped on the hundred bandwagon: the washington times reported, ''d.c. mayor adrian m. fenty yesterday listed roughly 200 priorities for his administration to accomplish in its first 100 days and beyond.'' the palm beach post: ''dieters in delray pledge goal to lose 1,000 pounds in 100 days.''  as the phrase caught hold, speaker pelosi told her colleagues in the house: ''this new congress doesn't have two years or 100 days to renew itself.'' that was an oblique reference to john f. kennnedy's inaugural address in 1961: ''all this will not be finished in the first hundred days. nor will it be finished in the first thousand days, nor in the life of this administration, nor even perhaps in our lifetime on this planet. but let us begin.''  her 100-day escalation caused the connecticut post to recall ''newt gingrich-led republicans of 1994, who vowed to pass their 'contract with america' during the first 100 days.''  what speaker pelosi, and gingrich before her, and j.f.k. before them, were evoking was the new deal. (new was new back then, despite wilson's new freedom and the communist milovan djilas's new class.) franklin roosevelt did not announce his hundred days in advance; it grew out of the fact that in exactly 100 real days -- from march 9 to june 16, 1933 -- the 73rd congress enacted huge relief and public-works measures, agricultural subsidies, guarantees of bank deposits and the tennessee valley authority, an altogether unparalleled rush of legislation to cope with the depression.  the hundred days phrase is rooted in the biography of napoleon bonaparte. many history buffs recall it as the time between his escape from the island of elba through his triumphant march through europe to culminate in his final defeat at waterloo. the time that lapsed in those events, however, was 116 days. the phrase measures the time beginning with king louis xviii's flight from paris on march 20, 1815, when napoleon took over, to june 28, when the king returned in state after napoleon was crushed. the coiner was the count de chambord, prefect of paris: ''a hundred days, sire, have elapsed since the fatal moment when your majesty was forced to quit your capital in the midst of tears.''  now nancy pelosi sits atop the rhetorical pyramid constructed by chambord, misattributed to napoleon, built higher by new deal historians, renewed by john f. kennedy and ted sorensen in a great speech, evoked by the historian arthur schlesinger jr. in his book ''a thousand days,'' which turned out to be roughly the length of j.f.k.'s time in office, then used by gingrich in leading a recent republican revival.  the question the phrasedick brigade is asking: what inventive speechwriter, historian or pollster gave nancy pelosi that phrase, brilliantly boosting the hundred days to 100 hours?  i put it to rahm emanuel, democrat of illinois, who was standing there in the gas station when the phrase was uttered, barely noticed in the new direction oratory. he was the man behind ''six ideas in '06,'' not a grabber, but also the master of nuance who passed the word to democrats everywhere to switch the bush new-directional surge to the vietnam-evoking escalation. he assures me that he checked it out thoroughly and that 100 hours was a phrase that representative pelosi has been using on her own throughout the '06 campaign. under further savage interrogation, he did not wince nor cry aloud. on his solemn say-so, i award the coinage of 100 hours to nancy pelosi until somebody comes up with a provable earlier citation. but even as you read this, some sharp political phrasemaker is working on a paragraph that begins ''not in a hundred days, not in a hundred hours, but in a hundred new york minutes. . . . ''  the way we live now: 1-28-07: on language  