daunted by the subway? try it in a wheelchair   from michael harris's house in sheepshead bay, brooklyn, it is a seven-block walk to the nearest subway station.  let's be more precise. it would be a seven-block walk if mr. harris could in fact walk it. but dystonia, a neurological disorder that he has endured since childhood, forces him to use a motorized wheelchair. and the station, avenue u on the q line, does him no good, inaccessible as it is for him in his chair.  to use the subway, something he does most days, this is his routine:  he wheels eight blocks to a bus stop at avenue r and nostrand avenue. he rides the b44 bus for 15 or 20 minutes, depending on traffic, to the brooklyn college-flatbush avenue stop on the nos. 2 and 5 subway lines. it is the nearest station with an elevator that can get him from the street to the platform.  let's be more precise again. the elevator gets him to the platform when it is working. it breaks down fairly often, mr. harris said, as it did the other morning when we met at a coffee shop nearby. on the bright side, he said, ''that elevator is rarely out of service more than two or three days at a time.''  wouldn't there be less wear and tear on him if he relied on access-a-ride? why put himself through the subway's frequent frustrations?  ''is it easy?'' he said. ''no. do i sometimes face tons of barriers? yes. but i still do it because it's the way new yorkers get around, and i don't think that people with disabilities should segregate themselves by not using the subways.''  it is mr. harris's self-assigned task to call attention to obstacles that new yorkers with disabilities must overcome to navigate the city. they are obstacles that can be daunting at times even for those with full use of both legs, both arms, both eyes, both ears. if you have ever contended with a broken subway elevator or escalator -- and wondered how hard could it be to keep the darn thing in running order -- you know the problem.  mr. harris, 22, is a political science major at manhattanville college in purchase, n.y. he also takes journalism courses at brooklyn college. he is something of a rarity these days: a college student who goes forth in suit and tie, down to the neatly folded pocket square.  you may have seen him on television as a leader of the disabled riders coalition. as the name suggests, the group tries to make the journey on buses and subways less of a trial for people with disabilities.  it deals with a range of issues: hearing-impaired riders who have trouble with subway announcements, signs in braille that are not always adequate, burdens for people with seeing eye dogs and other service animals. but the group draws the most attention when it focuses on broken subway elevators.  ''mobility issues obviously are the most visible,'' mr. harris said, although his group discovered in a survey that a more dominant concern for wheelchair users is the gap between the train and the platform. people ''are afraid of their wheels being caught,'' he said.  of the subway system's 468 stations, only 54 are wheelchair accessible, with 119 elevators in all. some seem to break down with disheartening frequency. ''no. 1 on our serial offender list'' is the 161st street-yankee stadium station, mr. harris said. when out-of-order elevators hit double digits, as they did the other week, he deems it ''an epidemic.'' epidemics are not everyday happenings, but they occur often enough.  charles f. seaton, a spokesman for new york city transit, called the century-old subway system ''a rather harsh environment for elevators.'' that said, 13 new elevators were installed in 6 stations in 2006, and 13 more are planned for 7 stations this year. ''could we do better?'' mr. seaton said. ''of course. but we're working to do better.''  mr. harris grants the subway masters that much, but says that improvements could come faster. some remedies would seem to require little effort or money. why, he asked, can't train conductors be alerted when, say, the flatbush avenue elevator is broken? they could then advise southbound riders on the no. 2 line to get off at church avenue, the stop closest to flatbush avenue with wheelchair access.  ''my dream is to have every person in a wheelchair using the subways,'' mr. harris said. ''new york city prides itself on its subway system, but there's this large portion of the population that won't use it. i think it's sad.''  nyc e-mail: haberman@nytimes.com  