in the region/long island; higher price tags in montauk   montauk, the hamlet on the end of long island's south fork, has been a rustic un-hampton summer destination for more than 50 years. but two new projects suggest that montauk may be heading for year-round status, and the recent sale of a former celebrity retreat has also put a spotlight on the hamlet.  a new condop -- a co-op complex with condominium-style rules -- is under construction in montauk on the site of the panoramic view hotel on old montauk highway. the property, still operating as a hotel, has more than 1,000 feet of sandy beach on the atlantic ocean. the condop is a complete renovation of the hotel.  the developer, distinctive ventures, hopes to attract young manhattan families who want a year-round getaway, but not the bustle and hype of east hampton and southampton, according to adam manson, a company spokesman.  when completed, the 75-unit complex, to be called panoramic villas, will have a full-service concierge, an outdoor heated pool and a fitness center. a mixture of two-, three- and four-bedroom duplexes and some triplexes, ranging in size from 2,000 to 4,000 square feet, is planned. if buyers don't have time to decorate, mr. manson said, they can choose from a variety of furniture packages and accessories, including ''everything from table cutlery to napkins in the kitchen ready to use.''  the units, which will start at $1.5 million, will also have oak floors, hot tubs and flat-panel televisions, and granite counters and expensive appliances, mr. manson added.  buyers will purchase shares in the complex, but there are no board approvals, and owners can sublet the units anytime, mr. manson said.  distinctive ventures plans to start selling the first 27 units of the project this spring, and the units will be ready by fall, mr. manson said.  the company believes that wealthier second-home buyers who want year-round services are heading for montauk. clues came from the company's research of montauk's rental market, mr. manson said.  ''a lot of rentals in the last few seasons were longer term,'' mr. manson said. ''people want to own out there, but there's very little that is brand new.''  former warhol retreat is sold for $27 million  when the pop artist andy warhol and paul morrissey, his manager and film collaborator, bought a 20-acre estate on the ocean in montauk in 1971 for $225,000, they thought it was a good investment. that's what mr. morrissey said last september when the remaining 5.6 acres was on the market for $40 million.  perhaps that overestimated price how good an investment it was. earlier this month, millard s. drexler, chief executive of the clothing company j. crew, bought the estate for much less: $27 million, according to paul brennan of prudential douglas elliman, who handled the sale.  (the andy warhol foundation for the visual arts donated the other 15 acres to the nature conservancy after the artist's death in 1987. the conservancy created the andy warhol preserve in 1993.)  the sold property, called eothen, ancient greek for ''at first light,'' sits in a valley among high cliffs in an area known as the montauk moorlands. mr. morrissey listed it with several different real estate firms over the last five years, originally asking $50 million.  eothen includes a compound of five colonial revival-style houses, a horse stable and a three-car garage. all of the houses have spectacular views of the atlantic ocean.  mr. drexler scouted eothen for a friend who was interested, mr. brennan said, but then bought it himself when the friend passed on it. ''he said, 'it's like a painting,' a very unique property,'' mr. brennan said.  the five homes, with 15 bedrooms in all, were built in 1931 for the church family, descendants of a founder of the church & dwight company, makers of arm & hammer baking soda. seven of the bedrooms are in the main house, a rustic wood-paneled structure with blue shuttered windows and a great room with two fireplaces, exposed beams and a vaulted ceiling.  ''i would say he has very good taste'' to buy the estate, said tina fredericks, the east hampton broker who sold mr. morrissey and warhol the estate in 1971. as for the price, $40 million ''always seemed rather high,'' ms. fredericks said.  a hotel project recalls a '20s developer's dream  a developer is renovating the 1929 shepherd's neck inn, a 65-room montauk hotel, and plans to convert it into a year-round ''resort hotel'' called solé east. (sole is italian for ''sun,'' although the italians don't use an accent mark for the noun.)  the hotel will have 60 rooms on 2.5 landscaped acres when it opens in the spring, according to tom feeley, an owner of the development firm wavestone properties. wavestone has also bought the shepherd's beach hotel nearby and an adjacent five acres of vacant land, where the zoning was recently changed to permit residential development.  wavestone has built condominiums and rental buildings in jersey city and hoboken, n.j., but this is its first project on long island.  solé east will be one of two branded hotels, mr. feeley said. the first, called solé on the ocean, is a condominium hotel in sunny isles, fla., which offers owners hotel-like services, including a concierge and housekeeping, and the ability to rent out their units as hotel rooms.  the look and feel of the montauk hotel will come from stephane dupoux, whose interior design firm has designed highly stylized bars, nightclubs and hotels, including buddha bar and cielo in manhattan and the gansevoort beach club hotel in south beach.  the new hotel, mr. feeley said, will have high-definition flat-screen televisions, whitewashed walls, restored hardwood floors, cedar platform beds and black slate tile bathrooms with a large window in the wall separating the shower from the hotel room.  for winter visitors, there will be a 2,000-square-foot wine cellar and the developer will update the wood-burning fireplaces in the restaurant and in the lobby, mr. feeley said.  the shepherd's neck inn was originally called montauk arms. it was built by carl fisher, the developer who, with a partner, created miami beach from swampland in the 1920s.  after that success, fisher tried to build a similar resort in montauk. a devastating hurricane and the stock market crash of 1929 left fisher financially ruined, but not before he had planned an entire community in montauk for the wealthy and partially created some of it, including private homes, grand hotels, a yacht club, a school and office buildings.  the inn was to serve as apartments for the managers of his resorts in montauk, according to a history provided by the montauk library. ''we feel a connection with carl fisher's original concept and his connection to both markets where we are opening, in miami and montauk,'' mr. feeley said.  in the region | long island  