playing mozart and his pal, funky funky, uh, mozart   duke ellington's quip that there are only two kinds of music -- good and the other kind -- was apposite on saturday night at merkin concert hall in a concert celebrating mozart's 251st birthday. the uninitiated might have heard two kinds of music, classical and jazz. but in ellington's terms there was only one: excellent.  the concert involved the meeting of two crack musicians, the cellist matt haimovitz (who has made a specialty of exploring the places where classical music and other forms can intersect) and the jazz pianist uri caine. the first half was straight mozart; the second, mozart refracted through the prism of mr. caine's mind in pieces that don't quite merit the vexed label of crossover. it is, after all, part of the jazz tradition to work famous tunes into new pieces of your own.  this might sound like an exercise in comparing the strait-laced and the funky. but the straight part of the program was too riveting to merit any label other than good music. mr. haimovitz brought in two colleagues from mcgill university in montreal, where he teaches -- jonathan crow, a violinist, and douglas mcnabney, a violist -- to join him in the divertimento in e flat (k. 563), a drop-dead gorgeous piece (which this trio recorded last year).  they played it ravishingly. mr. haimovitz makes a huge, dark sound, and mr. crow has one of those sweet, singing violin tones that seduces the ear. the piece is mozart's longest instrumental work, but it didn't seem long enough.  mr. caine set the tone for the second half with an exegesis on the famous c major piano sonata that led that little tune into a wilderness of challenging rhythmic twists, bouncing it off unfamiliar harmonies and even taking it on a spin through another familiar beginners' piece, ''chopsticks.'' he then brought out his five-person ensemble, which opened in a somber fog until the theme of the g minor symphony suddenly crystallized out of the chaos.  mr. caine's arrangements riffed on mozart, first acknowledging that composer's autonomy, then exploring how far afield a development section or a cadenza could go, sometimes with appended squiggles of computer sound. the ensemble, and approach, were at their best in breathtaking displays of hell-for-leather virtuosity, in, for instance, their version of ''der hölle rache'' from ''die zauberflöte.''  slow movements were slightly more difficult: the familiar tunes threatened to become merely treacly, despite the talent of the players (including joyce hammann on violin, ralph alessi on trumpet and jim black, a wonderfully evocative drummer).  mr. haimovitz joined the group for the sinfonia concertante in e flat, and exchanged (musical) views with ms. hammann in a semi-improvised cadenza so articulate that it drew involuntary laughs from the audience.  music review  