mars and venus, coping with the 21st century   the joy of text  mating, dating and techno-relating.  by kristina grish.  176 pp., simon spotlight entertainment.  $12.95.  the new rules of marriage  what you need to know to make love work.  by terrence real.  320 pp., ballantine.  $24.95.  long ago, in that dark, clamorous age before the '90s really got under way -- sometime after wham! dropped off radio playlists, but before vanilla ice had evaporated -- most people did not have e-mail or cellphones, and there were no such things as match.com, instant messaging, text messaging, blackberry or myspace. back then, men and women had to actually meet in person, or phone each other, if they wanted to talk. but scientific advances have brought remarkable progress to the dating game, right? not necessarily.  in ''the joy of text: mating, dating and techno-relating,'' the foxy young relationship pundit kristina grish (the author of ''boy vey!'' -- tips for non-jewish women who hope to snare jewish boyfriends -- among other advice guides) shows that the great leap forward in communication has dragged along with it a blight of text-driven power games and misunderstandings.  for instance, when a woman abruptly logs off an i.m. exchange, does she mean it to sting or to tantalize? how long do you wait to respond to an e-mail message (up to three days is not insulting, ms. grish believes) and text messages (more than a few hours is probably a brushoff)?  also, she cautions, be careful how you word your techno flirtation: misspellings can be cute, or can make you look like a moron, while quirky punctuation can make you seem unstable. if you use too many exclamation points in your blackberry messages, you'll look slap-happy. if you use all caps, your ichats can resemble death threats. ''like it or not, you are what you type,'' ms. grish declares. shrewdly and wittily, she points the way on alphanumeric dating.  her recommendations are often strikingly specific. an especially useful one: what should you do when a cyber-cyrano sends you long, eloquent missives, but never asks you out? pull a few words from his e-mail message that could be ''easily misconstrued'' and tease him with them. ms. grish instructs: ''your only response is one sentence: 'i'm sorry, but you just used the words ''hot,'' ''pursuing'' and ''strapped'' in that last e-mail and i'm still recovering.  is there something you wanted to ask me?' ''  but be careful of the passions you whip up, she warns, and remember that once you hit ''send,'' you cannot prevent your correspondent from hitting ''forward,'' or worse, posting your steamy prose on his blog, where it can be salivated over ''by strangers with a bucket of popcorn.''  like ms. grish, the relationship counselor terrence real recognizes that the last decades have seen a revolution in the dealings between men and women that has flummoxed both sexes. ''for most of us, whatever we learned growing up about relationships is simply not sophisticated enough to deliver all that we hope for,'' he writes.  he adds consolingly, ''you have been trying to negotiate a 21st-century relationship using 20th-century skills.'' in ''the new rules of marriage,'' he provides a set of ''operating instructions'' for modern couples, illustrated by compassionately told case studies of embattled clients he has led away from the brink of divorce.  mr. real isn't afraid to make breathtakingly bold statements. ''in the last generation women have radically changed, and men, by and large, have not,'' he writes. as a result, ''men are not all that unhappy in their marriages. they are unhappy that their women are so unhappy with them.'' women, on the other hand, ''want radical transformation.'' they want their marriages to be ''intimate'' (new paradigm), not ''companionable'' (old paradigm).  if this in fact is what women want (sounds about right to me), many of them have an awfully strange way of going about it, as mr. real's true-life stories show.  venting, criticizing, blaming and complaining -- all in the name of ''honest expression'' -- too many women provoke resentment, not sympathy, in their mates, he explains. the men respond by giving in to their worst impulses, like withdrawal, bullying, arrogance or stonewalling, hoping to ride out the storm.  how can we all get along? by replacing accusation with understanding, mr. real suggests, and continually posing the question: ''what can i give you to help you give me what i want?''  mr. real blames psychotherapy, in part, for the communication impasse: too many americans, he believes, have been encouraged to seek ''personal empowerment'' rather than ''relationship empowerment,'' putting themselves first, and not trying hard enough to appreciate their partner's good points.  he identifies five major pitfalls that trip up the over-empowered individual: unbridled self-expression, needing to be right, controlling our partner, retaliation, and withdrawal. and he provides exercises so couples can assess their own flaws (no, don't surprise your partner by showing him your bullet-pointed list of his failings), and strategies to increase ''cherishing.''  mr. real knows that readers may feel overwhelmed by his unsparing solutions to tough-love woes. he writes, ''a part of you may be wondering, 'has the game of love really grown so technical that i need an intimacy coach just to have a decent relationship?' '' in a word: yes. luckily, you should be able to track one down on the internet.  books of style  