views of a neighbor   taken from above  the instruments aboard nasa's mars reconnaissance orbiter, now in the third month of its scientific mission, have taken expansive global images, like a downward look at mars' north polar region, above, and colorful close-ups, like one of victoria crater, right. the orbiter's high-resolution camera was able to spot not only where the opportunity rover is exploring, but even its tracks in the sand. elsewhere, the sharper-than-ever images have revealed large boulders in areas that previously looked smooth, which led nasa to reconsider the landing site for its phoenix mission, scheduled to set down in 2008.  a polar canyon, dipped in color  the false-color image, right, taken by the mars reconnaissance orbiter's high-resolution camera, shows part of the side wall of chasma boreale, a canyon in mars' north polar region. the reddish area is dust-colored ice at the top of the canyon. the stripes are layers of different materials that have piled on top of each other, and the dark material at the bottom of the canyon may have been sand dunes.  perservering on the ground  nasa's rovers, spirit and opportunity, were designed to last just three months on mars, but both of them passed their third anniversaries this month. the two rovers are aging. the right front wheel on spirit no longer turns, for example, and one of opportunity's turning motors has failed. but spirit continues to drive on its other five wheels, and opportunity just makes wider turns. while spirit hunkered down through most of winter -- the season is now turning to spring -- opportunity drove five miles to reach victoria crater. below left is opportunity's view of cape st. mary, one of the promontories that jut into the half-mile-wide crater as other parts of the crater edge erode. what the scientists see so far at victoria crater fits with their notion that this region of mars was once wet. like other craters in meridiani planum, the plains that opportunity landed on, the rocks appear to have formed from sediments that were pushed by flowing water, dried out and then blown around by wind. what the scientists have not seen yet: finer sediments that settle out on a lake bottom. ''what we would love to find is evidence for a standing body of water,'' said john grotzinger, a professor of geology at the california institute of technology and a member of the rover science team.  martian winds and their toll on the planet  above: the bottom of an impact crater is eroding into a series of ridges. middle left: the medusae fossae formation, a light-colored terrain in the martian midlatitudes, contains wind-sculpted landforms, including elongated hills known as yardangs. near left: polygonal patterns of cracks and troughs are seen in many martian landscapes. the polygons are about 10 yards to 20 yards in diameter and are similar to patterns seen in cracking permafrost on earth.  kenneth chang  