barbaro's plight shined a light on advances   even after enduring eight months of searing emotions, the people most involved in attempting to save the kentucky derby winner barbaro said the costly and complicated effort was a worthwhile pursuit.  in mourning, barbaro's owners, roy and gretchen jackson; his surgeon, dr. dean richardson; and others in the industry agreed that the experience had already paid practical and emotional dividends.  ''i think the most important aspect of barbaro's fight is that it focused everyone on what our capabilities are in treating serious injuries, of how many options we have now,'' dr. larry bramlage, a noted equine surgeon in kentucky, said in a telephone interview tuesday. ''i don't know how much was spent on barbaro's care. but i do know that if you went out and got an estimate for launching a public-awareness campaign that educated the public as well as barbaro's situation has, i bet you couldn't approach it for 10 times what it costs the jacksons.''  neither the jacksons nor the officials at the new bolton center at the university of pennsylvania have released a cost figure for barbaro's multiple operations and procedures or for his stay here in the intensive-care unit of the george d. widener hospital for large animals.  bramlage, who is affiliated with the rood & riddle equine hospital in lexington, ky., said that facility handles about a dozen operations a year similar to the one performed on barbaro's right hind leg on may 21, the day after he shattered it in the preakness stakes.  if such an operation proceeds without complications, bramlage said, it would cost about $12,000.  barbaro had many complications, enough to require nearly two dozen procedures and cast changes. the cost of medicine and round-the-clock care quickly adds up: a dose of antibiotics for a 1,200-pound horse requires seven times the amount given to a human, bramlage said. one day in intensive care can cost $400 to $1,000.  several horsemen estimated that the jacksons spent at least $500,000 trying to return barbaro to the pain-free life of a healthy horse.  richardson and his team here employed state-of-the-art techniques that bramlage said he believed would soon become more popular. the system of locking plates and screws used to piece barbaro's leg back together has only been used on horses for two years, bramlage said. likewise, he said, richardson's choice of managing barbaro's pain with a catheter attached directly into the spinal canal was innovative.  ''i think what the most amazing thing the jacksons demonstrated was how people will do everything for their horses when it makes no economic sense,'' bramlage said. ''we run into this all the time, and i'm not talking about kentucky derby winners. i'm talking about geldings and lesser horses, and owners who have to worry about putting their kids in school and paying the mortgage.''  most horses with injuries as severe as barbaro's would have been euthanized on the racetrack. the jacksons, however, have been involved in thoroughbred racing for nearly 30 years and have a reputation for going to great lengths for their injured horses.  soon after barbaro was injured, roy jackson acknowledged that his colt was insured for reproductive rights and life. as an undefeated kentucky derby winner, barbaro probably was insured for at least $13 million, according to several owners and breeders.  barbaro would have been valued by commercial breeders at about $30 million if his legs had recovered enough to support him as he covered a mare. thoroughbred racing's jockey club does not allow artificial insemination.  john ward, a third-generation horseman who trained the 2001 derby winner, monarchos, praised the jacksons for sharing their experience with the world.  ''what the jacksons let everyone see is the agony that people in our industry usually go through in private,'' ward said. ''they showed how much people care about their horses. they made a valiant effort and lost, but not before letting the rest of us see some miraculous medical work that we haven't seen before. we can get to the point that we can start saving these horses.''  in the short term, however, the jacksons must decide where barbaro will be buried. the kentucky derby museum wants churchill downs to be the site, and its officials have contacted the jacksons. the couple said monday they had not reached a decision on barbaro's final resting place. they were not available to comment tuesday.  beyond the gains made in veterinary medicine, horsemen said they were touched by the overwhelming interest in barbaro.  and just as the death of dale earnhardt in the 2001 daytona 500 prompted nascar to spend more on research to make its drivers safer, barbaro's breakdown brought urgency to reducing the number of catastrophic injuries to racehorses. one important change sweeping the industry is the installation of synthetic racing surfaces, which are said to be more forgiving.  ''in this tragedy, i believe there was some reassurance for the industry that horses matter to a lot of people,'' said jerry bailey, the retired hall of fame jockey who is now an analyst for espn. ''i wasn't aware of the depths of how much america cares.''  horse racing  