as the sun beats down, so can the stress   invincibility never looked so convincing. the man possessed shoulders as wide as a hitching post, broad enough to where his entire name, tank johnson, fit on his bears jersey.  his arms were etched with faint tattoos stretched to near distortion by gathering muscle. his eyes were hidden behind dark nike shades and his baby dreadlocks spiraled from his skull cap. his body mass created breathing room as cameras and recorders orbited him like satellites.  tank, are you checking in with a probation officer?  tank, why allow loaded guns at home with your children?  tank, are you confined to your super bowl hotel?  in different ways, at endless angles during yesterday's annual news media cattle call at the super bowl, the questions kept coming about dec. 14. that was the day a swat team raided johnson's suburban chicago home and discovered an n.r.a. member's dream catalog: two assault rifles, four handguns and 500 rounds of ammunition.  johnson, a bears defensive tackle, was standing here, with sun splashed on his goatee, only by the grace of a gavel last week when a cook county, ill., judge granted him permission to travel to super bowl xli, although he faces multiple firearms charges.  ''i'm not a flight risk to do nothing,'' said johnson, adding: ''i don't have any kind of confinement. i've been able to do a couple of things. it's nice to get out, go to subway.''  was this 12 inches of baloney? in truth, invincibility never seemed so vulnerable. johnson sounded resolute in swearing off shady acquaintances and night-crawling habits and legal entanglements -- ''i've just got to tighten some screws and become more of a homebody and a family-oriented person,'' he said -- and yet the super bowl has always tested the screws of the troubled.  the whole week is about celebrity parties and attention excess and strapless temptations, about performance stress, game-day anxiety and fear of failure.  ''it's a fishbowl phenomenon,'' said dr. john f. murray, a licensed clinical and sports psychologist who works with elite athletes in south florida. ''people who shy away or don't deal with things they're not comfortable with are suddenly forced to confront them on a large scale.''  a paradise like south beach can become a platform for the deep end. to leap is to escape.  cocaine was the vehicle of choice for stanley wilson. the night before super bowl xxiii in miami, wilson missed a bengals meeting. a teammate discovered him on the floor of his hotel room in a drug-induced stupor. he later vanished down a fire escape.  eugene robinson detonated his clean image before super bowl xxxiii. as the falcons' pro bowl safety with a heart, robinson was presented the bart starr award for his mister rogers persona a day before the game. hours later, on a seedy strip of miami, he was arrested for soliciting a prostitute, who, as it happened, was an undercover angie dickinson.  barret robbins buckled from bipolar disorder. he fell apart before super bowl xxxvii, disappearing from the raiders' hotel to seek comfort in tequila. the heightened biggest-game-of-your-whole-life tension had plunged robbins, the raiders' all-pro center, into a dark depression. he spent super bowl sunday in a san diego hospital.  wilson, robinson and robbins were superstars at their positions. they were used to hype and notoriety and pressure, but they couldn't cope with a sort of super bowl stress syndrome.  what makes a star combust with the whole world watching?  ''we self-sabotage when we're under enormous pressure,'' murray said. ''it's like a student going out to party before a big exam. if they fail, it's, 'oh, it's not my fault; it's because i partied.' ''  team scouts measure 40-yard times and vertical jumps and neck size. but few teams dare venture into the borders of a player's mind because it seems too oprah for football.  ''i'm trying to masculinize talking,'' murray said. ''coaches don't need to be afraid of it softening their athletes.''  as murray explained, psychology can steel a player. but coping mechanisms are considered a crutch for the weak by the tackling gods.  johnson, for one, defines himself in terms of toughness and strength. and, to be sure, he may maneuver through the mental trapdoors of this week just fine.  but his small margin for error -- reinforced when the cook county judge declared that any miami slipups would result in dire consequences -- is made more fragile because of what has really become super bowl stress syndrome for players.  who is making sure any subway runs don't go through a south beach club? johnson said he has turned to god, his family and his teammates for support.  ''i know i'm playing on my last chance,'' he said. ''i know it's an opportunity i don't want to squander.''  he has blown chances before, though. that's what is so worrisome about johnson. he is not the best decision-maker in a crisis. with the dec. 14 raid, johnson was arrested for the third time in 18 months.  bears management scolded him, benched him, put him on notice. but within hours, johnson cruised to a hip chicago night haunt with willie posey, a childhood pal and bodyguard. posey died that night at the club from a gunshot. johnson had nothing to do with the murder, but knowing what was at stake, how the spotlight was on him, he still chose to put himself in a vulnerable position.  johnson -- or tank, as he is known -- only looks invincible.  sports of the times e-mail: selenasports@nytimes.com  