tata steel buying corus for $11 billion   when the bidding was over, tata steel stepped away as the winner in a heated battle for its european rival, the corus group, topping an offer from brazil's companhia siderúrgica nacional. tata agreed to pay $11.3 billion for corus.  at an auction late tuesday in london, tata's cash offer of 608 pence a share bested csn's bid of 603 pence, according to the british takeover panel, which set the terms and presided over the bidding.  the final price was a big jump from tata's original bid of 455 pence a share offered in mid-october, and ended almost three months of tit-for-tat bidding. when tata offered $9.2 billion in early december, for example, csn came back hours later with $9.6 billion.  to bring the takeover battle to an end, the takeover panel last week announced an auction with a maximum of nine rounds to decide the winner. after several hours, tata was declared the winner when csn reportedly backed out.  tata steel executives were not available for comment wednesday morning in india, but the company confirmed the deal in a statement.  the acquisition will be the latest consolidation within the industry as steelmakers try to cope with increasing raw material and labor costs. last year, mittal steel acquired the european steelmaker arcelor for $38.3 million to become the world's biggest steelmaker.  ''consolidation is the only way to keep prices stable and tata's buying of corus is one step in that direction,'' nilesh shah, chief investment officer at prudential icici asset management, told bloomberg news.  in an interview with a local television network, a tata steel director, j.j. irani, said the corus acquisition would help improve the company's ''negotiating power in the global market'' with suppliers and buyers.  ''from a small player, we will now become a big player in the world market,'' mr. irani said. indeed, with the acquisition, tata -- ranked 56th in the world in terms of output -- becomes the fifth-largest steelmaker. the combined company could make 25 million tons of steel a year.  most industry specialists considered the bidding overheated and excessive. both moody's investors service and standard & poor's said they might lower tata's debt rating.  corus was created in 1999 through the combination of royal hoogovens of the netherlands and british steel. it has more than 47,000 workers, with plants in the belgium, britain, france germany and netherlands.  