what's on   8 p.m. (13, 49) rhinoceros -- virtually unchanged over 25 million years, the rhinoceros once roamed the earth in hordes. today, it is one of the planet's rarest animals, with three of the remaining five species (including the white rhino, right) headed toward extinction. this ''nature'' special follows rangers through the savannahs of south africa, the grasslands of india and the jungles of indonesia to examine efforts to protect rhinos from poachers and relocate them to new habitats, and peers into a fertility lab at an american zoo to find out about attempts to breed them in captivity. it also zooms in on some startling behavior in the rhinos' natural environments, including a nursery full of mothers and calves and a charge from an angry bull.  8 p.m. (bet) celebration of gospel -- '07 steve harvey gets spiritual as host of this evening of rafter-raising inspirational music from the orpheum theater in los angeles. performers include kirk franklin, yolanda adams, fantasia, tye tribbett, kelly price, tonex, coko, smokie norful, lil' mo, pastor shirley caesar, dr. bobby jones, fred hammond and the caravans. lou gossett jr., quincy jones, blair underwood, gabrielle union, loretta devine, idris elba, derek luke and keke palmer are among the presenters. the show also features a tribute to tyler perry for his work in gospel-themed urban theater.  8 p.m. (gsn) the women who changed game shows -- vicki lawrence leads a survey of some of the women, including betty white, arlene francis, dr. joyce brothers, anne robinson, meredith vieira and vanna white, who kept people guessing and spinning.  9 p.m. (cbs) the valley of light -- chris klein stars in this hallmark hall of fame movie, based on a novel by terry kaye, about a world war ii veteran who returns to the family farm to find life in shreds. but all is not lost, as he discovers on a journey to the south, where he befriends a young widow (gretchen mol, above, with mr. klein) and a silent boy.  10 p.m. (bet) an evening of stars: tribute to aretha franklin -- in 1979, lou rawls, who died in january 2006, originated this annual special, which raises money for the united negro college fund. this year, ms. franklin (above) follows in the footsteps of mr. rawls, quincy jones and stevie wonder -- and stands on her own as the first woman -- as the recipient of the fund's award of excellence. performers include michael bolton, natalie cole, fantasia, james ingram, al jarreau, chaka khan, mary mary, smokey robinson, bebe winans and mr. wonder angela bassett and courtney b. vance narrate vignettes that speak to the significance of historically black colleges and universities.  kathryn shattuck  