in opera's famous pair of one-acts, tenor doubles his workload   the traveling sideshow of ''pagliacci'' added a strongman act to its clowns, acrobats and derailed theatrical entertainments on friday night. salvatore licitra was scheduled to sing leoncavallo's canio at the metropolitan opera, while frank porretta would be mascagni's turiddu in ''cavalleria rusticana.'' on thursday mr. porretta reported in sick. rather than let a cover singer be called for, mr. licitra said he would sing both operas.  given the flat-out vocal and emotional muscle each part requires, not to mention the met's vast acoustical space needing to be filled, pitching tenorial woo at both ends of a doubleheader is not unheard of, but it is to be remarked on when it happens. going 9 innings is the normal aim, 18 a rarity these days.  mr. licitra's only uneasy moments came oddly at the beginning, during his curtain-raising offstage aria in ''cavalleria.'' he has a clear sound and a musical sense that is mostly enlightened if betrayed occasionally by small crudenesses of attack. he has developed the top of his voice carefully, but he can be wary of it, wisely turning down the flame when trouble threatens. on the other hand, when either opera needed full commitment, nothing was withheld. tough evenings like this require management of resources.  with only a day to orient himself, mr. licitra seemed comfortable on franco zeffirelli's venerable set for ''cavalleria.'' in the pre-duel spat with alfio (mark delavan) his teeth found his opponent's ear with perfect aim. the shutting of church doors in santuzza's face also had a nice theatrical flourish to it. mr. licitra runs a lot in both operas, which helps keep things moving.  marco armiliato conducted, as he did earlier in the season. the appealing dolora zajick was a blast furnace of a santuzza; with her and mr. licitra on either side, mr. delavan sounded a little underpowered.  in ''pagliacci'' i very much admired the vocal completeness of krassimira's stoyanova's nedda. mr. licitra actually gathered strength as his burdens grew. with stamina like this, can tristan be far behind? i hope not.  music review  