today in business   nielsen adds student viewers -- ratings of shows like ''america's next top model'' and ''family guy'' are expected to surge this week as nielsen media research, a unit of the nielsen company, includes in its tv ratings, for the first time, the viewing of students living away from home. advertising. [page c1.]  tech investors go to washington -- silicon valley's technology investors, traditionally free-market advocates, are heading to washington on a crusade to influence energy policy. having poured billions of dollars into alternative energy start-up companies, they have a big stake in the outcome. [c1.]  hiring in silicon valley -- a huge increase in investment in the emerging category of clean environment technology -- from $34 million in the first quarter of 2006 to $290 million in the third quarter -- has helped spur a turnaround in job prospects in silicon valley. [c8.]  digital divide still a concern -- concerns over a growing digital divide have taken a back seat to the challenge of climate change at this year's world economic forum in davos, switzerland. but passions still run high over what is the best way to deploy computers in the developing world. [c1.]  how not to win an oscar -- ''dreamgirls,'' having failed to win an academy award nomination for best picture despite eight other nominations and an all-out drive by its backers for top honors, may well be remembered as the picture that showed how far a studio cannot go in seeking a prize. [c1.]  earthlink bets on security -- hoping to fortify its bottom line and attract new customers, the internet service provider earthlink plans to make sophisticated new computer security services available to both earthlink users and others. ''security is very much a moneymaker for us,'' said craig forman, above, an earthlink executive. e-commerce report. [c7.]  a shaky speech embargo -- a handshake agreement that gives the news media copies of the state of the union address ahead of time on condition that it not be published until after the president begins his delivery has broken down. copies of the speech could be found at sites like the drudge report and thinkprogress.org well before president bush began his address shortly after 9 p.m. last tuesday. link by link: tom zeller jr. [c3.]  case law and wikipedia -- the united states court of federal claims rejected a decision by a court-appointed special master who cited an article in wikipedia, the collaborate online encyclopedia, saying that the material did not meet standards of reliability. but a simple search of published court decisions finds that more than 100 judicial rulings have relied on wikipedia, beginning in 2004, including 13 from circuit courts of appeal, one step below the supreme court. [c3.]  greetings from the billboard -- mini usa plans to start delivering custom messages to mini cooper owners on digital signs the company calls ''talking'' billboards that are programmed to identify approaching mini drivers through a coded signal from a radio chip embedded in their key fob. [c3.]  news blog readership up -- despite some setbacks, traffic to newspaper blogs has more than tripled over the last year, according to nielsen/netratings, reaching 3.8 million in december. [c3.]  telecom lowers its forecast -- deutsche telekom, europe's largest telephone company, cut its forecast for profit this year as because of intensified competition in germany and the dollar's decline against the euro, which is cutting into revenue in the united states. [c2.]  capitalizing on access -- the sacramento bee says it will introduce a new web site focused on california government and state politics, and charge readers for it. [c6.]  stock tables returned -- the washington post and the wall street journal are restoring some stock market tables that were trimmed to reduce newsprint costs. [c6.]  google-gaming halted -- a favored online tactic to mock the president -- gaming the google search engine so that the words ''miserable failure'' lead to president bush's home page at the white house -- has been neutralized. [c6.]  posting readers' voice mail -- the san francisco chronicle has started posting some of the voice mail messages left for reporters and editors on its web site, sfgate.com, as audio files. [c6.]  