in a yale dining hall, independent study at the microwave   as students streamed into a towering gothic dining hall at yale university last week, appraising the plats du jour on a cafeteria buffet, one of their classmates was concocting his own sauce from peanut butter and a dark liquid.  ''you have to be careful with the sesame oil,'' cautioned the student, zach marks, a self-described dining hall gastronome. ''too much of this and the texture gets watery.''  after mixing in some soy sauce, mr. marks, a sophomore from philadelphia, reached for curry powder and swirled in a pinch, followed by a little dried ginger and dried coriander.  ''hey zach, what's that you're making tonight?'' asked marvin cunningham, a kitchen worker.  ''appetizers of chicken satay, and some tikka masala,'' mr. marks replied, never diverting his eyes from the oeuvre in progress.  ''ooohthat sounds good to me,'' mr. cunningham said with a grin.  mr. marks transferred the peanut mixture to a microwave oven for about 30 seconds, ''until it bubbles and has a nice smooth texture.'' he wanted fresh limes, but they were not on the buffet that evening, so he settled for lemon to add a little bite to the sauce. (the spices were also a twist on his basic recipe.)  next stop: the giant steel milk dispenser. ''this makes it creamy,'' he said, letting go with two short squirts.  a gregarious and athletic 20-year-old, mr. marks prepares what he describes as ''gourmet treats'' by employing items from the dining room buffet, a well-stocked condiment bar and occasional borrowing from the kitchen.  mr. marks has garnered no small degree of celebrity around campus for his culinary legerdemain, which he often shares with fellow students in a monthly column in the yale daily news.  ''i'm not saying that yale food isn't good -- it is good, especially compared to most colleges,'' mr. marks said. ''but i've learned that by playing around you can make your own excellent meals.''  turning back to matters at hand, he fetched a grilled chicken breast and hacked it into bite-size pieces. for ease of dipping he decided to skewer the meat -- ''hey marvin! you have any toothpicks?''  ''if food tastes good it should look good,'' he opined, sprinkling the sauce with black and white sesame seeds and garnishing it with fresh cilantro.  ''here we go!'' mr. marks beamed. ''chicken satay!'' though dry, it was tasty enough. the dish was the amuse-gueule of a two-course tasting menu that also featured a free-wheeling interpretation of tikka masala fashioned from yogurt, coriander, curry and garlic. broccoli florets were set out for dipping.  when mr. marks started his column last spring, his first effort was a culinary call to arms for fellow yalies.  ''do not regard the condiment bar as a humble home for ketchup and mustard,'' he wrote. ''think of it as an arsenal of ingredients to whip up savory sauces -- you'll find the possibilities are limitless.''  a column for valentine's day suggested chocolate fondue with chocolate chips, cream from the coffee station, sugar and eggs (brought over from his dorm room). the fondue served as a sauce for cocobanana, a truly original twist on the banana split confected with crushed cornflakes, peanuts and shredded coconut.  the column carries practical tips like these for dining hall denizens:  all dining halls have microwave ovens; learn to use them. steam all kinds of vegetables in a little water. carrots and broccoli actually turn out better this way. or place onion slices (or garlic cloves) in a pool of olive oil and cook until soft. not only do you have flavorful onions and garlic, but the olive oil takes on some of their flavor.  don't be discouraged if you can't find a certain ingredient. if there's no more cream cheese, try sour cream. if you want to make amandine sauce but all they have is cashews, go for it.  when microwaving anything with bread, put a napkin underneath to keep it from getting soggy. (this is especially helpful with reubens and garlic bread.)  ''my column is not so much about the recipes,'' mr. marks said as he plunged a piece of broccoli into the masala sauce. ''it's about empowering students to use their creativity not just in the classroom but in the dining hall, too.''  his message may find a national following. he said he had been approached by a publisher to write a students' guide to dining hall food.  mr. marks said he is largely a self-taught cook, having learned the basics from his father, whom he calls ''pretty serious'' when it comes to food.  he has no aspirations to become a chef, though. ''i don't want to have to stand for 14 hours a day and be abused all day.'' having grown up in central philadelphia, he is interested in city issues and hopes to become an urban planner.  even without the column or his position as secretary of the yale college council, mr. marks would have commanded a high profile on campus because of a pig roast he staged last year on the freshman quad.  ''it was finals week and everybody was studying and miserable, so i thought we'd have a little fun,'' he said.  mr. marks and a companion drove to a pig farm and brought back a freshly slaughtered 120-pound specimen -- snout to curly tail. undeterred by ignorance of pig preparation, they carried the pig up five flights of stairs to mr. marks's dormitory room and placed it on ice from a vending machine in the hall.  when the ice melted, they hauled the pig to the dining hall, hacked it into six pieces and placed it in a refrigerator.  ''that's where my dining hall contacts came in handy,'' mr. marks said.  the following afternoon they fired up an ancient wood-frame charcoal grill and laid on the pig, suffusing the quad with the sweet waftings of barbecue -- that is, until the grill caught fire and collapsed.  ''after the fire went out we roasted it inside,'' mr. marks said. ''when we brought it back about 200 yale students descended on us, with everybody taking pictures and having a great time. what a party!''  he paused, reveling in the smoky memory, then added:  ''that was the weekend my girlfriend became a vegetarian.''  thai chicken satay  time: 5 minutes  for the sauce:  1/4 cup crunchy peanut butter (preferably natural, unsweetened)  2 tablespoons sesame oil  1 tablespoon soy sauce  1 tablespoon honey  1 teaspoon milk  for the satay:  1 cooked chicken breast  2 tablespoons soy sauce  2 tablespoons honey  1 teaspoon sesame seeds.  1. for sauce: mix peanut butter, sesame oil, soy sauce, honey and milk in a small microwaveable bowl. microwave until thoroughly heated, about 30 seconds (be careful not to overcook), then mix until smooth.  2. for satay: cut chicken into 1-inch-thick strips. mix soy sauce and honey in small bowl. coat chicken with mixture, discarding any excess. microwave for 15 seconds. sprinkle with sesame seeds, and serve with sauce.  yield: 1 serving.  