these kids never say 'yech!'   on saturdays at paradou, a small french restaurant in the meatpacking district, the bed-headed brunch crowd slogs in after noon, ready for mimosas. the morning crew is rowdier: a gaggle of apron-wearing children, mostly under 5, who come for the mini chef cooking lessons.  for $40 a session, pint-size cooks can learn to make dim sum, sopas and baba ghanouj. on a recent weekend, alyssa volland, the instructor and the wife of alex volland, the restaurant's owner and chef, chose pizza for the day's lesson. but this wasn't a typical child-friendly pizza -- frozen, on a bagel or dripping with pepperoni.  instead, hanna mandel, 5, set to mixing yeast pebbles, sea salt and extra virgin olive oil into an artisanal dough, which she topped with mozzarella and a nutty, slightly stinky gruyère before choosing a vegetable topping. as she kneaded, she talked about her no. 1 food, sushi, declaring, ''seaweed is my favorite part.''  alyse mandel, her mother, glanced over with the pride usually reserved for straight-a report cards, and said, ''she'll try anything.''  ms. mandel and her daughter are part of the growing wave of parents obsessed with all things culinary who are indoctrinating their children to the ways of gastronomy.  for these children, peanut butter and jelly sandwiches and mac and cheese are no longer standard fare. they prefer ethnic and gourmet foods. they dine (not eat) out. and don't expect them to order from a childrens' menu. chicken fingers are lost on this crowd.  japanese restaurants like blue ribbon sushi in brooklyn and rosanjin in tribeca (offering prix fixe meals from $105), where children might once have been lucky to have a yearly birthday dinner, now offer child-size portions for small guests. blue hill, that avatar of haute barnyard cuisine prepared sous vide and with minimal saucing, provides crayons for young gourmands.  other businesses have taken note of the trend, responding with cooking classes, cookbooks and even toys. at blue ribbon cooking and culinary center in seattle, children learn knife skills and whip up dishes like chicken curry. batter up kids culinary center in austin, tex., which teaches children as young as 2 1/2 to make raspberry tea sandwiches, has grown so popular that the owner has begun selling franchises.  nursery bookshelves are filling with cookbooks aimed at parents who want to make ambitious meals for toddlers, including ''first meals'' by annabel karmel (dk, 2004), whose recipes include fillet of cod with a trio of vegetables and chicken caterpillar kebabs with red peppers and litchis.  food toys are increasingly sophisticated. abc carpet and home in manhattan sells sleek wooden mini kitchens. the pretend toasters and mixing bowls at the pottery barn kids store are as pricey as some working adult versions.  ''food is the next frontier in terms of the precious raising of children,'' said pilar guzmán, the editor in chief of cookie, the high-end parenting magazine. ''parents are marrying later, having kids later. they have established sensibilities by the time they have kids which don't come to a screeching halt.''  parents seeking to tantalize their offspring's taste buds are usually foodies themselves. some mothers start children's gastronomic education while still pregnant, eating spicy and garlicky meals, and continue to do so while nursing, citing research that suggests children exposed to many tastes through breast milk or in the womb are less likely to be picky eaters.  thus nourished, these children presumably appreciate the chickpea stew with chorizo or the lamb korma found in books like ''food adventures: introducing your child to flavors from around the world'' by elisabeth luard and frances boswell (kyle books, 2006).  ''the popularity of ethnic food has expanded kids' palates,'' said pam abrams, the author of ''gadgetology: kitchen fun with your kids,'' to be published in april. she noted that edamame and balsamic vinaigrette are now staples in american homes, and eaten by children as a matter of course. this explains the highchairs available at fatty crab, a downtown manhattan upscale take on malaysian cuisine, where quail shooters are a popular starter.  the toy company melissa and doug sells a sushi set that includes a realistic velcroed roll that can be ''cut'' with a play knife. ''we get hundreds of consumer calls a day requesting foods from different cultures,'' said melissa bernstein, who owns the company with her husband, doug.  many parents have noticed that their children have as much affection for cooking shows as for the cartoon network. six-year-old beanie boylston of los angeles has been a fan of the food network since she was 3. ''it makes sense -- the colors, the hands-on touching the food,'' said her mother, heather boylston, noting that beanie ''suggests it as an activity to watch together.''  susan stockton, the food network's vice president for culinary productions, said that to the surprise of network executives, a lot of children showed up to the first audience taping of ''emeril live'' in 1997. ''since then, kids have been big fans of many of our talent,'' ms. stockton said. ''we often host local kids' cooking classes and behind-the-scenes tours through our kitchens.''  ''years ago, our programmers kicked around the idea of doing shows just for kids,'' she added. ''but in the end we found that kids were responding well to the family shows we were already producing.''  though a quick perusal of restaurant blogs underscores the consternation created by children's infiltration of restaurants that used to be adult oases, their owners say children are mostly well behaved.  ''at otto, they are capable of taking over without damaging the vibe,'' said the chef mario batali, adding that he sees plenty of children at two of his other restaurants, del posto and babbo, both foodie meccas.  eric ripert, the chef at le bernardin, zagat's highest-rated restaurant in new york, thinks his dress code helps keep children in line. ''they have a tie, so they are almost strangled already,'' he said. ''they don't move much.''  hugh garvey, the features editor of bon appétit, and matthew yeomans, who works for time magazine online, are the bloggers behind gastrokid.com, which has since august followed their efforts to introduce their offspring to the pleasures of say, guanciale, a pork product favored by mr. batali, whom the site calls a ''gastrodad extraordinaire.''  mr. garvey's daughter, violet, now 5, ate stilton and baby octopus -- not together -- at 18 months. mr. yeomans wrote proudly about giving his daughter, zelda, 1, steak at 8 months.  but for all the cooking classes and the trooping of 5-year-olds to three-star restaurants, parents say they have had mixed success trying to turn children on to fine cuisine. mr. ripert admitted he learned a lesson when he offered his son, adrien, now 3, a burger that was medium-rare -- the only way real food snobs will eat it -- at 18 months.  ''i didn't want him to have meat well done his whole life,'' mr. ripert explained. ''the nanny said, 'you don't do that for a baby.' i did it. he got sick. since then we have been reluctant with red meat. i do spaghetti bolognese and he loves that. but no steak yet.''  how embarrassing. ''it's a badge of urban sophisticate honor to have your kid be an adventurous eater,'' ms. guzmán said.  pediatricians warn that parents should talk to their doctors about the proper times to introduce foods, as advice varies about many foods, including fish, as well as potential allergens like wheat, soy, milk and eggs. parents should also know that exposing children to an adventurous menu -- celery root, artisanal cheese, shrimp dumplings -- won't automatically produce an adventurous eater, or even a nonpicky one.  violet garvey's brother, desmond, 2, likes only foods in shades of brown. ms. boswell's youngest daughter, 2 1/2-year-old plum, is going through a lentil soup and calamari phase. and chef batali's son leo, 8, will not eat anything with green flecks.  ''some kids have sensitive palates or they don't like texture. that isn't developmental, that's temperamental,'' said jean kunhardt, a director of the soho parenting center, which conducts child-rearing classes in downtown manhattan. ''parents have to be sensitive to that.''  she added that most children go through a picky phase no matter what, starting at around 2 and sometimes lasting for years. if parents ''try not to care too much about them eating or not eating,'' ms. kunhardt said, the odds are better they will not be picky. struggling with children over food or being overly manipulative exacerbates the problem, she said.  mr. yeomans introduces his children to everything. ''i get a kick out of the fact that my 4-year-old can tell the smell of roast garlic and that he knows and likes goat cheese when he tastes it,'' he said. ''what he does with that education when he grows up is up to him. but it's a good start.''  