3 palestinians killed as hamas and fatah fight on   at least three more palestinians were killed saturday in gaza in continuing battles between fighters loyal to fatah and hamas, which has been celebrating its victory a year ago over fatah in legislative elections.  at least 14 palestinians, including a 2-year-old boy, died friday in daylong clashes and retaliatory attacks. the death toll has reached 20 since thursday, with more than 65 people wounded, news agencies reported.  those killed saturday were identified as mahmoud khalil khatib, 17, who appears to have been a student bystander, and two members of the security forces, ibrahim al-khalout, 25, and mohammad khattab, 33.  the fighting started near the hamas islamic university, the headquarters of the fatah-dominated preventive security force in gaza city and the shifa hospital a few blocks away.  hamas, which leads the palestinian authority, said friday that it was suspending new talks with the fatah movement of the palestinian authority president, mahmoud abbas, on forming a national unity government because of the violence. mr. abbas, who was at a conference in switzerland and then in spain, said he expected negotiations on a government to last at least another three weeks.  if the talks fail, mr. abbas said he would move to make good on his dec. 16 call for early presidential and parliamentary elections, despite hamas's victory a year ago. hamas has labeled the call an attempted coup, and said it would resist or obstruct any new legislative elections.  mr. abbas went to damascus, syria, last week to meet with the hamas political director, khaled meshal, who lives there in exile, and the two said they had made progress. but hamas is insisting that the current prime minister, ismail haniya, remain in the job and that hamas retain effective control of major ministries, including the interior ministry.  the latest talks between hamas and fatah started tuesday. on saturday, tawfiq abu khoussa, a fatah spokesman in gaza, blamed hamas for starting the latest mayhem. ''we in fatah did not stop the dialogue,'' he said. ''those who stopped the dialogue are required to return.''  hamas blamed fatah, saying in a statement that the unity talks were close to an agreement ''when putschists inside fatah rushed to blow up the situation to serve their own interests and a foreign agenda.''  the point of a new government would be to try to meet international requirements that the palestinian authority accept the right of israel to exist, forswear violence and accept previous palestinian-israeli agreements. hamas has refused to do that, but has negotiated with mr. abbas for months over a political program for a government that could meet the standards and thus let western budgetary aid resume.  the fight for power in gaza between fatah and hamas has been intermittently bloody, with more than 30 people killed between mid-december and early january in urban fighting. palestinians warned then of a possible civil war, though the factions tend to calm down after a spike in violence, in part because of growing popular disgust with the gunmen.  the united states is continuing to try to support mr. abbas and his loyal presidential guard with more than $80 million in what is supposed to be nonlethal aid. washington, which will sponsor a meeting of middle east diplomats on feb. 2 before holding joint talks with mr. abbas and prime minister ehud olmert of israel, is trying to provide a ''political horizon'' for a peace settlement to the palestinians, again to try to bolster fatah, which supports a palestinian state next to an independent israel.  but the last year of isolation has not overthrown hamas, though it is less popular. more important, hamas is more firmly entrenched, having built a parallel paramilitary force in gaza of nearly 6,000 men known as the executive force, which is loyal to the hamas interior minister, said siam, not to mr. abbas.  in addition to the deaths since thursday, nine members of hamas and five members of fatah were kidnapped in tit-for-tat abductions in gaza and the occupied west bank on friday, and nine hamas members were kidnapped in the northern village of kafr qalil by fatah, security sources said.  late on friday, hamas attacked the gaza headquarters of the preventive security service, a force dominated by fatah, with mortars and rocket-propelled grenades. no injuries were reported. grenades were also fired at the home of rashid abu shbak of fatah, who is in charge of internal security for the palestinian authority. the gaza home of the hamas leader mahmoud zahar, the foreign minister, was also hit by grenades but no one was injured.  mr. haniya said in an interview published in the london arabic newspaper al hayat that the long effort to negotiate the release of an israeli soldier captured in june in return for palestinian prisoners was ''complex and difficult'' and would require more work.  