23-month campaign   in the old days, presidential races were one-year events. john f. kennedy announced his candidacy on jan. 2, 1960, and was elected that november. earlier this month, would-be candidates who were still deciding whether to run in 2008 were being accused of reckless delay. presidential campaign pundits were saying that if senator hillary clinton had waited another minute to announce, senator barack obama would have locked up every new hampshire county committee member and hedge fund billionaire.  this really is an election on hyperspeed.  part of this is due to the peculiarities of the race. president bush is so unpopular that a power vacuum is opening up in washington and, for the first time in many election cycles, both parties' nominations are wide open. the internet is also fueling the overdrive, with ''netroots primaries,'' in which the voting has already begun.  the biggest factors, though, are money and an ever-compressed schedule. california, illinois, florida and new jersey are all maneuvering to move up their primaries to next february. that has candidates rushing to lock up the big donors -- and bypassing the public finance system. senator clinton has already made clear that she will be opting out for both the primary and the general election. senator john mccain, a major supporter of campaign finance reform who is no longer sponsoring a big reform bill that once bore his name, seems likely to do the same, with many candidates to follow. the problem with the 23-month campaign is not just the fatigue it will inspire, but the effect on democracy. bundlers -- master fund-raisers who package individual contributions into big ones -- will have even more power. there is no way to stop candidates from hurling their hats into the ring so early. but there are things that can, and should, be done.  the national parties should stop the states' mad race to have first-in-the-nation primaries. they should adopt a schedule that reformers have been proposing for years: regional primaries that rotate, so that voters in every state eventually have a turn to be among the first to vote. congress should fix the broken public financing system, which has not been significantly updated since it was adopted in 1974. spending limits need to be raised, to keep pace with ever-rising costs. more money needs to be put in the fund, and there should be more flexibility to help candidates who accept public financing compete against big-money candidates who opt out.  if hillary vs. obama vs. rudy vs. mccain is already starting to feel old, remember that there are more than 600 days to go. we will never return to the time when presidential campaigns unfolded handshake by handshake in new hampshire -- and we shouldn't -- but congress and the national parties can set a more thoughtful 21st-century pace.  editorial  