what's on tonight   7 p.m. (cinemax) what remains: the life and work of sally mann -- ''it never occurred to me to leave home to make art,'' says the photographer sally mann, who built a career chronicling the lives of her children. ''the things that are close to you are the things that you can photograph the best.'' in this documentary from steven cantor, ms. mann embarks on a new project: a provocative photo series that explores the subject of death and decay through images of not only her son and two daughters but her husband, larry, whose body is changing because of a rare form of muscular dystrophy. she also looks at how nature assimilates the body once life has left it, and in doing so confronts american attitudes toward death, through photographs examining the scars left on her property after an armed fugitive, being hunted by police, shot himself; landscapes from the civil war battlefield of antietam; a forensics study showing human decomposition; and images of the bones and skin of a pet greyhound long since departed.  4 p.m. (fox news) your world with neil cavuto -- mr. cavuto interviews president bush.  8 p.m. (nbc) friday night lights -- tension is high as the team prepares for its first playoff game, and coach taylor struggles  as he deals with smash's situation. meanwhile, tyra and julie form an unlikely alliance, riggins reconnects with his estranged father, and jason and lyla have their own problems once buddy learns about their engagement.  8 p.m. (13, 49) america's ballroom challenge -- the competitors in this fivepart series, now in its second season, may not  be household names, but they sure can dance. tonight, 24 world-class couples (including toni redpath and michael mead, above) glide their way through the american smooth. marilu henner and tony meredith are hosts.  8 p.m. (abc) george lopez -- baby boom: angie keeps up the facade that she's pregnant to prevent george from missing carmen. vic introduces his very young fiancée (the wrestler stacy keibler, perhaps best known for her stint on ''dancing with the stars'') to the family.  9 p.m. (13, 49) the supreme court -- it's known as the court of last resort, the place where nine judges appointed for life make  monumental decisions that govern the way we live -- from the content of our newspapers to what we can do behind closed doors. this four-part series merges history with biography to humanize the people in the black robes; it also explores some of the dramatic cases that have come before the court as well as the often controversial rulings that affect all americans. chief justice john g. roberts jr. and sandra day o'connor (above), the retired justice and the first woman to serve on the court, weigh in.  kathryn shattuck  