now you, too, can enter the world of 007 finance   compared with button-down stock jockeys at fidelity or t. rowe price, hedge fund managers may be the james bonds of the financial world. they have a reputation for being secretive risk takers who use an array of specialized financial weaponry like derivatives and short-selling. (no license to kill, of course, though their lightly regulated funds do allow managers tremendous, nonlethal latitude.)  but times are changing, and just as any spy buffs can google up sophisticated techno-gadgets and have them sent directly to their homes, it's now possible for a do-it-yourself investor to tap a financial arsenal that was once readily available only to the pros. for good or ill, alternative investment vehicles like foreign currencies, commodities, real estate and private equity are landing in the hands of the masses.  thomas smicklas, 55, a retired high-school principal from wadsworth, ohio, says he is unimpressed with the performance of traditional mutual funds, so he has become a die-hard do-it-yourselfer. ''i act as my own hedge fund manager, which to me means being able to take additional risk,'' mr. smicklas said.  he hardly fancies himself an amateur george soros, though. mr. smicklas has no wild dreams of breaking the bank of england. and, for another matter, he doesn't want to risk accidentally blowing up his own portfolio. (long-term capital management's problems come to mind.) he says he just wants a spicier portfolio, keeping 75 percent of assets in stocks and bonds that he deems ''secure from fiasco,'' and 25 percent in more speculative investments.  among the latter holdings are offbeat exchange-traded funds, like ishares msci singapore index; claymore bric, which invests in brazil, russia, india and china; and powershares water resources, which focuses on water treatment and services companies.  mr. smicklas became interested in the water e.t.f. after he started thinking about various commodities during the oil-price surge last year. water is a narrow slice of the stock market, and mr. smicklas acknowledged that without the e.t.f., he wouldn't have known where to start. ''i think the only water company i knew was calgon,'' he recalled. industry names like insituform technologies and companhia de saneamento básico do estado de são paulo didn't jump to mind.  with a good deal of research, mr. smicklas might have eventually found those companies and thoroughly analyzed them. still, he had no way to gain access to private equity investments, which seemed to be the domain of american chief executives, saudi princes or deposed foreign presidents -- not retired ohio educators.  well, what popped into mr. smicklas's e-mail box the other day? an ad for powershares listed private equity portfolio -- an e.t.f. that mimics the red rocks capital listed private equity index. the red rocks index tracks public companies that make direct investments in privately held companies.  and just look at some of the offerings from rydex investments. in addition to e.t.f.'s tracking foreign currencies like the australian dollar and the swiss franc, rydex offers ''alternative'' mutual funds like the rydex dynamic strengthening dollar and dynamic weakening dollar funds. these invest in index swaps, options and futures contracts in order to double returns on the real-world performance of the dollar, with a bet on its direction. before e.t.f.'s and funds like these, speculating in currencies probably would have required setting up a managed futures account at a brokerage firm.  currency, water and private equity e.t.f.'s? it sounds like the wild west out there to christine benz, director of mutual fund analysis at morningstar. ''seems the e.t.f. industry is making a lot of the same mistakes that the fund industry made in the '90s when there were a lot of gimmicky, narrowly focused products that didn't belong in investors' portfolios,'' she said.  like many investment experts, ms. benz says the average investor has enough of a task analyzing traditional stock and bond funds and doesn't need to complicate matters with a bunch of esoteric new products.  david reilly, director of portfolio strategies at rydex, has heard that sort of criticism before. he recalled reading a magazine recently in which a financial adviser called such niche products ''just another way to shoot yourself in the head.'' but mr. reilly contends that ''the data don't warrant that perception.'' he says, for instance, that funds that track the movement of the dollar against foreign currencies are great for diversification because they move independently of more common asset classes like stocks and bonds. ''they're not really correlated at all,'' he said.  lowering portfolio volatility and reducing downside risk through smart hedging is also the financial goal of mark d. wolfinger, author of a 2005 book, ''create your own hedge fund.'' he advocates, for instance, using a simple covered-call strategy with e.t.f. options -- essentially selling a call option on an s.& p. 500 or russell 2000 e.t.f. that you already own -- through the american stock exchange. (if your eyes are already beginning to bleed, be warned that this is probably the simplest strategy in the book.) this allows a hedger to collect a modest premium from selling the call as well as to receive a bit of downside insurance if the e.t.f. slips in price.  ''before e.t.f.'s, one could not easily write covered calls on a diversified stock portfolio, unless one owned the entire index portfolio,'' mr. wolfinger said. ''that's a very awkward and expensive thing to do and requires lots of trading.''  and as long as you're in a hedging frame of mind, remember that you can now hedge against real estate declines or speculate on the direction of housing prices. last spring, the chicago mercantile exchange started offering futures contracts pegged to housing price indexes in 10 major metropolitan areas, including new york, chicago, denver and san diego. what's more, a new web site, hedgestreet, allows investors to trade contracts on economic statistics like 30-year mortgage rates or consumer prices.  (for that matter, why not go to intrade, an online betting site, where you can hedge the 2008 presidential election? if you're a democrat, try betting republican, so that if the vote doesn't go your way, you can take solace in the cash you make on election night.)  if you like the idea of soros-like risk taking -- but are worried about go-it-alone strategies -- more and more mutual funds are offering trading strategies borrowed from hedge funds, like going both long and short on stocks. ric dillon, portfolio manager of the diamond hill long-short a fund in columbus, ohio, says the popularity of such funds really started growing after the internet bubble burst in 2000. ''investors started looking for a better return, really any return at all,'' he said.  mr. dillon says the major differences between his long-short mutual fund and a similar hedge fund he manages are that the mutual fund doesn't use leverage and will short up to only 40 percent of the fund.  but in both funds, he says, he uses classic benjamin graham-warren buffett value-investing analysis to find stocks that aren't trading at their intrinsic values, based on estimates of future cash flow. he shorts stocks trading above what he deems that intrinsic value, like procter & gamble, and buys those trading below, like devon energy.  diamond hill long-short a has more than doubled the average annual return of the s.& p. 500 during the last five years, though the fund has a front-end load, or sales charge, of 5 percent.  he urges caution in using aggressive trading strategies. using an aphorism sometimes attributed to john maynard keynes, mr. dillon said, ''the market can stay irrational longer than you can stay solvent.''  not as catchy as ''shaken, not stirred,'' but certainly worth remembering.  sunday money: investing  