rookies hear rustle of woods's footsteps in the grass   after two rounds of watching a rookie play the big room at the buick invitational, tiger woods finally cleared his throat saturday on the south course at torrey pines. for more than four hours, woods elbowed his way past competitors and made a steady climb up the leader board until he had whittled a seven-stroke deficit to two.  woods, who is bidding for his seventh pga tour victory in a row, shot a three-under-par 69 to trail the rookies brandt snedeker (74) and andrew buckle (68) by two shots in his 2007 debut.  the veteran kevin sutherland (70) was one shot behind snedeker and buckle, while charles howell iii (73), troy matteson (69) and bill haas (72) also trailed the leaders by two shots. mark calcavecchia (68) was among a group of seven players who stood three shots back. snedeker and buckle were at 11-under-par 205.  woods, with 3 birdies in his first seven holes and 11 pars to close out the round, quickly changed the dynamic of the tournament, which he has won four times, including the last two years. during the third round, many of the players who had been well out in front of woods were aware of his rise up the leader board.  some of the fans in the gallery even made it a point to tell snedeker, who opened the tournament with a 61 and has owned at least a share of the lead for three rounds.  ''you know it's coming,'' snedeker said of woods's emergence. ''i think everybody out here knows he's going to play well. it was not a shock at all. i hope he goes out there and plays a great round tomorrow, and i hope i go out there and beat him by one. that would be the best scenario ever.''  when sutherland made birdie on the 18th hole, he pushed woods out of the final group and into the penultimate group, a fact not lost on snedeker, 26, and buckle, 24, who is from australia.  snedeker and buckle will be paired instead with the 42-year-old sutherland, whose lone tour victory came at the 2002 match play championship.  ''i need to send him a thank-you note,'' snedeker said of sutherland. ''i would love to play in the last group with tiger, but as a rookie, i'm glad the way it worked out.''  buckle, who twice won the junior world golf championships at torrey pines, agreed that there would be plenty of time to play alongside woods in the future.  ''i think i would have been pretty nervous,'' buckle said.  the catalyst for woods's move up the leader board was a sparkling short game. he was a little scattered with his driver and irons, missing 11 of 14 fairways and landing in 9 bunkers, but he manufactured pars with his putter.  woods and nick watney (70) were the only players who did not make a bogey saturday.  ''i dropped some key putts to keep the round going and keep momentum going and, basically, keep me in contention,'' woods said. ''it's nice to be in contention the first week out. that's why i prepared as hard as i did, to put myself in this spot.''  much of woods's mastery in his career has come when he has led going into the final round. only 16 of his 54 tournament victories have come after trailing through three rounds. but he knows the nuances of torrey pines as well as anyone on the leader board.  he does not, however, know much about the competitors he will face sunday.  ''there are a lot of new guys out here,'' woods said. ''you go out on the range and there's a bunch of new faces.''  he finally met snedeker on saturday morning, when they bumped into each other on the practice green before the third round. at last, woods was face to face with the player who had been edging him out of the spotlight.  ''tiger said hello to me on the putting green, which is pretty phenomenal,'' snedeker said. ''i didn't think he knew who i was and he said, 'brandt, great playing.'  ''somebody told me he's had 41 more wins than i've had starts on this tour. i think he's got me beat in that aspect. i know he's going to be there down the stretch. it's just a matter of keeping my wits about me and learning how to play golf.''  golf  