home away: summer rentals: the forecast is calm   the summer rental market used to be fairly predictable on the southern coast of maine.  maureen regan, the owner of seaside vacation rentals in york, saw summer renters booking seaside retreats six to eight months in advance, and rental demand was reliable enough that owners of cozy beachside cottages and grand victorians bolstered their weekly rental prices nearly every year.  these days renters are waiting longer to book trips, and they have a lot more properties to choose from, since the soft real estate market has added to the inventory and pushed down prices.  ''last year the average rental per week dropped for the first time in many years,'' ms. regan said. ''it is creating a lower price per rental week, which is good news for the renter, but not so great news for the homeowner. this year we're telling owners, 'please hold the home at last year's rate or even drop the price.' ''  prices in other prime east coast beach destinations are also remaining in line with last year's, or even decreasing, according to rental agents.  on the outer banks in north carolina, many owners of rental property have opted not increase their rates. prices for the 550 homes in outer beaches realty's seasonal rental inventory on hatteras island haven't really budged.  ''ninety percent stayed flat,'' confirmed scott leggat, vice president for marketing of outer beaches realty. ''a handful even went down slightly.''  but that doesn't mean the activity has ceased. on the outer banks, homes with six or more bedrooms are already racking up bookings (a beach house with nine bedrooms might fetch $9,000 a week).  bill williams, an agent with sotheby's international realty in east hampton, n.y., has rented out four homes this summer, including a five-bedroom house in wainscott, a quarter-mile from the beach, for a total of $255,000 for the entire summer.  while prices are in line with last year's, he is advising owners who want to test out a small price increase to do it now. ''if it rented for $50,000 last summer and they want to raise it by $6,000, i say give it a shot in january,'' he said. ''if there is not any interest by the end of february, then we can adjust the price.''  steps to lure renters  while rental agencies report that oceanfront trumps oceanside and homes with five or more bedrooms are typically booked before smaller properties, there are a number of steps that owners can take to help their properties stand out.  add amenities ''it's an amenity-laden experience,'' said mr. leggat of the outer banks. ''these homes have swimming pools, multiple hot tubs, tiki bars, a media room, and a home theater. generally they are loaded with electronics. every bedroom has a television, and every bedroom might have a dvd player. there are theater-style chairs and game rooms with pool tables.''  high-speed wireless internet access is increasingly a must-have, as are flat-screen televisions, long-distance phone service and good gas grills.  for owners contemplating redecorating, double beds should be replaced with queen beds, said marlene romanowski, and agent with the van dyk group, which has an office on long beach island, n.j.  air conditioning is the most important amenity of all. ''the thinking used to be that you didn't need a.c. at the shore,'' ms. romanowski said. ''you need a.c.''  mr. williams recommends that hamptons homeowners invest in heaters for their swimming pools, a feature that can help get a home rented in june, which is generally a slow month at the beach. ''it costs $2,500 to install a pool heater,'' he said, ''and even if it doesn't get used it is worth it. it will help the house get rented more quickly and may even increase the price.''  trim minimum rental stays jim waggoner, vice president for resort rentals at long & foster, which manages 1,500 seasonal rentals in maryland and delaware, said homes and condominiums being rented out for less than a full week are increasingly being snapped up.  ''they are doing extremely well,'' he said. ''their summer revenue is often higher or at least the same as other comparable weekly rentals.''  alter the start date getting a car to block island on a weekend means booking space on a ferry months in advance. while most block island rentals start on saturday or sunday, an owner who starts a weekly rental on friday or monday can lure vacationers looking for a less harried ferry trip.  ''it makes the trip more leisurely,'' said jennifer phillips, the owner of phillips real estate on block island, ''and it's a great draw to arrive on a low-key day.''  throw in extras  outer banks homeowners are throwing in free kayak rentals, fishing-pier passes and even charter fishing cruises to attract renters. other vacation homeowners are offering tickets to local cultural activities.  ''we do some packaging with local retailers and theaters,'' said ms. regan of maine's seaside vacation rentals. ''if you look at two houses that are similar and have the same price, but one provides two tickets to the summer playhouse, a renter might decide to take that one.''  