it has unraveled so quickly   a painful measure of just how much iraq has changed in the four years since i started coming here is contained in my cellphone. many numbers in the address book are for iraqis who have either fled the country or been killed. one of the first sunni politicians: gunned down. a shiite baker: missing. a sunni family: moved to syria.  i first came to iraq in april 2003, at the end of the looting several weeks after the american invasion. in all, i have spent 22 months here, time enough for the place, its people and their ever-evolving tragedy to fix itself firmly in my heart.  now, as i am leaving iraq, a new american plan is unfolding in the capital. it feels as if we have come back to the beginning. boots are on the ground again. boxy humvees move in the streets. baghdad fell in 2003 and we are still trying to pick it back up. but iraq is a different country now.  the moderates are mostly gone. my phone includes at least a dozen entries for middle-class families who have given up and moved away. they were supposed to build democracy here. instead they work odd jobs in syria and jordan. even the moderate political leaders have left. i have three numbers for adnan pachachi, the distinguished iraqi statesman; none have iraqi country codes.  neighborhoods i used to visit a year ago with my armed guards and my black abaya are off limits. most were sunni and had been merely dangerous. now they are dead. a neighborhood that used to be baghdad's upper east side has the dilapidated, broken feel of a city just hit by a hurricane.  the iraqi government and the political process, which seemed to have great promise a year ago, have soured. deeply damaged from years of abuse under saddam hussein, the shiites who run the government have themselves turned into abusers.  never having covered a civil war before, i learned about it together with my iraqi friends. it is a bit like watching a slow-motion train wreck. broken bodies fly past. faces freeze in one's memory in the moments before impact. passengers grab handles and doorframes that simply tear off or uselessly collapse.  i learned how much violence changes people, and how trust is chipped away, leaving society a thin layer of moth-eaten fabric that tears easily. it has unraveled so quickly. a year ago, my interviews were peppered with phrases like ''iraqis are all brothers.'' the subjects would get angry when you asked their sect. now some of them introduce themselves that way.  i met raad jassim, a 38-year-old shiite refugee, in a largely empty house, recently owned by sunnis, where he now lives in western baghdad. he moved there in the fall, after sunni militants killed his brother and his nephew and confiscated his large chicken farm north of baghdad. he had lived with sunnis his whole life, but after what happened, a hatred spread through him like a disease.  ''the word sunni, it hurts me,'' he said, sitting on the floor in a bare room, his 7-year-old boy on his lap. ''all that i have lost came from this word. i try to avoid mixing with them.''  ''a volcano of revenge'' has built up inside him, he said. ''i want to rip them up with my teeth.''  in another measure of just how much things have changed, mr. jassim's shiite neighborhood is relatively safe. the area is now largely free of sunnis, after shiite militias swept it last year, and it runs smoothly on a complex network of relationships among the local militias, the police and a powerful local council. his street is dotted with fruit stands. boys in uniforms roughhouse. men sit in teahouses sipping from tiny glass cups.  just to the south, the sunni neighborhood of dawoodi is ghostly at almost any time of day. wide boulevards trimmed with palm trees used to connect luxury homes. now giant piles of trash go uncollected in the median.  a serious problem is dead bodies. they began to appear several times a week last summer on the railroad tracks that run through the neighborhood. but when residents call the police to pick up the bodies, they do not come. the police are shiite and afraid of the area.  ''entering a sunni area for them is a risk,'' said yasir, a 40-year-old sunni whose house is close to the dumping ground.  a few weeks ago, a woman's body appeared. it was raining. yasir said he covered her with blankets and called the police. a day later the police arrived. they peeked under the waterlogged blanket and drove away. it was another day before they collected the body. they took it at night, turning off their headlights and inching toward the area like thieves.  for those eager to write off iraq as lost, one fact bears remembering. a great many shiites and kurds, who together make up 80 percent of the population, will tell you that in spite of all the mistakes the americans have made here, the single act of removing saddam hussein was worth it. and the new american plan, despite all the obstacles, may have a chance to work. with an iraqi colleague, i have been studying a neighborhood in northern baghdad that has become a dumping ground for bodies. there, after american troops conducted sweeps, the number of corpses dropped by a third in september. the new plan is built around that kind of tactic. but the odds are stacked against the corps of bright young officers charged with making the plan work, particularly because their iraqi partner -- the government of prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki -- seems to be on an entirely different page. when american officials were debating whether to send more troops in december, i went to see an iraqi government official. the prospect of more troops infuriated him. more americans would simply prolong the war, he said.  ''if you don't allow the minority to lose, you will carry on forever,'' he said.  the remarks struck me as a powerful insight into the shiites' thinking. abused under mr. hussein, they still act like an oppressed class. that means iraqis are looking into a future of war, at least in the near term. as one young shiite in sadr city said to me: ''this just has to burn itself out.''  hazim al-aaraji, a disciple of the renegade shiite cleric moktada al-sadr, understands this. a cleric himself, he is looking for foot soldiers for the war. on a warm october afternoon, as he bustled around his mosque in western baghdad, he said the ideal disciples would have ''an empty mind,'' and a weapon. surprised by the word choice, an iraqi friend i was with stopped him, to clarify his intent. once again, he used the word ''empty.''  the frank remark spoke of a new power balance, in which radicals rule and moderates have no voice. for many families i have become attached to here, the country is no longer recognizable.  i met haifa and her husband, hassan, both teachers, in a driveway in western baghdad. they had just found the body of their 12-year-old son, who had been kidnapped and brutally killed, and were frantic with grief. they finally decided to leave iraq, but its violence tormented them to the end. they paid a man to drive them to jordan, but he was working with sunni militants in western iraq, and pointed out hassan, a shiite, to a sunni gang that stopped the car. over the next several hours, haifa waved a tiny koran at men in masks, pleading for her husband's release, her two remaining children in tow.  hassan, meanwhile, knelt in a small room, his hands behind his back. his captors shot a man next to him in the neck. haifa, a sunni, eventually prevailed on them to let him go. the family returned to baghdad, then borrowed money to fly to jordan.  now they live there, in a tiny basement apartment without windows in a white stone housing project on the side of a hill. like many iraqis there, they live in hiding. residency permits cost $100,000, far beyond their means. hassan cannot work, nor even risk leaving the house during the day for fear the jordanian police will deport him.  he tries not to talk to people, afraid someone will recognize his iraqi accent. he doesn't bargain in the vegetable market. he accepts mean remarks by jordanian cabdrivers wordlessly.  most of all, he wants to go home. ''but death is waiting for us there,'' he tells me. ''we are homeless. please help us.''  the world: eyewitness  correction:  february 4, 2007, sunday  a picture caption last week with an article about a reporter's experience covering iraq misstated the given name of the photographer in the credit. he is johan spanner, not john.  