weighing the consequences of telling others the truth   there is riveting political theater taking place on the sixth floor of the e. barrett prettyman federal courthouse. that is where i. lewis libby jr. is being tried.  but on thursday something more important was happening down the hall. in an argument in a grand ceremonial courtroom, nine judges were trying to figure out how to answer one of the great open questions in american constitutional law, which seems to be popping up all over: when is it all right to punish people for telling the truth about matters of public concern?  in threatening to prosecute reporters for publishing articles about surveillance programs and secret prisons, and in actually prosecuting two lobbyists for passing along information a government official had leaked to them, the bush administration says the first amendment offers no protection to people who did nothing beyond learning things and talking about them.  the case argued thursday, before the united states court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit, presents the same issue. it arises from a decade-long death match between two congressmen, but it started with something mundane.  john and alice martin, a florida couple, were fooling around with a police scanner on their way to do some christmas shopping in 1996. they picked up a conversation involving newt gingrich, then the speaker of the house, who was strategizing with several colleagues about how to handle his ethics troubles. the martins recorded the call.  that was a crime, but a minor one. in the end, they paid fines of $500.  the couple gave the tape to representative jim mcdermott, democrat of washington. he passed it along to the new york times, which published a front-page article about the call.  representative john a. boehner of ohio, now the house republican leader, was also on the call. he sued mr. mcdermott under the federal wiretapping law for disclosing the tape. the law forbids the interception of phone calls and other communications. but it also bars anyone aware of the interception from divulging what was said, even if a complete stranger did the wiretapping. in 2001, though, the supreme court ruled that the disclosure part of the law was unconstitutional, at least when the person doing the disclosing was not involved in the eavesdropping and the information was of public importance.  nonetheless, in march, a divided three-judge panel of the appeals court ruled against mr. mcdermott, upholding a $60,000 damage award and exposing him to a claim for mr. boehner's lawyers' fees of more than $500,000.  in dissent, judge david b. sentelle said the logic of the decision was ''fraught with danger'' and could imperil the first amendment rights of journalists and anyone else who learned about information from an illegal wiretap. (many news organizations, including the times, have filed briefs supporting mr. mcdermott, and i worked on some of them when i practiced law.)  the full court agreed to rehear the case. at thursday's argument, the judges seemed to be trying to find a way to meet judge sentelle's objection, to punish mr. mcdermott without doing violence to the first amendment. they were trying to find a way to call him a leaker and not the recipient of a leak, and they hit upon a wrinkle.  it has always been the case that you can give up your first amendment rights by agreement -- by taking a job, for instance, that requires confidentiality. mr. mcdermott was the senior democrat on the house ethics committee when he received the tape. last month, the committee said he had violated the spirit of its rules in disclosing the tape, though it imposed no punishment.  that wrinkle may allow the court to duck the larger first amendment issue, punishing the congressman for violating his committee responsibilities while leaving the rights of journalists and other civilians unharmed.  at the libby trial a few steps away, the lawyers were arguing about the legibility of photocopies. when that trial is over, we will have learned some things about our leaders and some things about their interactions with the press, but it will be in the nature of gossip. the question posed in mr. mcdermott's case is more vital.  michael a. carvin, who represents mr. boehner, told me, in a mild and convivial tone, that ''what the new york times did, in my personal opinion, was despicable.'' he added, ''you don't have a right to publish other people's stolen speech.''  statements like that are in the air these days -- at congressional hearings, in courtrooms, in opinion magazines.  but what mr. carvin is saying has profound consequences. the information on the martins' tape was true. mr. mcdermott and the times were not involved in making the tape. and what was on it helped voters assess the character and conduct of mr. gingrich, who was at the time third in line for the presidency.  sidebar  