12 new yorkers among finalists for national science prize   as a first grader, kathryn blair friedman was so allergic to wheat, peanuts and sesame that she had to settle for carrots whenever her schoolmates celebrated class birthdays with cupcakes.  kathryn, who goes by katie, now 18 and a high school senior, has parlayed those memories of confectionary deprivation into a science project that yesterday earned her a place among 40 finalists in the intel science talent search, the nation's premier high school science contest.  the finalists, selected from 1,705 entrants, will be formally announced today. in march, they will travel to washington, where they will compete for $530,000 in scholarships. the top winner will receive a $100,000 scholarship.  for the first time since the competition began in 1942, this year there was an equal number of female and male finalists, which the chairman of intel, craig r. barrett, described in a statement as ''heartening.''  twelve of this year's finalists are from new york state, including six from long island. one finalist attends a new york city public school: hermain shahid suhail khan, a senior at staten island technical high school.  hermain, 17, found a way to date fossilized crocodile teeth using electron spin resonance techniques. among his other accomplishments: he wrote a play about his immigrant mother's struggle to raise five children that was performed off broadway and founded a nonprofit group that raised $6,000 for earthquake relief in his native pakistan. to unwind, he jogs and plays the violin.  he said he was ''jumping for joy'' after being named a finalist but seemed surprised to be the only one from a city public school.  ''i think it really sends a message out to the administration in the department of education that we need to give more funding for the sciences,'' he said.  two long island finalists focused on education topics.  natalie avella cameron, 17, of westbury, studied how students' seating positions and teachers' tendencies to walk around the classroom affected student achievement and motivation.  kaitlin duncan, 17, of north massapequa, drew her inspiration from the defeat of the budget for her local school district in the spring of 2005.  ''it brought a lot of passion to our community, and i wanted to see how we could identify where those passions came from,'' she said.  kaitlin studied the effects of demographic variables, like age, education level and number of children, on residents' likeliness to approve school district budgets in different situations. one of her findings was that people were particularly likely to support a school budget in a district where test scores were high. she also found that people with higher levels of education were most likely to support school budgets over all.  katie friedman, a senior at the chapin school on the upper east side, chose her topic after noticing how many people seemed to be allergic to both peanuts and sesame. she outgrew her peanut allergy but is still so allergic to sesame that she has not eaten any type of bagel in six or seven years.  she consulted with her allergist, who welcomed her to use his lab at mount sinai hospital. over the past year, katie examined blood samples of three groups of people -- those allergic only to peanuts, those allergic only to sesame, and those allergic to both -- to determine the relationship between peanut and sesame allergies.  she identified two laboratory blood tests that she believed could accurately diagnose peanut allergies, potentially freeing patients from the need to confirm their allergy by eating peanuts in a doctor's presence.  ''it took a long time and was very uncomfortable,'' katie recalled of her own experience with that ordeal.  katie, a tournament-level tennis player, plans to attend williams college. she wants to be a doctor and may specialize in allergies, immunology or infectious diseases.  other finalists from new york are: sarah dana bayefsky-anand, abraham joshua heschel school, manhattan; oren brecher, suffern high school; jimmy hom, syosset high school; daniel scott katz, hebrew academy of the five towns and rockaway, lawrence; rebecca lynn kaufman, croton-harmon high school, croton-on-hudson; abhinav rohatgi, garden city high school; catherine schlingheyde, oyster bay high school; and rui wang, fairport high school.  