fed has yet to set target on inflation   when ben s. bernanke took over as chairman of the federal reserve board one year ago this week, he brought with him a long-held conviction that the central bank should be more explicit about its goals and less personalized than it had been under alan greenspan.  yet as mr. bernanke celebrates his first anniversary on the job, the fed is still far away from acting on his major proposal of setting an explicit target for inflation.  mr. bernanke has long argued that publicly committing the central bank to an inflation target -- probably 1 to 2 percent a year -- would make its policy more transparent and open to the public. its decisions would be easier for investors to anticipate, he argued, and the public might have greater confidence that inflation would indeed remain low.  it is an idea that mr. greenspan staunchly opposed, arguing that it would bind the fed to rigid rules and deprive it of crucial flexibility in reacting to economic surprises.  but even though a majority of those on the fed board agree with mr. bernanke in principle, officials have, if anything, become more cautious over the last year about making a change.  fed officials caution that they have to wrestle with a thicket of intermediate issues before making a change. on tuesday, policy makers gather for the start of a two-day meeting at which they will discuss one possible intermediate step: telling the public more about the fed's economic forecasts.  but even that decision may be months away, and fed officials appear even less urgent about committing themselves in public to a specific goal for inflation.  ''there's just not a lot of enthusiasm for moving in any of these directions,'' said laurence meyer, a former fed governor and a forecaster at macroeconomic advisers. ''nobody thought this was such an important issue.''  outside experts say the caution stems from deeper concerns: a reluctance to change a practice that appears to be working well already; a fear among some that the fed may become trapped by its own promises; and perhaps a worry about opposition from democratic lawmakers, who now control congress and who have publicly fretted that the fed will focus on inflation while ignoring unemployment.  as a practical matter, mr. bernanke will reach his first anniversary with the economy heading toward the fed's goal of a ''soft landing'' -- a modest slowdown in economic growth and a slight ebb in inflation, yet with strong wage increases and continued low unemployment.  the fed is all but certain to leave its benchmark overnight interest rate unchanged at 5.25 percent, and to signal once again that it remains slightly more worried about inflation than slower economic growth. in short, the fed will continue its ''pause'' in raising rates and is unlikely to reduce rates later this year.  the outlook for mr. bernanke's goal of setting inflation targets is more uncertain. a majority of fed governors and presidents of the federal reserve's district banks support the idea as an important move toward greater openness.  indeed, the federal reserve board now includes frederic s. mishkin, one of mr. bernanke's co-authors on a book in 1999 that championed inflation targeting. they are joined in the fed's policy making by a raft of other influential officials who also support setting inflation targets: william poole, president of the st. louis fed; janet yellen, president of the san francisco fed; and jeffrey m. lacker, president of the richmond fed.  the leading opponent of inflation targeting is donald l. kohn, the fed's highly respected vice chairman. timothy f. geithner, president of the new york fed, is also considered a skeptic.  mr. bernanke has taken pains to build a consensus before making any changes, and has gone so far as to put mr. kohn in charge of a special committee to review ''communication issues,'' including the prospects for inflation targets.  but even many longtime supporters of the idea predict that the fed is unlikely to change gears this year.  ''the fed has a somewhat odd problem in that things are going so well right now, and it's hard to push for change when things are going well,'' said mark gertler, an economics professor at new york university who has worked with mr. bernanke on many academic projects. ''in the case of the united states, it's hard to argue that monetary policy would have performed better if we had had inflation targets.''  adam s. posen, who was a co-author with mr. bernanke and mr. mishkin on their book about inflation targeting, said mr. bernanke would need at least a year to build consensus.  ''bernanke has to build three consensuses at once,'' said mr. posen, a senior fellow at the peterson institute for international economics. in addition to persuading the fed's other governors, mr. posen said, mr. bernanke must also build support from the central bank's influential staff and with congress.  it remains unclear whether the fed needs legislation from congress to adopt explicit inflation targets. but many democrats have been quick to criticize the central bank for not focusing enough attention on wages and job creation.  indeed, the new chairman of the house financial services committee is representative barney frank of massachusetts, who often challenged mr. greenspan about rising income inequality and stubbornly high unemployment.  mr. bernanke is set to testify about the economic outlook before mr. frank's committee on feb. 15. in an indication that mr. bernanke will face a more combative political environment than he did last year, aides to mr. frank said he was planning a second hearing to get contrasting views from economists and people with ''other real world experience.''  but perhaps the biggest reason for the slow movement is that mr. bernanke's approach may not end up being much different from mr. greenspan's.  in recent years, fed officials under mr. greenspan made it clear they had an informal target or ''comfort zone'' on inflation. for many, that zone was a ''core'' inflation rate -- excluding volatile prices for food and energy -- of 1 to 2 percent a year.  ''if we asked 10 people who follow what the fed does, we all know what the fed's comfort zone is,'' said john makin, an economist at the american enterprise institute.  even if the fed were to set a public target for inflation, mr. bernanke and other supporters have not said how quickly the fed would need to meet the target.  mr. bernanke and others now stress that the fed will not react mechanically if inflation climbs above the target, as it has over the last year. mr. bernanke has argued for defining an ''optimal long-run inflation rate'' and originally suggested the fed should aim to hit that target within three years.  but some of mr. bernanke's allies now contend that there should be no specific time frame at all.  