bryant barred for one game after hard hit   in slow motion on computer screens around the country, especially in the n.b.a. offices, flashed the supposed los angeles crime scene from last weekend.  kobe bryant, draped by two defenders, was trying to break a tied score with 2.7 seconds left in regulation for the lakers against san antonio on sunday. but as bryant shot a jumper, the spurs' manu ginóbili blocked him from behind. bryant flailed his arm backward, hoping to draw a foul but instead drawing blood from ginóbili's nose.  no foul was called at the time. that came yesterday with a reciprocal force.  even though bryant told n.b.a. officials monday in a telephone conversation that he had hit ginóbili unintentionally, the national basketball association suspended him yesterday for one game without pay because it was ''an unnatural basketball act'' that was made more serious because it happened above the shoulders. the ban cost bryant about $161,000 in salary and forced him to sit out the lakers' 99-94 loss to the knicks last night at madison square garden.  when the players union's appeal for an immediate hearing was denied, and bryant was made to stay at the team hotel for the game, lakers coach phil jackson said he was ''astonished'' at the league's swift justice.  ''it's a unilateral decision,'' jackson said. ''baseball has all the appeals that they go through. basketball, we just have the dictation come to us, and we submit. this is one of those things we're questioning why.''  the surprise should not be total, however. the n.b.a. has shown little tolerance this season for any action that is illegal and overtly ugly, especially with regard to players' making contact above the shoulders.  beyond the knicks-nuggets brawl last month, which drew lengthy suspensions for the primary players, carmelo anthony and nate robinson, five players have received one-game suspensions this month for overly aggressive physical acts.  minnesota's kevin garnett, golden state's baron davis, chicago's andres nocioni and phoenix's raja bell have all been suspended.  bell was also suspended one game for clotheslining bryant in game 5 of the first round of the western conference playoffs last season. bryant drew a two-game suspension last season for elbowing mike miller of the grizzlies in the throat.  bryant was not allowed to be at the arena last night to hear the crowd boo when his suspension was announced. but he was visibly upset at the morning shoot-around, 45 minutes after jackson told him the news.  ''it's a basketball game; you unintentionally catch people with elbows every once in a while,'' bryant said at the shoot-around. ''i'm blown away by it, it makes no sense.''  bryant added: ''i guess they're just trying to crack down, but to crack down on something that's unintentional, what's it going to lead to now? you go in there, you take an offensive foul, or a charge, you unintentionally knee somebody as you're taking a charge, a player gets hurt, and you get suspended? i don't get it.''  jackson said the decision was based not on basketball, but on ''just how it looks and that's the problem.''  billy hunter, the union chief executive, was also frustrated.  ''when the game is being called so closely,'' hunter said yesterday, ''they're trying to sterilize it.''  the league conducted an investigation and concluded that bryant's action was ''not inadvertent,'' first watching the telecast live, then reviewing video and interviewing bryant and ginóbili. replays also showed ginóbili being treated for a bloody nose on the bench.  stu jackson, the league's vice president in charge of discipline, said that rather than mandate the proper image on the court, the ruling was about players' safety.  ''there was contact made with ginóbili above the shoulders,'' jackson said. ''this particular action by kobe was an unnatural basketball act. after he followed through with a shot, he drove a stiff arm backwards in a hard motion and struck ginóbili in the head.''  although referees are reluctant to make game-deciding calls anyway, they did miss what should have been called a foul, jackson said, because ''this blow was so swift in real time.''  bryant said he considered it physical basketball. phil jackson agreed.  ''there was a shot, a block, two guys on him; he's trying to draw contact so he can get to the line at the end of the game if he can't get the shot off,'' jackson said before last night's game. ''there are so many things that go into it. to draw a conclusion like that lets me think a nonbasketball player probably made the decision on this particular act.''  hunter said that he spoke with ginóbili yesterday. ''he couldn't say it was intentional,'' hunter said. ''he has no history with kobe.''  stu jackson said the n.b.a. did not accept the union's appeal because ''this is not the process we use in the n.b.a.''  ''in theory, given the fact that the lakers were in new york,'' jackson said, ''we could have heard an appeal, but we never have. he does have the right to appeal at a later date.''  by then, his date at the garden will be forgotten.  pro basketball  