the human rights of a disabled child   to the editor:  re ''a convenient truth'' (op-ed, jan. 26):  our reaction to ashley's treatment is moral intuition telling us that it's wrong. we should not, as peter singer does, use reason to gloss over that insight and rationalize that it's justified. the parents wanted to make ashley's body continue to match her mental age. but that treats her as an object to be ''designed,'' not as a natural person to be respected whatever her state.  this is where human dignity comes in. the two radically opposed versions are intrinsic human dignity (we have dignity just because we are human); and extrinsic human dignity (peter singer's version), dignity conferred on us by others. ashley ''is precious not so much for what she is, but because her parents and siblings love her and care about her.''  extrinsic human dignity says that below a certain level of mental or physical functioning, we don't merit dignity and its protections.  a society's ''ethical tone'' is set not by how it treats its most powerful citizens, but by how it treats its weakest and most vulnerable -- its ashleys.  margaret a. somerville  montreal, jan. 30, 2007  the writer is founding director of the center for medicine, ethics and law at mcgill university.  to the editor:  peter singer, a highly controversial ethicist, argues for the ''best interest'' principle and against the notion that ashley has dignity.  ''benevolence,'' ''best intentions'' and ''for their own good'' have often had disastrous consequences for people with disabilities.  for decades, parents, families and disability advocates have been fighting for the principle that personal and physical autonomy of all people with disabilities is sacrosanct and for community-based services for children and adults. their advocacy led to enactment of laws that establish rights to full personhood for people with disabilities.  social service and health care systems should be strengthened so that people can receive help at home and appropriate equipment. to the extent that it remains difficult to provide community services for individuals and families, then it is all our duty to change the system so that it works rather than to modify people so that they will more easily ''fit'' a flawed system.  the united nations recently adopted the convention on the protection and promotion of the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities. article 17 reads in part, ''every person with disabilities has a right to respect for his or her physical and mental integrity on an equal basis with others.''  ashley has been denied her basic human rights through draconian interventions to her person.  julia epstein  berkeley, calif., jan. 26, 2007  the writer is director of communications, disability rights education and defense fund.  