in the courtyard of a killer, conclusions are drawn   on the sidewalk outside the stapleton houses on staten island, the dreary complex where ronell wilson once lived, people talked about the sentence that was handed up yesterday without mentioning the footnote.  the footnote was that mr. wilson had become the first person sentenced to death in a federal case in new york since the 1950s. but what people talked about yesterday was whether mr. wilson, 24, deserved to die for shooting two undercover detectives in the head in 2003.  ''i don't think they should give him the death penalty,'' said eugene jack, 31. ''there have been a lot of people doing worse things.''  he was walking with margaret mitchell, 35, who said, ''a lot of cops have killed people.''  mr. jack picked up the phrase where she had ended it: ''and they're not going to jail, let alone getting a death sentence. if anything, leave him in jail for the rest of his life.''  like many others in the courtyards of staten island's largest public housing project, they mentioned people who died at the hands of the police, including amadou diallo and sean bell, or were injured, like abner louima. but in brooklyn, where mr. wilson was tried and convicted, others who had watched the case closely hailed the sentence and praised the jury for arriving at it. some even expressed surprise.  ''if i said to you that i expected this decision, i wouldn't be truthful,'' michael j. palladino, the president of the detectives endowment association, said. but he added that the case had ''screamed out'' for the death penalty.  jeffrey ward, a narcotics detective assigned to the staten island district attorney's office, said he had always believed the jury would sentence mr. wilson to die.  ''a lot of people said it probably won't happen,'' said detective ward, who was on the scene the night of the killings. ''i said if there is a case for it to happen, this case had all the elements.''  rose nemorin, the widow of one of the slain detectives, james v. nemorin, voiced thanks to the jury and the prosecution. maryann andrews, the widow of detective rodney j. andrews, detective nemorin's partner, said, ''all i can say is that my prayers have been answered.''  detective nemorin's sister, marie-jean, said she believed the sentence was appropriate. ''me personally, i will always think that anything lower than the death penalty will be a victory for the criminal,'' she said.  roslynn r. mauskopf, the united states attorney in brooklyn, whose prosecutors handled the case, said the sentence ''speaks to the sacrifice of every n.y.p.d. cop who puts his or her life on the line every single day to keep all of us safe.''  the police department issued a statement quoting the commissioner, raymond w. kelly, as saying, ''i want to commend the jury for their difficult and courageous work.''  and, in a pizza parlor in mr. wilson's neighborhood, there were those who agreed. ''he didn't give the cops a chance, so he shouldn't have a chance, either,'' said maria collazo, 54, a deliverer. ''it hurts me every time i see those officers' faces on tv, knowing they had little children and families.''  outside, others reached the same conclusion. ''if you kill, you got to die, too,'' said pedro veles, 50. ''we got to do something about the crime. we're supposed to be brothers. we are not supposed to be killing each other.''  but inside the local community center, where a dance class was going on while card players checked their hands and pool players lined up their shots, krystal cottrell said she had hoped the jury would give mr. wilson life in prison.  ''yes,'' said ms. cottrell, 27, ''he did kill two people, but sticking a needle in his arm won't help the wives of those officers sleep better at night.''  then she flipped open her cellphone. ''they're going to kill him,'' she said into the mouthpiece.  