lysacek dazzles his way to the men's title   evan lysacek charged into his long program at the united states figure skating championships, landed the first quad jump of his career to go with eight triple jumps and brought the spokane arena crowd to a thunderous celebration in winning his first national title saturday night.  the quad toe loop came on lysacek's first jump, which he followed in combination with a triple toe loop, and his spirits lifted with each successive jump. by the end, the crowd was clapping and yelling to his music, from the opera carmen, and lysacek fell to his knees when it was over.  his performance was so spectacular, he beat second-place finisher ryan bradley by more than 19 points and three-time national champion johnny weir by 35 points.  "my feeling is, you don't dethrone a leader in this sport and johnny weir was on top of men's figure skating for quite some time by skating hesitant," lysacek said. "you go out and fight with passion and just go gangbusters and if i fell on my butt three times, i was going to do it going for the gold."  weir attempted a quad jump, which he had never landed in competition, but two-footed the landing. he also fell on a triple loop. he had the misfortune of having to skate immediately after lysacek, so weir skated onto the ice littered with flowers and stuffed animals in front of a crowd still howling for lysacek.  "i knew how well evan must have skated because of the reaction he had and the scores he had and it was very, very difficult to go out after that," weir said.  lysacek, bradley and weir will represent the united states at the world championships in tokyo in march.  initially, weir did not take his dethroning easily. he sobbed while waiting for his marks, with his coach priscilla hill trying to comfort him. but later, weir took his defeat graciously.  "i'm proud that our u.s. champion skated clean," weir said. "i know how well i've skated the past three years and i did not want to be beat by something that was sub-par. i'm glad for his first national title that he was able to do the skate of his life because that's how i remember my first national title. just as long as he doesn't get used to being national champion."  for bradley, the second-place finish was the breakthrough he has been waiting for. he did not attempt a quad, but skated a clean, exuberant program. when he was finished, he came back on the ice and did a back flip as the crowd celebrated his performance.  "i was just so happy," bradley said. "this was everything i was hoping to do all season long. i just feel so good to have everyone behind me. i can't really explain it."  bradley, 23, said he nearly quit the sport several years ago when he began college at the university of colorado at colorado springs. he stayed in, but last year he finished eighth in the nationals and completely revamped his skating for this season.  but no one has come further than lysacek, who is 21. he has finished third in the past two world championships, but without a quad jump in his program he was not considered a threat to skaters like evgeni plushenko of russia or stephane lambiel of switzerland. but neither of those skaters will be at the world championships this year.  to get to worlds, though, lysacek felt like he needed to conquer nationals and become the top american skater.  and yet, his coach, frank carroll, constantly counsels him against thinking about winning.  "it's so like a curse to think about placement," lysacek said. "not only is it totally out of your control, but no matter how well you do, it's still not guaranteed. you have to tell yourself, 'whatever. i've trained for this. i can do this.' "  but when all the training and preparation turned into that victory at last, lysacek could not control the feeling. he skidded across the ice on his knees when his music ended, overwhelmed by the moment.  "it's hard to put into words how much i wanted to come in here and claim this title," he said.  in the end, he did not need words. the roar said it all.  u.s. figure skating championships  