for ruland, reading is therapeutic   jeff ruland gave his winless basketball team the day off yesterday. but things got worse anyway.  while the iona players were in class, or whatever they did to take their minds off 21 straight losses, they had yet another setback: anthony bruin, a senior who was playing 34.2 minutes a game, was declared out for three to six weeks with a badly sprained ankle.  ruland got the news coming out of a bookstore, where he had purchased three books for a long wintry evening when nobody could hang another loss on his team.  for the record, the books were: ''the mammoth book of true crime,'' by colin wilson, ''pistol: the life of pete maravich,'' by mark kriegel, and ''the secret life of houdini: the making of america's first superhero,'' by william kalush and larry sloman.  ''i might make myself disappear,'' ruland said, leaning toward the houdini book. ruland is not going anywhere. he left the college in new rochelle, n.y., once in his life, under unpleasant circumstances, and now he is back, seriously back.  in a profession where coaches flit around for the slightest upgrade, like passengers frantically playing musical chairs in a half-empty airplane, ruland has hunkered his large frame back at his alma mater. he has lived through controversy and he can handle coaching the only division i men's team that has not won a game this season. only two have gone through a season without winning -- prairie view in 1995 and savannah state in 2005.  ruland can take the longer view. he is 6 feet 10 inches and was an all-star in the national basketball association. as a coach at his old college, he has won the metro atlantic athletic conference tournament three times in eight years. he can afford to tell his players that every morning he wakes up in stamford, conn., the sun is glittering on long island sound.  ''life could be worse,'' ruland said in a telephone conversation, relating the message he tries to send to his squad, which has been decimated by graduation, ineligibility and injuries.  ''i signed with an agent and left school after my junior year,'' he said, talking about low points. ''i woke up in the hospital at the age of 28 and had doctors tell me my career was over. my 22-year marriage fell apart, but my former wife and i are friends, and we have three beautiful daughters.''  not everybody gets a chance to go home the way ruland has done. he first went to iona under the spell of the charismatic jim valvano, who pointed the entire 1979-80 season toward the 9 p.m. game at madison square garden against louisville, the ultimate national champion, and pulled off the upset, 77-60.  but there were short cuts, little perks and favors against college rules, as valvano went on his merry way toward being jimmy v, the american original who would win the 1983 n.c.a.a. championship at north carolina state. ruland learned the lessons well, signing with an agent, illegally, and being forced to leave iona before his senior season, playing in barcelona, spain, for a year before joining the n.b.a.  it is well known that ruland felt abandoned by valvano. they did not speak in the years before valvano died of cancer in 1993, at age 47.  ''i pass on stories about him,'' ruland said affectionately yesterday. ''he had a lot of redeeming qualities.''  the pain went deep enough that it seemed improbable ruland would ever go back to iona, but after his knee fell apart quickly with washington, he returned as an assistant in 1995 and became the head coach three years later. lacking 70 credits, he earned his degree at iona in classes with students 10 years younger who knew quite well who that tall, older man was.  ''i didn't go to class because my coach didn't tell me to,'' ruland said of his playing days. ''that's what i tell my players: 'do as i say, not as i did.' ''  he views this season as a survivor. he knew he was in trouble this season because he lost four players to graduation, but he has lost four other players, and will start five freshmen at siena tomorrow.  ruland has seen inexperience lose games this season, including the night one player did not defend in the corner with a 3-point lead. ruland said he asked his player, ''just for my own sanity, what were you thinking?'' the young player said he did not believe his man could make a 3-pointer to send the game into overtime, which, of course, he did.  ''feeling sorry won't do any good,'' ruland said.  through it all, the iona fans have remained positive, reminding ruland why he took a comfortable eight-year contract in 1999 and has turned down three lucrative offers to leave.  ''no regrets,'' ruland said, going home with three books to read and no game to be played.  sports of the times e-mail: geovec@nytimes.com  