harrison opens up on the field, not off it   close to the end of the hour, marvin harrison was perched on the edge of his seat, asking all the questions.  ''that it? that it?'' he said, one leg already dangling near the edge of his podium.  harrison is the anti-terrell owens, a gifted wide receiver who has never met a microphone he wanted to stand in front of. that has made harrison an n.f.l. anomaly, an anonymous superstar in his 11th season who rarely shows up in the highlight reel, his exploits reduced by his nonchalance. the first time many fans will hear harrison's voice may be when he makes his speech at his near-certain hall of fame induction five years after he retires.  but super bowl media day demanded harrison's presence tuesday, so the famously nontalkative harrison planted himself somewhat uneasily in front of waves of reporters who were trying desperately to plumb the depths of his inscrutability. ''i don't mind doing interviews, especially when there is something good to talk about,'' harrison said at the beginning of his hour. ''i don't know why i'm not flashy. the opportunity is to be winning every week, not to be part of hollywood.''  harrison is an enigma even in his own locker room. his relationship with most of his teammates is striking, friendly, yet slightly removed. he does not interact with many of them for long, and even he and quarterback peyton manning, who share an obvious chemistry on the field -- in nine seasons together, they have combined for 106 touchdowns, 878 completions and 11,908 yards, all n.f.l. records for a quarterback-receiver tandem -- are rarely spotted talking.  manning, who joined the colts in 1998, said he did not really get to know harrison until he visited him for two days in philadelphia in 2001 when the 76ers were in the n.b.a. finals.  ''there's a marvin in philly and a marvin in indianapolis,'' manning said. ''he doesn't open up to a lot of people. i think the reason he doesn't show a lot of emotion is that he feels like that's what people expect him to do. he said the games he's playing for free. he gets paid to practice. how many other marquee n.f.l. receivers have that kind of attitude?''  bob casullo, who recruited harrison to syracuse, saw it in the slight, silent high school receiver from philadelphia. casullo watched harrison play for roman catholic high school in the catholic league championship game during his junior year. casullo remembers harrison catching a touchdown pass, running for another and intercepting a pass as a defensive back.  his reaction then was what it would be now: nothing.  casullo made an appeal to harrison's distaste for promotion. he told harrison he would call him once a week, at the same time every week, and that would be the only time harrison would have to talk to him. it was a relief from the relentless telephone calls during recruiting season, and it appealed to harrison's personality.  ''you hear about opposites,'' said casullo, who is now the tight ends coach for the tampa bay buccaneers. ''the terrell owenses, the randy mosses. he's very respectful of the other person's talent. he would never do what reggie bush did to urlacher, not out of fear, but because he respects how hard urlacher plays. he knows he's good, but he doesn't need to tell everyone. he's just going to let recognition come as it is.''  inevitably, it does. casullo was driving to roman catholic high one afternoon when he got stuck in heavy traffic on the highway that runs near the school. panicked that he would miss his chance to visit with harrison, he asked a nearby police officer if there was an accident. no, he was told, just a race between two kids at the school.  that race has added to harrison's reputation, a footrace against the fastest kid in the school, a sprinter who, the story goes, was the 100-meter state champion. the question had been asked at the small all-boys school: who was faster, harrison or the champ? and so the entire school -- the faculty and the students -- flooded out in front of the school on broad and vine streets. harrison won, making him the unofficial fastest high schooler in pennsylvania.  at syracuse, harrison became one of the nation's top receivers. he was so good that when syracuse had a three-way quarterback competition one year (donovan mcnabb won the job), harrison took aside one of the losers, kevin johnson, and persuaded him not to transfer by promising he would teach him how to be a receiver. johnson was a second-round pick in 1999, and was most recently with the lions in 2005.  harrison, who ran a blistering 4.38 in the 40-yard dash as a senior, was the 19th overall pick in 1996, part of the greatest wide receiver class in history, led by the no. 1 pick, keyshawn johnson. ''if he were as outgoing and vocal as keyshawn, he'd be in every magazine and every front page,'' said gil brandt, the former vice president for player personnel of the dallas cowboys who is now an analyst for nfl.com.  harrison has turned out to be the best of that class and could someday challenge almost all of jerry rice's receiving records. his longevity is particularly remarkable in the era of big wide receivers and bruising safeties because harrison remains slight, listed at 6 feet and 185 pounds but perhaps a few pounds lighter. harrison has learned how to turn his body to avoid taking the brunt of hits, prolonging his career and his ability to run after the catch.  that was a gift that rice, who played 21 seasons, also had. casullo said he knew how long harrison planned to play, but would not say. on tuesday, harrison would only say that he had plenty of years left.  one thing is certain. whether he stays long enough to break rice's records, harrison will not follow rice on his second career path.  '' 'dancing with the stars' -- no way he would ever do that,'' casullo said. ''he might not even be in the audience to watch someone else do it.''  pro football  