today in business   investing in smoking -- the future of cigarettes appears to be brighter than ever. that is the message investors are sending as the altria group, the former philip morris, prepares to spin off its kraft foods division and become primarily a tobacco company. [page a1.]  mr. icahn comes calling -- carl c. icahn, the billionaire financier, said that he planned to seek a seat on the board of motorola, a move aimed at putting pressure on motorola to use its $10.5 billion cash pile toward a huge buyback of shares. [c1.]  the wii is the rage -- nintendo's wii, the innovative game console, has upset the order of the video game world by taking the lead in buzz and sales over another new console, the sony playstation 3. [c1.]  stumbling start -- the dip in sony's quarterly earnings underscores the shaky start of its long-awaited playstation 3 console. [c3.]  a calm introduction -- little hoopla visited the debut of microsoft's latest windows successor, vista, reflecting how much microsoft's influence in the computer technology marketplace has faded as the fortunes of rivals like google and apple have grown. [c3.]  raising pilots' retirement age -- the federal aviation administration will propose allowing airline pilots to fly until they are 65 years old, dropping a 47-year requirement that they retire at 60, said marion c. blakey, above, the agency's administrator. ''experience counts; it's an added margin of safety,'' she said. [c4.]  reconsidering biofuels -- leaders in many countries are rethinking the billions of dollars they have spent supporting ''eco-friendly'' fuels. [c1.]  a marketer's slam dunk -- the search for ingenious places to place advertising has discovered the support arms behind the backboards at the basketball courts of many leading college teams. advertising: stuart elliott [c10.]  fuel prices surge on forecasts -- oil prices settled just below $57 a barrel -- a gain of almost $3 -- and the price of natural gas soared more than 11 percent on expectations of more arctic weather in the united states. [c11.]  airlines report profit -- us airways and jetblue posted quarterly profits, in contrast to losses a year ago, as they took advantage of strong travel demand and higher ticket prices. but shares of both airlines dropped as crude oil prices rose, heralding higher costs for airlines. [c4.]  from arms to arts -- a real estate company transforming an abandoned warehouse at a navy shipyard in south carolina has found unexpected demand for artistic space in the huge complex. [c9.]  doubts edge economy's optimism -- consumers were feeling confident in january: the job market was chugging along and oil prices were down. but their optimism may dwindle on concerns that job and wage growth may slow. [c10.]  shares end the day higher -- stocks finished moderately higher in an uneven session as optimism about the economy helped investors overcome some of their apprehension about the federal reserve's decision on interest rates.[c11.]  putting up the barricades -- the paris city government has banned the swedish clothing giant h&m from opening a megastore on the champs-Élysées, the first step in its effort to stop the ''banalization'' of its famous avenue. [a1.]  bush's economic offensive -- president bush struck back against democratic criticism of his economic policies, in the first of back-to-back speeches promoting what the white house characterizes as 41 consecutive months of economic growth. [a14.]  a move to ensure safety -- the food and drug administration announced changes to ensure that marketed drugs are as safe as advertised. [a17.]  editor returns to the times -- dean baquet, who was fired in november as the editor of the los angeles times for refusing to cut jobs from his newsroom, is returning to the new york times as chief of its washington bureau. philip taubman, who has been washington bureau chief since mid-2003, will become an investigative reporter covering national security issues. [a13.]  online  business briefing  articles on these developments are at nytimes.com/business.  allstate, the insurance company, said that fourth-quarter profit rose 17 percent as calmer weather lowered claims. net income increased to $1.21 billion, or $1.93 a share, from $1.04 billion, or $1.59, a year earlier. (bloomberg news)  burger king holdings, the fast-food restaurant chain, reported a 41 percent increase in second-quarter profit. (ap)  michael j. kopper, a former enron corporation finance executive who ran illicit partnerships allowing the company to conceal debt off its balance sheets, started serving a three-year prison sentence in big spring, tex. (bloomberg news)  elkcorp, a maker of roofing and building products, said that it planned to accept a bid for the company from the building materials corporation of america and terminate a planned sale to the private equity firm carlyle group. (bloomberg news)  the owner of a hedge fund management firm was sentenced to three years in prison and three years of supervised release, federal prosecutors said. scott sacane, who owned and controlled durus capital management, pleaded guilty in december 2005 to violating the investment advisers act of 1940. (ap)  