federer makes it look easy, winning 10th grand slam   at least there is history for roger federer to play against, because for the moment, no man is much of a match.  fernando gonzález gave it all he had, or at least all he had left, in the final sunday at the australian open. with his forehand working and federer's slightly off target, the chilean even managed to serve for the opening set.  but despite all the latin emotion in motion, the coolest head in tennis once again ruled the evening as federer defended his title in melbourne and won his 10th grand slam singles title with a 7-6 (2), 6-4, 6-4 victory.  if federer's opponents hoped that all his success in the past three seasons would leave him feeling sated, his performance here in the year's first grand slam event was an unmistakable signal that he remains eager and excellent.  for the first time in his groundbreaking career, federer swept through a grand slam tournament without dropping a set, and the only set points he faced were the two he saved in the first set against gonzález.  it was a terrific set, full of bold shotmaking and lunging defense with gonzález's blocks of fans providing plenty of positive reinforcement for their national icon with their chants of ''chi-chi-chi, le-le-le, chile! chile!''  until this tournament, gonzález had never advanced past the quarterfinals in a grand slam event, but with an improved backhand and improved confidence thanks to his new coach, larry stefanki, he had broken through by beating four members of the top 20.  against tommy haas in the semifinals, he finished with a stunning 42 winners and just three unforced errors, but a grand slam final, particularly against federer, is a more unnerving proposition. there is the protocol: the photographs at the net beforehand; the aura of gravitas that seeps into the expressions of the officials. it takes time to adjust, and gonzález did a much better job than most debutants. but he could not maintain the same level of excellence. after just eight points against federer, gonzález already had more unforced errors than in the entire match against haas. but federer was also not nearly as sharp early as he had been in his semifinal demolition of andy roddick.  windy conditions sometimes cause him trouble, and there were enough gusts mixed in with the blasts from gonzález to throw him off his rhythm. his deadliest shot is the midcourt forehand, which he can take either direction into the corners, but he failed to convert on several in the early stages of the match. and in the ninth game, gonzález put together two great backhand passing shots in a row to break federer's serve and earn the chance to serve for the set at 5-4.  at 40-15, after federer hit a backhand return wide, it looked the chilean was going to transform this final into something more compelling than the latest federer coronation. but on the first set point, federer pushed forward to the net and gonzález hit a hasty forehand passing shot straight at him, which the swiss volleyed away for a winner. on the second set point, gonzález kicked a first serve to the backhand and was greeted with a deep return. the chilean responded with an edgy forehand unforced error.  it was deuce, and federer would soon be back to 5-5, and though gonzález saved four set points of his own on his serve in the 12th game, he could not dig his teeth into the tiebreaker, falling behind 0-5.  the rest was less suspenseful, as is so often the case with one of the best players and front runners in history.  ''he was the better player in the first set,'' federer said. ''if he closes it out 6-4, it's clear he's the better player in that set. but i came back just at the right moment. i was missing too many forehands, didn't know what to do with his slice. maybe the wind, maybe his court coverage put me under pressure. i wasn't feeling that great from the start.''  he looked much more at ease from then on, controlling his serve with ease and breaking gonzález in the seventh game of both the second and third sets. he would claim the match and his third australian open title by holding his serve at love, shrieking with delight after he hit a backhand winner down the line and then rolling onto his back on the green hard court.  the last man to win here without dropping a set was ken rosewall in 1971, and rosewall was in the president's box in rod laver arena, looking, as usual, fit and neatly coifed.  ''i'm happy to be the guy who follows up on you; it's a great honor,'' federer said in his postmatch remarks as he gestured toward rosewall.  it was a telling moment, because federer for now has much more in common with the game's former luminaries than his current rivals. he is now, just to take one example, 10-0 against gonzález.  ''i have to congratulate again, again roger,'' gonzález said, eliciting laughter from the crowd in his post- match remarks. ''he's a great champion. he played a great match today, the whole week and almost all of his life.''  pete sampras leads the list with 14 grand slam singles titles; roy emerson is next with 12, and bjorn borg and laver each had 11. bill tilden, like federer, has 10. but federer, still only 25 years old, is moving quickly into range, and sampras has already said he is convinced that the swiss will pass him.  his only losses in majors the past two years came at the french open in 2005 and 2006, with last year's defeat to rafael nadal of spain in the final depriving him of a shot at the grand slam. but after this performance, the drums will start beating again as the clay court season and roland garros approach.  ''well, i think last year was really the first year i thought if everything goes perfectly well, there might be a chance,'' federer said of the grand slam. ''and i got so awfully close looking back, but the french open is the second one. it's such a tough one to win. i've given myself chances the last two years, but rafa has been so dominant on that surface.''  that is true, but federer has been dominant on everything else.  australian open  