kirstein, youth and all those mice who made good   it has been said that there would have been no new york city ballet without lincoln kirstein. on saturday night the company presented ''tribute to kirstein,'' a prelude of sorts to its season-long homage in the spring, on the centenary of his birth.  the program's three ballets -- ''episodes,'' ''tribute'' and ''vienna waltzes'' -- didn't have any special connection to kirstein. it was business as usual, as was the saturday matinee, which included the season's first performance of christopher wheeldon's ''carousel (a dance)'' and role debuts in jerome robbins's ''i'm old fashioned.'' but the extraordinary range of the repertory and outpourings of fresh young talent spoke to kirstein's achievement.  a man of imposing stature and intellectual brilliance, kirstein, who died in 1996, coaxed george balanchine to the united states in 1933. though autocratic and self-doubting, kirstein was a knowledgeable advocate and patron of american art, writing, photography and architecture as well as classical ballet. many of his visions for an american ballet were unwieldy and impractical. but he and balanchine made the improbable happen, kirstein said, ''by behaving as if it would happen.''  one of kirstein's most beloved projects was the company-affiliated school of american ballet, which he directed from its inception until 1989. christopher d'amboise's ''tribute,'' created for the school workshop performances in 2005, pays slightly academic homage to that love and to the traditions of classical ballet. set to bach, conducted by fayçal karoui with susan walters as piano soloist, the piece unfolds in eight flowing sections that give city ballet's youngest dancers many chances to shine.  kirstein's spirit hovered over the proceedings. the ballet's lyrical opening solo, performed with luminous authority by devin alberda, would probably have delighted kirstein, who followed the development of the school's gifted male students with special interest. the nibbling bourrées of the allegro that followed, performed by tiler peck, robert fairchild and eight female corps dancers, recalled kirstein's habitual reference to the students as mice. ms. peck's attack, like a colt let out at last from the starting gate, suggested the potential for physical daring and openness that balanchine saw in american dancers. quotations from balanchine classics are embedded in the rest of the ballet, whose principals included ashley bouder, tyler angle, megan lecrone, gretchen smith and adrian danchig-waring.  the two worlds created by balanchine in ''episodes'' and ''vienna waltzes,'' repertory standards that opened and closed the evening program, could not be more different. the atmosphere is serene yet spare in ''episodes,'' whose performers included ask la cour in a quietly authoritative role debut dancing with teresa reichlen in the five pieces pas de deux. the presence of albert evans, the black principal partnering wendy whelan in the concerto pas de deux, recalls kirstein's championing of black dancers.  kirstein also saw the point of spectacle. and balanchine's 1977 ''vienna waltzes'' shows off how far the company had come in terms of sumptuous resources, with its wondrously imaginative set designs by rouben ter-arutunian and luscious dancing. kyra nichols was haunting in the closing waltz, performed with philip neal. sterling hyltin was an amusing scamp in a well-danced role debut, partnering adam hendrickson, in the explosions polka, with miranda weese and benjamin millepied pulling out the stops in the frühlingsstimmen waltz.  in the afternoon program, mr. wheeldon avoided references to the dark narrative of the musical ''carousel,'' choosing instead to spool out dancing to match the score's hum-along sweep. ms. peck made a strongly danced, appropriately demure role debut, with damian woetzel as a nicely cocky partner. sara mearns created a full character in a well-danced, expressive role debut as the woman in blue in ''i'm old fashioned.'' ellen bar swept through a less central role as a new woman in yellow.  the new york city ballet performs through feb. 25 at the new york state theater, lincoln center; (212) 870-5570 or nycballet.com.  dance review  