friends proclaim innocence of actor going on trial in dancer's killing   paul cortez's friends see him as a victim of slapdash police work, in which a young man who rose out of a poor neighborhood in the bronx is the usual suspect. he is, they say, a shining example of the success of programs designed to send gifted but poor children to the best private schools.  they describe mr. cortez, 26, as a charismatic and deeply religious singer-songwriter, who sometimes called himself adonai -- hebrew for god -- and say his lyrics and poetry have been misunderstood as the meditations of a killer. they call him a talented actor who was struggling like many other starving artists, but was destined for success. where others might see his need to be admired as a trigger that could explain the killing of a girlfriend who rejected him, they see it as inspirational.  ''i think he has power, you know. i always felt that with paul,'' langley danowitz, a physical training client of mr. cortez's at the new york sports club, said yesterday. ''he's almost kind of a person that might be kind of like a guru.'' ms. danowitz, 64, who has visited and corresponded with mr. cortez in jail, added: ''he's kind of a leader. that's what i always sensed about him, that he had that kind of a powerful aura in a very good way.''  prosecutors say they have forensic evidence to show that paul cortez obsessively stalked his sometime girlfriend, catherine woods, an aspiring broadway dancer from ohio, and, in her apartment on east 86th street on nov. 27, 2005, slashed her throat.  but as opening statements begin today in his trial in state supreme court in manhattan, mr. cortez stands as the rare murder defendant who has a network of supporters proclaiming not only his innocence, but his saintliness.  though they say they do not want to minimize the death of ms. woods, mr. cortez's network of friends -- teachers and classmates from high school, physical training clients and members of his yoga and meditation group -- have banded together to help raise money to pay for a private lawyer for his defense. some of them hope to attend his trial.  ''i don't want my words to reflect any disrespect for the police,'' said wilfredo acosta jr., a high school classmate who played football with mr. cortez. ''nor do i want them to reflect a lack of sympathy for the woods family. it's unfortunate that i'm on the end where i have to defend my best friend from poly prep country day school, because i honestly know he's not capable of something like this.''  foremost among mr. cortez's supporters is his mother, ivette cortez drake, who has kept folders recording her son's achievements.  she can pull out a neatly typewritten letter, dated oct. 18, 1990, from john j. garvey, the computer teacher at public school 85 in the fordham area of the bronx, recommending his star student for a scholarship to the buckley school, a prestigious all-boys private school on the upper east side of manhattan. then there is the acceptance letter from the high school at poly prep, in brooklyn, again on scholarship.  his mother has kept the programs from the high school shows starring her son -- as riff, the leader of the jets, ''west side story''; as leading player in ''pippin''; and as mike costa in ''a chorus line'' -- and similar programs from boston university, from which he graduated with a degree in acting.  but among all the memorabilia -- the childish letters from camp, the mother's day cards, the academic awards -- the thing that mrs. cortez drake treasures most, she says, is the book of poetry her son wrote over the last year while in jail.  mrs. cortez drake keeps paul's poetry, printed on parchment and bound in gray cardboard, on her nightstand, next to her rosary.  ''from time to time when things seem hopeless i read his passages of love and forgiveness and manage to find renewed strength,'' mrs. cortez drake wrote on a note attached to the homemade book, entitled ''light-songs from the tomb-shrine.''  much of the poetry is spiritual, quoting the old testament while referring to eastern religion. it is not confessional, but some poems seem to be about ms. woods, and the book is dedicated to her ''immortal spirit.''  ''i miss my dead lover, terribly,'' one verse says. says another, describing his time in jail: ''i have wanted this to be a dream for so many nights. but it is my reality. i have lost many loved ones, my pride, my ambition, my sex-drive, and my hope for a successful future.''  mr. cortez was the youngest of three children, raised by a single mother who, she says with a rueful laugh, all too often filled her children with spaghetti and butter. mrs. cortez drake went from being on welfare to working as benefits coordinator at bronx-lebanon hospital center and then director of training at the hospital workers' union.  his doting grandmother, a seamstress from puerto rico, sewed costumes for him to star in school plays, and teachers put him in gifted classes. in fourth grade, he rode the subway to harlem by himself to an enrichment program at the st. aloysius education clinic, and he was accepted at buckley in the fifth grade.  when paul went to high school, mrs. cortez drake moved the family to throgs neck, and paul rode the bus two hours each way to poly prep in bay ridge. he wrote his school assignments by hand, until his gym teacher took pity on him and bought him a computer, his mother says.  after college, he supported himself by working as a trainer at a new york sports club on the upper east side, where he met ms. woods.  ''she's beautiful. she's a dancer. she's so sweet and wonderful,'' he told his mother.  ms. woods was a classically trained ballerina from columbus, the daughter of jon woods, director of the ohio state university marching band. but to make ends meet in new york, she was working as a topless dancer, using the stage name ava. her family has said she did not tell them about this side of her life.  marguerite shinouda, an acupuncturist who got to know mr. cortez at a spiritual retreat, says he was a fun-loving, flirtatious member of the group. ''we played leapfrog, danced in the rain, looked at shooting stars, went skinny-dipping,'' she said. ms. shinouda says she was the one who began raising money for mr. cortez's lawyer, after his first, court-appointed lawyer advised him to plead guilty in return for a reduced sentence.  she says that when she argued with him, he always chose retreat rather than escalation. ''he never clenches his fist, never clenches his jaw,'' she said. she sees him not as a demon, but as a guardian angel, who had persuaded another woman to stop stripping and was trying to do the same with ms. woods.  ms. danowitz says she and her husband, jeff, who works in marketing, became involved in mr. cortez's defense because they worried that he was too trusting. ''he was feeling that god would provide,'' she said.  ms. danowitz says she bonded with mr. cortez because, although she is a corporate controller, she does some modeling and acting, and he pushed her and her husband to train harder than they would have otherwise. she describes mr. cortez as a demanding perfectionist.  she says that she helped him buy handmade soaps for catherine woods and his mother one christmas, and sends him books in jail. he asked, she said, for a collection of poems by allen ginsberg.  ms. danowitz insists that mr. cortez is innocent. ''he didn't say anything to anybody that he was there and that he did this,'' she said. ''it just seems kind of like a 'twilight zone' scenario to me, that somebody could be arrested for something that they didn't do, just because they don't have anybody else who did it.''  two of his high school teachers were also disbelieving but said their headmaster had forbidden them to speak to reporters about mr. cortez. ''he had an innocence, a sweetness,'' one of the teachers said.  a man who answered the telephone yesterday at the home of ms. woods's family in ohio said that no one there wanted to talk about the trial. after mr. cortez was charged with second-degree murder in december 2005, ms. woods's mother, donna, said, ''we're relieved that this has happened so quickly.'' she said that the family was grateful for the support of the police.  crime scene photographs show the wall of ms. woods's bedroom, where she was murdered, splashed in blood, and a bloody boot print with a distinctive pattern on the sole. mr. cortez's friends say the boot print was too large to have been made by his foot. one photo shows ms. woods's blood-drenched hand, clutching several strands of hair, which mr. cortez's friends say appear to be blond and not his.  barbara thompson, a spokeswoman for the manhattan district attorney, declined to discuss the evidence last week.  a film director, bernardo ruiz, remembered mr. cortez as a 17-year-old whom he cast opposite eli wallach in a short independent film, ''the devil's twilight.''  ''that i had secured eli wallach was a big deal for me, and i was looking for someone who wouldn't be crushed by that weight,'' he said. the film, he said, was a ''sweet fable about a wayward kid who walks into a junk shop on the edge of brooklyn.'' the owner of the junk shop, eli wallach, ''watches the kid and intuits something about him,'' mr. ruiz said. he tells the boy a story, and when the boy goes back out into the street, he has been a little bit changed.  mr. cortez, he said, was right for the part. ''he had a little bit of that street toughness,'' mr. ruiz said, ''but he was also sweet, maybe even a little naïve.''  