gone but hardly forgotten, an idol isn't buried yet, either   more than a month after the death of the legendary soul singer james brown, his body still has not been laid to rest, a circumstance that has dismayed his friends and bewildered residents here in the town that has honored him as a native son.  ''he wrote a song about this,'' said charles a. reid jr., a funeral director and a lifelong friend who is holding mr. brown's body while his survivors and the trustees of his estate squabble over control. '' 'papa don't take no mess.' that's what he'd be hollering now.''  the six children mr. brown acknowledged in his will want his body placed in a mausoleum on his 60-acre property just across the south carolina state line near the savannah river, an estate they hope will become a museum and memorial park akin to graceland, the home of elvis presley in memphis, which has long been a lucrative tourist attraction. but the children are in a financial dispute with the trustees of the brown estate, and it is possible mr. brown will not be laid to rest until it is settled.  in recent weeks, mr. brown's body, sealed in a gleaming golden coffin, has been kept in a temperature-controlled room at his beech island, s.c., home. since late december, when mr. brown was given a star-studded send-off complete with costume changes between memorial services in three cities, his final wishes have been the subject of at least two lawsuits. still, a spokeswoman for the six children insisted that logistics were causing the wait.  ''it's only been a month since he died,'' said the spokeswoman, debra opri, a beverly hills lawyer. ''they're trying to get engineers out to the site, they're getting a mausoleum done. the property may have to be rezoned. that kind of thing.''  it is not clear, however, that mr. brown's children will control what happens to the 60-acre property, where they have said they would like his tomb to be placed.  in a will read to survivors on jan. 11, mr. brown left the bulk of his assets, including the beech island property and the copyrights to his extensive music catalog, in the care of three of his business managers, who are trustees of his estate.  the six children were left to divide mr. brown's personal effects, a bequest of significantly less value. those children and eight of mr. brown's grandchildren filed a lawsuit last week in aiken, s.c., to remove the three trustees, citing mismanagement of their father's finances and conflicts of interest.  a letter included in the court filings against the trustees suggests that all three men, alfred a. bradley, albert h. dallas and david g. cannon, stand to profit from the sale of mr. brown's music catalog, a deal that is already being negotiated.  in a separate legal matter involving mr. brown, tomie rae hynie, who married him in 2001, has also filed a lawsuit claiming half of mr. brown's estate for herself and her 5-year-old son, james brown jr.  it is unclear whether they were married at the time of mr. brown's death. until that lawsuit is settled, however, ms. hynie has no legal right to mr. brown's remains.  mr. dallas, who was also mr. brown's personal lawyer, said the petition to depose the trustees was sour grapes. ''i'm sorry that the way mr. brown left his estate displeases his children, but it was for mr. brown to decide how to leave his estate, and it's very clearly spelled out,'' mr. dallas said.  he added that mr. brown had left his estate to support a foundation to educate needy children who wanted to study music. ''while there is breath left in my body, i will carry out those wishes,'' mr. dallas said.  mr. dallas described mr. brown's relationship with the six children as estranged. ''remember, these are the same children that sued their father,'' mr. dallas said.  two of mr. brown's daughters, deanna brown thomas and yamma brown lumar, filed a federal lawsuit against their father in 2002, asserting that he owed them $1 million for 25 songs they said they co-wrote with him as children.  louis levenson, a lawyer in atlanta who is representing the children and grandchildren, said his clients were not estranged from their father. mr. levenson declined to provide details about the proposed arrangements for mr. brown's body, saying only: ''these are legal matters. i don't want this case to be tried on 'entertainment tonight.' ''  mr. brown seems to have left at least one clue about where he wanted to end up. the lengthy epitaph on the grave of his third wife, adrienne lois rodriguez, which ends with ''i love you, sugar,'' suggests that he wanted to be buried next to her in the tiny walker memorial park in downtown augusta. mr. brown's father, joseph, is also buried there.  for the time being, however, that location does not seem to be under consideration as a fitting resting place for the man known as the godfather of soul.  ''it brings water to your eyes, it does,'' said mr. reid, who said he had fielded eight or nine calls a day about mr. brown's body. ''i don't think he would be pleased.''  