a sitcom that's all about me, sarah   those who know sarah silverman only from her much discussed star turn in the 2005 comedy film ''the aristocrats'' and from her one-woman concert movie, ''sarah silverman: jesus is magic,'' might bristle at the notion that another overnight wonder has been granted that holy grail of comedy, the self-titled sitcom.  but ''the sarah silverman program,'' a six-installment comedy central series that has its premiere on thursday night at 10:30 (9:30 central time), is far from the work of an overnight success.  ms. silverman, 36, has worked the comedy circuit for nearly two decades, been fired abruptly from some of the most coveted jobs in the field and been forced to endure the indignity of spending two years preparing scripts for series that not only were never broadcast but also were never taped.  in that time ms. silverman has earned a reputation as a sharply honed assessor of self-importance and political correctness, a persona that, in mocking the pretensions of people who believe they have none, is in vogue in the vein of ''borat,'' jon stewart and others.  she also has been refining her jokes about flatulence.  to those who might scoff that scatological humor should be beneath someone who aspires to poke holes in the convictions of the politically correct, she has an answer. ''it's the sign language of comedy,'' she said during an interview over a lunch of poached eggs and toast at a downscale-hipster diner in hollywood. ''it's universal.''  and particularly for comedians, who compete aggressively to make one another laugh. ''it's such a universal release in the comedy world,'' she continued, scooping up some hash browns with her fingers, ''that no matter how hoity-toity you are onstage,'' a joke about passing gas ''or someone putting his penis on the table is going to be funny.''  ms. silverman makes no apologies for the bountiful sophomoric humor in her new show, for which she is one of several writers. ''i appreciate the aggressively stupid,'' she said. ''i like silliness. i don't giggle from purely heady comedy. i can go, 'wow, that's really smart and funny.' but, sadly, it's going to take something really stupid to make me laugh.''  there are plenty of silly moments in ''the sarah silverman program,'' as when her character's overindulgence with cough syrup takes her on a tangerine-trees-and-marmalade-skies trip to an animated wonderland.  those moments are, in their way, an antidote to the self-serious sitcoms that broadcast networks continue to churn out, the ones that mix a young, idealistic married couple and an older, bitter married couple and wait for the hijinks to ensue.  ''the sarah silverman program'' has its couples, of course: there are brian and steve, sarah's ''big and orange and gay'' neighbors, played by brian posehn and steve agee, who both appeared in ''jesus is magic''; and laura and officer jay, the budding romantics played by sarah's real-life sister laura and jay johnston.  the show does not have much action; instead, it is about the types of people who lounge around in los angeles coffee shops, never seeming to work or having much of anywhere to go.  when comedy central approached ms. silverman with the idea of a series built around her, she submitted the opening sketch of ''jesus is magic,'' which shows her, her sister and mr. posehn ''just sitting and talking,'' she said.  ''it feels very real and small,'' she continued, ''and then it goes into a song.''  the singing is the other unusual part of ms. silverman's show -- her witty lyrics provide yet another showcase in which to expose the unusual selfishness of sarah silverman, the character -- a narcissistic, gleefully un-self-aware ditz.  ''there's this interesting difference between how she perceives herself and how the audience perceives her,'' ms. silverman said of her character. ''her intentions are good.''  rob schrab, an executive producer of the series, said recently that one joy of the show was that ''it's fun to be self-centered.''  ''what's great about sarah's character is that you can live through her,'' mr. schrab said. ''she gets to kind of be a jerk, but she doesn't mean to be a jerk.''  the question of whether she means it is one that ms. silverman has faced before. while most actors are reluctant to discuss critics' opinions of them, ms. silverman addresses them head on, particularly a 2005 review of ''jesus is magic'' by a. o. scott, a film critic for the new york times.  ''it totally hurt my feelings and was like a kick in the stomach,'' but, she said, she found it fascinating.  in the review mr. scott said her act was ''the latest evidence that mocking political correctness has become a form of political correctness in its own right.''  ''she depends on the assumption that only someone secure in his or her own lack of racism would dare to make, or to laugh at, a racist joke, the telling of which thus becomes a way of making fun simultaneously of racism and of racial hypersensitivity,'' he wrote. in short, he added, ''naughty as she may seem, she's playing it safe.''  ms. silverman said the review articulated a point that she had felt, but had been struggling to express. ''that was something that always festered in the back of my mind that i never talked about,'' she said. her crowds are usually liberal ones, ''and we know we're not racist,'' she said. ''but the whiter the crowd, the more that kind of voice in the back of my head comes toward the front, and i feel grosser doing that kind of stuff.''  ''at the very least, it's made me assess the choir,'' she continued. ''context is everything, and i don't think he would be pondering all that stuff if i was doing the material in front of an all-black crowd or a very mixed crowd,'' which, she said, she regularly does.  still, she added, she is reassessing at least part of her work.  ''it was rebellious to be politically incorrect now and in the past couple of years,'' she said. ''but i don't know how rebellious it will be when everybody has that point of view. it becomes hackneyed and it becomes irrelevant and it turns into something else.''  