reyna joins m.l.s. and says he hopes others will follow   claudio reyna said it was time to come home.  ''my wife is expecting in a month, and for both sporting and family reasons, this was the right time,'' reyna said monday in a telephone interview from his home on long island. ''manchester city didn't want me to leave, but it came to the point where it wasn't easy for us not having a family network. they understood, but they didn't want me to go.''  so europe's loss is the new york red bulls' gain. after more than a decade overseas, playing for wolfsburg and bayer leverkusen in germany, glasgow rangers in scotland, and sunderland and manchester city in england, reyna, 33, will be surveying the midfield at giants stadium as one of the club's two designated players. (a second slot was acquired by trading amado guevara to chivas usa.)  late last year, major league soccer altered its salary structure to allow each of its 13 teams to sign a player for more than the league maximum of about $300,000. the league will pay the first $400,000 of the player's salary; the club is responsible for the balance.  ''i think that the designated players should be americans,'' reyna said. ''the beckham situation is unique, something that is great for the league because of the attention it brings. on the other hand, i would like to see guys like mcbride, keller and lewis, who have been in europe for a long time, because i believe they want the league to flourish.'' he was referring to brian mcbride, kasey keller and eddie lewis.  ''i think it's important to have some older heads around,'' reyna said. ''that's how the kids learn to become good pros. at leverkusen, i had bernd schuster and rudi völler in the locker room every day. and they wanted to win all the time, even on the training ground. it helped me to have a long career.''  reyna and the red bulls will leave for preseason training in florida on friday as coach bruce arena begins his first full season with the club.  ''what bruce is trying to build is a good team that has the right players,'' reyna said. ''i think what's being misunderstood is that there are a lot of knowledgeable soccer fans in the country who know we're not going to get the best by signing 35-year-old players from europe. they just want to see good quality on the field. if you play good soccer, the fans will come and watch.''  the red bulls signed the dutch goalkeeper ronald waterreus, 36, to a senior international contract and did not use their second designated player slot. each club is allowed four senior internationals, players from outside north america who are 25 or older.  one of the club's former goalkeepers, jonny walker, 32, announced his retirement because of chronic back problems. walker played 16 games last season for columbus.  major league soccer  dave checketts said he might sell the rights to operate real salt lake after local officials decided monday not to provide $30 million in public financing for a new stadium. the club could remain in utah, or checketts could retain the rights and move the team, perhaps to st. louis. last year, he led a group that bought the st. louis blues. ''today it feels like a giant political play,'' checketts said during a conference call.  the m.l.s. all-star game will be played at the colorado rapids' new stadium, dick's sporting goods park, on july 19. players from the league's 13 clubs will play glasgow celtic, which is on track for its 41st domestic championship. celtic holds a 19-point lead over glasgow rangers in the scottish premier league.  d.c. united began preseason training monday, a week early, because its participation in the concacaf champions cup includes a game against cd olimpia of honduras on feb. 21. in addition to 32 regular-season games in m.l.s., the club could play an additional 23 games depending on how far it advances in the champions cup, the u.s. open cup and the superliga.  contrary to reports, the dutch midfielder edgar davids will not be joining f.c. dallas. davids, 33, left tottenham hotspur in england and signed an 18-month contract with ajax amsterdam yesterday. davids played for ajax between 1991 and 1996.  the prince  his mansion in england has been called beckingham palace, and now david beckham has had his opportunity to play a prince, thanks to a disney marketing campaign.  beckham was among a handful of celebrities photographed by annie leibovitz for disney's ''year of a million dreams'' theme park promotion. he appears as prince phillip from ''sleeping beauty'' sitting astride a white horse.  the photographs of beckham and others will be part of an advertising insert in magazines like vanity fair and vogue in march. among the others photographed for the campaign were beyoncé knowles as alice in wonderland and scarlett johansson as cinderella.  ''i'm the prince, and i'm sort of slaying a dragon, which is something i've never done before, obviously,'' beckham said.  around the world  after draws against germany and england, the united states women's national team got goals from defender lori chalupny and striker natasha kai yesterday to defeat host china, 2-0, and win the four nations tournament in guangzhou.  the brazilian striker ronaldo, 30, completed a transfer to a.c. milan from real madrid, signing an 18-month contract. real madrid paid inter milan a $40 million transfer fee when it acquired ronaldo in 2002, but received about $10 million from a.c. milan. he scored 99 goals in 164 appearances in all competitions for real.  michel platini, 51, the former star of the french national team, was elected president last week of uefa, european soccer's governing body. as one of his first initiatives, platini said he planned to reduce to three, from four, the number of clubs in the champions league from the top leagues in england, spain and italy.  the american oguchi onyewu, 24, one of the most sought-after central defenders during this month's transfer period, is headed to newcastle united of the english premier league on loan from standard liège of belgium.  eight countries last weekend qualified for the under-20 world cup, which will be played this summer in canada. advancing from south america were brazil, argentina, uruguay and chile. from africa, gambia, congo, zambia and nigeria advanced. the lone representative from oceania will be decided today, leaving only two spots to be filled from among the concacaf countries mexico, costa rica, jamaica and st. kitts and nevis.  week's notables  club -- in italy, inter milan won its 14th straight game to maintain its 11-point lead in serie a, but defender marco materazzi was again involved in a head-butting controversy. materazzi was head-butted by zinédine zidane of france in last summer's world cup final. in a 2-0 victory over sampdoria on sunday, materazzi crumpled to the turf when he was butted by gennaro delvecchio, who was ejected.  player -- in the united arab emirates, ismael matar scored the winning goal against saudi arabia in a gulf cup semifinal and was rewarded by a fan who gave him two camels, which are worth $109,000 each, according to reuters. matar scored the winner again yesterday as u.a.e. defeated oman, 1-0, in the final in abu dhabi.  soccer: extra time  