queens officer stops fight and shoots one assailant   an off-duty police lieutenant interrupted two men beating a third on a corner in jackson heights, queens, early yesterday, and shot and wounded one of the assailants, the police said.  the police did not release the wounded man's identity, but said he was 17 years old and in critical but stable condition at elmhurst hospital center. charges against him were pending yesterday. the police said he swung or threw an empty beer bottle at the lieutenant during the fracas.  the lieutenant, a member of the police department for 16 years, was not identified. yesterday's shooting was his first, the police said.  the episode began shortly after 5 a.m., as the lieutenant was driving his girlfriend from her job at a bar to a coffee shop, as was their custom after her shift, said chief michael collins, a department spokesman. along the way, at 37th avenue and 90th street, he saw the two men beating the third, and shouted, ''what's going on?'' from his car, chief collins said.  when the beating victim asked the lieutenant for help, the lieutenant drew his badge and identified himself as a police officer in english and spanish before leaving the car and approaching the men on foot, while his companion called 911, chief collins said. he caught one of the men at the corner, and again announced himself as an officer, while the other man approached from behind with the beer bottle, chief collins said.  the bottle missed the lieutenant and crashed to the ground, and the lieutenant and the second man struggled. the man reached for the lieutenant's pistol in its holster, and one of them drew it and fired, striking the man in the torso, chief collins said. it was unclear whether the shot was accidental or who fired it, the chief said.  because the two were struggling so closely together for the gun, the spent shell casing did not eject, a hazard known as ''stovepiping'' that leaves the gun inoperable until the chamber is cleared manually.  a passing woman dialed 911 and gave the lieutenant her cellphone, chief collins said.  then the second man ran away, said a neighbor, ysidra espinal, 35, a secretary, who watched from her window. she said she saw the lieutenant and another man -- possibly the original assault victim -- chase the second man down the street.  the wounded suspect, suddenly alone, rose to his knees in the street and approached a car waiting at a red light, she said.  ''he said, 'let me in. get me out of here. they're going to lock me up,' '' she said. ''i was afraid, because i thought the car was going to run over him.''  but the car's passenger pushed the injured man away from the car, and it sped away, she said.  the wounded man was quickly caught and taken to elmhurst, where he was placed under arrest yesterday.  at some point, the assault victim ran away, leaving officers searching for two men. a 24-year-old man believed to be the assailant who ran was being questioned by the police yesterday evening, chief collins said.  to further complicate matters, the wounded man was carrying someone else's identification, to gain entry to a club earlier in the evening, chief collins said.  the misidentification was cleared up when the man to whom the identification belonged, a 20-year-old who was not involved in the fight, came forward yesterday, the police said.  