for a nation of debaters, one court to rule them all   a four-part program on pbs about the supreme court does not have to be boring, or so i believed as i sat down to watch a review copy of ''the supreme court,'' which begins tonight.  now i believe that such a series does have to be boring. otherwise, why would jeffrey rosen, a lively writer on legal issues, write the documentary's companion book without overhauling its script? why would the producers settle for such a dozy score? why would they use a mundane palette, stilted university settings, dozens of indistinguishable male talking heads, the worst clichés of ken burns photo-panning and coy, noncommittal re-creations?  and then there's the deadpan voice-over, with its chronic use of the portentous ''would.'' is this still called the conditional? it seems to have become documentary tense. consider just this line, delivered to the swell of important music: ''it would fall to the supreme court to attach specific meaning and substance to those arguable 14th amendment phrases.''  the suspense isn't exactly killing. would the court attach specific meaning and substance to the arguable 14th amendment phrases? would it? stay tuned.  either the history of the supreme court does not lend itself to visual storytelling, or the producers lacked confidence in their material. contemporary documentarians really ought to rethink the formula that was so fresh when mr. burns introduced it 17 years ago with ''the civil war.'' now the swing between closely studied photos and interviews with professors in studies where you'd expect pipe smoke does not say freshness. it says obsolete.  for variety, mr. burns used fragmentary images -- an oil lamp, horses' hooves -- to evoke the past, without actually crossing the line to fully costumed and cast re-creations. re-creations strike some high-minded filmmakers as tacky and even unethical, especially those filmmakers who don't want to pay the freight for a boxcar full of actors with guild cards.  in the meantime, the history channel, court tv, bravo and a half-dozen other less savory channels have gotten into the documentary business, and they have no such qualms. two years ago e! went so far as to hire actors to recreate, day by day, the trial of michael jackson, based on court transcripts.  the history channel -- with ''desperate crossing,'' for example, its november documentary about the mayflower -- has supplied rip-roaring re-creations, often to thrilling (and amusing) effect. better still, by using interviews with the academic c list, including some potential crackpots, the netherchannels manage to work noncanonical history into their versions of events. their talking heads also display less smugness and more lapel-grasping passion; this is just how lay history should be.  faced with an incendiary subject like the supreme court, these channels would have gone for the jugular and produced a vivid history with a view to stirring emotions. every scene would be shaped to thrill and frighten viewers with the mounting powers of the court over more than 200 years.  as it went along, viewers should have found themselves urgently wondering: does the president get to declare war on anyone he wants? why does the federal government own so much land in nevada? should federal workers get christmas off? what's wrong with the ten commandments in the classroom? and what about the gold standard and abortion?  the history of the judiciary, unlike the history of the civil war or the mayflower, may simply be more polemical than narrative. ''the supreme court'' presents as potted, agreed-upon history what is in fact a series of rancorous debates, most of which are still alive and kicking.  in other words, rather than hear disinterested historians tell stories about early american federalism, i would have liked to see contemporary anarchists and religious activists discuss jefferson, adams and the threat still posed to individuals by the federal government. as a pbs viewer, i don't want to be treated as an empty-headed undergraduate; i want to be treated as a citizen, a consumer and a person to be entertained and engaged.  perhaps ''the supreme court'' does serve as a spur to thinking, if only in reaction to its boringness. consider me for the dissent, then.  the supreme court  on most pbs stations tonight (check local listings).  thomas lennon, director; rob rapley, producer; mark zwonitzer, writer; david strathairn, narrator; bruce shaw, editor; original music by brian keane. a hiddenhill production for thirteen/wnet new york.  television review  