minneapolis: the chambers minneapolis   rather than cloning the original art-filled chambers boutique hotel in new york, the midwestern outpost, which opened in september, strikes an independent profile in a gallerylike compound fashioned from two neighboring pre-1910 brick low-rise office buildings with a a courtyard-cum-lounge in between. interiors and exteriors showcase the estimable contemporary art collection of the owner, the minneapolis developer ralph burnet, helping to increase minneapolis's emerging stature as the artiest town on the prairie.  the location  pedestrian friendly. the chambers's downtown locale is walking distance of theaters, the target center sports arena, warehouse district restaurants and retail-centric nicollet avenue.  the rooms  the high-tech rooms are a bit cold. a throw rug over the black-stained wood floors would have warmed up my gallery-white standard room, no. 512. but cloudlike feather bedding, down pillows and high-thread-count linens compensate. business travelers and e-mail users are well served with an expansive desk and countertop that lines an entire wall, as well as with free wi-fi and d.s.l. a painting by the local artist rod massey, decorative vases and a video art channel on the 42-inch plasma television confirm the art theme.  the bathrooms  functionally stylish. an opaque window wall in the shower plays peek-a-boo with the entry foyer on the other side. a german-made metal ''ramp'' sink by alape slopes back toward the blue-glass-tiled wall, heated tiles pave the floor and a 13-inch flat-screen television faces the toilet.  amenities  the chambers's chief asset is its $7 million art collection spanning painting, sculpture, photography, neon and hybrids like a wall hanging of indian chipati tongs by subodh gupta. works by damien hirst and other marquee artists are displayed in an adjacent gallery that rotates mr. burnet's collection, while video art flashes in the lobby, lounge and guestroom corridors.  the über-chef jean-georges vongerichten created the menu at the paper-lantern-lighted chambers kitchen, where the local fish, walleye, is dressed up with basil and jalapeno ($18). a glass-walled and balcony-ringed bar on the top floor draws a hip, partying crowd, but soundproof doors seal the noise from guestroom hallways.  the outdoor courtyard has a large fire pit and screenings of experimental films on the whitewashed walls. the lobby's shopping nook sells barbara kruger tote bags ($65); skateboard decks by a local artist, sean tubridy ($58); and yoshitomo nara clocks ($250). the basement fitness center was overheated at 75 degrees and offered no privacy from staff members passing in a service corridor.  room service  guests must call for morning coffee ($4 per cup) -- there is no maker in the room -- but delivery is speedy. (my order arrived in less than 10 minutes.) all food comes from the chambers kitchen, which bears mr. vongerichten's stamp even in breakfast basics like a bagel and smoked salmon, which comes with an endive salad dressed in sherry vinaigrette ($16).  the crowd  guests on a friday night looked like the 40-something sophisticates who might buy the modern art on the walls, whereas the younger, bohemian lounge set looked like those who had created it. with the exception of one indifferent bar host, the helpful hotel staff is free of attitude.  bottom line  art-focused lodgings are poised to appeal to travelers in search of design-forward minneapolis. the 60 rooms start at $199 and go to $3,500 for the 1,000-square-foot rock star suite with skyline views.  chambers minneapolis, 901 hennepin avenue, 612-767-6900; www.chambersminneapolis.com.  elaine glusac  check in / check out  