a night out with: brían f. o'byrne; if memory serves   ''new york city is beautiful!''  brían f. o'byrne had just come down off the high of a 12-minute helicopter ride above manhattan and gave it an exuberant review, using a common expletive to modify ''beautiful.'' mr. o'byrne, a tony award winner and a four-time nominee, is starring in tom stoppard's marathon of a play at lincoln center, ''the coast of utopia,'' about voluble russian philosophers. on this night, mr. o'byrne had taken his dressing-room partner and colleague, jason butler harner, who plays the novelist ivan turgenev, on an aerial tour of the city, courtesy of a christmas gift certificate. ''the way the city blocks look with the lights, just gorgeous,'' mr. o'byrne said, with the expletive preceding ''gorgeous.'' (mr. o'byrne uses that word so often, some of his quotations here are the equivalent of the a&e version of ''the sopranos.'')  it was monday, the actors' requisite day off. sort of. mr. o'byrne (whose first name is pronounced bree-in) had recorded a voice-over as alexander hamilton for a pbs special. he kept insisting he should have been home in queens memorizing lines. the first two parts of ''the coast of utopia'' are running in repertory, while the third part of the trilogy begins previews on tuesday.  the friends headed to dinner in the theater district at angus mcindoe, where mr. mcindoe joined them. mr. mcindoe, a scot, and mr. o'byrne, an irishman, go back a decade. not to be outdone, mr. harner insisted he was part welsh, which he learned reading a book of names.  a book! both actors lamented how little time they have to read anything not russian-related. mr. o'byrne again fretted about not being home memorizing. adding stress was the thought that mr. stoppard might be writing another scene for him.  over beet and goat-cheese salad and juicy mussels, the three mocked and cajoled. the two actors rib each other like brothers and finish each other's sentences like lovers, though they are neither. mr. o'byrne has a girlfriend in los angeles and mr. harner is single. mr. mcindoe, also single, pulled out a picture of his half-scottish, half-chinese son.  ''i thought your ex-wife is japanese?'' mr. o'byrne said, sounding serious.  ''oh, you're right, i must be wrong,'' mr. mcindoe said gamely.  the discussion turned to reviews; mr. o'byrne reads them all. ''you learn from them,'' he said. he talked of performing in ''the beauty queen of leenane'' in galway. one night, a stranger at a pub recognized him from the play and mr. o'byrne asked his opinion of it. when the stranger gave a dead-on assessment of the production's shortcomings, mr. o'byrne introduced him to the director, garry hynes. they followed the stranger's advice and everything ''clicked into place,'' as mr. o'byrne put it. the icing on the cake? the guy later married the girl from the box office.  more war stories followed:  ''i heard about a play at the abbey, where a doctor stood up in the middle and said: 'i'm a doctor. is there an actor in the house?' '' mr. o'byrne said.  coffee arrived. mr. o'byrne checked his voice mail. mr. stoppard had called: he'd finished the scene. history in the making.  the bartender played keane. mr. mcindoe and mr. o'byrne gushed: ''what a great band.''  soon, mr. o'byrne checked his watch. ''one a.m.! i have to get home.''  back to queens he went, to sleep, perchance to dream. or, to stay up all night, perchance to memorize.  