giants sign bonds for $15.8 million, but cut the perks   almost two months after barry bonds and the san francisco giants agreed on the financial part of a one-year, $15.8 million contract, the two sides finally completed the remaining aspects of the deal last night. so bonds will return to san francisco for 2007, needing 22 home runs to break hank aaron's career record of 755.  despite the prolonged delay while the sides worked on the contract language, bonds called it ''normal procedure.'' bonds joked that a skiing vacation had slowed the process, but the process actually involved his losing some perks from his last contract. bonds's personal trainers will no longer be allowed in the giants' clubhouse.  the giants also wanted contract language that would protect them if bonds is indicted in connection with the bay area laboratory co-operative steroid distribution case and misses games. a federal grand jury is investigating whether he committed perjury by testifying in 2003 that he never knowingly used steroids.  in addition, the daily news reported this month that bonds had tested positive for amphetamine use last season and had blamed it on his teammate mark sweeney. during a conference call, bonds declined to comment when asked if he used amphetamines. but bonds said, ''mark sweeney never did anything, period.''  bonds's last contract included language that allowed him to have personal trainers who had lockers beside him in the clubhouse. that will not be the case this season, but bonds said, ''i have no problem with it.'' the trainers, who had admittance to clubhouses and ballparks as club employees, will continue working for bonds away from the ballpark.  as the wait for an official agreement continued, there was speculation that bonds and the giants might end up walking away from each other. but bonds, who has been a giant for the past 14 seasons, and the giants, who have embraced and endured bonds's exploits, have consistently proved that they are meant for one another.  ''i'm just happy that it's all over with and i'm happy that i can get back and i'm excited to get into spring training,'' bonds said.  now that bonds is officially a giant, commissioner bud selig can resume sweating about what is bound to be an awkward season. as long as bonds does not get injured or go to jail, he will most likely eclipse aaron's record. selig and aaron are close friends.  if bonds was not stained by the suspicions that he used steroids or performance-enhancing substances, selig would be in attendance to celebrate bonds's potential record-breaking homer. but the allegations will make bonds's march toward 755 delicate for selig.  when bonds, who turns 43 years old in july, was asked if he would return in 2008 if he did not pass aaron, he said that he would ''stay around until i'm 100.'' after chuckling, bonds said: ''that's a yes. i'm going to keep playing.''  possible helton trade dies -- the colorado rockies said last night that discussion of a potential trade of todd helton to the boston red sox had ended and ''there will be no further discussions.''  ''this is not a trade that we were anxious to complete, but we are always exploring ways to improve our team,'' the owner of the rockies, charlie monfort, said in a statement.  monfort said the red sox would have had to part with pitching prospects in addition to third baseman mike lowell and reliever julián tavárez, players they had already offered in exchange for the 33-year-old helton. the rockies wanted the promising relievers craig hansen and manny delcarmen from boston.  schilling to play in 2008 -- curt schilling said yesterday that he would not retire at the end of the 2007 season, as he previously said, and planned to pitch in 2008. schilling, 40, is under contract with the red sox through this season, but he said he was in discussions for an extension.  if schilling, who acts as his own agent, cannot work out a deal in boston, he said he would pitch for another team -- but not the yankees.  clemens is undecided -- roger clemens was on the mound in astros gear yesterday, still undecided about whether he would pitch this season. clemens threw almost an hour of batting practice during the club's pitching and hitting camp in houston. he mostly faced minor leaguers, including his son koby.  when asked to handicap the odds that he would return for another season, clemens replied, ''i'm not even interested in playing right now -- that's my handicap for you.''  clemens confirmed that if he did pitch, it would not be for the full season, and he expressed concern about being physically able to do the job.  ''i'm nowhere near being in the competitive shape i need to be in to be a power pitcher,'' he said. ''i've put a lot of pressure on myself to perform, and i'm going to be a year older and i don't know how my body is going to react.''  baseball: roundup  