raining e-blows on egos   they pour into your e-mail in-box, as explicit as they are relentless, with subject lines too shameful to share with colleagues. enlarge your penis! shrink your waistline! enhance your sex life! delete, delete, delete.  but they reappear, as relentless as they are explicit, with pop-up pictures embarrassing for the boss to see. enlarge your penis! shrink your waistline! enhance your sex life! all before lunch.  the spewing of spam over the digital transom has long been derided as an annoyance and provoked concerns about the insecurity of computer networks. but now some e-mailers and experts on psychology and technology worry that it is also having a more pernicious effect: insecurity for the recipient.  with worldwide volumes having doubled in the past year, and ever-more sophisticated spammers singling out computer users with particular interests or problems, it can serve as a constant reminder of what is lacking for those with fragile egos -- whether a sinuous body or an eight-cylinder sex drive.  ''how do they know i need to (fill in the blank)?'' the recipient wonders.  delete, delete, delete.  ''it can affect your emotions and your level of stress,'' said jeffrey t. parsons, a psychology professor at hunter college, who has conducted research on sexuality and the internet. ''once you get in a spam loop, you can get bombarded with these things four or five times a day, and that can definitely trigger insecurities and exacerbate ones that already exist.''  pam fitzgerald, managing partner of a marketing company in virginia who struggles with her weight, bristles at the diet-plan spam, wondering ''who knows how much i weigh.'' and her heart aches for one of her young employees, the only one in the small firm not to have finished college, who seems to be a magnet for spam pushing johnny-come-lately bachelor's degree programs. ''it's rubbing him raw day in and day out,'' she said. worsening the psychic toll is the increasingly focused tailoring of spam of all stripes.  legitimate retailers buy contact lists of e-mail addresses, while underground computer hacks trade -- or steal -- them. spammers often steal e-mail addresses from topic-oriented and corporate web sites with scores of registered users, and also corral highjacked networks of personal computers called botnets to glean specific information from other computers' hard drives, like e-mail address books.  so junk e-mail arrives looking as if it came from a personal friend, or it will seem sympathetic to the receiver's lifestyle, with advertisements for christian mortgages popping up in the in-boxes of computer users active in christian organizations.  howard steinberg, a diabetic and the head of a westport, conn., company specializing in diabetes education, is a lightning rod for diabetes-related spam -- most of it offering quack remedies for a disease he considers deadly serious.  ''they are absolutely using social engineering techniques,'' said daniel druker, executive vice president for marketing at postini, a communications company in san carlos, calif., that provides anti-spam services and processes about 1 billion e-mail messages a day. ''anything they can do to break down your natural resistance.''  though 99 percent of spam is still sent randomly, mr. druker said that tailored spam is increasing and that we will only see more of it. ''i would predict that in 2007, the bad guys will be targeting their attacks even more.''  all of which only enhances a computer user's fear that somehow he keeps getting a certain solicitation for penis-enlargement because someone, somewhere, thinks he is lacking.  ''whether it's overweight or sexual topics, for those who have challenges there can be low self-esteem,'' said joshua fogel, an assistant professor of behavioral sciences at brooklyn college. ''there's a lot of psychological baggage with being overweight. likewise for a man who is having trouble sexually. the spam reminds them of their vulnerabilities and will make them feel even more inadequate.''  though e-mail ads for weight-loss and sexual performance products have been around for years, they are still among the most common forms of spam. and if you are struggling with a personal issue and happen to be easily suggestible, such spam can be uncomfortably personal.  ''it feels like a real invasion of privacy,'' said ms. fitzgerald, the virginia marketing executive wary of weight-loss spam. ''you do react emotionally to this stuff, there's no doubt about it.''  what are sensitive types to do? professor parsons recommends addressing the root of the problem. ''seek professional help for the underlying issue,'' he said, so that spam doesn't become ''a trigger for more emotional distress.'' people with serious disorders, like sex addicts, should get a very strong filter that not only blocks access to pornographic web sites, but filters out pornographic spam.  unlike the sources of glossy catalogs and other pieces of bulk mail that pile up on kitchen tables, spam's origins are often illicit, the handiwork of offshore operators. even for those who are at peace with their physique, having unseemly spam thrust into their face can be embarrassing, evoking a tawdry netherworld they would rather not know about.  ''some of the penis enlargement ones will have images, which gets you,'' said carolyn sevos, president of intracommunities, a technology company in manhattan, referring to the thumbprint-size pictures that appear at the bottom of her screen as she scrolls through e-mail even without opening it.  ''you're sifting through your e-mail -- click, click, click -- and then you'll see that and it makes you sit up in your seat,'' ms. sevos said.  betty maul, who owns a print and advertising company in cherry hill, n.j., said more than 115 junk e-mail messages had poured into her in-box one recent day by 5:15 p.m. there were cures for obesity and impotence, cheap pills from canada, men in hot pants, stock tips, gambling opportunities and the cryptically worded ''love enhancements.''  absent, at least for the moment, was one of ms. maul's favorites: a come-on for breast enlargements. ''i'm already a very well-endowed woman, so that one frightens me,'' she said. ''that's become a joke in our office. everybody howls.''  