toy story   i am plastic  the designer toy explosion.  by paul budnitz.  illustrated. 367 pp. harry n. abrams. $40.  the (variously) one-eyed, one-horned, purple, red and green people eaters called uglydolls are among the most successful of a new wave of vinyl, plastic and plush ''designer toys.'' originally conceived by the new york design school graduates david horvath and sun-min kim, the uglydoll line has grown into a monstrous franchise with dozens of iterations, collected (ostensibly for their kids) by baby boomers, like me, who have yet to fully embrace maturity. uglydolls are, however, but one brand among scores -- if not hundreds -- of patently quirky and deliberately unsightly toy/object characters that have exploded into a minor global phenomenon.  starting in hong kong and japan during the mid-1990s, when comic illustrators fiendishly began tearing off and substituting heads and appendages on g.i. joes, barbies and other mainstream dolls and toys with mangled (and melted) body parts, these hybrids were sold at comic-book conventions, where people went wild for them. soon toy factories in guangdong province in china were commissioned to produce limited editions of around 250 each, and the ''designer toy movement'' erupted.  in ''i am plastic: the designer toy explosion,'' paul budnitz, founder of kidrobot, one of the most prodigious retailers of designer toys in the united states, and co-creator of the dunny doll (a balloonlike head with rounded ears atop a stumpy teddy-bear body, produced in various customized versions), showcases many of the more adventurous toy designers and their wares. while much too short on descriptive text -- it could also have benefited from more historical analysis -- this large, sumptuous display of alluring oddities shows the extent to which independent artists and designers have aggressively and satirically pushed the limits of convention beyond the benign world brought to life in the animated film ''toy story.''  small toy companies -- with rock-band names like secret base, tokyo guns, cube works, rough toyz and the creatures in my head, featuring bizarre (sometimes sarcastically cute) toys by illustrators and artists like frank kozik, tim biskup, gary baseman, sara antoinette martin and jim woodring -- have since flooded art and design galleries and alternative toy stores with collectibles in a wide price range. these radical, ribald objects are influenced by all manner of pop culture genres, from the gangsta rap used in misha & shauna's missing link to the heavy metal in takumi iwase's rock rabbit. in the outlaw tradition, there are plenty of scurrilous defacements of corporate symbols: the artist filth transforms mickey mouse into a monster mouse with devil 666 bear qee; ron english's mc supersized is a stubby, bling-wearing ronald mcdonald.  many among this new breed of toy designer were weaned on japanese manga comics and anime films, as well as american cartoons like ''ren & stimpy,'' ''the simpsons'' and ''south park.'' some also emerged from the skateboard and graffiti cultures, where they were hard-wired to attack or analyze everything in mass culture. for them anything is artistically possible, especially challenging the convention-bound toy industry. yet budnitz notes that despite their influences, one thing is certain: these toys are not nostalgic. ''as far as i am concerned nostalgia is a creativity killer, and a life killer,'' he says. and while some toys overtly riff on tv shows and movies (like nathan cabrera's r2-d4, in which a can of the popular lubricant wd-40 is made to look like the body of the ''star wars'' character r2-d2, and his breakfast at tiffany's, starring french kitty, featuring a sassy, wide-eyed plastic cat in audrey hepburn's famous cocktail dress), a vast majority are unique, conceptual comic absurdities made, more or less, from whole cloth (or fresh plastic). to-fu oyako, a 10-inch piece of tofu in a spaceman outfit, made by devilrobots, and gloomy bear, a sad-eyed pink creature clinging to a lifeless friend named pity, designed by mori chack, are among the most imaginative creatures in a book filled with many surprises.  although designer toys emerged on the pop culture scene with a kind of d.i.y. underground cred, most are intricately and professionally produced, with well-articulated parts and accessories. le messie's zombies -- a series of brightly colored creatures with sardonic expressions, whose bodies resemble large gel caps with arms, legs and removable heads that cover their deformed brains -- are typical of an obsessive attention to detail. in fact, designer toys are also more sculptural than their mainstream counterparts. even the cardboard and bubble-wrapped packages (sadly, not reproduced in the book) are graphically alluring. ''what draws a person to an object is not always an idea -- it might just be an intense love for the material reality of the object itself,'' budnitz writes.  he's right. over the past five years i've bought dozens of toys, not for bathtub play but for arrangement in pristine displays (kept out of reach of my son) that are a pleasure simply to look at. ''i am plastic'' proves that as this art form grows, there will be many more toys worth collecting.  steven heller is the former art director of the book review.  