7 months, and still no rate cut   talk of a federal reserve interest-rate cut began spreading almost from the moment of the last rate increase, in june, but it is now sounding more like urban legend than economic analysis.  the fed stopped raising short-term rates last summer and is expected to hold firm again on wednesday, yet it has continued to warn of the risks of inflation and offered few, if any, hints of a cut. wall street got a reality check when the employment report a month ago showed surprising strength, and one market strategist expects another dose of uncomfortable economic facts on friday, in the next update on jobs.  a bloomberg news poll of economists predicts 140,000 net new jobs in january, down from 167,000 last month. edward e. yardeni, president of yardeni research, warns that stocks and bonds may sell off if, as he anticipates, the final figure is closer to 200,000.  ''if the number is stronger than expected and we get a '2' handle, the markets won't be too happy with it,'' he said. ''it would definitely bury any expectations still out there that the fed's next move will be an easing one anytime soon.''  mr. yardeni noted that in past economic growth spurts, 200,000 new jobs a month was routine. but that has changed, he said.  ''at the fed there's a perception that somewhere between 100,000 and 150,000, there's a number consistent with an economic expansion that's quite mature and an unemployment rate that's close to full employment,'' he said.  but mr. yardeni contends that the economy has more room to maneuver, that jobs can be added at a faster pace without a worrisome rise in wage inflation. he expects his belief to be put to the test this year. he thinks that unemployment, now at 4.5 percent, will decline to 3.5 percent, a level unseen since 1969.  ''most economists subscribe to the theory that there's no trade-off between unemployment and inflation,'' he said. ''you can have an even tighter labor market and better-than-expected economic growth without inflation.''  but mr. yardeni said that stronger job reports would worry the markets unless a certain handful of economists made clear that they held to the same theory.  ''i'm entitled to my opinion,'' mr. yardeni said, ''but at the end of the day what matters is what they think at the fed.''  data watch -- other items on a busy economic calendar include the institute of supply management's snapshot on thursday of the nation's manufacturing activity in january. the bloomberg poll predicts a slight increase, to a reading of 51.6 from 51.4 in december.  the same day, reports on personal spending and income in december are expected to show increases. income is estimated to have risen 0.5 percent, after a 0.3 percent gain in november. spending is predicted to show a 0.7 percent increase, versus a november climb of 0.5 percent.  market week  