tale of survival quickly turns into lesson on fragility of life   the news out of kennett square, pa., is not promising.  barbaro, the world's most popular thoroughbred, has had a setback. since he shattered his right hind leg in may during the opening seconds of the preakness stakes, his condition has been regularly updated. the updates have been cautious but mostly upbeat as barbaro, last year's kentucky derby winner, continued to defy the odds.  but the tone of yesterday's update, by dr. dean richardson, the chief of surgery at the university of pennsylvania's new bolton center, had the feeling of a somber hospital conference. it was the attending physician telling the patient's family the facts of life. and death.  in an update yesterday, richardson wrote: ''on saturday, jan. 27, barbaro was taken back to surgery because we could not keep him comfortable on his right hind foot. that foot developed a deep subsolar abscess secondary to bruising when he went through a period of discomfort on the left hind foot. it is not laminitis, but the undermining of the sole and part of the lateral heel region are potentially just as serious.''  surgery was performed saturday to insert two steel pins in a bone to eliminate all weight bearing on barbaro's ailing foot. the procedure is risky, richardson conceded, because it transfers all the weight to the rest of the leg.  in yesterday's somber release, richardson laid out the risks of the external skeletal fixation device, namely that the bones bearing the weight could fracture. he told the associated press that if the barbaro's bone breaks, ''i think we'll quit.''  we've never heard the word ''quit'' before. not in relation to this horse. barbaro was one of the most intriguing sports stories of 2006, and he continues to be a fascinating tale of survival. from the frantic moments of his injury in may in baltimore until yesterday's ominous announcement, barbaro has been a monument to veterinary science. who knows how many lives the horse has already saved -- lives of young thoroughbreds who are often run hard and ground up before they are 4 years old.  barbaro may provide the model for how far and to what lengths veterinary medicine can go to keep an injured horse from being destroyed. certainly, racehorses with far less serious injuries than barbaro's have been destroyed much earlier in the process, perhaps because the owners lacked the resources, the patience or the access to top-flight veterinarians.  in light of yesterday's news, the resounding question is, where do we go from here? at what point will his owners, gretchen and roy jackson, pull the plug on what has been a draining emotional experience, one lived under the gaze of excruciating medical attention?  entertainment, politics and sports are fragile. each discipline has its pitfalls and drawbacks. entertainers struggle with the emotional highs and lows of show business, with the stress of dealing with public attention and opinion. the politician must continually navigate between the truth and the lie, serving the public versus serving oneself.  sports is most fragile of all. a career may end in the split second of a broken bone or, in barbaro's case, a misstep in a highly anticipated race.  things can change in a flash.  indeed, the news was brighter thursday, when barbaro ''was doing well after a planned procedure.'' richardson said. ''we also removed the cast on his right hind leg and replaced it with a custom-fabricated plastic and steel orthotic brace to give his foot additional support.''  he described how barbaro had a smooth recovery and ''has been comfortable with an excellent attitude and appetite since then.''  the stakes are considerably higher now, and high risk, apparently, had to be the order of the day. richardson conceded there was '' significant risk in this approach.''  ''but we believed it was our only option given the worsening of the right hind foot problem,'' he said. ''unfortunately, we felt we needed to take this risk because this approach offered our only hope of keeping barbaro acceptably comfortable.''  any decision the jackson family makes will be criticized. some will say save the horse's life at virtually any cost. others will question the extraordinary expenditure to keep a horse alive when he may never be able to walk again on his own.  earlier this month, gretchen jackson expressed that concern to the philadelphia inquirer. ''what's hard to accept is you see him steadily improving and you're talking about getting out of there, and realize that this kind of thing could probably happen the rest of his lifetime,'' she said.  they ask, what is the point? i'm beginning to wonder about the point as well.  richardson wrote that the team of veterinarians ''will continue to treat barbaro aggressively as long as he remains bright, alert and eating.''  but he added that ''this is another significant setback that exemplifies how complex his medical situation remains because both hind limbs have major problems.''  barbaro has had another significant setback, and his fight for survival may have reached a critical point.  i read this and wondered with a sinking feeling whether this was another update. or whether the doctor is warning us that a brilliant animal may be approaching the end of his road.  sports of the times e-mail: wcr@nytimes.com  