going, going, gone?   to the sports editor:  re ''extra innings throws a curve, and fans cry foul,'' jan. 26: as a lifelong fan, i am outraged about major league baseball's decision to offer the extra innings television package exclusively to directv. if this proposed deal goes through, in my mind it will be the equivalent of a strike, and this time i will not come back and support the game.  as a yankee fan living within walking distance of petco park, i have attended 10 to 12 padres games in recent years. if baseball offers extra innings exclusively to directtv, i will cease all baseball expenditures.  hopefully major league baseball will take into account the loss of peripheral income when making its business decision.  roy m. stein  san diego  to the sports editor:  i am a mets fan living in florida and have enjoyed the opportunity to watch them play most games on cable. the loss, while on the surface significant, may not be all that bad. i'll just have to work a bit to find when or if they are on. surely, with the success of the mets last season, they should be on a few extra national games. i just won't enjoy listening to those ''homer'' announcers.  my wife, on the other hand, will be thrilled about the move. it will force me to abandon the 65-inch tv in the great room and watch the games (i'll probably sign up for mlb.com's package) in the seclusion of ''my'' room. our social life should improve a bit, too. i no longer will say, ''i want to be home for the ballgame.''  better yet, maybe baseball will come to its senses and not make the switch.  jeff robins  lake worth, fla.  to the sports editor:  not only do i think major league baseball has the right to pursue its best interests, but i also think this deal meets the best interests of fans in general.  with increased adoption of mlb.tv, baseball will have greater wherewithal to invest in and develop the product, which ultimately will be great for most fans. unfortunately, a small percentage of fans will be negatively affected (the extra innings subscribers who either do not or cannot subscribe to directv). i am hopeful that baseball will not allow the rumblings of a vocal minority to distract it from what would be a good deal for the industry and its wider fan base.  william juliano  new york  