maybe 'i'm marrying a jackass' didn't test well   bam margera, the professional skateboarder and ''jackass'' star, is used to making appearances at his hometown courthouse, but on this frosty wednesday morning he was here of his own volition, more or less. he had arrived at a sterile and totally-not-rad government office (just across the hall from the tax claims and liens bureau) with his fiancée, missy rothstein, an mtv camera crew close behind recording mr. margera, the scruffy 27-year-old daredevil, as he took the biggest plunge of all: applying for a marriage license.  before the young couple could qualify, however, they had to answer a series of seemingly perfunctory questions posed by a clerk, who addressed the groom-to-be by his given name, brandon. were either of them afflicted with any transmittable diseases? were they under the influence of liquor or other intoxicants? were they weak-minded or insane? mr. margera thought long and hard about each of these inquiries before answering no to all.  finally the clerk asked if they had fully contemplated the responsibilities of marriage and were certain they wanted to go through with it. ms. rothstein, a slender, 26-year-old west chester native who works at a nearby sign shop, was first to respond. ''if i wasn't sure,'' she said, ''i would have run away a long time ago.''  then she waited for her betrothed to pay the $50 cash application fee, but mr. margera had forgotten to bring any money. instead their camera crew pooled their resources and bought the couple their ticket to a future of connubial bliss, dirty diapers and equitable distribution laws.  the singles scene's loss is cable television's gain. beginning on tuesday the unorthodox, mostly unscripted preparations for mr. margera and ms. rothstein's wedding will provide the raw footage for a new mtv reality series, ''bam's unholy union,'' the third mtv show on which mr. margera has played a prominent role.  those viewers who were unaware of his skateboarding exploits were introduced to mr. margera on ''jackass,'' the stunt show that featured him running amok at a rest stop while dressed as an escaped mental patient and setting off fireworks in the bedroom of his sleeping parents. a spinoff, ''viva la bam,'' followed mr. margera, his family and friends as they wreaked havoc on the pennsylvania estate near here that he built from endorsement deals for skating gear, apparel and right guard deodorant.  last january mr. margera and ms. rothstein were shopping at the cartier store in the king of prussia mall when they discovered a diamond engagement ring that happened to fit ms. rothstein's finger perfectly. mr. margera took it as a sign and decided to propose on the spot.  ''i was like, 'now's the time,' '' mr. margera recalled over lunch at a local pub, swigging strongbow cider while ms. rothstein sipped unsweetened iced tea. ''we just sat there and drank three bottles of champagne. then we forgot to get gas on the way home, and we straight up ran out of gas on route 202.''  after celebrating the good news with ms. rothstein's family, mr. margera reached out to mtv. ''bam called up and said: 'hey, i'm getting married. is that a show?' '' lois curren, the network's executive vice president for series entertainment and programming, recalled in a telephone interview. ''and we thought, 'yes, we believe it is.' it offers this different prism for our viewers to look at things like marriage for the first time. it's tender and it's torturous at the same time.''  the same could be said for mr. margera and ms. rothstein's tumultuous courtship. though they had been friends since they were in sixth grade together, by 2001 they were dating other people who would not allow them to see each other. (''they must have been jealous for a reason,'' ms. rothstein said.)  but two years ago they found themselves available again after ms. rothstein parted ways with her boyfriend and mr. margera endured a particularly nasty split from his former fiancée, the actress jenn rivell, against whom mr. margera would later seek an order of protection. ''sometimes when you're with somebody, and all their stuff is at your house, it's so hard to break up with them,'' mr. margera explained. ''you don't know what they're going to wreck and destroy.''  after reuniting and embarking on a relationship of their own, mr. margera and ms. rothstein discovered they were a perfect match. ''i love his spontaneity, even though it drives me crazy sometimes,'' ms. rothstein said. ''i'd be bored if he was normal like everyone else.''  mr. margera said: ''if it's valentine's day, i don't want her to expect flowers from me just because that's what you're supposed to do. my valentine's day is may 5.''  ms. rothstein in return provided mr. margera with a much-needed calming influence. ''i'm the type of dude that'll stay out till 5 in the morning,'' he explained, ''while she'll be like, 'o.k., it's midnight, time to go to bed.' i'm not 21 anymore. i've got to stop going for it.''  ''and,'' ms. rothstein added proudly, ''i'm stopping him.''  since production began on ''bam's unholy union,'' the two have been consumed with preparations for their february nuptials (all of them being documented for the show): organizing a bridal shower for ms. rothstein, scheduling a pair of bachelor parties for mr. margera in new york and las vegas, booking iggy pop and the stooges to play at their post-wedding celebration. (the exact date and location of the wedding have not been revealed for fear of attracting unwanted attention from fans and ex-girlfriends.)  mr. margera is happy to leave the finer details of the ceremony in the hands of the mtv producers. ''if i didn't have a whole crew of 30 here to help me,'' he said, ''i'd probably have gray hair by now.''  mtv benefits from the bargain too. it gets another opportunity to showcase one of its most popular on-air personalities and to extend the ''jackass'' franchise, even as mr. margera undergoes a rite of passage that would seem to spell the end of his outrageous shenanigans. ''bam's just so easily distracted that something as mundane as setting a guest list for a wedding, he brings new life to it,'' ms. curren said. ''once a 'jackass,' always a 'jackass.' ''  there is also the hope that the wedding might break the network's unlucky streak of celebrity couples -- nick lachey and jessica simpson, dave navarro and carmen electra, travis barker and shanna moakler -- whose marriages unraveled soon after they appeared in mtv reality shows. ''well, the osbournes are still together,'' ms. curren offered, ''so we have that going for us.''  ms. rothstein insisted that she and mr. margera would beat the odds: ''we don't live in hollywood. it's not two celebrities coming together, fighting over the spotlight. it'll be a nice memory that, years from now, we can look back on, and we have the entire process documented.''  having finished lunch mr. margera and ms. rothstein made their way down the street to the x-treme ink tattoo parlor (''no smoking, alcohol, or attitudes'') to commemorate their marriage license with indelible pigmentation. behind her lower lip, ms. rothstein got a tattoo of the number 313, the area code for detroit, where the couple bought their wedding bands.  behind his lower lip, mr. margera got a tattoo that read ''dr. j,'' the nickname of the legendary basketball player julius erving, who played in nearby philadelphia. ''he's the man,'' mr. margera explained.  despite the symbolism, ms. rothstein was confused by her fiancé's choice: ''what does that have to do with the wedding?''  television  