ways to end the nightmare in iraq   to the editor:  bob herbert (''more than antiwar,'' column, jan. 29) got it right about the united for peace and justice march last saturday. the crowds i marched with ''love their country as much as anyone ever has,'' as he wrote -- ''they love it enough to try to save it.''  while it was reassuring to be among so many others who are as fed up as i am about iraq and this failed administration, i was surprised and disappointed that few key members of congress attended or spoke to the crowd starving for the leadership we voted in last november. where were they?  i rallied and marched on saturday to voice my hope for america, but i returned home wondering if anyone really listened.  betsy craz  remsenburg, n.y., jan. 29, 2007  to the editor:  on the morning after the large antiwar demonstration in washington -- a war that has taken the lives of more than 3,000 american men and women, egregiously wounded tens of thousands more, and destroyed the lives of countless thousands of iraqi civilians -- we were shocked to find that your article about that protest was buried inside the paper (''protest focuses on iraq troop increase,'' jan. 28).  why did the times not consider that article worthy of the front page (aside from a mention in the ''inside'' box)?  at a time when the polls indicate that a majority of americans have finally awakened from their apathy and are seeing the truth about this reckless and catastrophic adventure, where was the new york times -- the paper of record -- on this story?  barbara gordon  rita lloyd  new york, jan. 28, 2007  to the editor:  re ''parting ways in iraq'' (column, jan. 28): david brooks has proved to be a reliable trailing indicator of political and social developments. if he's beginning to contemplate soft partition in iraq, then partition is probably inevitable.  our government should acknowledge that reality, apologize to the world for our arrogance and willful blindness, and seek assistance from the united nations and the international community in minimizing the loss of life that partition may entail.  it's not victory, but it's the only way to leave the iraqi people better off than they are right now.  joseph robert hanc  chicago, jan. 28, 2007  to the editor:  although i usually don't agree with david brooks, i agree that the idea of a partition of iraq is inevitable. this country, like yugoslavia, should have never been patched together in the first place.  but i take issue with mr. brooks's logic. modifying the iraqis' constitution is irrelevant since they don't have faith in it in the first place.  ''guaranteeing'' the sunnis 20 percent of the oil and gas revenues by this constitution would be a farce that no one, certainly not the sunnis, would believe. specifically, how would the sunnis get their money from the other two main groups?  relocating people makes sense, but what about the families in which one parent is sunni and the other shiite? there would be no place for them to go, just as now.  reassuring the turks that an independent kurdistan will never come into being is an empty promise. who could give them this reassurance? certainly not the united states.  jack cain  highland park, ill., jan. 28, 2007  to the editor:  defense secretary robert m. gates claims that congressional action to end the war ''emboldens the enemy'' (''democrats try to increase leverage over iraq policy,'' news article, jan. 27). doesn't mr. gates recall that president bush declared the war ''won'' by us three years ago and when asked about insurgent forces said, ''bring 'em on!''?  no one in the world could do more than george w. bush has done to ''embolden'' terrorists around the world. americans will be paying with blood for years thanks to mr. bush's ignorance.  david bennett  tesuque, n.m., jan. 27, 2007  to the editor:  president bush says that if i don't like his escalation plan, i am responsible for coming up with an alternative. he also claims that i didn't vote for failure. he is correct. i voted for getting out of iraq now.  i did not vote for failure. i have been stuck with it by president bush, who started the war under false pretenses, who lied about its progress for three years, who kept on an incompetent defense secretary, whose idea of diplomacy with iran is public intimidation, and whose plan for iraq continues to be ''stay the course.''  given all of this, i am supposed to trust his judgment.  i believe that the ''way forward'' lies directly through the president. he and his administration said the november vote will not stop them. it is time for the senate to stop quibbling about a nonbinding resolution. congress needs to take forceful action against the president, or there will be no progress in iraq.  david p. bloomfield  santa fe, n.m., jan. 26, 2007  to the editor:  i agree with thomas l. friedman (''running on empty,'' column, jan. 26) that a regional conference to try to stabilize iraq is a priority. but this should be preceded by a sustained diplomatic effort led by a special united states envoy involving saudi arabia, egypt, jordan, syria and iraqi sunnis to end the insurgency, the most important single cause of the continued violence.  while it is clear that the sunni insurgency was a response to the united states invasion, negotiating an end to it with the help of iraq's sunni neighbors would deflate the growing sectarian violence and promote conditions for an eventual political settlement in iraq similar to that in bosnia.  the time has come for a united states diplomatic offensive, as robust and as targeted as the continuing military operations, devoted to ending the greatest roadblock of all to peace, the sunni insurgency.  that would be a victory for all sides.  r. bruce hitchner  medford, mass., jan. 26, 2007  the writer is a professor of classics and international relations at tufts university.  