paperback row   the diviners, by rick moody. (back bay/little, brown, $14.99.) this exhilarating satire revolves around a proposed mini-series that follows generations of a tribe of water dowsers, or diviners, from the mongol hordes to the founding of las vegas. there's no script, only a synopsis concocted by an independent film company's office assistant and her lover, a married b-picture action star. meanwhile, an imperious producer's accountant embezzles thousands of dollars and goes on the lam, and the producer's aging alcoholic mother disappears. taken together, this kaleidoscopic group forms ''a fitting milieu for moody's own talent, which is to present an ensemble cast in the grips of ambient hysteria,'' stephen metcalf wrote in the book review.  field notes from a catastrophe: man, nature, and climate change, by elizabeth kolbert. (bloomsbury, $13.95.) based on a series of articles kolbert wrote for the new yorker, this sober book visits scientists around the globe, in places where climate change is affecting the natural world -- from melting ice caps in greenland and rising water levels in the netherlands to butterflies in england migrating to higher elevations.  the gang that wouldn't write straight: wolfe, thompson, didion, capote and the new journalism revolution, by marc weingarten. (three rivers, $13.95.) this is an enthusiastic group biography of the talented, disparate writers whose dramatically personal nonfiction of the 1960s and '70s represented ''the last, great good time of american journalism.'' weingarten examines the making of the period's best-known journalism, including hunter s. thompson's misadventures with the hell's angels and truman capote's research in holcomb, kan., for ''in cold blood.''  hershey: milton s. hershey's extraordinary life of wealth, empire, and utopian dreams, by michael d'antonio. (simon & schuster, $15.) ''if it's a rule that behind every great fortune lies a great crime, m. s. hershey was the exception,'' d'antonio, a pulitzer prize-winning journalist, writes in this thorough and highly readable biography of the candy magnate. d'antonio recounts how hershey, born on a pennsylvania farm in 1857, founded what became the world's largest chocolate factory, built a utopian worker-village that still draws millions of tourists a year, and placed much of his fortune in trust to a school that he started for orphans. ''while some look at hershey and see either a beneficent angel or a willful tyrant, it is the great charm of d'antonio's book that he will not plunk entirely for one judgment or the other,'' benjamin cheever wrote here.  the fugitive wife, by peter c. brown. (norton, $14.95.) in brown's enormously satisfying first novel, a minnesota farm girl gives up on her alcoholic husband and impulsively joins a crew of gold prospectors bound for alaska at the turn of the 20th century.  cousins and strangers: america, britain, and europe in a new century, by chris patten. (times/holt, $17.) in this penetrating analysis patten -- chancellor of oxford, former chairman of britain's conservative party and the last british governor of hong kong -- inspects the fault lines of international politics, taking an uncharitable view of the forces that have weakened the trans-atlantic bond. our reviewer, josef joffe, called ''cousins and strangers'' a ''brilliantly catty and nicely constructed text.''  the caliph's house, by tahir shah. (bantam, $13.) in early 2003, the british travel writer shah, right, moved his young family into a sprawling mansion in a casablanca slum. ''the caliph's house'' is shah's alternately comical and alarming account of how he restored the place, which was infested not only with all manner of earthly pests but also with magical spirits that love to haunt unoccupied houses. in the book review, adam goodheart said shah's narrative is ''enlivened by well-wrought descriptions of life in casablanca: a place suspended between modernity and the middle ages, between europe and africa.'' in his absorbing memoir golden boy: memories of a hong kong childhood (picador, $14), the british novelist and popular historian martin booth, who died in 2004, recalls his adventures as a streetwise 7-year-old when his father, a navy clerk, was posted in hong kong in 1952.  timothy: or, notes of an abject reptile, by verlyn klinkenborg. (vintage, $12.) blending nature writing and novelistic invention, klinkenborg, a member of the editorial board of the new york times and the author of ''the rural life,'' takes us inside the watchful mind of an 18th-century tortoise, who is abducted from the turkish coast and ends up in the garden of the curate and naturalist gilbert white.  ihsan taylor  