the neediest cases; her deadly illness becomes her family's struggle   the quinceañera photo hangs high up on the living room wall: wanda reynoso, at 15, in a sparkling white dress and a tiara, radiant against the pink backdrop.  ms. reynoso, now 18, is still the same beautiful girl, but underneath her cocoa skin, her color is yellow and pale.  subdued and gracious, ms. reynoso is fighting a disease that has left her exhausted; the treatments she undergoes have been like a battle.  she has aplastic anemia, a disorder of the bone marrow that causes it to stop producing red and white blood cells, and platelets. ''the inside of the bone is, like, empty,'' she said. ''i'm not producing blood or any type of cells.''  the disease compromises her ability to fight infections. her bones and joints ache. she is at risk of uncontrolled bleeding. ''if i get a bruise, i got to tell him real quick,'' she said of her doctor's strict instructions.  ''sometimes i don't even want to wake up,'' she said. ''i feel my body so tired, so heavy. i don't even want to get up from the bed.''  in august, she began chemotherapy at the children's hospital at montefiore in the bronx, but it was discontinued in october because her body was not responding.  she needs a bone marrow transplant and is waiting for a compatible donor. neither her mother nor her brother is a match. on tuesdays and fridays she takes two trains and a bus from her bronx apartment to the hospital for blood transfusions. she receives two bags each visit, and the process takes about four hours and leaves her exhausted.  her doctors worry that public transportation will expose her weakened immune system to infections, but she has no other way to get to the hospital and back. it reassures her that her mother, fatima sanchez, goes with her.  if she needs to, ms. reynoso can sleep on the train.  no parent could be prepared for such a frightening illness in a child, but for ms. sanchez, this has been particularly devastating.  three years ago, ms. sanchez, 44, moved her son, gregory reynoso, now 15, and ms. reynoso from the dominican republic to the bronx. when ms. reynoso became ill, ms. sanchez left her restaurant job to care for her daughter full time.  ''not being able to work has not been easy,'' ms. sanchez said in spanish. ''there have been times when i feel very desperate.'' her salary was the family's only income. they are legal residents, not citizens, and the family does not qualify for public assistance.  ms. reynoso's grandmother and aunts, also in the bronx, pay the $642 monthly rent on their one-bedroom apartment.  then there is the language barrier. ms. sanchez does not speak english and often relies on her daughter to translate medical information.  ''there's days when she's not even up to speaking, so when she's not up to it, what information does mom get?'' asked minerva cales, a social worker. ms. cales works at ms. reynoso's high school for the children's aid society, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund.  in late september, ms. cales noticed that ms. reynoso, a senior and a strong student, was missing a lot of school. when she learned about the illness behind the absences, ms. cales did what she could to help.  ms. cales used $1,570.80 in neediest cases money for a variety of items: a sofa bed and armchair for the living room; $200 in clothing vouchers ; $80 in metrocards; $90.89 to pay the bill on a cellphone, which is the family's only phone; and $200 in food vouchers.  with ms. cales's help, ms. reynoso now has medicaid, and can be treated at memorial sloan-kettering cancer center, where, ms. cales said, ms. reynoso can be added to a list for a bone marrow donor. now that she is 18, she is above the age limit at the children's hospital, ms. cales said.  ms. reynoso continues her school work at home, with daily visits from a home educator, and a computer borrowed from the school. ''even with the illness, she's still up to date on her schoolwork,'' ms. cales said.  when ms. reynoso talks about dancing, she still sparkles. ''i was the shakira of the school,'' she said. she won the title after dancing in a school talent show, when she showed off some moves inspired by the pop performer.  now, ms. reynoso's brother sometimes has to carry her up the stairs to their fourth-floor walk-up.  ''she's a senior at school this year, we're hoping that she's able to be there at graduation,'' ms. cales said. ''that's my goal.''  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest. for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  previously recorded: $7,409,805.46  recorded monday: 34,436.25  total: $7,444,241.71  last year to date: $6,639,740.70  