a blog offers insiders' guides to paris   when in paris, do as the parisians do. at www.voiceofacity.com, a new blog, 10 paris residents give visitors their insiders' guides to the city of light. published by eurostar, the company that runs the channel tunnel trains between paris and london, visitors to the site can check out the voices of after8 (a 28-year-old night-life lover and graphic designer), mama gilda (a 40-something mother of two), and putyourflareon (an american ''marketing goddess'' living in paris). others might prefer to listen to king negrito, described as a 23-centimeter-tall leather bear that frequents the trendy parts of paris.  after8 posts invitations to free parties and new clubs, while putyourflareon recommends downloading ''a moveable feast: the hemingway in paris rough guides'' from itoors. mama gilda offers advice on buying last-minute presents for children, while jean f (a landscape designer) gives a rundown on the best gardens in the city.  also useful is the ''set a challenge'' box, where you can give the voices a task, like ''where should we go on valentine's day?'' (king negrito, ''a lover of good things,'' suggests the cristal room at the baccarat museum.)  and while you're there, why not live like a native and stay in someone's home? the city of paris has begun a new program for residents willing to operate bed-and-breakfasts -- hôtes qualité paris (www.hqp.fr) -- and encouraging locals to make their spare rooms available. for 95 euros a night (about $123 at $1.29 to the euro), you can stay on a barge docked between the louvre and the place de la concorde; or for 69.30 euros in a room near the bois de boulogne, with ''a passionate history lecturer'' as host.  even better, on the web site www.bed-and-breakfast-in-paris.com,travelers can book a stay in an elegant room on the Île st.-louis for 145 euros a night with an english woman and her husband, ''a retired french senior official,'' who can get his houseguests into the assemblée nationale, which normally requires an invitation.  in transit  