fight over quilt reflects changing times in battle against aids   it has been 20 years since cleve jones started the aids memorial quilt here, painting the name of a friend who had died from the disease on a simple piece of fabric.  during the next two decades the quilt became the largest piece of community folk art in the world, a 54-ton collage affixed with the names of 91,000 victims of aids, a tapestry of grief that was one of the earliest and most effective tools in raising awareness of the disease.  now mr. jones is locked in a legal tug of war with the quilt's caretaker, the names project foundation, over custody of 35 of its 6,000 panels. the dispute is not just about the relatively small swatch of the quilt, or even the simmering personality clash between mr. jones, a founder of the group, and his successors. more broadly, the battle reflects the changing symbolism and purpose of one of the most recognizable symbols of the aids crisis as the crisis itself has changed.  the confrontation has touched on issues percolating through the aids community, including the new racial, social and international demographics of the disease; changes in philanthropic trends; and the question of whether memorials are appropriate at a time when other major problems, including a rebound in unsafe sex and the emergence of new drug-resistant strains, persist.  ''the quilt was very effective in the late '80s and early '90s for aids awareness,'' said michael petrelis, a writer in san francisco who has been active in the aids movement. ''on the other hand, there's hundreds and thousands of people that need a housing subsidy, just trying to keep a roof over their head. should we be putting our time and money into another vigil? i don't know.''  the legal dispute dates to 2004, when mr. jones filed a wrongful termination suit against the names project foundation, which is based in atlanta and was established to care for the quilt, after being fired from a job as a fund-raiser and public speaker. the termination claims were dismissed, but a 2005 settlement granted mr. jones custody of the 35 billboard-size panels for his emotional distress. the panels are generally made up of eight individual quilts affixed with names of people who died.  the settlement called for mr. jones to establish a nonprofit organization to care for the quilt while it was in his possession. but in december, mr. jones informed the foundation that he would use an umbrella group instead of a newly formed nonprofit to sponsor the quilt, a plan the foundation said was unacceptable under the terms of the agreement.  a lawyer for the foundation, charles thompson, said the matter seemed closed. ''mr. jones didn't comply with the agreement, and our obligations are over,'' mr. thompson said.  that assessment has angered some san francisco city officials as well as mr. jones, who said he had planned to return his piece of the quilt ''to the front line of activism'' in the city, a hot zone in the aids crisis where the disease, according to the city's health department, is still a leading cause of death for men ages 15 to 54. mr. jones emphasized that he had no financial gain from the settlement, only a desire for more forceful advocacy.  ''they've taken it upon themselves to decommission one of the most powerful weapons we have,'' said mr. jones, who now spends his time in palm springs and san francisco and works for unite here, a union representing hotel workers, among others. ''it's not intended as a passive memorial.''  the foundation's executive director, julie rhoad, said more than half of the 6,000 panels had been displayed in each of the last three years, including dozens of times in san francisco. that said, the quilt, which if unfurled would cover six city blocks, needs constant upkeep, and the foundation has rules about lending it out and caring for it, ms. rhoad said.  ''not only do we need to look at our daily work of sending the quilt on the road and making sure we have it as active as possible,'' ms. rhoad said, ''but we also have to plan for long-term stewardship.''  she said the focus in atlanta has included more efforts in black and latino communities, which were not ''at the epicenter of the disease when we were founded.'' like many aids groups, the foundation has been trying keep people's interest in combating the disease even as it has become a less imminent threat to financially stable gay white men, who long drove fund-raising and awareness efforts.  kandy ferree, the president and chief executive of the national aids fund, which channels private and corporate money to aids groups, said fund-raising for some groups in the united states had lost a sense of urgency as the disease had begun to devastate other, often poorer parts of the world.  ''we did not do a good job as domestic aids organizations in keeping the changing face of aids on the domestic radar screen,'' ms. ferree said.  ms. ferree added that while she supported the quilt, she believed its place in the aids community had diminished in part because it was so large that it was rarely seen in its entirety. the whole quilt was last displayed in 1996 on the mall in washington, when it was visited by more than one million people, an event ms. rhoad called ''transformative.''  but it was also expensive, leaving the group deeply in the red, foundation officials say. that debt also coincided with the emergence of new drugs, which gave many long-suffering patients a new lease on life and caused a serious dip in philanthropic giving to aids groups.  by 1999, the foundation had laid off dozens of staff members and substantially curtailed its operations. in 2001, the foundation relocated to atlanta from san francisco, in part for financial reasons as well as to bring the quilt closer to minority groups and civil rights leaders. mr. jones, who has aids, said he spoke publicly in favor of the move, though it was met with outcry from some san franciscans who thought the quilt should have stayed in the city.  but mr. jones said he personally regretted the relocation. ''san francisco is the birthplace of the quilt,'' he said. ''it's part of our history. are you going to move the cable cars to spokane?''  in 2003, mr. jones was dismissed by the foundation. he said he lost his job after he sought to display the entire quilt in washington during the 2004 presidential election. foundation officials said such a display would have seriously taxed the group's financial and administrative resources but denied that the proposal had cost mr. jones his job. court papers state that in 2003 mr. jones demanded that the board turn over the organization to him and oust its then-president, behavior the board found ''unacceptably disruptive.''  foundation officials also said the legal proceedings with mr. jones had drained the group's resources and thwarted plans to establish a permanent satellite display in san francisco, something mr. jones calls ''nonsense.'' the foundation had a $1 million budget in 2006, down slightly from the year before.  ''the quilt has always had a footprint in san francisco,'' ms. rhoad said. ''but certainly you can understand that the institution has to have the financial underpinnings itself to have a satellite venue.'' but she added that a san francisco quilt display was still on her foundation's ''to-do list.''  city leaders here hope so. earlier this month, the san francisco board of supervisors adopted a resolution saying it would be an ''unconscionable and unthinkable offense against the citizenry of san francisco'' if mr. jones's panels were not returned. some people active with aids groups have suggested the quilt be enshrined here in a new museum devoted to the aids crisis.  still, there is a sense among some people that the quilt, like the once-ubiquitous red ribbon on the lapel, may have seen its cultural moment pass. robert mcmullin, the executive director of the stop aids project, a prevention group in san francisco, said the quilt, like any symbol, might have ''lost its punch'' over time.  ''the quilt is about loss,'' mr. mcmullin said. ''and while people are still dying, for most of us, the most important part of our message may not be about people dying.''  