a little bit of a bad thing can be good   forgive that older gentleman in malibu, calif., if he was not among the millions mesmerized by ''american idol'' last night. for one thing, it was his 85th birthday, and he might have had better things to do. for another, this notion of singers so wincingly bad that you can't turn away? been there. done that. about 40 years ago.  the gentleman is dick martin, and once upon a time he; his comic partner, dan rowan; and his executive producer, george schlatter, stared dumbfounded as a guy with stringy hair, a ukulele and a ridiculous falsetto voice auditioned for their new show, ''rowan & martin's laugh-in.''  ''someone brought him in, and we thought george was putting us on, and he thought we were putting him on,'' mr. martin recalled. ''i stared at him and thought, 'god, that was funny, but it worked.' ''  the ukulele-strummer was herbert khaury, better known as tiny tim, and how brutally simon cowell and the other ''idol'' judges would have dismissed him is frightening to contemplate. mr. martin and company, though, made him a ''laugh-in'' regular -- but in small doses. brevity, mr. martin said, is the key to keeping a spectacle like tiny tim funny, and it's why he has not been a regular watcher of ''idol'' or similar reality shows: too much of a bad thing.  ''good god, they're terrible,'' he said. ''we did that on purpose. but you can't do it too long, or too often.''  mr. martin spoke in a telephone interview coinciding with a couple of milestones: not only his birthday, but also the 40th anniversary of the creation of ''laugh-in.'' oh, the real 40th-anniversary hoopla will be about a year from now -- the show had its debut as a series in january 1968 -- but before that there was a test run, a pilot broadcast on nbc in 1967.  ''it didn't do much in the ratings,'' mr. martin recalled, ''but it got a significant amount of mail.'' that led to the series, tossed into nbc's schedule as a midseason replacement for ''the man from u.n.c.l.e.''  ''by the eighth show we were the no. 1 show in the country,'' mr. martin said. ''no one was more surprised than nbc.''  mr. martin and mr. rowan, who died in 1987, had until ''laugh-in'' been a fairly conventional nightclub act. the comic tommy noonan had introduced the two in 1952, taking mr. rowan, who was selling cars for a living, into the establishment in los angeles where mr. martin was tending bar. they hit it off, and hit the road.  ''we were a very inexpensive act for the club owner to buy,'' mr. martin recalled. ''we didn't have music. we didn't have props or anything. we had a rented tuxedo.''  their gimmick was simple and timeless: a smart guy and (this would be mr. martin) a not-so-smart guy.  ''what our act basically was over the years is, he would tell me about things, and i would find everything incredulous,'' mr. martin said. ''and sexy.''  it worked nicely on conventional television -- the two made frequent appearances on ed sullivan's show and were guest hosts of dean martin's show for the summer of 1966. but there was nothing conventional about ''laugh-in,'' which shattered the variety-show mold with an avalanche of gags strung together with quick cuts and catchphrases like ''sock it to me'' that were soon on everyone's lips.  ''our whole premise when we started it was, we had a shoebox full of cartoons from the saturday evening post, playboy, the new yorker, and 90 percent of them were one frame,'' mr. martin said. ''you could tell a joke in that length of time.''  mr. rowan and mr. martin delivered some of the material, often with a ribald undercurrent. (mr. rowan, fretting about mr. martin's gaunt appearance: ''for your own good, you should pick up some weight.'' mr. martin: ''shoulda been with me last night. i picked up 118 pounds.'') an assortment of no-name young troupe members (judy carne, arte johnson, goldie hawn, ruth buzzi, flip wilson) and big-name guests (bob hope, jack benny, richard m. nixon) delivered the rest.  it all zipped by at a pace that made other shows seem as if they were shot in slow motion. and though ''laugh-in'' may share the national-phenomenon credentials of ''american idol,'' mr. martin said he saw evidence of the show's pacing and film techniques in a different fox show, one that he does watch regularly: ''24,'' the counterterrorism drama.  it's not just the short segments and the urgency; it's the challenge to the viewers to keep up. the running gags and incongruous juxtapositions of ''laugh-in'' aren't so dissimilar from the running story lines and unnerving twists of ''24,'' and though ''laugh-in'' is often credited with expanding what could be done on television, mr. martin suggested that it also expanded the definition of the audience.  ''they got it quickly,'' he said of those viewers back in the 1960s.  after ''laugh-in'' went off the air in 1973, mr. martin had some success as a director, including on the sitcoms of his friend bob newhart. what among television's offerings makes him laugh today?  not much.  ''i liked 'frasier,' '' he said. but, he added a bit glumly, ''i can't find anything funny today.''  