metropolitan diary   dear diary:  i was walking on west 72nd street last month when i was approached by a tourist who spoke very little english. she asked, ''where doctor's apartment?''  i asked her to repeat her question, and she said, ''where doctor's apartment?'' i started to be concerned because she was clearly looking for a doctor and i could not help her. i asked her, ''which doctor?'' she replied, ''john lennon.''  my linguistic skills kicked in and i knew she wanted the dakota apartments. i pointed her in the right direction and she marched away happily, camera in hand.  trudy zimmern  dear diary:  overheard in a diner on second avenue, on new year's day:  an elderly man is having lunch when a friend, also quite elderly, arrives, takes off his coat, sits down and asks, ''so, how are you doing?'' the friend replies, ''i don't know -- how do i look?''  marian miller  dear diary:  on a recent saturday, i was in prospect park, skating with my mother and younger sister. after going several rounds, i decided to rest awhile on the grass near the parking lot and wait for my mother and sister to catch up. as i sat idly, i took to carefully surveying the people speeding down the track ahead of me.  i observed the following: a cloud of up-and-coming tour de france champions whizzing past one very irate elderly man passionately scolding them in fluent cantonese; a pregnant woman power-walking her triple stroller down the runners' track; a youngish man swiveling expertly down the riders' path on his rather innovative two-prong, four-wheel scooter-cycle (patent surely pending); and a man on a bicycle, pulling a child on a tricycle, clutching a dachshund puppy strapped to a basket at the handlebars.  latoya raveneau  dear diary:  commuting from my apartment in washington heights to my teaching job at the lycée français, i often chose the leisurely no. 4 bus, which provided door-to-door service, though at a slower pace than the subway.  another advantage was the occasional urban adventure, including a memorable moment when the driver came to a sudden stop at columbus avenue and 110th street and darted out of the bus to help a very nontraditional commuter.  i was sitting in the front seat, and the driver handed me the new passenger for safekeeping: a small, stunned bird that had apparently just flown into the windshield of the bus, and was groggy but otherwise unharmed.  by the time we reached fifth avenue, my seatmate had started to recover; no longer in need of a special unscheduled stop, it waited patiently in my hands until the bus arrived at 96th and fifth, and then exited, cheerfully fluttering just above the other passengers out the door. i couldn't help hoping that this was its intended destination all along.  jane f. ross  dear diary:  date: just before christmas. scene:  the lobby of a central park west building. two brothers, ages 5 and 8, are waiting for the elevator while admiring the newly decorated christmas tree.  boy, 5: ''i like to take the candy canes off the tree and eat them.''  boy, 8: ''i used to like candy canes but now i don't like them so much anymore.''  boy, 5: ''that's because your taste buds are changing.''  boy, 8: ''yeah. you know how i knew my taste buds were changing?''  boy, 5: ''no.''  boy, 8: ''when i started to like the inside of sushi.''  rachel melniker  dear diary:  the scene: the union square greenmarket on a saturday in early january when the temperatures reached the low 70s.  overheard: a young woman, dressed appropriately for a day at the beach, is chatting on her cellphone: ''i mean, like, what's the point of global warming if you can't wear flip-flops?''  brenda fine  dear diary:  a couple of weeks ago, my husband, steven, was on a lexington avenue bus when he heard the following announcement: ''no smoking or drinking on the bus.''  at this point, a little boy, approximately 5 years old, got up from his seat and started to walk around the bus, much to the consternation of his baby sitter.  when he reached my husband, he pointed his little finger and said, ''no smoking or drinking on the bus.''  my husband asked good-naturedly, ''why are you telling me this?'' the child replied, ''you look like you would smoke and drink!'' whereupon the bus exploded in peals of laughter.  when my husband got off the bus there was a chorus of passengers yelling, ''no smoking or drinking on the bus.''  carol rand  metropolitan diary  