battle pits patent rights against low-cost generic drugs   the supply of low-cost generic versions of cancer and aids treatments for the developing world could be blocked if novartis wins a legal challenge to india's patent law, patients' rights groups have contended.  but western drug companies say that if novartis loses its challenge, their ability to invest in the research and development of new medicines will be severely hampered.  in a court in chennai on monday, novartis, the swiss pharmaceutical company, appealed a decision not to grant it a patent on a modified form of its leukemia drug, gleevac. the court was asked to clarify new regulations on patents for new versions of drugs whose original patents have expired.  if the company's arguments prevail, indian companies could be banned from manufacturing generic versions of the drug, which are sold in india and around the world for about a tenth of the $2,600 that novartis charges for a month's course of treatment.  patients' rights organizations say that a ruling in favor of novartis would eliminate a global supply of affordable, generic drugs from india; aid agencies said millions of people would be left without access to the cancer treatment.  it would also effectively tighten patent legislation passed by india in 2005 to limit the manufacture of generic drugs. the law was intended to bring india in line with the world trade organization's agreement on intellectual property rights.  the 2005 law allows patents to be granted on new versions of older, off-patent medicines if the new version can be shown to represent a significant improvement on the original, but not in the case of ''incremental innovations.''  novartis said its new drug could be absorbed more easily by the body. last year, an indian court rejected the argument that the drug constituted a major improvement on the earlier version.  john gilardi, a spokesman for novartis, said by telephone from switzerland that the company's appeal was in part an attempt to gauge how the law was going to be put into practice.  ''we are trying to gain clarity as to what guides india's patent laws,'' mr. gilardi said. the case was about ''clarifying intellectual property rights and not about access to medicines,'' he said, adding that novartis already gave free supplies of gleevac to 6,800 patients in india suffering from the rare form of leukemia that it was developed to combat. he said that number represented more than 90 percent of all the cases in the country.  ''if there is no patent protection, we will not see billions of dollars being invested in the research of medicines,'' mr. gilardi said. ''this is not about access to medicines. it is about establishing whether india is going to step up and adopt the minimum international standards required for the protection of intellectual property.''  but unni karunakara, medical director of a doctors without borders campaign to broaden access to medicines, said a ruling in favor of novartis could obstruct the organization in providing treatment for aids patients globally.  ''novartis is trying to shut down the pharmacy of the developing world,'' dr. karunakara said at a news conference in new delhi. ''indian drugs form the backbone of our aids programs, in which 80,000 people in over 30 counties receive treatment. over 80 percent of the medicines we use to treat aids come from india.''  doctors without borders and oxfam have collected nearly 250,000 signatures on a petition asking novartis to drop the case, which was adjourned until feb. 15.  