arts, briefly   indian actress wins on show after racial taunts  the indian actress shilpa shetty, left, emerged the winner of the british ''celebrity big brother'' reality show on sunday after a contest marked by accusations of racial bullying that touched off protests in india and debates about the state of race relations in britain, the associated press reported. ''i want to thank the whole of great britain for giving me this fantastic opportunity to make my whole country proud,'' she said. ms. shetty, 31, attracted the public's support in the elimination contest after being the target of insults from contestants that led to 40,000 complaints to media regulators. ms. shetty has hired the public relations consultant max clifford to promote her career in britain. he estimated that she could earn $2 million in the next year.  james bond in china  ling ling qi, otherwise known as 007, landed in china yesterday when audiences in the world's most populous country got their first chance to see a james bond film in theaters, uncut and uncensored, reuters reported. just before the premiere of ''casino royale,'' daniel craig, above, on hand with his co-star eva green, said with regret: ''it hasn't premiered here yet, but i think it's been seen here. someone tried to sell me a copy last night.'' poor-quality pirated dvd versions of ''casino royale,'' priced at little more than $1, have been selling in china for weeks.  underwear tossing roils kiri te kanawa  the soprano kiri te kanawa is being sued for $1.55 million for breach of contract by a promoter after withdrawing from a tour with john farnham, an australian rock star, upon learning that his fans threw underwear at him, agence france-presse reported. a court in sydney was told yesterday that after agreeing to appear with mr. farnham in three ''two great voices'' concerts, ms. te kanawa watched a dvd of one of his concerts, where underpants landed onstage, and found it ''absolutely horrendous.''  inquiry in brandy's case  the california highway patrol recommended yesterday that the actress and grammy award-winning singer brandy be charged with misdemeanor vehicular manslaughter in a los angeles freeway crash that killed a woman motorist last month, the associated press reported. nick velasquez, a spokesman for the city attorney's office, said it ''is currently reviewing the case and determining whether the evidence warrants the filing of a misdemeanor charge of vehicular manslaughter.'' the charge carries a maximum sentence of a year in jail and a $1,000 fine. a message seeking comment from courtney barnes, a press representative for brandy, 27, whose full name is brandy norwood, was not immediately returned.  footnotes  for london theaters it was a very good year, reuters reported. figures compiled by the society of london theaters showed that ticket sales, buoyed by several hit musicals, broke the £400 million ($780 million) mark for the first time; revenues were up by nearly 5 percent, and attendance rose by about half a percentage point, to more than 12 million. pedro almodóvar's ''volver,'' the tragicomic tale of a mother's survival, won five awards, including best film, best director and best actress (penélope cruz) when the goya awards, spain's counterpart of the oscars, were bestowed in madrid yesterday, reuters reported. about 60 works from more than 20 leading european and american museums will be displayed in ''tintoretto,'' beginning today at the prado in madrid. trumpeted as the first comprehensive exhibition in 70 years and the first in spain to be devoted to this renaissance artist, the show will run through may 13.  