shannon hamm and john warner iv   as a child, john w. warner iv loved explosions, cartoons, army uniforms, pranks involving frogs and ice cream -- he called health food ''seeds and twigs.''  mr. warner, the son of senator john warner, republican of virginia, and catherine conover, the daughter of the philanthropist paul mellon, also loved wearing kilts because of his scottish heritage.  although his parents divorced when he was young, they lived next door to each other in washington. he was known to ride his motorized minibike there as fast as it would go, sometimes with senator warner's second wife, the actress elizabeth taylor, as a very vocal passenger.  after mr. warner graduated from the university of virginia, where his fraternity, chi phi, voted him ''hellmaster'' four years in a row, he became a professional race car driver, naturally. ''it's a blood sport,'' said mr. warner, now 44. ''it's a thrill going around the track 6 inches from the wall at 180 miles per hour, but it's frightening. you grow up very quickly.''  his father said, ''he wanted his own identity and he found it.''  in 1998, mr. warner moved to westport, conn., living alone in a big old house that was decorated with 18th-century furniture and always filled with friends, usually playing pool in the dining room. ''john is all-inclusive,'' tommy walker, an old friend, said of his parties. ''he invites not only the people he's close to, but also the guys doing the gardening at his house.''  mr. warner created americanstock.us, a web site offering nascar and stock car racing history and collectibles. he also began making documentaries like ''the wendell scott story,'' about the first black driver to reach the top level of stock-car racing.  through it all he remained a die-hard and distinctive bachelor, sometimes picking dates up in his 1936 packard or his 1966 aston martin. but he grew to dislike breaking hearts as much as he hated eating tofu. ''johnny never wants to let anyone down,'' said jill mullen, a friend.  he also became disillusioned, always questioning the motives of the women he dated. by the time he was in his early 40s, he had broken two engagements and pretty much given up hope. ''a lot of women in new york and l.a. are in it for the dollar, not for a healthy relationship,'' he said wearily.  then, in november 2004, jodi edmonds, another old friend of mr. warner's, set him up on a blind date with shannon ford hamm, a first-grade teacher at the spence school in new york, who had taught her two daughters. mr. warner, who still loves frogs and other slimy creatures, suggested that they meet by the reptiles at the american museum of natural history in new york. ''he had such a wide-eyed view of the world'' ms. hamm said. ''it was wonderful to meet someone like that, especially at our age.''  he, on the other hand, was unsure about ms. hamm, whose family founded the hamm's brewing company, which was based in minnesota. she was nothing like the wild supermodels and party girls he had been dating. ms. hamm has unflashy clothes, jewelry and ways and is the opposite of high-maintenance.  she is never one to speak first or loudest, and though beautiful, seems to deflect attention. her parents, jean hamm of wayzata, minn., and edward hamm of jupiter island, in florida, describe her as a solid midwestern girl who doesn't need flattery. but, underneath her cool demeanor, friends say she has a wicked sense of humor.  nevertheless, he wasn't interested in a second date with her.  then, one year later, tired of young, temperamental beauties, he called. ms. hamm wasn't miffed and agreed to see him. ''i feel strongly that you never want to close any doors,'' she said. ''you never know.''  this time, they went to the guggenheim, and then to lunch, then to a party and a late dinner. ''we had such a great time,'' ms. hamm, now 41, said of their 12-hour date. ''we just had to wait until the first kiss to see how that went.''  mr. warner was surprised he had much in common with a schoolteacher. like him, she collected antiques and had a come-one-come-all attitude about parties. and, he said, ''her family grew up with wealth, and they're eccentric and funky and i feel totally at home. she gets it when i tell her all the weird things about my family, and i get it with her family.''  he recalled falling in love with her when he visited her classroom at spence. ''she's just beautiful with children,'' he said, adding that she seemed so guileless and good-hearted, especially in comparison to him. ''i never thought she'd like a bad boy like me.''  soon after they started dating, friends noticed a change in mr. warner. he put his pool table up for sale, and started shopping for dining room furniture, now that he had someone to dine with regularly. ''he used to watch all these war movies, hours of war movies,'' said ramon ruiz, another friend. ''then, one day he said, 'change it to the antiques channel.' that's when i knew it was serious.''  for the first time in his life, mr. warner said he felt unconflicted about getting married, and last may, six months after their 12-hour date, he proposed in paris. ''there's an old adage that you wait for the right one,'' senator warner said. ''and if ever there was a case of a man waiting, it was john.''  the couple wed on jan. 13 in jupiter island, where the bride's family has a vacation home with a sign on the front door that reads: ''friends welcome. relatives by appointment only.'' it is an immaculate place with homes that are pastel-colored, like mentos, and as low profile as its residents seek to be.  the couple's episcopal ceremony took place at the beach-cottage-like christ memorial chapel of hobe sound, where the rev. david prior, its chaplain, officiated with the rev. william billow, senior chaplain at st. albans school in washington, which the bridegroom attended.  after the service, the couple and their 170 guests followed a sandy path lined with hurricane lamps down to a white tent set up on the beach. inside, the tent looked like a chic new manhattan hotel lobby. it was decorated with seashell-white couches, carpeting, chandeliers, candles and flowers.  the bridegroom, whose back still hurt from a recent motorcycle crash, greeted guests à la truman capote, while lounging (in a kilt) on one of the couches. the bride, meanwhile, looked completely natural in her sleeveless gown and her hair pulled back as if for tennis.  ''these two people are just so meant for each other,'' observed bernard rogers, a guest. ''she is enormously patient, and he's enormously impatient and it really goes together.''  weddings/celebrations: vows  