north carolina exacts revenge while remaining undefeated   at the final four in boston last april, the north carolina women's basketball team saw a night full of promise dissolve into a disquieting mess.  the top-seeded tar heels lost in a semifinal to maryland, which went on to win the national championship against duke. north carolina guard ivory latta said the flight home was filled with quiet tears.  weeks and months passed, and latta refused to watch the film from that game.  but on friday, as the undefeated tar heels prepared for sunday's game against maryland, north carolina coach sylvia hatchell figured the time was right. her players sat and stomached last season's end.  ''man, it was depressing,'' latta said. ''it was very hard to watch.''  but latta said the film was also helpful. the players noticed simple mistakes they had made and vowed not to repeat them. at the comcast center on sunday, the second-ranked tar heels took their long-awaited shot at the no. 3 terrapins. this time, they walked off the court delighted, with an 84-71 victory that snapped maryland's 19-game home winning streak before a crowd of 17,950 that was the largest to attend an atlantic coast conference regular-season women's game.  ''playing against north carolina, playing against duke, the revenge factor is so, so big right now,'' said maryland forward laura harper, whose team lost to duke, 81-62, on jan. 13. ''they come ready to play us.''  for a time, north carolina's victory looked as if it would come easily. the tar heels (23-0, 7-0) raced to a 20-point second-half lead behind the shooting of latta, who made six 3-pointers and finished with 32 points.  but maryland (21-2, 5-2) responded with a furious comeback that was led by the senior guard shay doron, who scored 13 of her 19 points in the second half. with 3 minutes 13 seconds left, doron converted a 15-footer, pulling the terrapins to 67-66.  ''she just kept putting them up, making shots and all,'' hatchell said. ''but, you know, that's maryland; i knew they could score like that.''  the tar heels, who entered the game as the nation's top-scoring team, can pounce quickly, too. they closed the game with a 17-5 run, and revenge was theirs.  when maryland, duke and north carolina reached the final four last season, it was the first time a conference had placed three teams in the national semifinals; the a.c.c. had never sent more than one.  this season, the three a.c.c. powers have a combined record of 65-2, with the two losses coming within their impressive triumvirate. maryland plays host to duke on feb. 18 but will not face north carolina again in the regular season. north carolina plays host to duke on feb. 8 before visiting the blue devils on feb. 25.  sunday's game became a sellout more than two weeks ago. the atmosphere and the national-television audience might have caused some early-game jitters for the terrapins. maryland missed 15 of its first 18 field-goal attempts and committed 10 turnovers in the first 10 minutes.  ''anxiousness, nerves, whatever you want to call it,'' maryland coach brenda frese said. ''but at the same time, we have played on the biggest stage before.''  with 30 seconds remaining in the first half and north carolina leading, 33-27, maryland guard kristi toliver was hounded by two defenders as she struggled to bring the ball across midcourt. frese stomped the floor and yelled to a referee, frustrated that a foul had not been called. she received a technical foul, and latta made both free throws, giving the tar heels an 8-point halftime lead. latta made four 3-pointers in the first 4:50 of the second half, putting north carolina ahead by 20.  college basketball  