critic's choice: new dvds   robert mitchum  the signature collection  vincente minnelli is justly famous for his mgm musicals, which include ''meet me in st. louis'' (1944) and ''the band wagon'' (1953). but his talent also prospered in a different, though related, genre, the domestic melodrama. mostly dismissed as ''women's pictures'' at the time of their release, minnelli melodramas like ''the cobweb'' (1955) and ''some came running'' (1958) now seem like field guides to the confused, rapidly changing sexual and political mores of the supposedly bland 1950s, when radical transformations in american life were taking place behind the discreetly drawn floral-print curtains of the eisenhower administration.  minnelli's characters don't simply act out their discomfort with the roles they've been thrust into or the relationships they've chosen to endure, but project their feelings onto the visual and aural fabric of the film. where minnelli's musicals express emotions through song and dance, his melodramas express feeling through color (of which he was one of the medium's great masters) and set design.  ''home from the hill'' (1960), which has crept into the marketplace as part of the highly worthwhile box set ''robert mitchum: the signature collection,'' from warner home video, is a superb example of minnelli's method and seems even more effective now that its fading color has been restored and its widescreen framing carefully transferred to dvd.  mitchum, pushing his relaxed masculinity into something monstrous and smothering (much as he did in ''the night of the hunter''), plays a texas patriarch who goes nowhere without his rifle and hunting dogs. he's disappointed that his son, (george hamilton), whom mitchum turned over to his estranged wife (eleanor parker) to rear in a conventional manner, has developed into something of a wimp. the film follows the crash course in manly behavior mitchum gives to his timorous boy, as defined by shooting animals and seducing stray wives.  minnelli and his art directors designed ''home from the hill'' in an earth-toned palette that seems directly drawn from 1950s issues of field and stream and argosy. but there are strong color fields that run against the overall tones, like the lemon-yellow sweater vest that mr. hamilton wears through much of the film and, most impressively, the oxblood-red set that represents mitchum's den, decorated with leather furniture and stuffed boar heads as if it were the toniest steakhouse in dallas.  there are no arias here, but the film is organized into operatic climaxes: great emotional outpourings, centered on traumatic events like the discovery by mr. hamilton's character that the sympathetic ranch hand (george peppard) is actually his half-brother, product of his father's indiscretion.  by composing elaborate tracking shots on location and staging a fair portion of the ''outdoor'' action on sound stages, minnelli blurs the distinction between the artificial and the real, marking out the ambiguous territory where most of his protagonists live, between the facts of their lives and the fantasies they have spun around them.  there are many other pleasures in the mitchum box, including otto preminger's devastating noir ''angel face'' and the josef von sternberg-nicholas ray mash-up ''macao'' (both 1952), fred zinnemann's australian western ''the sundowners'' (1960), burt kennedy's western spoof ''the good guys and the bad guys'' (1969) and sydney pollack's cross-cultural gangster film, ''the yakuza'' (1974). warner home video, $59.98, not rated.  van gogh  four years after his death, maurice pialat remains the major european filmmaker perhaps least known to american audiences. few of his intense psychological dramas have crossed the atlantic, and with the release of his penultimate film, the 1991 ''van gogh,'' the total number of his works available on domestic dvd is now three. (criterion has a fine edition of his masterpiece, ''À nos amours,'' from 1983, and with a bit of poking around you might find new yorker's five-year-old edition of the terrific ''loulou,'' from 1980.)  mr. pialat was a burly, unruly, difficult man whose mal de vivre was reflected in the abrupt, chaotic rhythms of his films. his van gogh (played by the popular french singer jacques dutronc, so gaunt that he is barely recognizable) is a close self-portrait, with approximately 100 pounds of body mass removed, who throws spectacular tantrums and tries to seduce the daughter of the kindly dr. gachet, his last friend and caretaker in auvers. gachet (gérard séty) is mr. pialat's backhanded tribute to his most persistent patron, the producer daniel toscan du plantier.  this is not the picturesque 19th century of, say, vincente minnelli's van gogh film, ''lust for life'' (1956), but rather a dirty, earthy place where the provincial boredom is palpable. the most beautiful moment in the picture is a complete digression -- a staging of a dance in a peasant inn, which, as mr. pialat explained, was a close copy of john ford's ballroom dancing sequence in ''fort apache'' (1948).  life may be a horrible mess, but these sudden moments of formal lucidity -- the ballroom dance, as well as van gogh's art -- help to make it bearable. sony pictures home entertainment, $24.96, r.  corsair  the flood of fascinating poverty row and b pictures coming out of the independent budget label alpha video (oldies.com) continues to yield unexpected pleasures and extreme rarities, not always in the greatest of prints but generally quite watchable. (for $6, alpha gives you a perfectly fine $6 dvd.)  ''corsair,'' a recent find from 1931, is a gatsbyesque drama of high society rum-running by the interesting and underrated roland west (''the bat whispers,'' 1930; ''alibi,'' 1929) that stars mr. west's girlfriend, the cultivated but unabashedly sexual thelma todd, as a rich girl who gets turned on watching chester morris raid smuggling ships and hijack their product.  mr. west was capable of moments of anomalously abstract graphic expression (bob kane is said to have based his batman design on the title character in mr. west's 1926 silent thriller, ''the bat''), and ''corsair'' has several of them, including an unusually callous killing executed as a series of measured close-ups.  ms. todd died in 1935, apparently a suicide, though stories have circulated ever since that she was murdered by mobsters intent on taking over her popular hollywood restaurant. the print that alpha is using is apparently from a later 1930s re-release, and her name -- which suggests how notorious the case had become -- has been replaced on the main title by the pseudonym alison lloyd. alpha video, $5.95, not rated.  also out today  flyboys -- tony bill's history of the lafayette escadrille, the american flying squad in world war i. with james franco and scott hazell; available in single- ($29.95) and double-disc ($39.98) editions. mgm, pg-13.  open season -- digitally animated talking animals, in a film by roger allers and jill culton. with the voices of martin lawrence, ashton kutcher and jon favreau. sony home entertainment, $28.98, pg.  critic’s choice  correction:  february 5, 2007, monday  the critic's choice column on tuesday, about new dvds, referred incorrectly to the use of a pseudonym for the actress thelma todd in the credits for ''corsair,'' a 1931 film now out on dvd, and misspelled the surname of the pseudonym. ms. todd, who was known for her comic roles, was listed as alison loyd, not lloyd, for ''corsair,'' a drama, to distance her from her comedy work. the alison loyd credit dates from the film's release; it was not changed from thelma todd for a later 1930s re-release because of notoriety surrounding ms. todd's death in 1935.  