in iowa, candidate clinton takes a new tack, and talks   senator hillary rodham clinton was in a cedar rapids living room crammed with iowa voters on saturday night when a voice from the back asked why the clintons were such polarizing figures in american politics. the room grew still, except for the crackle of the fireplace.  ''i could give you a flip answer that, you know, some people are going to like me, and some people are not,'' mrs. clinton said, smiling and sipping from a cup of water. ''but i think it's bigger and deeper than that.''  for the next few minutes, mrs. clinton spoke about why she thought she incited such strong emotions -- because she was part of an unconventional, high-profile couple, ''standing my ground'' on controversial issues -- and how she could overcome them in a presidential race.  ''i was part of a political couple that was very much committed to progressive political policies,'' she said. ''in a perverse form of flattery, people who opposed us took us seriously and decided that it was important to go after us, and i understand that and i accept that.''  the last time mrs. clinton was on a journey like this, as a democratic candidate for the senate on a ''listening tour'' in new york in 1999, she almost certainly would have resorted to a flip answer, a nervous joke or a cautious evasion.  but by the time she was done with her inaugural two-day trip as a presidential hopeful on sunday evening, it was clear that the candidate who trudged across new york almost seven years ago did not show up in iowa this weekend.  this candidate clinton did a lot more talking than listening. she offered an assertive case against the bush administration and for her own qualifications to be president. she discussed easily the intricacies of american policy in israel and in iran, and, less easily, in iraq, as she called on president bush to ''extricate our country'' from iraq by the time he leaves office in 2009.  she dealt, with self-deprecatory answers and at some length, with questions she used to avoid with a nervous shrug. again and again, without a whisper of the hesitancy she showed when she began her 2000 campaign, mrs. clinton embraced her status as a woman seeking a high office, with all its attendant benefits and risks.  some of her answers could arguably be described as self-serving, including the one in cedar rapids on saturday night about her place in american politics. she still skipped away from the specifics on tough issues. while she called for universal health coverage far more forcefully this weekend than she did in 2000 -- ''i am committed to universal health care,'' she said saturday to roars of approval in des moines -- she said she was not prepared to lay out what form that should take.  at a news conference on sunday afternoon, she repeatedly dodged a query about whom she had had in mind, at a town hall meeting earlier in the day, when she slowly and theatrically repeated back a question -- ''what, in my background, equips me to deal with evil and bad men?'' -- with a conspiratorial smile. the question referred to foreign leaders; the audience, which responded with a roar of laughter, clearly thought mrs. clinton had been thinking of tormentors on the domestic front.  to a certain extent, the change in mrs. clinton on display this weekend reflected an adaptation to a far different political challenge in iowa than she faced in new york. but it was also evidence of her evolution as a candidate, displaying what two campaigns and six years in the senate have done for her political skills. it showed how she was responding to an intensely competitive field and to persistent doubts about her initial support for the war in iraq and her electability.  from the start, mrs. clinton said she would approach her campaign in iowa, the state that is supposed to have the first nominating contest for the 2008 race, as she did her 2000 senate campaign in new york: methodically and exhaustively, with intimate chats where she would listen to voter concerns and permit iowans to get to know her.  ''this is what i like to do best; it's what i did in new york when i started running,'' mrs. clinton said.  but for all her effort to restage the 2000 campaign here -- ''let the conversation begin!'' read the banner at her town hall meeting -- this is a very different year and a very different campaign.  the central goal of the new york listening tour was to address accusations that mrs. clinton, a native of chicago, was a carpetbagger. iowans, however, expect their presidential candidates to represent different parts of the nation's geography and culture.  and after this weekend, it seemed fair to say that a dutiful schedule of stops at churches and diners, which worked when mrs. clinton had a full year to devote to such visits in new york, would not work here.  an estimated 1,000 people turned out to see her at the town hall event on sunday morning, prompting organizers to move it from a restaurant to an exhibit hall at the state fairgrounds. mrs. clinton spent an hour taking questions and lingered for nearly another hour talking to anyone who could push through the crowd. an intimate chat it was not.  even more striking was the shift in mrs. clinton. in 1999, the listening tour was aptly named: mrs. clinton would go for hours saying barely a word, just nodding and asking questions. her aides, concerned that she was viewed as too polarizing, were delighted at any day that passed without her saying anything that made big news; it was a campaign that succeeded because it was bland.  but in iowa, over the course of two days, mrs. clinton attacked the bush administration for policies that she said favored the rich, for destroying what she said was a balanced world and financial order left by her husband, and for pursuing policies that she said encouraged global warming.  ''our leadership in washington, in particular from our president and vice president, has been undermining the progress our country made during the 20th century,'' she said in cedar rapids. ''when i first got to the united states senate, i realized this new administration wanted to undo everything my husband had done. and i admit, i take that rather personally.''  mrs. clinton took issue with mr. bush's suggestion that the war in iraq would spill into the administration of the next president.  ''i think it's the height of irresponsibility, and i really resent it,'' she said. ''this was his decision to go to war, he went with an ill-conceived plan, an incompetently executed strategy, and we should expect him to extricate our country from this before he leaves office.''  whatever the confusion at the news conference over her remarks about ''evil and bad men,'' her audience of voters -- iowans who had not flown in for the day -- ate it up, breaking out in long laughter, a reaction mrs. clinton seldom saw in her senate campaign, at least in the early days of the tour. as for her audience of reporters, mrs. clinton lifted an eyebrow and said no when someone asked if she had had another person named clinton in mind.  ''you guys!'' she chuckled after the third question from a reporter on the topic. ''i thought i was funny. you guys keep telling me, lighten up, be fun. now i get a little funny, and i'm being psychoanalyzed.''  