3 men killed and 9 are hurt in brooklyn and bronx disputes   three men were killed and nine others were injured in about two hours yesterday morning in three disputes in brooklyn and the bronx, the police said.  the first, in brooklyn, began about 5:20 a.m., when an uninvited guest at a party in an east new york apartment fatally stabbed one man with an ice pick and injured three others after an argument, witnesses said. the man who was killed was identified by the police and witnesses as hewitt hester, 23, also known as gus.  billy collom, 19, a cousin of mr. hester's who was at the party, said that when the fight began and the ice pick appeared, things turned chaotic. ''girls were crying because they didn't know what to do,'' he said, adding that the music was too loud for him to hear what the argument was about.  at least two men tried to help, witnesses said, and they were among those injured. it was unclear last evening how a third man, stabbed in the head and the left forearm, was wounded before the attacker fled.  the three wounded men, none of whom was identified by the police, were in stable condition yesterday at brookdale university hospital and medical center, the police said.  about an hour later, in the flatlands section of brooklyn, one man was killed and three others were wounded when gunshots were fired outside the island grill cafe on glenwood road near east 55th street, the police said.  according to neighbors on the mostly residential street, the owner of the restaurant was giving a party. it was unclear yesterday what provoked the shooting just outside. the restaurant's owner declined to comment.  diane backas, 38, who lives nearby, said she was walking by the scene about 6 a.m. and saw a woman kneeling over one of four men in the street. the men were taken to kings county hospital center, where one, roger maxwell, 30, of brooklyn, was pronounced dead. the others, who were not identified by the police, were in stable condition, the police said.  city councilman lewis a. fidler, a brooklyn democrat who represents the neighborhood where the shooting occurred, said he had worked to close some nearby late-night establishments that have been prone to violence.  ''there's a need for tighter enforcement at some of these places,'' he said. ''this one hadn't come to my attention but clearly something was going on there that needed to be watched.''  the violence continued about 7:30 a.m. yesterday in the bronx, when one man was killed and three were wounded in a shooting after a chase involving at least one car and several people on foot near two popular nightclubs. the police said it appeared that the chase began near boston road and 222nd street, near the club expressions and the caribbean sunset restaurant and lounge.  shell casings were found on several blocks, and a 33-year-old man, whom the police did not identify, was found dead with a gunshot wound to the head on bruner avenue.  the three wounded men, who also were not identified, were taken to area hospitals and were expected to survive, according to the police, though their conditions were not immediately known.  the owners of both nightclubs said yesterday that no disputes had occurred inside their establishments before the shooting. a limousine driver, who would not give his name, said that by 4 a.m. he ''saw a police car in the street. i assumed there had been another fight. there is always fighting in these clubs.''  the police said last evening that their investigation into the bronx shooting, as well as both attacks in brooklyn, remained under investigation and that no arrests had been made.  