all over america, wines search for identity   maybe it was the 2004 peninsula cellars riesling that i tried last fall out in san francisco. it was dry and delicious with a minerally flavor that i don't find so often in american rieslings. what surprised me most of all, though, was the wine's provenance: old mission peninsula, north of traverse city, mich.  or it might have been the 1998 ultra brut blanc de blancs i had from westport rivers in westport, mass. who knew there was such a thing as the southeastern new england appellation, or that it would include such an elegant champagne-like sparkling wine as the westport rivers?  it might even have been the 2005 chaddsford pinot noir, a light-bodied wine with earthy cherry and spice flavors that was distinctly not a california pinot noir, though i would have been hard-pressed to guess it was from pennsylvania.  regardless of the particular wine, these three bottles and more like them have convinced me that credible wines at the least, and often enough really good wines, are emerging from the most unexpected corners of north america, and now is a good time to start paying attention to them.  like most wine drinkers, i'm pretty much a creature of habit. so many good wines come from so many familiar, well-established places that motivating myself to try something new and different seems pointless and onerous, like going to a great steakhouse and ordering the fish.  yet what if that fish were distinctive and unanticipated, a fish that you couldn't find anywhere but at that one steakhouse? wouldn't it then be worth a trip to try the fish?  one organization that certainly thinks so is appellation america, whose web site, wine.appellationamerica.com, is dedicated to what it inelegantly calls the ''appellation-ization of north american wine culture.''  in appellation america's view, the steakhouse offers dozens if not hundreds of unexpected things to try. the trick is making sure the restaurant keeps offering those exciting fish, rather than looking for fish that tastes like steak. or to put it another way, pennsylvania pinot noir is only worth drinking if it tastes of pennsylvania rather than trying to duplicate a california style.  that's a not-unfamiliar old world idea, that wine should reflect its place of origin. by this way of thinking, a pauillac should not taste like a margaux. or a chenin blanc from the okanagan valley in british columbia, like a 2005 quails' gate, which i greatly enjoyed last summer, should have something in common with other okanagan chenin blanc.  here in the united states, such thinking is alien. consumers go to the wine shop for a cabernet sauvignon, not an oakville or a rutherford. but appellation america is hoping to change all that, and to that end it has marshaled a team of more than two dozen regionally based wine writers whose task is to try to identify the precise characteristics of each meaningful wine-producing area in north america, to recommend producers and wines that express these characteristics and eventually to redraw the viticultural map.  it's a daunting task. ''americans are not concerned with a sense of place,'' said alan goldfarb, appellation america's correspondent for the napa valley. ''we're ahead of the curve, and that's a good place to be.''  but it's not simply a matter of pushing appellations, around 300 of which are already recognized by the american and canadian governments. many appellations -- sonoma coast, for example, which extends well inland from the pacific -- were drawn for political or marketing purposes. appellation america proposes, in the words of its publisher, roger dial, ''documenting terroir from the ground up and doing radical surgery on appellations to give them ecological authenticity.''  they sound like fighting words, but mr. dial says no. he's been in the wine business for 40-plus years and he says he would like it to be thriving 40 years from now. the key, he believes, is creating distinct regional identities rather than continuing to promote a stultifying sameness.  ''we're here to establish an alternative place-force,'' he said, ''an alternative understanding of producing wine.''  in mr. dial's view, the american wine industry was originally based on a sense of place. the problem was that the place was europe; hence the myriad american wines called chablis, rhine wine, burgundy and champagne. the growth of the american wine industry in the 1970s and 80s came from the more honest emphasis on grape varietals and the individual stories that wineries used to market themselves.  you can almost imagine it as a christopher guest-style mockumentary: ''i was a mild-mannered dentist, but am now a passionate winemaker. this is the best place to grow grapes because this is the place that i bought.''  whether americans are ready for another paradigm shift is not clear. right now, if you want to learn what kind of wines are made in the old mission peninsula appellation, or the arkansas appellation, you can get the information at appellation's web site. but if you want to taste the wines themselves, it's another story.  while the liberalization in shipping laws makes more wines available to more people now than two years ago, it hasn't made it easy to get offbeat wines. chaddsford, the pennsylvania producer, can ship its pinot noir to new york, for example, but gnarly state regulations permit neither old peninsula in michigan nor westport rivers in massachusetts to send their wines. for its part, appellation america has entered the e-commerce world to sell wines that it deems representative of their appellation.  so far, most of the wines, and most of the discussion on the web site, involve california wines. that's as it should be, as california remains north america's most evolved winemaking region. the sample is still a little small to debate what makes a true old mission peninsula wine. even in the web site's discussion about california, conclusions about what defines a spring mountain cabernet sauvignon or a carneros pinot noir seem feeble at best.  ''can we really make these distinctions?'' mr. dial said. ''if you ask the question and the results are, 'hmmm, maybe we're not very different from our neighbor,' you might make them think about what the differences ought to be.''  the pour  