after murder, keeping a flame alive   the father of fidelina claros has spent most of his days lately sitting quietly in a hard chair by a shelf of cleaning supplies and votive candles in the g & p deli & grocery, just a few feet from the counter where his daughter died, with two bullets to her head and one to her back.  he always has plenty of company. his grandson was at the register one recent morning, selling lottery tickets to those who felt lucky. his son and daughter-in-law were dispensing coffee and making sandwiches for the early lunch trade. and his daughter smiled at him from a picture that was taped inside the glass candy display.  ''she was alone,'' said joe andino, who lives a few doors up webster avenue in the heights neighborhood and who has joined the brigade of family and friends that has kept the store going. ''nobody's here alone anymore.''  fidelina claros was alone in her corner store just before 1 p.m. the day before halloween -- the store she had bought five years earlier with money saved from her job as a home health aide, the store where she worked seven days a week, closing only to go to church on sunday mornings, the store from which she dispensed motherly wisdom to grateful neighbors -- when someone came in with a semiautomatic .22 pistol, shot her and took all the money from the cash drawers of the register and the lottery machine. she had turned 47 just two days before.  ''it was a vicious killing,'' said the hudson county prosecutor, edward j. de fazio. ''brutal. we thank god we don't see too many of these stranger-on-stranger type cases.'' investigators have a sketch of the driver of the getaway car, but as of late wednesday they had not arrested any suspects.  for several weeks after her murder, as her family took her body home for burial in her native el salvador, ms. claros's store remained closed, the metal grate drawn down tight on the narrow space that her vibrant generosity had widened into a welcoming hearth for the neighborhood. but that just didn't seem right, to let her killers claim the store as a victim, too.  ''every single can, every piece of merchandise, is fidelina's effort,'' said her companion, mario avelar, an insurance agent who first met her when she bought a policy in 1988. like him, she was divorced, and two years ago she left her longtime home in north bergen to live with him in roselle. ''we shouldn't leave everything behind and just walk away.''  and so the grate went up again in late november, and family and friends tried to fill the void behind the counter. ''we started opening up at 6:45 to let them know we're down but we're not out,'' said mr. andino. (the store had previously opened at 7.) an auto mechanic, he starts each day buttering rolls and making coffee for the construction workers who are the first customers. ''nobody will scare us away.''  ms. claros's son brian herrera arrives next and holds down the day shift with concepcion and misael claros, his aunt and uncle. misael then picks up brian's sister, johanna, a high school sophomore, who stays until the store closes at 8:30.  ''at first it was very hard,'' johanna herrera said. ''but this was like her home.''  ms. claros's oldest son, guillermo, also works at the store in the evenings. her father, juan, will soon return to his home in el salvador after a month's visit. he has a small grocery store of his own there, but it has never been robbed.  ''somebody might take a piece of candy, that's it,'' mr. claros said in spanish, as mr. andino translated.  the ''for sale'' sign that ms. claros put up not long before her death still hangs in the window. ''she said, 'enough is enough, i've got to get out of this,' '' said mr. avelar, who has talked of organizing a march to city hall -- to remember her, and to call attention to what he believes is the need for more police presence in the area around the store. ''i always was afraid, from the very beginning of the business.''  there are still four years left on the lease, and if no buyer appears, her family plans to keep running the store as long as they can. ''i could do it,'' said brian herrera, 20, who goes to school at night to get his g.e.d. ''she died in this store to have money, to put a plate on the table for us. she was just trying to raise us up.''  when his mother was here, she lighted a votive candle every day, and now that the store has come back to life, somebody takes one each morning from the shelf behind juan claros's chair and lights it again. one was burning behind mr. herrera as he worked the register at the spot where his mother died.  jersey  