no pumpkin and no dancing broom, but cinderella still finds love   when an obscure russian company comes to town for a one-off performance of a classical ballet, you never know what to expect. the latest example was the state ballet theater of russia, the touring name of the voronezh state theater of opera and ballet, a group formed in 1961. its presentation of vladimir vasiliev's ''cinderella'' at the new jersey performing arts center departed liberally from the program's synopsis, based on nikolai volkov's 1940s libretto.  a sampling of the characters and props missing from the stage included cinderella's father, the portrait of her mother, a broom with which she is meant to dance a tender pas de deux, dragonflies in a magic forest, the pumpkin and a jester at the prince's palace. the most bewildering tactic surely had to be when the curtain fell intentionally to signal intermission -- smack dab in the middle of the second-act ball.  yet for all its awkward moments, as an overall production ''cinderella'' was full of enchantment. along with a live orchestra performing prokofiev's score, lovely scenery by viktor volsky and graceful costumes that worked within a vibrant and pastel color scheme by rafail volsky, this fairy tale came to life.  there was nothing confusing about the appeal of svetlana noskova as cinderella. with her exquisite feet and gracious performance quality, ms. noskova grasped the sweet sincerity of her role. as her attentive, handsome prince, ivan alexeev was the archetype of youthful nobility. and ekaterina liubikh's enchantress -- otherwise known as the fairy godmother -- was all refinement.  the rest of the young cast, including the fairies, lacked sufficient strength and stage presence to pull off their variations with the poise of the ballet's leads. tatiana sidorova and alina taranzhina played the spoiled stepsisters, but as cinderella's stepmother, vladislav ivanov, bronzed and redheaded, was overly broad.  the gnomes, more in keeping with snow white's seven dwarfs (there were 9 or 10 depending on the scene, but there should have been 12 to represent the hands of a clock), were distractingly thuggish. here and throughout the ballet mr. vasiliev's fussy choreography frequently seemed at odds with the music.  but especially for the dozens of attentive, cinderella-obsessed young ladies in the audience, including one who turned to flash an ecstatic grin when it was over, the ballet was deliverance. their girl got the guy in the end and looked pretty doing it. and that counts.  dance review  