college booster bias is delaying minority hiring   the boosters of inequity, the true power brokers of college football, feel safe staring down at a football field and seeing their reflection in the skybox glass.  they take comfort in their ''white-like-me'' hires as a perk of owning the program with their six-figure donations. they are used-car barons and fortune 500 executives whose contribution to higher education is not enlightenment but enwhitenment. they tailgate for ignorance.  nearly 20 football head-coaching vacancies opened on the division i-a level this past season, but only two were filled by minority coaches: randy shannon, an african-american, at miami; and mario cristobal, a cuban-american, at florida international.  the total of minority head football coaches jumped to a pitiful 7 out of 119 programs -- one fewer than the high of eight in 1998.  ''you hate to say it, but so much of change is by force,'' said university of washington coach tyrone willingham, an african-american story of resilience. ''the n.f.l. had to implement the rooney rule.''  the lawyer johnnie cochran applied the pressure of shame. he helped produce an unsparing report on n.f.l. employment practices in 2002, which prompted a workplace group, led by the steelers' owner, dan rooney, to require teams to include at least one minority candidate per opening, with fines for resistance.  what is good for the n.f.l. -- a diverse vision with the bears' lovie smith and the colts' tony dungy on the super bowl sidelines for millions to witness next sunday -- is considered a threat to the inner circles of college football.  for years, richard e. lapchick has urged the n.c.a.a.'s president, myles brand, to adopt a version of the rooney rule.  ''he has backed away from it big time,'' said lapchick, the director of the institute for diversity and ethics in sport at the university of central florida. ''he didn't believe the membership would pass it. my position is, test it.''  the hazard to brand is embarrassment. failure to pass a diversity rule would reveal the sordid power structure of college football, where decisions by presidents and athletic directors are held hostage by booster bias.  to some big-wheel donors, seeking diversity means to risk losing their identity in the secret society of good ol' boys or risk losing influence in the only network they've ever known.  the nick sabans soothe them. minorities make them nervous.  ''it's access to power,'' willingham said. ''it's about asking, is my access to power diminished because of diversity?''  comfort level is simply code for bias. willingham was forced out of notre dame in 2004, not by the president or the athletic director, but by four-leaf boosters and trustees who, deep down, craved one of their own.  on the surface, they swore willingham's dismissal wasn't because he was a southern baptist who didn't convert to irish-olicism or because he didn't protest when ''rudy'' was snubbed by oscar or because he was an african-american who looked different from their base.  talk of race was malarkey, the irish cried. willingham didn't win the big games, they declared. and yet charlie weis, sainted by the touchdown jesus faithful, has been creamed from southern california to michigan in games that matter.  as jon wilner of the san jose mercury news recently noted in a comparison of weis and willingham: ''weis is 0-4 in big games in the past 54 weeks. shouldn't he be held to the same standard?''  standards are not doomed to a sliding scale. diversity and fandom can enthusiastically coexist. mississippi state coach sylvester croom, the only black football coach ever hired in the southeastern conference, prepared himself to be accepted.  on dec. 2, 2003, croom entered a packed room for his introduction at mississippi state. he kissed his mother, then stood up to say, ''i am the first african-american coach in the sec, but there is only one color that matters here, and that color is maroon.''  he had them, every bulldogs fan in the state.  ''the place just erupted,'' said larry templeton, who as the bulldogs' athletic director hired croom, adding: ''i'm more confident today that we've hired the right man than i was then, and we haven't won but three games a year for three years. he is going to have every opportunity to succeed. and it's not because he's a minority, it's because of the man.''  progress has moved starkville, miss., and yet college football is in racial regression. the better the money in college football, the more white flight there is from the n.f.l. coaches from saban to steve spurrier have bolted the pros without a cost-of-living hardship on the n.c.a.a. level.  class barriers and perception obstacles stand like rows of tackling dummies. keep pushing, keep pounding, say black coaches who dare to hope.  kansas state coach ron prince is one of them. before he was hired in 2005, before his team upset texas last season, he educated himself on the college culture. he knew about the stereotypes -- like black coaches can't fund-raise -- but he had faith in himself to be all things.  ''these are iconic positions,'' prince said of coaching. ''it's mostly the unknown that makes people afraid. i can tell you that tyrone willingham and karl dorrell at u.c.l.a. and randy shannon in miami -- many of these men i know personally -- make a great impression.  ''i know i have the corporate crowd in kansas city, and i have the farmers and the ranchers in the western part of the state. and i have to be able to communicate effectively to both.''  and, by all accounts, prince has -- one whistle-stop town at a time.  exposure to diversity can vanquish fear. the rooney rule is proof. but what is a sign of progress in the n.f.l. is still a threat to some campus boosters. comfort, to them, is still a coach who reflects their image in every way.  sports of the times e-mail: selenasports@nytimes.com  