a faith-based fuel initiative   in 1975, after the oil embargo, congress approved the most successful energy-saving measure this country has ever seen: the corporate average fuel economy system, known as cafe, which set minimum mileage standards for cars. within 10 years, automobile efficiency had virtually doubled, to 27.5 miles per gallon in 1985 from just over 14 miles per gallon in 1976.  the mileage standards are still 27.5 m.p.g. except for minor tweaks, congress has refused to raise fuel efficiency requirements or close a gaping loophole that lets s.u.v.'s and pickups be measured by a more lenient standard.  americans who heard president bush's state of the union address, including his pledge to reduce america's gasoline consumption, can be forgiven for thinking he was finally ready to change that. but all mr. bush really asked for was the authority to set mileage standards in a different way. rather than requiring companies to meet an average fuel-efficiency standard, balancing gas savers against gas guzzlers, he would assign targets model by model, based on factors like size and weight.  as for what those new targets might be, mr. bush would leave it to his secretary of transportation to decide. and he asked the country to take it on faith that this new measurement system, combined with technological advances, would lead to annual mileage improvements of 4 percent a year.  our fear is that this program will take far too long to get going, if it gets going at all. like congress, the transportation department has been notoriously solicitous of the automobile industry.  but there's a way congress can get moving. senator barack obama plans to reintroduce a bill that would set a 4 percent annual increase in efficiency as a target, just what mr. bush says he wants. the bill would also give both the transportation department and the manufacturers considerable flexibility. but the department could not deviate from the target unless it could demonstrate that the costs outweighed the benefits.  even that is too much wiggle room for lawmakers like senator dianne feinstein and representative edward markey. while allowing for administrative flexibility, they would require a firm fleetwide standard of 35 m.p.g. with no escape hatches. but given the long congressional stalemate, the obama bill could be an important first step. it commands some bipartisan support, and unlike mr. bush's approach, it promises real as opposed to hypothetical results.  editorial  