staten island assemblyman is mourned by top politicians   many of the state's leading politicians flocked to staten island yesterday on a cold, blustery morning to pay their respects to john w. lavelle, the 61st district assemblyman and the chairman of the borough's democratic organization, who died of a stroke last week at 57.  the nearly 1,000 mourners at st. peter's roman catholic church in west brighton included gov. eliot spitzer, attorney general andrew m. cuomo, the borough presidents of the bronx and staten island, state senators and scores of mr. lavelle's fellow assembly members.  the funeral also brought out alan g. hevesi, who resigned as comptroller a month ago. with the service drawing the state's top leaders, the subject of mr. hevesi's replacement loomed over the gathering, since mr. lavelle's fellow assembly members will decide who gets the job.  during the service, speaker after speaker portrayed mr. lavelle as a passionate liberal, a disciple of robert f. kennedy and a man whose zeal for helping immigrants and homeless people went largely unnoticed.  mr. spitzer, who was strongly supported by staten island's democratic organization in last year's election, said, ''he never lacked for principles or perspective.''  in addition to many democratic officials from throughout the state, the mourners included a large number of prominent republican and conservative party elected officials, including united states representative vito j. fossella jr., borough president james p. molinaro, the city council's minority leader, james s. oddo, and all the other republican elected officials who represent the island.  the assembly members who attended the service will be returning today to albany, where they will vote on the next comptroller. assembly speaker sheldon silver, who attended yesterday's service, has made clear that he wants a member of the assembly to get the job, while mr. spitzer has said that he would like to see it go to an independent candidate with financial experience.  not one member of the assembly was selected when a panel of former comptrollers submitted a list of candidates to the legislature last week. even before the final benediction at yesterday's funeral, several assembly members spoke of their displeasure with the process. they said they viewed the situation as an institutional fight between the new governor and the assembly.  mr. spitzer has not set a date for a special election to fill mr. lavelle's seat, for a term that expires on dec. 31, 2008. but several names are being discussed among party leaders in the highly democratic district that mr. lavelle represented. they include mr. lavelle's son, daniel; matthew j. titone, who ran unsuccessfully for the state senate last year; marlene markoe-boyd, a vice chairwoman of the staten island democratic party, and city councilman michael mcmahon.  as for mr. lavelle's position as chairman of the staten island democrats, john p. gulino, the party's first vice chairman has assumed the role of leading the organization on an interim basis. he said he is considering running for the position of leader later this year.  