u.s. is urged to step up plan to attract more visitors   one year after the bush administration vowed to try to slow the decline of overseas visitors to the united states, travel industry executives and some democratic lawmakers say that the initiative needs to be stepped up.  the lawmakers and executives point to continuing delays in processing visas, staff shortages at international airports here and american consulates abroad and what they describe as a failure to promote the united states adequately as a travel destination since the terrorist attacks of sept. 11, 2001.  officials at the departments of state and homeland security counter that they have already made significant progress in addressing such problems. but senator daniel k. inouye, democrat of hawaii and chairman of the senate commerce committee, and senator byron l. dorgan, democrat of north dakota and chairman of the tourism subcommittee, say legislation is needed to prod the administration to do more.  ''announcing a new initiative is the easy part,'' mr. dorgan said of the administration's plan, which is intended to encourage tourism and business travel. ''the follow-through is what is important. and the fact is the results so far have been less than impressive.''  between 2000 and 2005, the number of overseas visitors dipped from 26 million annually to 21 million, according to the travel industry association. in some places in brazil, mexico, venezuela and the dominican republic, travelers still wait nearly two months or more to get an interview for a visa, state department statistics show. and travel industry executives say that an effort to transform the houston and dulles international airports into model airports has made ''marginal progress.''  an association of travel industry executives, called the discover america partnership, has hired tom ridge, the first homeland security secretary, to help promote its efforts.  the group includes jay rasulo, chairman of walt disney resorts and parks; jonathan m. tisch, chairman of loews hotels; and roger dow, president of the travel industry association. the travel executives are calling for legislation that would increase financing for consular and airport staff and require the administration to report to congress on its efforts to improve visa processing and customer service at customs checkpoints, among other things.  mr. dorgan, who will hold a hearing on the issue on wednesday, praised the partnership's proposals and said he and other lawmakers would consider them as they drafted legislation. ''other countries have become more aggressive while we have become less aggressive,'' he said. ''it seems to me we ought to change that.''  maura harty, assistant secretary for consular affairs in the state department, said critics failed to acknowledge progress that had been made. in september 2006, 47 of the 219 american embassies and consulates that handle nonimmigrant visas had wait times of 30 days or more for visa interviews. now, she said, only 20 of the postings have wait times of that length.  ms. harty noted that the number of business visas issued in brazil had surged by 70 percent over the past year and that the number of student visas had increased by 32 percent in china and 30 percent in india. in the meantime, she said, the state department was testing video conferencing of interviews and mobile consular units in remote locations.  she expressed disappointment that such achievements were not recognized. ''we have in essence been changing out the engine while the aircraft is in midflight,'' she said. ''we have enhanced our service delivery.''  jarrod agen, a spokesman for the department of homeland security, echoed her concerns. he said his department was pressing ahead with legislation that would expand the number of countries where travelers are not required to apply for visas in exchange for tougher security reviews of those travelers, among other changes.  ''a number of the points are areas where we're already working to improve and have made strides,'' mr. agen said.  stevan porter, the chairman of the discover america partnership, said more needed to be done. ''america is experiencing a travel crisis, one that hurts our economy, national security and global standing,'' said mr. porter, who is also the president of the intercontinental hotels group.  mr. ridge said a concerted effort was needed to make sure that america was viewed as a welcoming destination. ''i suspect every congressman, senator, ambassador, business leader as well as thousands of individuals citizens have a litany of anecdotes that confirm that it is more difficult traveling to this country,'' mr. ridge said.  