a threat to defy spitzer on comptroller selection   democratic lawmakers were leaning on tuesday toward reneging on the deal they made with gov. eliot spitzer and choosing one of their own as state comptroller -- a stance that drew a furious reaction from the spitzer administration.  the battle over who should be the next comptroller, the first big political challenge of the spitzer administration, heated up last week when a panel that the governor and the legislature had agreed should screen would-be comptrollers put forward the names of three qualified candidates, none of them lawmakers.  it was a victory for governor spitzer, who has maintained all along that he would like to see a financial expert from outside the legislature succeed alan g. hevesi, who resigned in disgrace late last year. but it was a slap in the face of the four assembly democrats who are seeking the post -- and the many other assembly members who would like to move on to bigger posts themselves someday. so the assembly speaker, sheldon silver, indicated that he might go back on the deal and pick a lawmaker.  when assembly democrats met privately on tuesday afternoon to talk about ignoring the panel's recommendations, the spitzer administration reacted angrily.  ''breaking the agreement and ignoring the people's call for reform will have consequences,'' said darren dopp, the governor's communications director. ''experience, not cronyism, should determine who manages a $145 billion pension fund.''  the battle has brought to the forefront the tensions between the new governor and the speaker, who until mr. spitzer's election was the most powerful democrat in albany. the two men met privately on monday night, but failed to agree on a deal. now mr. silver is caught between his angry members, who want to see a colleague installed as the next comptroller, and a new governor who was elected in a landslide and who is intent on upending the power structure mr. silver represents.  some lawmakers are grumbling that mr. silver ever ceded any of his power to the governor -- and to the outside panel that screened the candidates -- in the first place. the state constitution and state law give the legislature the right to pick a replacement.  several assembly democrats, who were told not to publicly discuss what happened in the conference, said that speaker after speaker expressed anger that no lawmakers had been recommended by the panel, and that many members appeared to be leaning toward ignoring the panel's recommendations and picking one of their own.  ''there is tremendous anger,'' said one assembly democrat, who was granted anonymity to discuss the private gathering.  the four assemblymen who expressed interest in running for the post -- richard l. brodsky of westchester, thomas p. dinapoli of nassau county, joseph d. morelle of the rochester area, and felix w. ortiz of brooklyn -- made it clear that they are still interested in the post. (a fifth assemblyman who expressed interest, alexander b. grannis of the east side of manhattan, left the race when he agreed to become the commissioner of the state department of environmental conservation.)  mr. dinapoli, who some officials said could be the assembly's consensus candidate, said, ''there's certainly a lack of confidence in the panel process up till now, and a lot of sentiment that a member should be considered as much as anybody else at this point.''  mr. morelle, who campaigned hard for the post, said that fellow assembly members felt that lawmakers had been ''blacklisted.''  mr. silver agreed to the panel process earlier in the month, and even appeared at a news conference with the governor to promote it as a way to ensure that only the most qualified candidates for comptroller would be considered. at the news conference, mr. spitzer said the panel would recommend ''up to five'' candidates. but mr. silver is now arguing that he understood that the panel would recommend five candidates -- so, in his view, the deal may have been broken and he may not need to live by it.  members of the pataki administration, who often complained that mr. silver broke his word or went back on deals with them, watched in amusement as the new democratic governor began to tangle with the democratic speaker.  candidates for comptroller  the following are the candidates selected by a panel convened by gov. eliot spitzer and the assembly speaker, sheldon silver. lawmakers said last night that they might reject all three.  william j. mulrow  a director of citigroup global capital markets in the municipal securities division, a managing director of paladin capital group, a private equity firm.  previous positions -- ran for state comptroller in 2002; member of government boards, including service as chairman of the westchester county industrial development agency from 1999 to 2001, board member of the municipal assistance corporation from 1994 to 1998, and executive assistant to the state budget director, 1981 and 1982.  assessment -- plenty of financial experience; he impressed many lawmakers at their hearings. but he faces the perception that he is governor spitzer's candidate -- an alliance that has hurt him, with the governor and the assembly at odds, and that troubles others given the comptroller's role as an auditor of the governor.  martha e. stark  new york city finance commissioner  previous positions -- corporate and tax lawyer, white house fellow, deputy counsel for the manhattan borough president, professor at hunter college, assistant professor at baruch college, portfolio manager for the edna mcconnell clark foundation.  assessment -- is praised lavishly, but not endorsed by her current boss, mayor michael r. bloomberg. is the chairwoman of two of the city's five pension boards. the only woman, and the only black candidate, in the running. lack of experience in electoral politics concerns democrats, who want to hold the position in four years.  howard s. weitzman  nassau county comptroller  previous positions -- founder and chief executive of several health care companies; a partner at kpmg peat marwick, overseeing accounting and auditing in the field of health care; mayor of the village of great neck estates.  assessment -- strong background in auditing, but no pension experience. originally considered a dark horse, because another nassau county democrat, assemblyman thomas p. dinapoli, was popular with many lawmakers. mr. weitzman's chances shot up when he made the final cut of three.  