news summary   international a3-11  bush's allies in senate organize effort of support  the bush administration's allies in the senate began a major effort to prevent a potentially embarrassing rejection of the president's plan to send 20,000 more troops into iraq. the effort is aimed at blocking two non-binding resolutions directly critical of the troop increase.  a1  iran linked to attack on u.s.  investigators say attackers who used american-style uniforms and weapons to infiltrate a secure compound and kill five american soldiers in the holy city of karbala on jan. 20 may have been trained and financed by iranian agents, american and iraqi officials say.  a10  more than 50 people were killed in sectarian violence, including a bomb attack on a shiite mosque that killed at least 23, leaving another reminder of just how deeply the nation has been divided in the past year.  a10  official defends u.s. iran policy  john d. negroponte, nominated as the next deputy secretary of state, defended the bush administration's more confrontational policy with iran during a senate confirmation hearing that was peppered with demands from both sides of the aisle that the united states show restraint in its dealings with tehran.  a11  fragile cease-fire in gaza  after five days of clashes in the gaza strip, palestinian factions mostly observed the latest cease-fire, though one hamas member was shot dead. also, the israeli air force bombed a tunnel it said palestinian militants were digging to enter israel and carry out an attack.  a3  national a12-17  reporter testifies at cheney aide's trial  judith miller, a former reporter for the new york times, testified as a witness for the prosecutor who had put her in jail for 85 days, recounting details of her once-confidential interviews with i. lewis libby jr.  a1  west virginia blast kills 4  an explosion at a store near a west virginia ski resort killed four people and injured five. investigators believe that the blast, which shattered windows nearly a mile away, occurred after propane gas seeped into the store and ignited.  a12  a return to the times  dean baquet will return to the new york times as chief of its washington bureau and an assistant managing editor. mr. baquet joined the new york times in 1990, then left in 2000 to become managing editor of the los angeles times, but he was fired in november for refusing to cut newsroom jobs.  a13  pell grant increase proposed  the maximum federal pell grant for middle- and low-income students to attend college would rise, to $4,310, for the first time in four years under a spending bill that house and senate democrats agreed on.  a14  science/health  new plans for drug safety  top food and drug administration officials announced a 30-point plan to ensure that drugs are as safe as advertised, including the first attempt to assess the safety of drugs 18 months after introduction.  a17  new york/region b1-8  death sentence for killer in murder of two officers  a federal jury in brooklyn sentenced ronell wilson, 24, to death for killing two new york police detectives on staten island in 2003. their decision marked the first successful federal capital punishment prosecution in new york in more than half a century.  a1  m.t.a. faces budget crisis  the metropolitan transportation authority faces surging costs that could jeopardize or delay renovations to subway and commuter train stations, maintenance of signal systems, and the purchase of hundreds of buses and subway cars.  a1  business day c1-14  altria ready to spin off kraft  investors are reacting positively to a decision by altria group, the company once known as philip morris, to spin off its kraft foods division to shareholders and return to being primarily a tobacco company.  a1  nintendo leads competition  the innovative nintendo wii has upset the order of the video game world. while sony's playstation 3, seemed destined to be the most popular console, the wii is winning many converts who do not fit the usual gamer stereotype.  c1  holocaust insurance trial  lawyers representing holocaust victims decided to strike a deal with assicurazioni generali, an italian company, to pay claims on life insurance policies sold to victims.  c1  business digest c2  editorial a18-19  editorials: honesty in elections; iraq's refugees; mixed news for wolves; verlyn klinkenborg on growing the winter tomato.  columns: thomas l. friedman, maureen dowd.  crossword: e4  weather: c12  tv listings: e10  