the george w. bush library: scholarly mecca or $500 million oxymoron?   the news reports that president bush's representatives seem to be closing in on a deal to put a half-billion-dollar presidential library and policy institute at southern methodist university in dallas has inspired the predictable lame jokes and references to ''the pet goat.''  but the project raises issues that are no laughing matter, touching on the writing of history, the university's scholarly mission, governmental integrity and the rule of law.  s.m.u.'s negotiations regarding mr. bush's library are bound to have a large public impact, which is why i'm hoping that the university's president, r. gerald turner, and members of his board of trustees (presuming laura bush, the best-known trustee, has removed herself from the deliberations) can be persuaded to withhold a final go-ahead unless two basic conditions are met.  first, the university should insist that mr. bush rescind executive order 13233, his 2001 directive that reverses -- illegally in the view of many leading historians, journalists and legal thinkers -- the strong presumption of a public right of access to presidential papers embedded in the 1978 presidential records act.  under this early exertion of presidential power, both sitting presidents and former presidents (and even their heirs) can indefinitely postpone public release of sensitive material past the law's usual 12-year waiting period by simply denying a request for access. no explanation is required, and there is no provision for appealing the denial to a trained professional archivist.  instead, the executive order requires the person requesting the material to begin a costly and time-consuming lawsuit challenging the stonewalling. it's a formula for keeping embarrassing facts secret in perpetuity and for thwarting a full and accurate accounting of a president's time in office, which, presumably, was among s.m.u.'s prime goals in seeking to be home to the new presidential edifice, along with enhancing the university's visibility, prestige and available financial resources.  mr. turner told concerned faculty members that the new library would house ''a treasure trove of documents and artifacts that describe one of the most intense and controversial periods in our history.'' for a university interested in promoting historical research and open inquiry, especially one located in the president's home state, it's undoubtedly a mighty tempting prize. but that is all the more reason mr. turner and the trustees owe a duty to act decisively to protect the university's reputation, the public's right to know and history itself from executive order 13233, and mr. bush's ignominious penchant for excessive secrecy.  second, there is the pesky issue of fund-raising. following the corruptive path blazed by white house predecessors, mr. bush and members of his library committee apparently plan to spend the administration's remaining days trying to coax huge contributions to the budding library complex from friends and well-heeled special interests. under present law, the identity of presidential library donors, and the amounts they contribute, need not be disclosed. the house speaker, nancy pelosi, supports legislation to change that, but its timing and fate remain unclear. meanwhile, s.m.u. officials have an opportunity to advance government integrity, and avoid entangling the university in potentially compromising secret fund-raising, by insisting on disclosure.  dozens of theologians and s.m.u. faculty members have objected to locating mr. bush's library and institute at the university, saying among other things that his awful record on civil liberties, the war in iraq and the abuse of prisoners should preclude any university affiliation. they have it wrong. but so do those who would minimize the university's duty for making sure the highest standards of scholarship, openness and ethics govern the entire enterprise.  editorial observer  