the long goodbye   in the minutes before an overdose of an anesthetic was given to barbaro on monday morning to terminate his life, dr. dean richardson took a moment to say goodbye. for richardson, the surgeon who worked so hard to save barbaro's life and who developed an emotional attachment to his famous patient, it was a final, and intensely poignant, moment.  as he spoke at a news conference at the university of pennsylvania's new bolton center later in the day, richardson, the chief of surgery at the center's widener hospital for large animals, was clearly upset. he choked up and stopped talking several times, in one instance for at least 10 seconds. he would then take a deep breath to regain his composure and begin speaking again.  even amid the tears, the 53-year-old richardson, who has been an equine surgeon at the new bolton center for 27 years, had other work to do. not long after barbaro was euthanized at 10:30 a.m., richardson had to attend to another horse. it was an obligation, he said, that helped take his mind off barbaro. but as the day wore on, the sadness was there, even outright grief.  ''i knew that if this day came, it would be very difficult to keep my composure,'' richardson said. ''it is what it is. it's not the first horse i've cried over.''  the decision to end barbaro's life came more than eight months after he shattered his right hind leg in the opening moments of the preakness stakes and was taken to the new bolton center. barbaro's owners, roy and gretchen jackson, were determined to do everything possible to save barbaro's life, and in the tall, even-tempered richardson they found an experienced surgeon with a national reputation who would share their devotion to the difficult task. for richardson, in some respects, it was the challenge of a lifetime.  in the months that followed, barbaro and richardson had any number of good days. in december, barbaro was doing so well that there was talk that he might soon be released from the new bolton center and continue his recovery at a farm in kentucky. it seemed possible that he would eventually be able to recover enough to move on to a life as a sire.  richardson was among those who began saying that a corner had been turned in barbaro's recovery.  ''i'm human,'' he said monday. ''there were many times i was optimistic he would make it. but at the same time, i am smart enough to know intellectually that all these challenges were there throughout and remained. but it would be hard to get up and go to work every day if i didn't think this could work.''  only a week ago, richardson was in beverly hills, calif., with the jacksons, to accept a special citation at the horse racing industry's annual awards dinner, an event that primarily honors the sport's top horses of the previous year. the award cited the jacksons and the team at the new bolton center for their efforts to save barbaro.  but by then, a new set of problems had begun for barbaro. the condition of his left hind foot, which developed laminitis in july and imperiled his life, was again proving troublesome. as the week progressed, the difficulties mounted. but through it all, to the final moments, richardson found it hard to give up. a graduate of dartmouth and the ohio state college of veterinary medicine, the son of a navy doctor, he battled until he had to surrender.  ''i'm very comfortable we made the right decision, which was something that was very difficult to do,'' he said. ''as your typical egotistical surgeon, i would have loved to prove what i can do on a daily basis. but you have to do what is best for the patient.''  only once on monday did richardson's sadness turned to anger -- when he was asked how much barbaro's care since may 20 had cost. he refused to answer the question and barked at the questioner, ''it's not relevant.''  ''the only gratification i will get out of this is that this horse had eight, nine months of time, the vast majority of which he was a happy horse,'' he said.  richardson said his experiences with barbaro would make him an even better surgeon.  ''if i had a horse come in with the same injury tomorrow, i honestly believe i'd have a better chance of saving his life and that's because i probably wouldn't make the same mistakes,'' he said, adding, ''you have to believe you're going to get better at what you do.''  horse racing  