critics' choice: new cds   charles tolliver big band  ''with love'' (blue note)  the trumpeter charles tolliver started his career in the early 1960s, playing with jackie mclean, art blakey and others; he became known as a bandleader later in the decade, after john coltrane died. at that shaky moment in jazz mr. tolliver was an exciting, undefinable force in its mainstream, holding fast against abstraction and electric music, pushing out well-balanced phrases with the ferocious zeal of late coltrane.  mr. tolliver started writing big-band music for a few years in the early '70s, then stopped and became less visible in general. in 2003 he formed his 20-piece group and jumped back in with gusto. his new big-band record, ''with love,'' sounds like the work of a man who has been in storage for a long while and is ready to fight.  the band, performing at the jazz standard tomorrow through saturday, is brash, powerful and immediate, with blasts of high brass and sharp drum fills. mr. tolliver's arrangements are reasonably complicated but direct; you can almost hear his furious conducting gestures.  his music here represents a time when jazz wasn't so tricked-up and self-doubting. instead there are modern-jazz basics, done earnestly and energetically: quartal harmonies, call-and-response arrangements and a slug-it-out rearrangement of monk's '' 'round midnight,'' taking the song through different moods and tempos.  ''with love'' has a comparatively old-school rhythm section in the bassist cecil mcbee and the drummer victor lewis; a young, iconoclastic pianist in robert glasper (whose improvisations in ''rejoicin' '' and ''right now'' are squirrelly, hyperactive, exciting things) and a brilliant lead trumpeter in mr. tolliver, whose bright, almost shattering sound takes over in several solos.  there's something strangely manifestolike about this album. it isn't preservationist or pedantic. it isn't protecting anything; it's having too much fun for that. but it demonstrates what we may be missing if we completely abandon the viscerally exciting qualities in jazz big bands that were important not so long ago.  ben ratliff  