iraqi forces in fierce battle with gunmen   iraqi forces backed by american helicopters and tanks battled hundreds of gunmen hiding in a date palm orchard near the southern city of najaf on sunday, exchanging fire for 15 hours in what appeared to be one of iraq's deadliest battles in years, iraqi officials said.  an american helicopter was shot down and 250 bodies were found where the clashes occurred near the village of zarqaa, about 120 miles south of baghdad, by a river and a large grain silo that is surrounded by orchards, the iraqi officials said.  col. ali numaas, a spokesman for the iraqi security forces in najaf, said that the fighting stopped just after 10 p.m. local time and that most of those killed were gunmen. an employee at a local morgue said at least two iraqi policemen were among the dead.  the united states military confirmed in a statement that the helicopter went down, that two soldiers aboard were killed, and that their bodies had been recovered. the crash is under investigation.  asad abu ghalal, the governor of najaf province, said that the fighters in the orchard were iraqi and foreign, some wearing the brown, white and maroon regalia of pakistani and afghan fighters. he said they had come to assassinate shiite clerics and attack religious convoys that are gathering in najaf, one of shiite islam's holiest cities, and other southern cities for ashura, a shiite holiday that starts monday night and runs through tuesday morning.  at a news conference sunday afternoon, he said they called themselves ''soldiers of heaven'' and seemed to be part of a wider effort to disrupt ashura. the holiday commemorates the seventh-century death of the prophet muhammad's grandson hussein in a battle at karbala, where hundreds of thousands of pilgrims have already started gathering.  two senior shiite clerics said, however, that the gunmen were part of a shiite splinter group that saddam hussein helped build in the 1990s to compete with followers of the venerated religious leader grand ayatollah ali al-sistani. they said the group, calling itself the mehwadiya, was loyal to ahmad bin al-hassan al-basri, an iraqi cleric who had a falling out with muhammad bakr al-sadr -- father-in-law of the shiite leader moktada al-sadr -- in hawza, a revered shiite seminary in najaf.  the clerics spoke on condition of anonymity because they said they had been ordered not to discuss shiite divisions.  iraqi officials said the group of 100 to 500 fighters was discovered in the orchard saturday night, leading to a midnight meeting of local authorities who hatched an attack plan.  ''we agreed to carry out an operation to take them by surprise,'' said mr. ghalal, the najaf governor.  at dawn, the governor said, the area was surrounded and the offensive began. he said the fighters had antiaircraft rockets and long-range sniper rifles, and, according to a soldier involved in the fighting, iraqi security forces encountered heavy resistance. commanders called for reinforcements and a brigade of soldiers from nearby babil province joined the fight.  eventually, iraqi officials said, they called on the united states military for help. american tanks and helicopter gunships arrived, and gun battles continued into the night. by 10:30 p.m., the gunfire had died down and iraqi troops began searching the area for bodies.  elsewhere in the heavily shiite south, there were other signs of potential strikes on ashura. officials in karbala said that police arrested three men sunday -- a saudi arabian, an afghan and a moroccan -- who were found on the road between najaf and karbala with a suicide bomb belt and explosives in their car. they said the vehicle had been hollowed out so it could be used as a car bomb.  the united states military also announced the deaths of a soldier and a marine.  the marine died saturday from combat wounds in anbar province, where american troops have been battling sunni insurgents for months. the soldier, a member of the military police, was killed when a roadside bomb exploded near his patrol north of baghdad on saturday.  throughout iraq, the daily violence continued.  in kirkuk, two car bombs at a kurdish car dealership and a kurdish market killed at least 17 people, authorities said.  in baghdad, 54 bodies were found, many showing signs of torture. at least five girls were killed and 20 wounded when a mortar round hit a school in the sunni adil neighborhood.  at 7:30 a.m. local time, a bomb inside a minibus exploded in a shiite area of the capital east of the tigris river, killing one and wounding five. two hours later, in the sunni area of yarmouk in west baghdad, gunmen killed four people, including a consultant with iraq's ministry of industry and his daughter, who were shot on their way to work.  after dark on sunday night, residents of the yarmouk neighborhood reported that heavy clashes had broken out, with gun and mortar fire raining down for hours.  also on sunday, saddam hussein's cousin ali hassan al-majid acknowledged in court that he had given orders to destroy scores of villages during iraq's campaign against the kurds in the 1980s. prosecutors introduced two dozen documents it said incriminated members of the hussein regime in the killing of tens of thousands of kurds.  the associated press reported that mr. majid, also known as chemical ali for his alleged use of chemical weapons against the kurds, said the area ''was full of iranian agents,'' and, ''we had to isolate these saboteurs.''  ''i am the one who gave orders to the army to demolish villages and relocate the villagers,'' he said, according to the a.p.  mr. majid is one of six defendants facing charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity stemming from baghdad's military campaign against iraqi kurds during the 1980-88 iran-iraq war. more than 100,000 kurds were killed.  