dash of success spices up gould's neighborhood   if robbie gould, the chicago bears' place-kicker, was feeling the heat, he did not show it. two days after kicking three field goals against the new orleans saints to help the bears reach super bowl xli, gould was standing over a gas stove, stirring the alfredo sauce that was simmering in a pot.  tanner long, the eldest of the three sons of gould's neighbors, stacy and stacy long, was perched on the granite counter in his family's kitchen, eager to add the wine that he had just poured into a glass measuring beaker. gould, with his usual precision, checked the fluid line and announced, ''you're short.''  following gould's instructions, tanner, 12, added another quarter cup of wine, then poured it all into the sauce. within a half-hour, gould (pronounced gold) was stirring in pieces of breaded and sautéed chicken, pouring the finished sauce over fettucini noodles cooked al dente and serving one of the newest entrees from his growing recipe file -- rustic chicken -- to tanner, his 9-year-old twin brothers, colton and austin, and their parents.  like the aroma of certain foods, the compatibility of the long family triggers fond memories for the 24-year-old gould, who is the eldest of three children. the evenings he spends with the longs satisfy his craving for normalcy, which he has struggled to hold on to during his breakout season, which has dovetailed with the bears' first appearance in the super bowl in 21 years.  it has not been easy for gould to keep his feet on the ground when all of chicago wants to carry him on its shoulders. that is where the longs loom large. ''these guys have been a great escape for me,'' gould said.  the longs live across the street from gould in an upper middle class neighborhood that is a 15-minute drive from the bears' training facility in lake forest. they met last summer when the longs invited gould, who had just moved in, to their fourth of july party and introduced him to his neighbors.  six months later, it is hard to find anybody in or around gurnee who does not know who gould is -- or where he lives. he arrived home jan. 21 after the bears celebrated their first national football conference title in 21 years to find the bare trees in his front yard swathed in toilet paper.  at first gould was slightly discomfited by the sight. where he grew up, in lock haven, pa., if your trees are covered in toilet paper, ''it means someone is mad at you,'' he said. then somebody explained to him that it was just the opposite in chicagoland. ''i guess it's a sign of affection,'' gould said.  the next morning he woke up to find that someone had spray-painted ''robbie u rockstar'' on the snow covering his front yard. by the end of the day, his front door resembled the high-school locker of the star quarterback after a victory in the state championship game. handmade congratulatory messages, drawn on construction paper, typing paper and colorful cardboard, were taped all over it.  the well-wishers included scott dale and caleb magnuson, 15-year-old sophomore linebackers on the warren township high football team who, two days after the bears' victory against the saints, shuffled down the street at dusk and took turns sticking signs on gould's door. ''he's in the zone,'' magnuson said. ''he's got to keep going.''  dale's sign read: ''robbie 'mr. clutch' gould. you are a beast.''  the young man who answered the door five minutes later -- tearing one of the posters in the process -- had a baby face and tired eyes. as he set out to cook dinner for the longs, gould explained that he had been trying all afternoon to take a nap but that autograph seekers kept ringing his doorbell.  why didn't he simply ignore them? ''i tried,'' gould said, ''but i just couldn't.''  gould knows what it is like to be disregarded. he went undrafted out of penn state in 2005, and then was signed -- and waived -- in a six-month span by the new england patriots and the baltimore ravens.  he was manning the telephones at a friend's construction business in lock haven in october 2005 when the bears called to invite him to a group tryout.  gould, who played soccer competitively until his early teens, impressed the bears with his leg strength. they waived the former jet doug brien, who was struggling with injuries and inaccuracy, and signed gould, who went on to lead the team in scoring with 82 points, converting 21 of 27 field-goal attempts and 19 of 20 extra points in 13 games.  this season, gould's second in the league, he converted his first 24 field-goal attempts, made the pro bowl, kicked the winning 49-yard field goal in overtime in a divisional playoff game against the seattle seahawks, and appeared on some chicagoans' sexiest bear lists.  ''it used to be i could go out and i could sneak under the radar,'' gould said. ''it's kind of changed now as far as anywhere i go, i'm recognized.''  when you are everybody's hot new dish, there is nothing quite as grounding as one of mom's casseroles. during his calls home, gould will sometimes ask his mother, cheryl, for the recipe for one of her dishes and then try to make it. even when he was still able to enjoy a quiet meal out, gould, who is single, preferred to dine in. he called home and asked for recipes for dishes that were staples of his childhood.  gould's mother mailed him a recipe box that contained cards with easy-to-follow instructions for some of the family's favorites: teriyaki chicken, broccoli salad, peanut butter meltaway cake and corn dip.  he has found that in cooking, as in kicking, preparation is the key to success. in the kitchen, gould's accuracy is about the same as on the field. most of his attempts are good, and the ones that are not he quickly puts out of his mind.  ''if you burn it,'' he said, ''you go get pizza.''  pro football  