maureen cannon, 84, a poet of the everyday, in light verse   maureen cannon, a heavy hitter in the world of light verse who in the last four decades published more than 1,000 poems, most written in under a minute, died on thursday at her home in wyckoff, n.j. she was 84 and had lived in ridgewood, n.j., for many years.  ms. cannon died in her sleep, her daughter deirdre holle said.  from the mid-1960s on, ms. cannon's rhymed observations about modern life proliferated in publications like good housekeeping, ladies' home journal and reader's digest. she was a regular contributor, always in verse, to the metropolitan diary column of the new york times and to jersey diary, in this newspaper's new jersey weekly section.  ms. cannon was also very possibly the only american poet to find, in a single career, happy outlets in playbill, golf digest, national review and progressive grocer.  in sprightly couplets, ms. cannon celebrated (or bemoaned) a spate of everyday things, from the changing seasons, family life and holidays to aging, cellphones and uninvited guests. here, in ''mother-wise,'' is her advice on child-rearing:  the method that i would describe  as most effective with my tribe  is this (don't tell the experts): bribe!  poems, unbidden, visited themselves on ms. cannon at all hours, and she lay in wait for them. she never went to bed without a pad on the nightstand, nor climbed into the bathtub without the tools of her trade. fortunately, she never used a computer.  ms. cannon also wrote serious poetry, which, like her light verse, often won prizes in state poetry contests around the country.  maureen patricia o'connor was born in the bronx on nov. 4, 1922, to a word-loving family; her father was an editor and theater critic at the new york journal-american. she earned a bachelor's degree in english from barnard college in 1943 and in 1950 married james p. cannon, a chemical engineer.  ms. cannon's husband died in 1977, an event she movingly addressed in her serious work. besides her daughter, ms. holle, of east hanover, n.j., she is survived by another daughter, kathleen cullinan, of olathe, kan.; and six grandchildren.  as a young mother in new jersey, ms. cannon dashed off strings of verses on the joys, real and dubious, of suburban life. but she did not see her work in print until she was in her 40s, when a friend submitted two of her poems to baby talk magazine. the editors sent her a check for $50.  that, as ms. cannon later said, was an epiphany.  and so, tucked next to the oil burner in her basement, she slaved away at the typewriter. the next year and a half brought only rejection slips. when, at last, mccall's accepted a poem, ms. cannon danced with the mailman on her front stoop.  