crunch time for the tunnel   the proposed new jersey to manhattan commuter rail tunnel, widely regarded as vital to the economy of both new york and new jersey, is moving into a critical period that could decide whether or not it actually gets built.  largely because of the efforts of new jersey transit director george warrington, who has announced his intention to step down at the end of march, the massive project has blossomed beyond being merely a dream of transportation planners and new jersey cheerleaders. officials in new york now support it and want to start construction in 2009.  and just this month, a key federal agency approved a draft of the tunnel's environmental impact statement, an essential step for getting federal funds.  but there are major hurdles to surmount during the next two years. the deficit-plagued federal government will have to come up with up to half of the $7.2 billion estimated cost. and even though the port authority of new york and new jersey has pledged $2 billion, new jersey, which has its own budget problems, may have to come up with more than the $500-million it has promised. and even that may not be enough.  since mr. warrington will not be around to keep the pressure on, there's a risk that some of this necessary funding may dry up or that other smaller, less important pet projects of various politicians may drain off money. it is imperative that new jersey gov. jon corzine, a strong supporter of the tunnel, name a successor with the same expertise and sense of commitment that mr. warrington has displayed.  the need for the tunnel is enormous. currently, a 96-year-old amtrak-owned tunnel with two tracks is the only rail link under the hudson river. serving both amtrak and new jersey transit trains, the link carries 45,000 passengers each peak period when 24 trains an hour are squeezed through the tunnel. if there is a breakdown, rail transportation between new jersey and manhattan stops. the new tunnel, which would end under 34th street on manhattan's west side, would provide essential backup and double the number of trains that could enter and exit manhattan from new jersey.  besides improved service for commuters from west of the hudson, the new tunnel is essential for new york city's economy, which is expected to become increasingly dependent on workers from new jersey, rockland and orange counties in new york, and even pennsylvania, as the years go by.  it is this argument that mr. warrington used to get gov. eliot spitzer, mayor michael bloomberg, sen. hillary clinton, sen. charles schumer and other key new york city and state officials behind the project.  and it is this argument, together with the importance of a healthy new york-new jersey metropolitan area to the economy of the entire nation, that mr. warrington's successor will have to make in washington to get the needed federal money.  for the tunnel to become a reality, new jersey transit will need one of the most able and persuasive mass transit directors in the country.  new jersey  