a star player, a video and a suspension   o. j. mayo, a west virginia high school senior considered the country's best guard prospect since lebron james, has been suspended and is not expected to play tonight in a national showdown game.  mayo's team, huntington high school, ranked no. 2 in the country by usa today, will play no. 11 artesia high school of lakewood, calif., in the hoophall classic in durham, n.c.  more than 5,000 fans are expected at cameron indoor stadium. the game is part of a tripleheader featuring some of the best high school teams in the country.  mayo was thrown out of a basketball game friday night after receiving two technical fouls, and he was escorted off the court by a police officer. state rules require him to sit out the next two games, no matter where they are played.  mayo and his advisers spent yesterday seeking legal options to reinstate him. the incident reflects the growing power of high school basketball stars and the internet's ability to shrink the sports world.  ''it's an amazingly bizarre story,'' said dave elkins, the director of marketing partnerships for the basketball hall of fame, which is putting on today's event. ''this is the team that's making so much history in that region.  ''to have something like this come up, it's intriguing.''  elkins said late last night that he would know by noon today whether mayo would play in the game.  the story has circulated around the country thanks to the curious circumstances of mayo's departure from the game and the availability of the video on the internet.  mayo picked up his first technical foul for taunting after a dunk late in the second half of friday's victory against charleston's capital high school, the no. 2-ranked team in the state. mayo caught the ball after it went through the net and strutted toward the free-throw line still holding the ball.  after being whistled for the technical, he walked to midcourt, where players from both teams had gathered and were jawing. mayo then walked away, tucking in his shirt and looking at the sky.  the second technical was called after mayo walked back toward the players gathered at halfcourt. on the video, he did not appear to say or do anything.  but when the official mike lazo walked over to the scorer's table to report the technical, mayo followed him. mayo appeared to make subtle contact with lazo, his shoulder brushing up against lazo's back. lazo then dropped suddenly to the ground. on the video, it appears that little contact was made and that lazo's fall was exaggerated.  the west virginia high school athletic commission did not return telephone calls seeking comment on the fouls. lazo could not be reached yesterday.  ''this official wanted to be the star of the show,'' said william bands, a lawyer in charleston who watched from the stands. ''that resulted in a situation that could have cost huntington high school and the state of west virginia a once-in-a-lifetime honor, to win a mythical national championship.''  bands was referring to the unlikely teaming of mayo, who has signed a letter of intent to play at southern california, with other stars at huntington. guard chris early has signed a letter of intent to play at oklahoma, and forward patrick patterson is considered the country's best unsigned player. his suitors include duke, kentucky and florida.  most of the teams ranked in the top 25 are prep or private schools. it is unusual that a public school like huntington is considered to be on the same level as traditional private-school powers like oak hill academy in virginia, st. anthony in jersey city and mater dei of southern california.  but it is mayo who has sent thousands of people around the country scouring web sites for the video.  mike waterhouse, the news operations manager for wsaz in west virginia, said the station had had more than five times the number of respondents in its online poll, which asked whether mayo deserved his two technical fouls. as of last night, 76.6 percent of the voters said that he did not.  the station's top-three most viewed articles are about mayo, with all the articles about him totaling more than 25,000 page views.  ''that's pretty good for these parts,'' waterhouse said.  mayo's star power is such that huntington coach lloyd mcguffin offered to withdraw the team from its game against artesia if mayo could not play.  ''he said, 'hey, if you don't want us to be a part, we understand,' '' elkins said. ''of course, we refused.  ''he's probably a little overwhelmed. it's not the publicity he wants for his school and for o. j.''  basketball  