when life hands you lemons, make pasta and confit   with winter having unmistakably arrived, the sunny presence of lemons is more welcome than ever. each year, demand for lemons peaks with the temperatures, as millions are squeezed for lemonade. but this is the time of year you need their brightness the most.  the harvest season's variety of diversions lets you feel free to juice lemons and dispose of the rest. but these cold days require more resourceful use of the fruit, especially with lemon prices rising and supplies reduced because of a recent freeze in california.  with plenty of sugar, and time to transform, whole lemon slices -- pulp, pith, peel and all -- become an intensely flavored tart. candied, the peel gives another dimension to the pie's lemonade flavor. an almondy shortbread is an assertive pairing. (a little lemon juice added to the dough tenderizes it.)  lemon zest -- the yellow part of the peel -- adds lemon flavor without the acidity of the pulp and juice. sprinkle it on a meaty braise, on chunks of salty feta, or crisp fritters, sweet (ricotta) or savory (spinach). candied strips also make a delightful afternoon nibble.  pasta has an unlikely affinity for lemon, both zest and juice. creamy, cheesy spaghetti al limone is succulent and lively. for a more streamlined dish -- no need for a recipe -- toss olive oil-splashed spaghetti with lemon juice and zest, then finish with parmesan and a hit of the fermented anchovy sauce called garum, or some anchovies melted in hot oil. it's the umami flavor of a caesar salad for a cold night.  lemon is chicken's best friend -- stuffed whole inside a roasting bird with a sprig of rosemary, or wrapped in foil, baked soft and puréed for a sauce, à la jean-georges vongerichten, or tossed with fennel and egg yolk for a rich, tangy sauce.  dozens of lemon varieties are grown around the world, varying in their sweetness, astringency and fragrance, the thickness of their skin, their juiciness. in the united states one variety, the eureka, is probably the most widely grown.  but california's meyer lemon, with its distinctive perfume and sweet, delicate flesh, has an almost cult-like following. a hybrid of lemon and sweet orange, it can be sliced, dressed with olive oil and sea salt and eaten on its own as a salad or side dish for chicken or fish. add a handful of slices to vegetables or fish you are deep-frying: they emerge crisp lemony wafers.  if you can't find them here, you might mention to a friend on the west coast that mailing a small package costs less than one might think.  with a bowlful of lemons on the table, who needs bottled juice? they last for several weeks, good for glazing a cake, zipping up a soup or dressing a salad.  and as you walk by, reach out, scratch the skin and inhale -- suddenly, regardless of the weather outside, you're in a lemon grove.  spaghetti al limone  time: 45 minutes  1 lemon  11/2 cups dry white wine  3/4 to 1 1/2 cups heavy cream, to taste  1 pound spaghetti  3 tablespoons butter, in pieces  3 1/2 to 4 ounces parmesan cheese, freshly grated  1 to 2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil, to taste  sea salt and fresh black pepper, to taste.  1. zest lemon and slice zest into matchsticks. juice lemon, strain and reserve. place zest in large nonreactive pan with wine and bring to boil over high heat. reduce heat to medium high and cook until it reduces to a syrupy mixture, about 1/4 cup, about 10 minutes.  2. remove from heat and pour in about 1/4 cup of cream. stir, then pour in remaining cream. return to stove and bring to boil. reduce heat and simmer until it is thickened and reduced slightly, about 5 minutes. remove from heat.  3. meanwhile, bring large pot of generously salted water to boil. cook pasta until al dente; reserve 1/2 cup cooking water and drain.  4. return hot pasta pot to stove. pour in cream, butter and lemon juice, stir, then add hot drained pasta and a few tablespoons of cooking water. toss together and add cheese in three or four parts, tossing each to meld with sauce. add more cooking water if sauce is too thick and crumbly.  5. ladle onto plates and drizzle each portion with olive oil, then add a little salt and pepper.  yield: 4 to 6 servings.  lemon confit shortbread tart  time: at least 2 hours  for the crust:  3 cups flour  1 teaspoon salt  1/2 pound (2 sticks) unsalted butter, cut into 1-inch pieces  1 1/4 cups sugar  1 large egg  1/8 to 1/4 teaspoon almond extract, or to taste  2 tablespoons lemon juice  for the confit:  8 lemons, preferably thin-skinned and seedless  3/4 cup sugar.  1. for crust, combine flour, salt, butter and 1 cup of sugar in a bowl. mix with your fingers until it forms flaky crumbs and lumps. mix in egg, almond extract and lemon juice. continue to mix until it clumps; at first it may seem very dry. shape into a ball, wrap in plastic, and refrigerate for at least 30 minutes, up to 1 day ahead of baking.  2. for confit, slice off and discard ends of lemons. slice 5 crosswise, peel and all, as thinly as possible. remove any seeds and place in a bowl. peel skin, including white pith, from remaining 3 lemons, then slice thinly crosswise, and add to bowl. add 3/4 cup sugar and 2 tablespoons water. toss and let sit at room temperature for at least 30 minutes or up to 2 hours.  3. place lemon slices and their juice in a saucepan, and bring to a boil. cook down until lemons are candied and small amount of liquid in pan is sticky and syrupy, about 15 minutes. transfer to a bowl and let cool.  4. to bake, preheat oven to 350 degrees. divide dough in half and form each half into a ball. roll one ball until large enough to fit into a 9-inch round tart pan. dough will be crumbly (more shortbread than pie crust); if it falls apart, press it back together. spoon confit over crust, spreading evenly. roll out second ball of dough and place on top, sealing edges but making sure no crust overlaps the rim (or tart will be difficult to remove later).  5. bake until edges of tart are lightly golden, about 35 minutes, then sprinkle top with remaining 1/4 cup sugar. return to oven for about 10 more minutes; edges should be lightly golden and crust cooked through but not browned. serve warm or cooled.  yield: 8 to 10 servings.  chicken breasts with fennel and lemon  time: 45 minutes  1 lemon  1 1/2 pounds boneless, skinless chicken breasts  salt to taste  2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil  1 medium large fennel bulb, sliced lengthwise and cut in strips  1 1/2 cups dry white wine such as pinot grigio  1 cup chicken broth  1 pinch cinnamon (about 1/8 teaspoon)  2 egg yolks.  1. zest lemon and slice zest into matchsticks. juice lemon, strain and reserve.  2. lightly sprinkle chicken with salt. put deep frying pan over medium-high heat, pour in oil and gently sauté chicken breasts, about two minutes per side, until they are about half-cooked. remove from pan.  3. pour off oil and discard, then add fennel, wine and lemon zest to pan. bring to boil over high heat and cook until wine is reduced by about half and fennel is tender. add broth and cinnamon, bring to boil and cook about 5 minutes to reduce sauce a bit.  4. add chicken with its juices and cook for 2 or 3 minutes.  5. meanwhile, in a small bowl, beat egg yolks with half the juice (about 1 tablespoon), then ladle in about 1/4 cup of sauce. mix well, then add to pan, mixing well. cook over medium heat, stirring a bit, until sauce appears creamy. taste and add more juice, if you like.  yield: 4 servings.  