you listening to me?   you have just written your first book, ''positively american: winning back the middle-class majority one family at a time,'' in which you try to produce a functional platform for the famously unfocused democratic party. what do democrats stand for? no one has a good answer. i felt anguish about that. i felt a burning need to have us thinking beyond the immediate.  what about your fellow senator barack obama? did you read his book, ''the audacity of hope,'' which similarly insists that politicians need to reclaim the american dream for the middle class? i just read little pieces of it.  you couldn't finish it? i skimmed the parts that were interesting.  he prescribes policy on the same issues you do, from education to health care to the war in iraq. and he similarly wants to increase support for education. but his is not a platform. the two books, in terms of their outlook, are not dissimilar. in terms of specificity, i think i go a lot further. i hope the presidential candidates will rip off my ideas and use them.  will you be supporting obama for president? i'm supporting hillary. i've worked closer with hillary and, on experience, i would have to give her the edge. i think she's terrific. when you see her work up close, she is really smart, she asks the right questions and has a good sense of how to balance things.  in your book, you express the travails of the middle class through the example of a couple you invented: joe bailey, an optimistic insurance agent, and his devoted wife, eileen, who ''is able to splurge now and then at the mall,'' as you write. did you like the description of them?  not that much. they're fictional characters who lack the artistry of fiction. oh, please! it's the baileys! they're everything. i didn't create the baileys for the book. i have been living with the baileys for decades. i talk to them. i know them. they're real to me. the baileys are average people. they could be anyone.  why did you, a brooklyn native, make the baileys suburbanites who own a house in massapequa, long island, and seldom drive into new york city? massapequa could be any suburb in america. i have always felt connected to average voters. jerry seinfeld, you know what he said massapequa meant? i had no idea. he said it meant in native american, ''it's near the mall.''  regardless of how your book is received, you made history in november as the chief strategist of the democrats' campaign to regain the senate, and you subsequently became the third-highest-ranking senator in the new majority. have you spoken to president bush since? he called me to congratulate me on taking back the senate. look, to his credit, he was gracious. he said: ''i never expected you to do this, but congratulations. you did an amazing job.''  does vice president cheney talk to you? no. he used to. on energy issues, i talked to him, and then when i didn't agree with him, he stopped talking to me.  do you think he will remain as large an influence inside the white house in the wake of the republican drubbing? unfortunately, yes, maybe more so, because in an odd way, the counter to cheney was karl rove, and he has lost some credibility.  do you expect the president to respond at all to the ideas of the new majority? i don't have much hope that bush will moderate, but many of the republicans in congress, having seen the handwriting on the wall, may moderate, and that will help us. dick lugar, john warner -- these are old-fashioned conservatives who know that this hard-right philosophy is wrong.  did you send a free copy of your book to the president or any members of his administration? no. i hope they'll buy it.  deborah solomon  the way we live now: 1-28-07: questions for charles e. schumer  