rumors fly about bristol, lifting stock   ever since bristol-myers squibb named an interim chief executive last fall, the market has been primed for a takeover of the drug company. so yesterday, all it took was one rumor printed as fact to incite a buying frenzy.  shares of both bristol-myers squibb and its supposed suitor, sanofi-aventis, traded heavily yesterday on speculation that the companies might merge to form one of the world's largest drug companies.  but yesterday people close to the companies denied the report, which appeared in the french weekly la lettre de l'expansion. the report said that bristol-myers, based in new york, had signed a premerger agreement to join forces with sanofi-aventis, a significantly larger french company, in a deal that would close this year.  such a merger would create a corporate behemoth, which at yesterday's closing share prices would be the second-largest pharmaceutical company, behind pfizer, with market capitalization of about $172 billion.  officially, spokesmen for both bristol-myers and sanofi declined to comment yesterday, and neither company officially denied the report. during an interview yesterday with bloomberg television, sanofi's chairman, jean-françois dehecq, responded to a question about the merger rumors by saying, ''i am not ready to answer this question.''  just last week, a spokesman for bristol-myers had vehemently denied that the company was actively seeking a merger or takeover.  still, the two companies have held exploratory talks in the past, the people close to the companies said, and some deal may be pursued in the future even if there are no current discussions. and the credibility of la lettre and the firm wording of its report gave the story credence, prompting a run-up in bristol-myers's share price yesterday.  bristol-myers squibb shares soared on the rumors, at one point reaching a 52-week high of $28.26 before closing at $27.43, up $1.22, or 4.65 percent. american depository receipts in sanofi-aventis declined 77 cents, to close at $44.57, or down 1.7 percent, in new york trading.  one reason a merger makes sense is that the companies already jointly market the blockbuster anticoagulant plavix and the blood pressure medicine avapro, products with a worldwide sales value of more than $8 billion. a combined company could market those products under one management structure.  plavix is bristol-myers's largest product and sanofi's second largest.  the marketing arrangements had fueled speculation for months that the companies were likely merger partners. that speculation has grown since september, when bristol-myers fired its chief executive, peter r. dolan, and appointed an interim chief, james m. cornelius, after bungled patent negotiations over plavix with a canadian generic drug maker.  since then, no permanent successor to mr. dolan has been named, increasing speculation that bristol-myers was in play. and there have been other signs a merger was being contemplated.  bristol-myers recently announced agreements with several top managers that would allow them to walk away with significant compensation in the event of demotions, transfers or cuts in pay.  in a note to clients yesterday, a banc of america securities analyst, christopher schott, said the companies' overlaps in several therapeutic areas -- including treatments for diabetes, cancer and blood clots -- would let a merged company cut costs and become more competitive.  another reason bristol-myers might be an attractive acquisition is its pipeline of new products, some in later stages of development, including two diabetes products it recently agreed to develop with astrazeneca. some analysts have criticized sanofi's pipeline and noted that its only potential blockbuster, the weight-loss and diabetes drug acomplia, has faced regulatory delays in the united states.  ''sanofi has a large legacy of mature products and its only potential blockbuster in the near term is acomplia,'' said paul diggle, a london-based analyst for nomura code securities.  some analysts, however, have worried that sanofi is still digesting its $65 billion takeover of the french drug maker aventis pharmaceuticals in 2004 and that it would be too soon for it to absorb another large company.  mr. schott also noted that there was still a chance the companies could lose the plavix franchise. bristol-myers and sanofi are currently in federal court in manhattan, in a trial that began last week, defending the patent on plavix against a challenge by apotex, a manufacturer of generics based in toronto.  ''while we consider bristol/sanofi to have a high probability of winning the plavix patent challenge after it was granted a preliminary injunction, the loss of the franchise is still a possibility,'' mr. schott said.  because bristol-myers has been troubled recently, some shareholders see a takeover as the fastest way to bring about a revival.  in the last five years, it has been plagued by federal and state investigations of its practices, as well as related shareholder lawsuits. the company recently announced plans to settle, for $499 million, an investigation by federal authorities in massachusetts into its sales and marketing practices. that settlement is expected to require that the company sign a corporate integrity agreement with the inspector general of the department of health and human services.  the company is currently operating under a similar agreement with the united states attorney in newark, christopher j. christie, after a settlement of a criminal investigation into whether it misled investors about its wholesale inventories.  mr. dolan's ouster in september followed efforts to settle the plavix patent litigation that ended up enabling apotex to sell its generic version for several weeks last august, flooding the united states market with more than $1 billion worth of the generic version. shipments were eventually halted by the judge now overseeing the patent trial.  bristol-myers reported a loss of $134 million in the fourth quarter of 2006 because of competition from that generic.  market place  