jurors cannot be excluded because of nationality, judge says   a federal magistrate judge has ruled that excluding prospective jurors because of their national origin is no more justified than barring them because of their race or sex.  the judge, in a ruling last week, opened a door to lawyers defending a west indian man who argued that he had been denied justice because all five potential jurors who were west indian were improperly excluded by the prosecution. the bronx jury that convicted the man, mark watson, of rape, sodomy and burglary included blacks, but all of them were american born.  while the judge did not find deliberate discrimination, his ruling vividly illustrates the city's growing diversity and its sometimes surprising ramifications.  in new york city, more than one in three blacks are foreign-born, most of them from the caribbean. their proportion is growing as more immigrants arrive and as more american-born blacks leave for the suburbs or move out of the metropolitan region.  the judge, james c. francis iv, ordered a hearing to determine ''whether the state can offer a nondiscriminatory explanation for its peremptory challenges and whether mr. watson can carry his burden of establishing discriminatory intent.'' if a separate hearing determines that jury selection was discriminatory, mr. watson, who was born in jamaica and is serving 37 1/2 to 75 years in prison, could receive a new trial.  the united states supreme court has held that, as a group, blacks and mexican-americans, among other minority groups, cannot be systematically excluded from a jury simply because of their race or ethnicity and that peremptory challenges, which require no stated explanation, can be legitimately exercised by the prosecution only ''to secure a fair and impartial jury.''  in his decision last week, the judge cited the supreme court decision and wrote that excluding jurors on the basis of national origin ''does not serve that interest.''  ''mr. watson established that the prosecutor had struck every one of the five west indian prospective jurors, a showing that was plainly sufficient to support an inference of intentional discrimination,'' judge francis wrote.  ''if striking five out of five west indian jurors is insufficient to raise an inference of discrimination, it is difficult to imagine what sort of pattern of strikes might do so,'' he said.  the suit was filed in 2005 in federal court in manhattan by michael c. taglieri, an appellate lawyer for the legal aid society. mr. watson was convicted in 2000. ''this is extremely good news,'' mr. taglieri said, ''both for my client and for the west indian community.''  through a spokesman, steven reed, the bronx district attorney, robert t. johnson, said: ''understand that there has been no finding of discrimination. the decision only finds that procedurally, the state court did not handle the matter properly.''  mr. reed added, ''it is not now nor has it ever been our policy to discriminate against, or condone discrimination against, west indians or any other group.''  the legal aid society suit challenged the trial judge's ruling that ''if there is a bias against a person from the west indies, it would be race-based and, as i said, there are a number of black americans on the jury.''  as a practical matter, mr. taglieri acknowledged that mr. watson might have been convicted even faster with west indians on the jury because they ''tend to be very law-and-order-oriented.'' but, he said, at least mr. watson ''would have had the conception that it was a fair trial.''  