broadway by the glass   when brett stasiewicz watches the first installment of ''the coast of utopia,'' tom stoppard's epic trilogy about prerevolutionary russian thought, he does not see a depiction of russian intelligentsia torn between ''dried-up old german reasoning and the new french idealism,'' as one character in the play puts it. instead, he sees vodka shaken with german schnapps and french lillet blanc.  mr. stasiewicz is the mixologist for sweet concessions, the concessionaire for the lincoln center theater (where ''the coast of utopia'' is playing) and eight other new york theaters, and his job is to wring alcoholic drinks from the themes of broadway productions -- to pair twelve angry cocktails with ''twelve angry men,'' for instance.  mr. stasiewicz's job is a singularly new york occupation: ''help wanted: cocktail dramaturg,'' is not a classified listing you would expect to find in other cities. after 6 years and almost 60 shows, he has yet to be stumped by a play, though the more dour productions have sometimes forced him to break a sweat. ''it's a lot harder to conceive a cocktail when the play is depressing,'' he said. (''the diary of anne frank'' was a particular challenge; he went nonalcoholic.)  for ''the coast of utopia,'' mr. stasiewicz's palette was full. when performed as one play, mr. stoppard's trilogy covers three turbulent decades of russian history, with occasional layovers in paris and geneva. (the first two installments are now showing, with the third to open in february; the ''marathon'' full play begins feb. 24.)  for the first installment, called ''voyage,'' mr. stasiewicz let green-apple schnapps and lillet battle for vodka's soul, adding a splash of orange juice (''the 'marathon' shows will start in the morning,'' he noted) and ginger ale to soften the blows. the vodka dominates, but the schnapps and lillet lend the drink a floral crispness. ''shipwreck,'' the second installment, is paired with a cranberry-red cosmopolitan-esque cocktail (the color signifying the theme of revolution, with a splash of cognac alluding to the parisian setting), while the third installment, ''salvage,'' gets a heavy treatment of vanilla vodka mixed with drambuie, frangelico and crème de cacao.  as the crowds funneled in on a recent friday night, mr. stasiewicz tucked himself behind the concession stand and began nimbly serving cocktails. what sells more, he was asked: cocktails or raisinets? ''between those two?'' he replied. ''probably cocktails. but if we're talking peanut m&m's, that's a different story.''  voyage  adapted from sweet concessions  1 1/2ounces absolut mandarin vodka  1/2ounce german apple schnapps  1/4ounce lillet blanc  squeeze of fresh lime juice  1/2ounce freshly squeezed orange juicesplash of ginger ale  orange slice for garnish.  shake the first four ingredients in a cocktail shaker filled with ice. add the orange juice and the splash of ginger ale and strain into a chilled cocktail glass. add the garnish.  yield: 1 serving.  shaken and stirred  