a top times editor returns to lead washington bureau   dean baquet, the editor of the los angeles times who was fired in november for refusing to cut jobs from his newsroom, is returning to the new york times as chief of its washington bureau and an assistant managing editor, effective march 5.  philip taubman, who has been washington bureau chief since mid-2003, will become an investigative reporter covering national security issues and will be based in california. he is also becoming associate editor of the paper, a title last held by r. w. apple jr., who died in october.  mr. baquet, who won the pulitzer prize for investigative reporting in 1988 while working at the chicago tribune, joined the new york times in 1990, then left as national editor in 2000 to become managing editor of the los angeles times, which is owned by the tribune company. his appointment as the top editor in 2005, making him one of the few african-americans to lead a major daily newspaper, was seen as a landmark in the industry. during his time there, the newspaper won 14 pulitzer prizes, including five in 2004 alone.  but his tenure was short-lived. last september, mr. baquet and jeffrey m. johnson, the publisher of the los angeles times, publicly defied orders by the tribune company to make more cuts to the newsroom staff. days later, after months of unrelated boardroom pressure, the beleaguered company put itself on the auction block, where it remains.  on oct. 5, mr. johnson was forced out, and on nov. 7, mr. baquet was, as well. mr. baquet's dismissal in particular helped elevate him to folk-hero status within the newspaper industry and left the los angeles times in turmoil as demoralized staff members debated whether to leave, all against the backdrop of the potential sale of the paper.  after mr. baquet was fired, there was much speculation over whether he would return to the new york times or wait to see whether a friendly buyer would take over in los angeles and bring him back as editor. he decided recently he could wait no more.  ''it's nice to have him back where he belongs, at a paper where he can devote his talents and enthusiasm fully to the practice of journalism, in a bureau that can rise to all of his expectations,'' said bill keller, executive editor of the new york times, in a note to the staff yesterday morning as he and mr. baquet met with the washington bureau.  mr. baquet, 50, said in an interview that he had met with eli broad and ronald burkle, two los angeles billionaires who have put in a bid for the tribune company. he said that the conversations were casual and that he had kept his personal distance, thinking he might someday be in the delicate position of directing news coverage of them as owners of the paper. he also said that he had not met with david geffen, another los angeles mogul, who has made an offer for the los angeles times.  as the decision over new ownership at the tribune company began to stretch out, mr. baquet said he began itching to get back into a newsroom, having been out of a job for almost three months. he added that his decision to leave los angeles should not be seen as a signal that he had ''inside information'' about the fate of the los angeles times or that he had lost faith in its future.  ''this is a personal decision for me,'' he said. ''this has been a long time for me to be outside a newsroom, and it's starting to make me nuts. i wish the l.a. times the best. i love it.'' he added, ''this is not a signal to run for the doors.''  mr. baquet was enormously popular with his staff. he ascended to the top job when john carroll, the editor and his mentor, stepped down, partly to protest cuts by the company. when mr. baquet was fired, the staff printed buttons and pictures with his name on them, and they remain on display in the newsroom.  vernon loeb, the paper's investigative editor for california, described the atmosphere in the newsroom yesterday as ''mournful.'' even though mr. baquet was fired three months ago, mr. loeb said, ''everyone hoped against hope that he would come back.'' yesterday's announcement dashed those hopes and marked the end of what mr. loeb called ''the carroll-baquet era.''  in the washington bureau of the los angeles times, which will now be competing directly with mr. baquet, doyle mcmanus, the bureau chief, said in a memorandum that competition was good for journalism. but, mr. mcmanus added, ''it will still be the n.y. times, still encumbered by that paper's institutional weaknesses and still, even with dean on the premises, an often unpleasant place to work.''  mr. carroll, who now lives in lexington, ky., said mr. baquet's move was ''good for new york and bad for l.a.'' he said he saw mr. mcmanus's memorandum as an effort to bolster his troops.  ''the l.a. times has a very good staff,'' mr. carroll said, ''but they've lost faith in the owners, and nothing hurts the staff more than seeing its talented people go somewhere else. it's a sign of bad things.''  james o'shea, who succeeded mr. baquet as editor in los angeles, said in a memorandum that he wanted to ''firmly second'' mr. baquet's plea that staff members not leave. ''hopefully our ownership situation should be resolved soon,'' mr. o'shea wrote. tribune officials have said a decision is expected by the end of march.  mr. keller said that the times had been courting mr. baquet almost since the day he left in 2000. with jill abramson, the paper's managing editor for news, who remained close to mr. baquet and acted as emissary, the talks stepped up after mr. carroll resigned and intensified again after mr. johnson was fired. mr. baquet would now appear to be in the running to succeed mr. keller whenever he steps down as executive editor, as would ms. abramson.  mr. baquet said the subject of his having defied tribune management ''never came up'' in the most recent round of talks with his new bosses. ''i got defiant when i thought it was mindless,'' he said of the tribune staff cuts. ''i understand the reality of newspapers, but they shouldn't eat themselves alive.''  mr. keller was asked if there was any trepidation on his part in hiring someone who had defied management before. ''on my part? are you kidding?'' mr. keller replied with a grin. ''standing up to tribune only adds to his luster.''  but, he added, ''i'm sure dean is going to find the executives of this paper much more supportive of good journalism than the tribune company.''  mr. taubman has spent 28 years at the new york times, including as a national security reporter in washington, moscow bureau chief and deputy editorial page editor. before coming to the times, he was a sportswriter at esquire and a writer and correspondent for time.  in praising mr. taubman's performance in washington, mr. keller read a grim roll call of events mr. taubman had faced: ''the imprisonment of a reporter, the murder of a revered colleague, the face-off with a hostile administration, vilification by partisan critics and the general anxiety of an industry in transition.''  nonetheless, mr. keller said, mr. taubman presided over a succession of ''journalistic triumphs.''  mr. keller said that recent hirings in the bureau and mr. baquet's return demonstrated that the new york times was ''perhaps the last great american news organization that is not in retreat.''  