arts, briefly   athens protest seeks return of elgin marbles  wearing bright orange jackets inscribed with the words ''parthenon marbles -- reunification now,'' about 2,000 students and their teachers formed a human chain, above, around the acropolis in athens yesterday, demanding the return by britain of the 2,500-year-old reliefs taken from the monument more than 200 years ago, reuters reported. giorgos hasiakis, secretary of the athens tutors union, who helped organize the demonstration, said a similar protest would soon be held at the british museum. ''the marbles belong in their rightful place, and the students will continue with such actions until they return,'' he said. the british museum has rejected all requests for the return of the marbles, removed by lord elgin, the british ambassador to the ottoman empire, which ruled greece at the time. the museum says the reliefs receive better care in london. a greek museum to house marbles is to open this year at the foot of the acropolis, where the parthenon stands.  shilpa shetty after victory  hot on the heels of her victory in the british ''celebrity big brother'' television competition, the indian actress shilpa shetty appealed to her compatriots yesterday to forgive the contestants accused of insulting her. meanwhile, an indian political party announced plans to enlist her as a candidate, and andrew lloyd webber was reported to have approached her about starring in a west end revival of the bollywood musical ''bombay dreams.'' after ms. shetty viewed tapes of the series, she told the daily mirror that she was shocked by the sniping aimed at her by some of the ''big brother'' contestants, agence france-presse reported. ''watching this show, i can understand why people complained so much,'' she said, referring to the 40,000 protests addressed to britain's media watchdog. ''it isn't just one or two attacks -- it's incessant.'' agence france-presse also reported from new delhi that vinod khanna, leader of the opposition hindu nationalist bharatiya janata party, said it was ''definitely looking at her as a potential candidate'' in legislative elections next month. in london the evening standard reported that mr. lloyd webber was considering ms. shetty not only for a revival of ''bombay dreams'' but also for a television project.  london honors for kathleen turner  kathleen turner, below, was chosen best actress yesterday when the 18th critics' circle theater awards were announced in london. ms. turner won for her performance in edward albee's ''who's afraid of virginia woolf?'' connie fisher, who emerged from a british television competition to win the role of maria in a west end revival of ''the sound of music,'' was voted most promising newcomer. tom stoppard's ''rock 'n' roll'' was named best new play, and rufus sewell of its cast was named best actor for his portrayal of jan, a czech student who leaves cambridge for prague in 1968 in response to the arrival of soviet tanks.  concert to commemorate bob marley's birth  four sons of the reggae eminence bob marley are planning a concert to commemorate the 62nd anniversary of his birth and to promote peace, the associated press reported. the concert, titled ''smile jamaica,'' is to be held on feb. 10 in nine miles in st. ann's parish, jamaica, where marley was born on feb. 6, 1945. he died of cancer in miami in 1981. the concert shares the name of a 1976 show presented by the former socialist prime minister michael manley to promote harmony between politically aligned gangs. the indie-rock band arctic monkeys, who hold the british record for the fastest-selling debut album, are pitted against babyshambles, muse, oasis and kasabian in the competition for best british band after nominations for nme awards were announced yesterday by nme, a music weekly, the bbc reported. arctic monkeys received four nominations, including live band, album and music dvd. winners will be announced on march 1 in london.  arbitration for j.lo  jennifer lopez's first husband, ojani noa, has been ordered to arbitrate their dispute over his plans for a revealing book about their 11-month marriage, which began in february 1997, the associated press reported. ms. lopez sued him for breach of contract nine months ago and obtained a restraining order barring him from publishing details of their sex life, but court documents revealed that the ghostwritten book maintained that ms. lopez, 37, had multiple affairs, including one with marc anthony, now her third husband. between the two, she was married to cris judd and engaged to ben affleck. in los angeles on monday, superior court judge victor h. person agreed with ms. lopez's lawyer, paul n. sorrell, that mr. noa was bound to arbitration. mr. noa, 32, who appeared in court without a lawyer, objected, saying he wanted the benefit of a public trial. a progress hearing is to be held on july 30.  pots for scarlett and ben  scarlett johansson and ben stiller, above, are going to harvard. no degrees will reward their efforts. instead the two hollywood stars will be roasted as recipients of the man and woman of the year honors from the university's hasty pudding theatricals. the 56-year-old award (a golden pudding pot) goes to performers who have made ''a lasting and impressive contribution to the world of entertainment,'' according to the hasty pudding web site (hastypudding.org). ms. johannson is to lead a parade through cambridge, mass., on feb. 15; mr. stiller is to be honored on feb. 23.  a strategic retreat  20th century fox has backed down in a dispute with german exhibitors over the gap between the theatrical release and the dvd release of films, variety.com reported yesterday. angered by the planned dvd release of ''eragon'' on march 19, just three months after its theatrical release, four leading german exhibitors carried out threats to remove fox films from their screens over the weekend, reducing their grosses. fox subsequently agreed to maintain the traditional six-month window for most of its films before their dvd releases.  