pfizer's birthplace, soon without pfizer   when the morning shift ends and the afternoon light thins, workers stream out of the pfizer pharmaceutical plant on flushing avenue in brooklyn.  some head across the avenue to a brick building emblazoned with the ''pfizer quality'' slogan. it is a public charter school now, leased by pfizer to the city for a dollar a year. a few parents walk their children home to the little white-sided town houses across the street, built partly on land pfizer gave the city in the 1980s.  a block away at a subway entrance, security cameras installed by pfizer relay any signs of danger back to the guard station at the plant.  if this area on the williamsburg-bedford-stuyvesant border is not quite pfizerville, it still may be the closest thing to a factory town in this largely postindustrial city. for 158 years, the pfizer company has presided over this remote-feeling stretch of brooklyn, a windswept, big-sky place sliced like a pie by broad, angling streets: first as industrial magnet, then as big brother-benefactor.  so pfizer's imminent departure, which the company announced on monday, will mean more than the loss of 600 jobs.  ''i wish it didn't have to end,'' said ricardo guadalupe, who was laid off from the plant last year and still gazes at the brick behemoth of a factory every time he drops his two sons off at the school. ''i wish it could have lasted forever.''  the school will remain open, but mr. guadalupe, who lives several miles away, now works in new jersey and is not sure how much longer it will make sense to send his children there.  on monday, pfizer, the world's biggest pharmaceutical firm, said it would slash 7,800 jobs in the united states, europe and japan. several of its best-selling drugs are losing their patent protection and will face competition from cheaper generics. the jobs at the brooklyn plant will be phased out over the next two years.  in many quarters, the announcement was not exactly surprising. for a while now, continuing to operate the brooklyn plant, where lipitor, zoloft, viagra and other drugs are manufactured and distributed, seemed more a good-will gesture to the borough of pfizer's birth than a business decision.  ''they could have left many years ago and found a lower cost-environment,'' said michael rochford, executive director of the st. nicholas neighborhood preservation corporation, a nonprofit group that found buyers for the 140 town houses, named the edmund t. pratt jr. houses after a pfizer chairman. ''but they resisted the trend, and then became the catalyst for development as well as providing jobs for the community.''  but surprise or not, the decision is still a shock. ''this was one of the things that you knew in your gut was going to be in the community forever,'' reginald tyson, a 40-year-old out-of-work copier technician, said as he walked by the plant on thursday afternoon. mr. tyson never worked at the plant, but his mother did, and like everyone in the neighborhood, he knew dozens of others who worked there, too.  almost from the day more than a century and a half ago that it introduced its first blockbuster drug, a toffee-flavored intestinal-worm remedy called santonin, pfizer has been an outsized presence in brooklyn.  its founders shook and moved the borough. a company scion's rumored dalliance with a burlesque actress was grist for the society pages. ''mr. pfizer rises to explain,'' read an 1893 headline in the new york times, ''he is interested in nina farrington, but did not elope with her.'' a pfizer president became a co-owner of the brooklyn dodgers.  brooklyn, of course, changed, and by the 1970s, the neighborhood around the plant had become a burnt-out dead zone. drugs and crime were rampant. inhabited buildings were not.  pfizer, which had moved its headquarters from flushing avenue to manhattan in 1961, tried to attract other industrial tenants to the area but could not.  rather than fleeing, as so many manufacturers and corporations did all over new york city in the 1970s, pfizer, wanting to hold onto both its veteran work force and its birthplace, decided to help rebuild the neighborhood, on the theory that it would be both good for business and good for the neighbors.  it formed a public-private partnership with the city to develop jobs, housing and education. ''nothing like it has been tried before by a manufacturer in the city,'' the new york times wrote in 1985.  pfizer had plenty of unused land near the plant. it cleaned up the property -- not a cheap endeavor -- and granted some to the city for the town houses, two-family starter homes for low- and middle-income owners. the company bought tax credits and conveyed them to nonprofit developers. a handful of blocks away, pfizer invested in a st. nicholas corporation apartment building whose tenants used to be homeless.  in 1989, an educational reform group wanted to open an alternative public school in the neighborhood. pfizer offered it the vacant four-story building across flushing avenue from the plant, kicked in half a million dollars for renovations and offered a broad support network for the school, called the beginning with children charter school.  ''whenever the founding principal would have an issue, she'd call up pfizer,'' said mimi corcoran, executive director of the beginning with children foundation, which runs the school. ''employees would come over and mentor our children. they'd send over engineers. they helped build our science labs.''  where the towering pfizer smokestack once stood, pfizer architects and engineers drew up plans and oversaw construction of a beautiful playground, complete with a gazebo area where the children can have class outside in nice weather.  ''it sounds kind of pollyannaish,'' ms. corcoran said, ''but they were incredibly generous.''  pfizer's loyalty to the city has been amply rewarded by the bloomberg administration. in 2003, the company was granted $46 million in tax breaks, spread over 15 years, in return for expanding operations in manhattan. it was not clear whether the closing of the brooklyn plant would prompt the city to cancel the tax break.  the school now has 450 students, and its students consistently score higher than the city average, and far higher than students at schools in the surrounding area. parents who work at the plant feel torn.  ''if i could happen to find some job around here and still keep my kids in the school, that would be great,'' said sam hernandez, a warehouse operator with 11 years experience.  but mr. hernandez, 30, has moved to staten island -- thanks in part to the relatively high wages at pfizer, which can reach $30 an hour for veteran operators. like mr. guadalupe, mr. hernandez said he was not sure how long his children would stay at the school.  even after the plant shuts down, pfizer has promised it will not abandon the area. it plans to spend several million dollars to help turn its boarded-up original 1849 headquarters next to the school into the charles pfizer community education center. the center will offer after-school programs, adult education and a training center for science and math teachers.  pfizer owns about 10 acres around the plant and, company officials say, wants to work with the community and the city to come up with a comprehensive plan for it that includes housing and commercial space as it sells off its holdings.  ''despite the difficult decision to close the facility,'' said richard luftglass, pfizer's senior director for philanthropy, ''we do appreciate the legacy that is there. and we appreciate the obligation to the community.''  the neighborhoodaround the plant remains shaky and shabby in places, but kathryn s. wylde, the president of the partnership for new york city, a nonprofit business coalition of which pfizer has been a longtime member, said there was only so much one company could do. and she thanked pfizer for its efforts.  ''had they closed this plant 20 years ago,'' she said, ''it would have been a devastating blow to new york city and to that community in particular. today, given the state of the economy and the renaissance of brooklyn, it's a blow, but it's one that we can survive.''  