man sold drugs to two accused in his death, friend says   manuel a. morey kept his drugs in a lockbox under his bed, his friend said. when his three young boys were asleep, the people he sold cocaine to could use drugs in any room of his two-story house on route 82. when the boys were awake, his customers had to go to the bedroom and close the door, or head to the basement.  the friend, frankie cannon, 18, lived with the morey family for the past four or five months and helped mr. morey sell drugs. in an interview on sunday in the dutchess county jail in poughkeepsie, he described how mr. morey ran his business.  mr. cannon said that two of mr. morey's clients who are now charged in his death were friends who lived nearby: charles w. gilleo jr., 31, and mark s. serrano, 29. mr. morey sold about $80 worth of powdered cocaine to mr. gilleo every week, and between $200 and $400 to mr. serrano, mr. cannon said.  it seemed to be a lucrative operation. late last may, mr. morey, known as tony, threw a birthday party for himself and his wife that cost $15,000. the party -- fueled by four ounces of cocaine, marijuana and plenty of beer -- lasted for four days, mr. cannon said.  but mr. morey's low-level drug-dealing apparently played a role in his death, and the deaths of his wife and three boys. on jan. 19, mr. morey and his family were murdered, the authorities said, and their house was set on fire to cover up the crime, one of the most vicious killings in dutchess county history.  mr. cannon was arrested a few days before the fire on a felony burglary charge, new york state police officials said, and he has been at the county jail since jan. 16. he said he has known mr. morey all his life, and that his mother and mr. morey went to high school together.  he spoke on sunday while wearing an orange prison jumpsuit, seated in a visitor's room, his brown hair disheveled. ''if i was in that house, i'd be dead right now,'' mr. cannon said. ''i'd be dead for sure.''  mr. gilleo and mr. serrano have been arrested in connection with the killings, state police officials said. the authorities would not discuss the motive or the circumstances leading up to the murders, but said previously that mr. gilleo and mr. serrano and mr. morey had a business relationship involving drugs.  mr. serrano did not have a criminal record, and mr. gilleo had been arrested a few times for minor offenses, the authorities said. mr. morey has been described by state police as a low-level cocaine dealer who had an arrest record for minor offenses, none of them drug-related.  mr. cannon said the police had interviewed him as part of their investigation, but the authorities would not discuss the case this weekend.  ''due to the nature of the investigation, in that it is still pending and pre-grand jury, i cannot comment,'' william v. grady, the dutchess county district attorney, said in reference to mr. cannon's comments.  relatives of the morey family and relatives of mr. gilleo and mr. serrano all declined to comment.  mr. morey and mr. gilleo were best friends, mr. cannon and neighbors of mr. gilleo said. they had grown up together and attended john jay senior high school in hopewell junction. they called each other brother, and mr. morey's sons called mr. gilleo uncle charlie. mr. serrano also went to john jay, but mr. cannon said mr. serrano was closer to mr. gilleo than he was to mr. morey.  mr. cannon said that he dropped out of john jay and had been kicked out of his grandmother's house. he was arrested for burglarizing john jay. he admitted that he robbed for the thrill of it, and said that he and mr. morey would often go on ''benders,'' staying up for days high on cocaine.  mr. morey had a small circle of friends whom he would allow to come over to his house to buy drugs, mr. cannon said. mr. morey and mr. cannon would drive to the house of buyers mr. morey did not know as well. and, mr. cannon said, mr. morey made a point of keeping his doors and windows locked, sometimes propping chairs against doors.  the authorities said that mr. morey, 33, and his wife, tina, 30, were fatally shot. the youngest child, ryan, 6, died of blunt trauma to the head. the other children, manuel, 13, and adam, 10, died of multiple stab wounds.  mr. serrano and mr. gilleo were charged only with the murder of mr. morey. more charges are possible after the evidence goes before a county grand jury this week, officials said. the two men are being held without bail at the county jail.  mr. cannon said that mrs. morey came to his court appearance on jan. 18, the day before the fire. ''she said, 'don't worry, frankie, i'm going to get you out of here,' '' he said.  