a people's food takes a step up   with its brightly painted houses and muslim melting pot, the bo kaap neighborhood of cape town may not seem like a foodie's delight. it was settled in the 17th century by slaves from india, malaysia and other southeast asian countries, who became known as cape malays. and their food, odd fusion dishes like bobotie (curried beef with egg custard) and sosatie (a mediterranean-style kebab marinated with indian curry), was largely regarded as working-class fare.  but with the cape malays' sweet and spicy mix of asian, european and mediterranean flavors now showing up at haute restaurants around cape town and beyond, that is starting to change.  take, for starters, the biriyani at the showroom (10 hospital street, 27-21-421-4682; www.theshowroomrestaurant.co.za), a chic new restaurant opened by a top chef, bruce robertson, who once worked with gordon ramsay in london. instead of the traditional spices and yogurt that make up this aromatic indian dish, mr. robertson adheres to an old cape malay recipe and uses fennel, a soft-boiled quail egg and lentils, albeit with a more refined touch.  ''cape malay is a mature taste,'' mr. robertson said in explaining the cuisine's newfound appeal. ''it's genuine food, proper food, and it's south africa's home cooking.''  another tastemaker, craig paterson, the chef at onewaterfront, a modern restaurant with harbor views (west quay, v & a waterfront, 27-21-410-7100), has turned his kitchen into a kind of cape malay laboratory, coaxing new flavors out of old ingredients.  ''wherever possible, i have tried to incorporate the influence of malay spices,'' said mr. paterson, whose restaurant is inside the elegant cape grace hotel, which counts bill clinton and beyoncé among its famous guests. the current menu includes a duck bobotie, a coriander-encrusted kingklip and a biryani-style saffron seafood risotto.  the dishes may be nouvelle, but they are very much in keeping with the cape malays' origins. the southeast asian slaves, who were brought to cape town by the dutch east india company, found themselves without access to their favorite ingredients like coconut milk (a staple of malay cooking) and tamarind (a favorite spice of south indians).  so they began adapting their recipes and invented a new style of cooking. along with the bobotie and sosatie, they came up with bredie, a tomato and mutton stew of dutch origin that's seasoned with cinnamon, cardamom, ginger, cloves and chili powder. and for dessert, they combined a european-style pastry with an indian gulab jamin, and came up with a koeksister, a fritter that's deep fried and dipped in a syrup seasoned with ginger, cardamom and cinnamon.  ''they took some ideas from the dutch, some from the mediterranean countries, and even a little from the british, but not too much -- their food is very bland,'' said latiefa larney. she is the consulting chef for the bo kaap kombuis (7 august street, 27-21-422-5446), which recently opened as the first high-end restaurant in bo kaap.  with tourists and locals packing its dining room nightly, the restaurant not only attests to the growing popularity of cape malay cuisine, but also to its continuing evolution. ''they say french is the best cooking, but no,'' said ms. larney with a smile. ''they need to spice it up a little.''  surfacing: cape town  