not ready to wind down   time is money, they say. and if you ask the puckish artist vik muniz why that is, exactly, he will explain in his own simple terms: each is meant to be spent -- not saved.  ''i like spending money,'' he said last week at the modern brooklyn house and studio where he lives with his wife and young daughter. ''i don't like money in the bank. i like moments.''  whatever reticence mr. muniz may once have had about espousing such a profligate point of view melted away pretty much right on schedule. it was his 40th birthday, that point at which many people come to feel they have reached a zenith, a noon, and that it is time to make the most of the time that is left.  so five years ago, after years of going through a variety of watches, mr. muniz went into wempe jewelers on fifth avenue and paid what seemed like a huge amount (about $25,000) for the watch he had longed for ever since it was introduced in 1994. that is, the lange 1, by a. lange & söhne, the fabled 162-year-old watchmaking house based outside dresden.  the company was reopened by the great-grandchildren of the founder in 1990, after a 42-year hiatus during which it was taken over by the east german government to mass-produce watches. the lange 1 was the first watch issued by the new a. lange company.  but mr. muniz was not attracted to the watch as some moving symbol of rebirth. rather, he thought it was beautiful, understated, simple (no extraneous moon-phase dials), and he liked its asymmetrical design, made more graphic by his choice of a white gold case and a black-and-white enamel face.  ''i thought, 'since this is one for the rest of my life, i want it to be pretty,' '' he said.  he also fetishizes about its incredibly precise mechanical movement, which has to be manually wound every four days or so. and by virtue of a ''skeleton'' back, the sapphire works can be seen working away. ''i always loved anything mechanical,'' said mr. muniz, who grew up relatively poor in são paulo, brazil. ''i always fixed my own car when i was growing up. i even fixed it once with my underwear.''  because he himself is the key that makes the clock run, he has developed a kind of kinship with the little wrist monitor. ''i feel like i am winding myself,'' he said, laughing and pantomiming the turning of a giant imaginary key on his side.  but then, mr. muniz's droll photographs always play with scale, from the small (the mona lisa he reproduced in peanut butter and jelly) to the mighty (a gigantic earthwork, seen from the air, of a simple depiction of a key). a solo show of his clever yet mind-bending work opens at p. s. 1 next month.  best of all, the lange 1 also has a novel feature that really endears it to mr. muniz (and enchains him to it): a power reserve gauge. this is the needle that travels from roughly two o'clock to four o'clock on the watch's face, telling the wearer how soon the watch will have to be wound. ''i like that this way you can keep an eye on how much time you have left,'' he said.  not to mention that you can keep getting an extension. so the watch, you might say, appeals to him as a symbol of rebirth after all. but it is his own rebirth, no one else's.  isn't that what makes everyone tick?  possessed  