faith at work   i answered an ad for a job as a data-entry clerk at a faith-based charity, but i stopped filling out the application when it said i could not work there unless i signed a ''statement of faith,'' affirming that i had evangelical christian beliefs. isn't this religious discrimination?  janet lama, charlotte, n.c.  if you ask a lawyer, he will explain why this group can reject non-christians. andrew g. celli jr., for example, an attorney with expertise in civil rights law, says, ''this is what the law allows -- and for good reason, given the time-honored constitutional principle of separation of church and state.'' this charity sees its work as an expression of faith, celli says, and ''government should not be in the business of telling religious organizations which of their activities are religious and which are secular.''  but if you ask me -- and you did -- i'm with you. for the law to retreat from making such judgments, even the most straightforward ones, allows religious freedom to mutate into religious discrimination. explicitly sacred tasks may, of course, be limited to believers: the position of imam may be reserved for muslims. but a group, even one with a religious affiliation, that proffers traditionally secular services to the general public should abide by the usual rules governing such things, including the prohibition on job discrimination. (there's nothing unusual about this sort of inclusiveness. catholic hospitals routinely hire non-catholic physicians.) if there are gray areas, jobs whose nature -- sacred or profane? -- is debatable, we might reasonably defer to the faithful, but the job you sought is clearly secular. i'm not a bible scholar, but as i recall, jesus was silent on the subject of data-entry clerks.  even if this charity sees proselytizing as part of its mission, the back-office job you sought would not put you in contact with the public, i.e. with potential converts. your views on religion would neither inhibit the charity's activities nor prevent the person at the next desk from making his work an expression of his faith. as an ethical matter, if you can do this job, you should have it.  i was to screen candidates for a job at my office that requires considerable phone time with our high-end, snobbish customers. when my boss said, ''don't bring in anyone who wants to 'ax' you a question,'' my first reaction was that she wanted me to exclude african-americans. my boss claims to support equal opportunity, but was she being racist here?  name withheld, new york  was your boss brusque? yes. uncouth? perhaps. unkempt? i can't say; i've never seen her. racist? i can't say that either, and neither can you. there's not enough information. using ''ax'' in place of ''ask'' is sometimes done in casual conversation by some african-americans, but it is done by other groups as well. since the job calls for chitchat with status-conscious clients, your boss might have been emphasizing the importance of finding someone -- of any ethnicity -- who speaks standard english with sufficient ease to cater to the tastes, reinforce the prejudices and stroke the vanity of your snobbish customers (perhaps someone named jeeves). it is possible that your boss was making a coded allusion to race, but absent other indications of racism on her part, she deserves the benefit of the doubt.  update: the questioner was taken off the search for reasons unrelated to this conversation. the company hired ''a girl from queens,'' white, with a slight regional accent and no extraordinary verbal sophistication.  the way we live now: 1-28-07: the ethicist  