bush promotes his free trade initiatives   with democrats making the case that his economic policies have benefited the rich more than the middle class, president bush struck back on tuesday, in the first of back-to-back speeches promoting what the white house characterizes as 41 consecutive months of economic growth.  mr. bush came here to east peoria, home to caterpillar, the world's biggest manufacturer of earth-moving equipment, to advance his free trade initiatives and press democrats to make his tax cuts permanent. on wednesday, he heads to new york's financial district to deliver a more formal ''state of the economy'' address at federal hall, where he is expected to ask congress to extend his authority to negotiate trade agreements that cannot be amended.  ''the temptation is to say, well, trade may not be worth it, let's isolate ourselves, let's protect ourselves,'' mr. bush told a friendly audience of caterpillar employees, standing against a backdrop of gigantic tractors in the company's familiar colors of yellow and black.  he added, ''it's a bad mistake for the country to lose our confidence and not compete.''  the president was mostly preaching to the converted. caterpillar was carefully chosen by the white house to put mr. bush's policies in the best possible light. the company's exports to chile and australia have shot up following free trade agreements negotiated by the bush administration. and china, which negotiated a trade deal with president bill clinton, is now caterpillar's fifth-largest export market.  ''americans wonder, can you compete in a global economy?'' mr. bush said, before answering himself. ''my answer is, darn right, you can.''  with mr. bush's public approval ratings having crumbled, his domestic agenda faltering and his iraq strategy running into a wall of opposition on capitol hill, white house advisers are hoping to capitalize on economic growth and low unemployment figures as a way to elevate public opinion of the president.  already, the polls show a fresh hint of optimism. a survey by the pew research center found that while public approval of mr. bush's handling of the war had dropped nine points, to 23 percent from 32 percent, from august to december 2006, approval of his handling of the economy went up six points, to 39 percent from 33 percent. a recent gallup poll, meanwhile, found 65 percent of respondents predicted they would be better off a year from now than they were today.  but democrats, who won control of congress in part by arguing that mr. bush's economic policies are giving short shrift to the middle class, do not intend to give up that ground without a fight. the president's twin appearances this week are setting the stage for a battle between mr. bush and congressional democrats over the economy in general and trade in particular.  already, democrats are signaling they will resist extending the president's ''fast track'' trade negotiating authority, unless mr. bush couples the plan with proposals to demand tougher labor and environmental standards from the united states' trading partners and help for american workers who are displaced by foreign competition.  ''we don't want to abandon free trade,'' senator charles e. schumer, democrat of new york, said in an interview tuesday, ''but he's got to offer more protections and cushions for people who are caught in its maw through no fault of their own.''  on wednesday, while mr. bush is delivering his speech in manhattan, a house-senate committee will hold a hearing on the economy, led by mr. schumer, who has just published a book outlining how democrats can hold power by reclaiming their status as the party of the middle class. the chief democratic witnesses are robert e. rubin and lawrence h. summers, both former treasury secretaries under president bill clinton.  ''when the average middle class voter hears the president speak, he or she thinks, 'the guy doesn't know what i'm going through, it's not terrible, but it's not so rosy either,' '' mr. schumer said, adding that the hearing is ''intended to be an answer to the president.''  in east peoria on tuesday, there was a preview of this same political clash. at caterpillar, with representative ray lahood, a republican, in tow, mr. bush found what a pool report described as his ''inner boy'' when he drove one of the giant tractors for about 20 feet.  ''i would suggest moving back,'' mr. bush announced as he climbed into the tractor cab. ''i'm about to crank this sucker up.'' and then he did, later pronouncing it ''a cool experience.''  while the president was busy driving, the freshman democrat who represents the district next door was busy issuing a press release arguing that mr. bush was ignoring the financial condition of his constituents. the congressman, representative phil hare, who worked as an aide to his predecessor before winning election in november, pointed to another illinois community, galesburg, where he said free trade treaties ''drove 1,600 good-paying maytag jobs'' to sonora, mexico.  