a researcher for microsoft is reported missing at sea   the coast guard is searching for a computer scientist from microsoft who left for a daylong sailing trip off the coast of san francisco on sunday and did not return.  the man, james gray, 63, who works in microsoft's silicon valley research lab, set out alone sunday morning for the farallon islands on his 40-foot boat, tenacious, and was expected back that afternoon, lt. amy marrs, a coast guard spokeswoman, said monday.  mr. gray's wife notified authorities at 8:35 p.m. sunday after he failed to return and did not answer cellphone calls, the coast guard said.  the farallon islands are about 25 miles west of the golden gate bridge, and in optimal conditions the trip there and back takes about 10 hours.  mr. gray, who has worked at microsoft for 10 years, researches databases and transaction processing systems. he is an authority on computer caching systems, which are meant to speed the transfer of frequently needed data or instructions. he received several computer science awards, including the prestigious turing award in 1998.  before joining the research division at microsoft, mr. gray worked at i.b.m. and at the digital equipment corporation. his focus is on ''using computers to make scientists more productive,'' according to his web site.  he has a longstanding interest in building supercomputers using inexpensive components to reduce the cost of storage. and he has been working with astronomers to build a powerful computer-based telescope.  ''our thoughts are with jim and his family as we hope for his safe return,'' said doug free, a microsoft spokesman.  lieutenant marrs said that mr. gray had more than 10 years of sailing experience and that his boat was well-equipped with communication, safety and emergency gear.  the san francisco bay area has experienced good weather since sunday morning. but local sailors consider this a particularly tricky time of year to sail to the farallons, as distant storms can cause large swells in the shallow waters between the golden gate and the islands.  