racism taints norman trial in brooklyn, defense says   it was not simply that the former brooklyn democratic leader clarence norman jr. did not commit a crime, one of his lawyers said yesterday during opening arguments in mr. norman's fourth corruption trial.  no, said the lawyer, anthony l. ricco, it was that the very actions that prosecutors characterized as grand larceny by coercion were in fact the brave work of a civil rights warrior, standing up to a racist judicial candidate's attempt to suppress the black vote. mr. norman, mr. ricco said, was a man in the model of the rev. dr. martin luther king jr.  and the judicial candidates cast by prosecutors as victims of a crude shakedown by mr. norman, mr. ricco said, ''were not extorted by clarence norman.'' rather, ''he tried to inspire them beyond their own ignorance.''  addressing a jury two-thirds composed of african-americans, mr. ricco, who is black, worked in references to poll taxes, literacy tests and dr. king's ''letter from birmingham jail'' as he built his defense.  ''this case is about the enfranchisement of a people,'' he said.  mr. norman, who was brooklyn's first black democratic party chief, has been at the center of district attorney charles j. hynes's five-year investigation into allegations that judgeships were for sale in brooklyn.  in the present case, he is accused of strong-arming two candidates in the 2002 primary race for civil court, karen b. yellen and marcia j. sikowitz, and threatening to withdraw the party's support if they did not hire his pet consultants and cronies to run their campaigns.  in his three prior trials, mr. norman, a former 12-term state assemblyman, was convicted of soliciting illegal contributions and pocketing campaign funds, but was acquitted of unlawfully billing the assembly for mileage on his car. he is already facing two to six years in prison.  all along, mr. norman's supporters have accused mr. hynes's prosecution of being racially motivated, but mr. norman's previous lawyers had not played the race card nearly so bluntly. mr. hynes's office has denied that race was a factor in the prosecution and would not comment on mr. ricco's opening statement.  assistant district attorney kevin s. richardson told the jury in his opening statement yesterday that mr. norman had demanded that judge yellen pay $12,000 for campaign fliers that she thought would not be effective.  on the eve of the primary, both sides agree, judge yellen was instructed to pay another $9,000 to an associate of mr. norman's to get out the vote in predominantly black central brooklyn. ms. yellen is white.  according to mr. richardson, when judge yellen balked, saying she thought she should concentrate her efforts elsewhere, mr. norman told her, '' 'if you don't pay this money, the county not only won't carry you in central brooklyn, the county won't carry you anywhere at all!' which for karen yellen's campaign was a death threat.''  judge yellen agreed to pay the money to the associate, william h. boone iii, the treasurer of the party's fund-raising wing. instead of using it to hire election workers, mr. richardson said, mr. boone simply pocketed the money.  ''he used it to pay his credit card bills,'' mr. richardson said.  mr. ricco, on the other hand, painted mr. norman as a seasoned coach coming off a losing season; the year before, two of the party's judicial candidates had lost to upstarts who ran against the democratic machine.  mr. norman studied the voting data and decided that the six assembly districts that make up central brooklyn had swung the outcome of the race, and he determined to go all out in those districts, mr. ricco said.  ''the advice that he was giving to those two candidates was based on intelligence,'' mr. ricco said. judge yellen's recalcitrance, mr. ricco said, was based on the belief that getting out the vote in black neighborhoods would only help her black opponent, delores j. thomas.  looking at the jury, mr. ricco said, ''what they were saying was, ''it's stupid for us to spend money on you and you and you and you.' ''  mr. norman's strategy turned out to be the right one, mr. ricco said. the six central brooklyn districts produced 45 percent of the votes in the borough, even though they made up only 30 percent of the districts. in four mostly white districts where judge yellen, without consulting mr. norman, spent $8,000 to get out the vote, she drew fewer votes than she did in central brooklyn, he said.  in the end, judge yellen and judge sikowitz both lost the primary. another of mr. norman's lawyers, edward d. wilford, said that if they had devoted more attention to central brooklyn, they would have won.  mr. ricco ended by exhorting the jurors: ''honor your vote. bring dignity to that man in the cell writing.''  he was not speaking of mr. norman, who is out on bail.  