respect is nice, but principals want a raise   alejandro soto, the principal of intermediate school 184 in the south bronx, is willing to accept the wider authority mayor michael r. bloomberg wants to give to school leaders. he is willing to weather further reorganization of the school system. he is willing to be held responsible for his students' scores and to face the scrutiny of outside evaluators and surveys of parents.  but what mr. soto said he cannot stomach, after more than two decades of toiling in the school system, is that some teachers, because of recent contract deals, can now earn more than the principals or assistant principals who supervise them. ''you read in the paper that you are going to be absolutely responsible,'' he said. ''it's demeaning that our employees make more than we do.''  this is supposed to be a glorious moment for principals. mr. bloomberg, seeking extraordinary gains in student achievement, has said principals must be elevated to a pre-eminent position in the school system's hierarchy. yet, in interviews with principals across the city, many say they have never felt so underappreciated while their jobs have never been tougher.  under mr. bloomberg's latest plans, announced in his state of the city address this month, principals will gain power but also face far more scrutiny. they will be held accountable for students' progress and for rigorously reviewing teachers up for tenure. they will be rated by superintendents in the chancellor's office and also, for the first time, by the staffs in their own schools.  and since the mayor plans to eliminate traditional superintendents' offices, principals will become the field commanders.  many principals applaud the concept. kenneth baum, principal of the urban assembly school for applied math and science, a bronx middle school, said, ''these kind of empowering moves for principals allow us to make the school-based decisions that make sense for us.''  yet others complained that the emphasis by mr. bloomberg and chancellor joel i. klein on corporate-style management and data-driven accountability, and relentless pressure from the federal no child left behind act, were drowning out the magic and poetry of teaching and learning.  ''i think the principals as a group feel very battle weary,'' said a brooklyn high school principal, who asked not to be identified out of fear of alienating superiors. ''we're tired. we don't feel like there's any real vision coming from the leadership around instruction.'' this principal added: ''the emotional and hopeful and romantic piece of education is left behind by businessmen.''  still, what echoed most in the interviews was bitterness over the lack of a raise to compensate for the added duties.  principals have not had a raise since before their current contract expired on june 30, 2003. the highest-paid teachers now earn $93,416 a year, with ample opportunity to earn extra pay before and after school and over the summer. principals earn $100,243 to $125,283, and assistant principals from $88,398 to $107,436, without summers off. both types of administrators can earn bonuses of up to $15,000.  contract talks have picked up since the mayor's speech, and negotiations are scheduled for today, but the sides remain deeply divided.  mr. klein has said he wants to increase pay, a point he reiterated in a statement yesterday, saying: ''our principals clearly deserve a raise.''  but he has also insisted on eliminating work rules that he said pose conflicts of interest between principals and assistant principals who are represented by the same union. the union, the council of school supervisors and administrators, representing nearly 1,500 principals and more than 3,000 assistant principals, has accused the chancellor of trying break the union apart.  ''not having a contract for so long certainly sets a tone in which people feel demoralized and that their work is not valued by the system they are working for,'' said stephen duch, the principal of hillcrest high school in jamaica, queens, adding that the lack of a contract ''continually surfaces when you are trying to have a conversation about education.''  still, mr. duch said he believed the new plans were intended to help children. ''i think the turmoil is really, really worth it,'' he said, adding that he was impressed by mr. klein. ''he is the best chancellor i have worked for,'' mr. duch said.  in interviews, many principals complained that they had not been given enough information to form an opinion about the mayor's plans or understand the impact of those plans on their schools. some said they worried that progress in their schools would stall as a result of further upheaval. some questioned whether their new powers would be real.  in high schools, where the fall term is ending and regents exams were last week, many principals said the timing of the mayor's news was evidence of a constant, fundamental disconnect between schools and the administration.  ''it's regents week,'' said gillian smith, principal of the facing history school in manhattan. ''short of the school falling down around us, everybody is really focused on the kids.''  the chancellor's office has started holding information sessions for principals, but many details remain to be worked out. and many principals said they were confused about basic things like who will be their supervisor.  ernest a. logan, president-elect of the council of school supervisors and administrators, said the mayor had principals carrying a huge burden. ''if something goes wrong, the only one held accountable now is the principal,'' he said.  melissa h. silberman, the principal of automotive high school in brooklyn, said mr. klein was taking a big risk giving so much authority to principals, some of whom may not feel ready for it.  ms. silberman was one of more than 300 principals to join the chancellor's empowerment program, in which school leaders get greater autonomy in exchange for agreeing to meet performance goals.  ''i wasn't afraid of empowerment, so i jumped,'' ms. silberman said. ''but i have principal peers who are terrified.'' ms. silberman, too, expressed dismay over the contract. ''how do you tell us that you want to empower us and respect us, and not give us a contract?'' she asked.  because teacher pay has risen steeply in recent years, some assistant principals have talked about returning to teaching where they could earn more and have summers off.  ''the teacher who works 10 months makes more than i do,'' said fred walsh, the principal of the school for international studies in brooklyn. ''that definitely stings.''  jeffrey scherr, the principal of francis lewis high school in fresh meadows, queens, said his 10 assistant principals wanted a raise. ''they are becoming extremely demoralized,'' he said, adding that he, too, was feeling pinched.  ''i am beginning to hurt,'' mr. scherr said. ''i love my job; i really do.'' but he added, ''you cannot succeed in this job, you cannot do it, if you feel like you are being taken advantage of.''  