rangel and others condemn bush medicaid plan   representative charles b. rangel and a number of city officials urged president bush yesterday to reconsider a proposed change to medicaid that could cost the city's public hospital network millions of dollars in annual financing.  ''we want to make sure the president knows how damaging his health care proposal will be to our health and hospitals corporation,'' the city council speaker, christine c. quinn, said, referring to the agency that runs the city's 11 public hospitals and dozens of diagnostic centers and health clinics.  agency officials estimate the president's plan would cost the corporation about $350 million a year, about 7 percent of its annual budget.  ms. quinn joined mr. rangel and more than a dozen other elected officials and health care representatives at city hall yesterday to protest the president's proposal.  ''isn't it embarrassing we have to do this,'' said mr. rangel, who promised to join other democrats and use his post as chairman of the powerful ways and means committee to cut off funds to the president's health care plans.  ''how can a great nation like ours explain that we can't take care of our own,'' he said, adding that the president's proposals come as ''millions are being spent on a war that nobody wants.''  mr. bush's proposal would end a longstanding regulation that allowed public hospitals to receive more money from medicaid, the health plan for the poor, than private hospitals receive for the same services.  federal officials have said that the resulting savings could be sent to the states in the form of ''affordable choice grants'' and used to provide the uninsured with private health insurance.  alan d. aviles, president of the health and hospitals corporation, said that the rule was in place to help public hospitals that provide treatment to the indigent, and that losing it would ''shred the safety net of the safety net providers.''  the city council plans to send a letter to the president this week opposing the proposal.  