f.a.a. review is expected on pilots' age at retirement   airlines and pilots' unions expect the federal aviation administration to announce tuesday that it will review its rule requiring airline pilots to retire at age 60, now that the international civil aviation organization has raised the age to 65.  an advisory committee assembled by the f.a.a. reported back on the issue last november but did not reach a consensus. its members, including airlines, pilots' unions and other specialists, simply laid out the pros and cons. but the group did recommend that if a change was made, it should be prospective, meaning that pilots who had already been forced to retire would not be allowed back.  committee members who favored the change argued that there was no medical rationale for setting the retirement age at 60, and that a pilot shortage was coming and could be alleviated by letting pilots work longer. those opposed said that setting a new age would replace one arbitrary limit with another and that no changes had been offered that would maintain current safety levels.  the report was released this month, and f.a.a. officials have been saying that an announcement on the issue will come soon. the administrator, marion c. blakey, is scheduled to give a speech tuesday that people involved in the issue say will include the subject of retirement age. ms. blakey cannot simply propose a change, however. under federal procedures, she is more likely to announce a review, but such an announcement amounts to a sign of willingness to make the change.  some of the impetus for change has nothing to do with safety. many pilots have lost the bulk of their pensions as a result of their airlines' bankruptcy proceedings and some older pilots have decided they would like to work longer.  the new international rule requires that if one member of a two-pilot crew is over 60, the other must be under 60.  since the international change last november, the f.a.a. has allowed foreign carriers to fly into the united states with pilots older than 60. the f.a.a. is not obligated to comply with the international rule, if it can show a compelling reason not to.  any change would create complications for the airlines. among them are whether retirees, if allowed to return, would regain their seniority and bump some younger pilots from captain down to first officer. that problem might be resolved by congress.  other issues include what medical standards would apply, and how fitness would be evaluated. captains now get physicals every six months. another issue is how the f.a.a. would gather information to demonstrate the effect of the change on safety.  the existing standard was set by the f.a.a. in 1960, partly at the request of the airlines. the agency did not use medical data on pilots at the time, proponents of change point out.  the f.a.a. recently decided to allow air traffic controllers to work beyond age 56, case by case.  