ex-comptollers endured controversy themselves   what do the ''three wise men,'' the former comptrollers who picked finalists on thursday for the state comptroller's job, have in common?  the three men, who decided not to include any state legislators in their choices, were legislators themselves before eventually becoming comptrollers. the men on the selection panel were h. carl mccall and harrison j. goldin, democrats who were state lawmakers, and edward v. regan, a republican who was a city councilman in buffalo.  ''that didn't disqualify them,'' observed assemblyman carl e. heastie, a bronx democrat. he was one of many albany lawmakers angry that none of their colleagues were deemed qualified to replace alan g. hevesi, who resigned as comptroller last month after admitting that he had illegally used state employees to chauffeur his wife.  ''to disqualify legislators is troubling to me and all of my colleagues,'' mr. heastie said. ''it's just a slap in the face that not one member qualified.''  each of the three former comptrollers on the panel was praised as a model of probity and experience when they were asked to screen candidates for a later vote by the legislature. the three were chosen by gov. eliot spitzer; the senate majority leader, joseph l. bruno; and the assembly speaker, sheldon silver.  over the years, however, each of the ''wise men,'' as the panel members were called, has also had brushes with controversy in connection with his duties as comptroller.  in his 2002 campaign for governor, mr. mccall endured days of withering headlines over disclosures that he had written, on official letterhead, letters of recommendation for his wife, daughter and cousin to companies that did business with the state pension fund, which the comptroller's office oversees.  four years earlier, he came under fire over evidence that his office repeatedly awarded contracts and other pension fund work to companies that had made donations to his campaign. in several cases, the donations -- which were legal -- came just before or just after the companies were awarded work by the pension fund.  in an interview on friday, mr. mccall described the fund-raising requirements of campaigning as unfortunate but necessary, and denied that there had been any connection between his or his staff's decisions and the campaign donations.  ''our record of our business is there for everybody to see,'' he said.  mr. goldin, who served four terms as new york city comptroller beginning in the 1970s, came under scrutiny for soliciting campaign money from companies that did business with his office, and faced allegations that he had improperly helped a businessman seeking a contract to build city bus shelters.  the city's department of investigation concluded an inquiry into the matter in 1981 without filing any charges against mr. goldin, who denied any impropriety.  ''as you know, people can make all kinds of allegations, and there have been complaints by bus shelter companies over many years, and complaints were made then as they have been in the ensuing period, by people who were disgruntled they didn't get the contract award,'' mr. goldin said on friday. ''the findings were that there was nothing improper that was going on.''  mr. regan served as state comptroller for more than a decade before resigning in 1993 to become the head of a research institute. (he was replaced by mr. mccall, who was selected for the office by a joint vote of the legislature.) though mr. regan won plaudits on both sides of the aisle for his management of the state's finances, his campaign fund-raising also came under scrutiny.  a state ethics commission and the manhattan district attorney examined mr. regan's practice of soliciting donations from companies that did business with his office. the investigations unearthed a memo, written by an assistant to mr. regan, saying, ''those who give will get.''  mr. regan endured further controversy when it emerged that he was using campaign funds to pay for lawyers' fees during the investigations, and that he had billed the state tens of thousands of dollars for a security check for his office, including a search for listening devices.  ultimately, those investigations -- like the inquiries into mr. mccall and mr. goldin -- did not result in any charges.  ''that's not a positive, is it?'' mr. regan said in an interview on friday, recalling the controversy. ''the major investment banks did business with the state, and the major investment banks wrote checks for the campaign. you had to raise a lot of money, though less than today. it's a huge dilemma.''  except when a comptroller resigns in midterm, the office is an elective one. the practice of accepting campaign donations from companies that do business with the state's pension fund is legal, but it has also been controversial.  during two days of public hearings, some of those vying for the comptroller's job, like assemblyman richard l. brodsky of westchester, pledged not to accept such contributions. thomas p. dinapoli, a nassau county assemblyman also interested in the job, said he would voluntarily limit those contributions to $10,000, but said that eliminating them altogether would make it unduly hard for the nonwealthy to run for the office.  the three ex-comptrollers chose william j. mulrow, an investment banker who ran in the democratic primary for comptroller in 2002; martha e. stark, the new york city finance commissioner; and howard s. weitzman, the nassau county comptroller.  mr. silver, who said he wanted a member of the assembly to get the job, has suggested that he might pick his own candidate, although mr. spitzer has said that the legislature should stick to the three finalists.  