f.a.a. to propose letting airline pilots fly until age 65   the federal aviation administration will propose allowing airline pilots to fly until they are 65 years old, dropping a 47-year requirement that they retire at 60, the agency's administrator said on tuesday.  the change will bring the united states in line with international practice.  ''there's a heck of a lot of experience behind those captains' stripes, and we shouldn't have to lose it the way we do these days,'' said marion c. blakey, the administrator of the f.a.a., in a speech.  ''experience counts; it's an added margin of safety,'' she said.  ms. blakey commissioned a report on the age issue last year from a panel drawn from pilot unions and airlines; ultimately, it did not reach a consensus but rather laid out the pros and cons of a change.  her decision moves aviation into the mainstream of changes in the work place nationally; many americans are working longer, some by choice and others from economic necessity. many pilots are in the second category, having lost hundreds of thousands of dollars in pension benefits because of airline bankruptcies.  the immediate impetus, however, was the international civil aviation organization, a body affiliated with the united nations, that recently changed its rules to allow pilots to fly until 65. ms. blakey said the rules worldwide should be ''seamless.''  she also said there was no medical justification for retirement at 60, adding that it it was not clear that the rule was medically justified in 1960. pilots receive physicals every six months.  the f.a.a will propose a rule before the end of the year, she said, although it is likely to take 18 months to two years to put in place. during this process, the f.a.a. will take comments from the public.  the rule will not be retroactive, she said; it will apply only to pilots who are under 60 when the new rule takes effect.  ms. blakey said that she had already received 180 applications for waivers from pilots who were anticipating the change, but that neither her agency nor the airlines had a way to process them.  the co-chairman of the f.a.a.'s panel on pilot age, duane woerth, 58, who was president of the air line pilots association until jan. 1, said that in the short term, the change might cut the airlines' training costs. but it may also add to sick time expenses, he said. ''guys my age are on lipitor, vioxx and nexium,'' he said, naming drugs for control of common health problems. ''we take the cocktail every day.''  mr. woerth, who is 58 and on leave from northwest airlines, said he did not know if the rule would take effect in time to affect him.  mr. woerth's union, now led by john prater, backs the current rule; many younger pilots say the current rule helps them advance faster. mr. prater said his union would study the proposal.  