bears' anderson likes being in a rush   as a rookie, mark anderson of the chicago bears has never played against peyton manning. anderson hopes to introduce himself on sunday. because when anderson meets quarterbacks, they often end up lying on the ground.  ''i love sacking quarterbacks, no matter who they are,'' said anderson, a defensive end who led all n.f.l. rookies with 12 sacks, during tuesday's super bowl media day. ''manning is real good with the ball, and he makes smart decisions. but no quarterback likes constant pressure.''  forcing manning into mistakes and erasing his comfort zone in the pocket rank among the bears' top priorities as they prepare for sunday's super bowl against the indianapolis colts. can the bears get to manning before manning gets to the bears? that is a game within the game in which chicago will pit its quick and talented defensive line against a colts' offensive line that guards manning like the secret service guards the president.  the bears harass quarterbacks the old-fashioned way, preferring not to blitz while relying on their defensive line to create pressure. that formula has worked this season, largely due to anderson, who enters the game in passing situations with one thought -- getting to the quarterback as quickly as possible.  during the national football conference championship, anderson gave an early greeting to new orleans quarterback drew brees, sacking him and stripping the ball from behind during the saints' second series. new orleans recovered the fumble, but the tone for a ferocious pass rush had been set. later in the game, brees fumbled again when hit by defensive end alex brown, and brees was also forced into a safety, when he had to get rid of the ball to avoid being clobbered in the end zone and was called for intentional grounding.  that is the kind of pressure the bears envision putting on manning, but it will not be easy. manning is rarely fooled by a defensive scheme and so he avoids many sacks by quickly recognizing which receivers should be open. the bears plan to vary their defense and camouflage it as long as possible, hoping that manning occasionally throws into coverage. a consistent pass rush will be extremely important for the bears, because the less time manning has to throw, the more mistakes he could make.  ''we want to get to him as fast as we can, as early as we can,'' said brown, who had seven sacks during the regular season. ''it's hard to get guys in his face because they do such a good job protecting him and he gets rid of the ball so fast. you get guys in his face or at his feet, he could make some bad throws. it's one thing to say it, but you've got to do it.  ''if you can disguise it, make him think you're playing one defense, then maybe he can run a receiver right into you, or maybe you can get a ball thrown to you. but it's hard to confuse the guy. eighty percent of the time, he's right. he knows what the defense is going to do before they actually do it. he could probably look over and tell the cornerback, 'well, you're not supposed to be there.' ''  ''over and over again, you see marvin harrison and reggie wayne running free through the defense,'' said brown, referring to the colts' wide receivers. ''every defense has a weakness, it's just a matter of, can you get to the quarterback before he actually finds it?''  anderson knows he is supposed to be where the quarterback is, and he gets there often, making the bears look smart for drafting him in the fifth round, no. 159 over all.  why did a player like anderson, from a big-time football program like alabama who led the team in sacks as a senior, last until the fifth round?  the word on anderson was that he took plays off, and that at 255 pounds, he might be too light to be an effective pass rusher in the n.f.l. but anderson dispelled those notions immediately, even after missing almost the entire preseason with a hamstring injury.  ''i was a little worried, because i was hurt and couldn't show these guys what i could do,'' said anderson, a native of tulsa, okla., whose 12 sacks set a bears' rookie record. ''but lovie just told me to get healthy, that i'd get my chance,'' anderson said, referring to bears coach lovie smith. ''when i did, i just tried to contribute right away.''  anderson had a sack in the bears' regular-season opener, and he has been relentless ever since. speed is his biggest asset, a quick first step that often puts offensive linemen at an immediate disadvantage. the bears will align him on either side of the ball, making it harder for defenses to key on him.  with anderson, brown and adewale ogunleye, the bears have three consistent pass rushers at defensive end, allowing them to stay fresh and not put too much pressure on one player to make the sack.  ''we have a competition between us,'' ogunleye said. ''but it's not a jealousy thing. the more we push each other, the better it is.''  if ogunleye gets a sack sunday, he said, he would not say anything to manning.  ''i never do,'' ogunleye said. ''i act like i've been there before. i never try to rub it in anybody's face. i just try to get there again.''  anderson would not make the same promise.  ''i might say a little something to him, just let him know i'm back there,'' he said.  brown has a personal conflict this week because his son, antonio, wants manning's autograph.  ''my son loves him,'' brown said. ''but if peyton manning does good, it's going to be hard for us to win.''  the bears agree on that, and anderson would love to run into manning on a regular basis at the super bowl.  pro football  