when the simple solution is the right one   i had run way too far for my level of training, and i knew it. but i had gotten lost, and the fastest way back to my car was to run. the next day, my left forefoot hurt so much i could hardly walk, so i did just what you might expect -- i checked the internet to see what sort of injury i might have and what to do about it.  my search was frustrating and unhelpful. but i ended up getting just the advice i needed from an unexpected source. and i came away with this lesson: these days, when it is oh so easy to order sophisticated medical tests, sometimes the best test, and the best treatment, can be low-tech.  after i was hurt, i did just what doctors worry that their patients will do. i searched medical web sites for a diagnosis i could accept. when i did not like the one i found, i tried to convince myself that it had to be wrong.  the web diagnosis was a stress fracture, a hairline crack in a bone. it sounded bad. it could take months to heal. i might need to immobilize the entire foot and walk around on crutches and then go through weeks of rehabilitation.  i told myself that i didn't have a stress fracture, that there were aspects of my injury that did not seem to fit. i kept running, four to six miles every other day. still, i was not getting better.  finally, in december, six weeks after the injury, i gave in and called one of the few orthopedists in my area who accepts my health insurance. the first available appointment was for jan. 16. i took it.  then i wrote about my injury, as part of a longer article for the new york times about running while hurt. as soon as it appeared, on jan. 11, i began getting e-mail from readers. a podiatrist told me that i definitely had a stress fracture and had better stop running. a trainer said i had injured a tendon attached to my big toe (he had no way of knowing that the injury was at the base of my third toe). and paul a. april, a rheumatologist in tulsa, okla., said he thought it was either a stress fracture or something called extensor tendinitis. ''i'd love to hear what the doctor finds,'' he added.  i looked up extensor tendinitis online: an inflammation of a tendon that straightens the toe. i hadn't found that injury when i first searched the web, but it sounded right.  on jan. 16, i finally saw the orthopedist and, of course, mentioned extensor tendinitis. all i got was a cursory exam and an x-ray. when the x-ray showed normal bone, the orthopedist said i needed an m.r.i. his office said someone would call me when my insurer approved it. then i could schedule it. then i could return to see the doctor and learn what the scan showed.  i e-mailed dr. april in oklahoma telling him what had happened. ''gratuitous advice may be worth nothing, but here goes,'' he replied. ''hands-on examination should have revealed tenderness in the distal forefoot and even an increase in pain with forced downward pressure on the toes. if that was the case, then a local injection of a corticosteroid in a small amount with lidocaine or something similar into the extensor tendon sheath would produce relief of pain within minutes and hopefully this would last.''  that sounded great. i could rule out a stress fracture and cure the inflammation all at once. if that did not work, i did not have extensor tendinitis.  i called the orthopedist to see whether he would give an injection. all i could get was an assistant's voicemail saying not to expect a reply for 48 hours because she was busy and, by the way, she does not work on fridays. it was a wednesday. (thirteen days later, i still have not heard from her.) i also called my internist to see whether she would give an injection. the answer, her nurse said, was no.  finally, i called an orthopedist who does not accept my insurance and asked whether he would inject cortisone into the tendon sheath of my foot. his assistant knew just what i was talking about.  ''you want to rule out a stress fracture?'' she asked.  the doctor would do it, for $277. i said that i would be there the next day and that i would pay.  the injection cured me. it also saved my insurer more than $1,000 for an m.r.i. and subsequent doctors' appointments. but how much simpler to do what the tulsa doctor recommended and the second orthopedist did: carefully examine my foot, ask about the injury, see that my symptoms seemed more like tendinitis than a stress fracture and simply give the injection.  as for dr. april, my correspondent in tulsa, he has learned something, too.  ''the idea of telephone medicine seems to be an easy way to make a living if i were inclined to that,'' he wrote. ''in your case, i was intrigued by a simple problem, the solution of which seemed to be stalled. it really was no big deal, but i loved doing it.''  cases  