at a position known for greatness, pretty good can be enough   on one side of the field sunday will be a quarterback who completed more passes this season than joe namath in 1968, for more yards than roger staubach in 1977, at a higher percentage than johnny unitas in 1970.  he threw more touchdowns passes than joe montana in 1981, with fewer interceptions than terry bradshaw in 1979, and with a higher passer rating than len dawson in 1969.  on the other side of the field will be peyton manning.  for most of this week, manning will be the one prompting comparisons to all those hall of fame quarterbacks in their championship seasons. as the quarterback of the indianapolis colts, manning has stretched defenses and scorched record books.  but the real statistical marvel of this season is rex grossman, quarterback of the chicago bears, who has managed to put up numbers on par with some super bowl legends and yet is still regarded by some as the reason that his team cannot possibly win it all.  manning and grossman will meet in super bowl xli at dolphin stadium, in what appears to be a historic individual mismatch. manning is poised to join the fraternity of quarterbacks who capped transcendent careers with championships.  grossman appears set to join another club, smaller and less distinguished. the members have names like david woodley, vince ferragamo, tony eason and joe kapp. they are among the most unheralded quarterbacks to start a super bowl.  woodley, ferragamo, eason and kapp share more than a low profile. all of them got one shot at football's biggest prize, and all of them lost.  ''it never leaves you,'' said kapp, quarterback of the minnesota vikings in the 1970 super bowl. ''when you have an opportunity to be a world champion and it doesn't happen, that's something you always remember.''  as a former quarterback and coach, kapp appreciates manning's knowledge of the game and his ability to change plays at the line of scrimmage. but on sunday, kapp will be rooting for the bears, throwing his support behind the passer who needs it more.  ''i love peyton manning's quarterbacking, but i like the way rex goes about his business,'' kapp said. ''something negative can happen and it doesn't matter. he always stays positive. it looks to me like angels are on his side.''  in super bowls, the quarterback with the most angels often wins. dan marino had a better arm than montana when they met in 1985, but montana prevailed. kurt warner had better statistics than tom brady when they met in 2002, but brady emerged the winner. montana and brady made the plays that marino and warner did not.  whether grossman is one of the worst quarterbacks in super bowl history -- or one of the best -- will not be determined until sunday night.  ''this game is going to belong to peyton and rex,'' said joe theismann, who played quarterback for the washington redskins in two super bowls. ''they will decide who wins and who loses. but rex has no expectations on him at all. he's the young gun who comes into town with no idea who's sitting on the barstool waiting for him.''  grossman is not as tall as manning, not as accurate and not as polished. he has a propensity to throw into triple coverage, on the run, off his back foot. his decision-making -- before, during and after games -- has come into question.  grossman is the rare quarterback who has become more inconsistent as he gains experience. after posting a passer rating of 0.0 in the regular-season finale, grossman admitted that he was not prepared to play, citing his anticipation for new year's eve.  ''it's the last game, it's new year's eve, and there were so many other factors that brought my focus away from what is actually important,'' grossman told reporters.  take away the sound bites and the bloopers, and grossman is a fairly typical super bowl quarterback. he ranked near the top of the league this season for interceptions (20), but also for touchdown passes (23) and yards (3,193). his completion percentage, 54.6, was respectable. his passer rating, 73.9, was not.  the bears have a better defense than the colts, a better running attack and superior special teams. but because the super bowl is the most glamorous game of the year, and because quarterback is the most glamorous position on the field, indianapolis is listed as a 7-point favorite.  ''when you're looking at quarterback versus quarterback here, you're only thinking one way,'' said john avello, who sets the betting line at the wynn las vegas casino. ''if rex grossman were not playing, the line would probably shift a few points. but if peyton manning were not playing, the line would shift so far that the bears would be favored.''  the last time a starting quarterback was seen as such a liability heading into the super bowl, he won. trent dilfer steered the baltimore ravens through the 2000 season, becoming the example for any team hoping to capture a title without a top quarterback.  like the 2000 ravens, the bears rely on their defense, but they handle their quarterback much differently. the ravens rarely put dilfer in position to make a big play or a big mistake. the bears, on the other hand, send grossman into all sorts of risky spots.  just flying him to miami was a little dangerous. for the next six days, praise will be heaped upon manning while questions are heaped upon grossman. how each quarterback responds -- to the flattery and the skepticism -- is part of the subplot.  if tradition and the point spread hold true, manning-grossman may be remembered the same way as bradshaw-ferragamo, theismann-woodley and dawson-kapp. in those super bowls, the more proven quarterback was the winner, even if he was not necessarily the better performer.  ''forget about len dawson,'' kapp said. ''check the stats from that game. mine were better.''  indeed, kapp completed 16 of 25 passes for 183 yards in super bowl iv, while dawson completed 12 of 17 passes for 142 yards. but dawson won the game, was voted most outstanding player and eventually made the hall of fame.  dawson and kapp played in a different era, but the stakes this week are similar -- a superstar trying to seal his legacy, an upstart trying to prove his worth, and football angels preparing to choose a side.  pro football  