giants pick palmer to get the most out of manning   in trying to create a brighter future for quarterback eli manning, giants coach tom coughlin continues to reach into his own past.  in 1997, coughlin, then the coach of the jacksonville jaguars, hired chris palmer as his offensive coordinator. palmer replaced kevin gilbride, who had taken the head-coaching position with the san diego chargers.  coughlin has made a similar move now, hiring palmer as the giants' quarterbacks coach to replace gilbride, who was elevated to offensive coordinator. an announcement is expected today.  palmer, 57, spent last season as the quarterbacks coach for the dallas cowboys, who changed to the inexperienced quarterback tony romo from the veteran drew bledsoe at midseason, with good results.  palmer was the offensive coordinator of the jaguars in 1997 and 1998. in 1997, mark brunell led the american football conference in passer rating and was named to the pro bowl.  in 1999, palmer became the coach of the expansion cleveland browns. he was fired after two seasons; quarterback tim couch, chosen with the first overall pick in the 1999 draft, struggled to live up to expectations.  from 2002 to 2005, palmer was the offensive coordinator of the houston texans, helping develop another no. 1 overall pick, quarterback david carr.  the tie between palmer and gilbride runs deep. each played quarterback at southern connecticut state -- palmer graduated in 1972, two years before gilbride. both are in the university's sports hall of fame.  palmer's first coaching experience in the n.f.l. was as the receivers coach for the houston oilers from 1990 to 1992. gilbride was the team's offensive coordinator.  the giants were 8-8 in 2006 and lost six of their final eight regular-season games. they made the national football conference playoffs as a wild-card team, but lost to the philadelphia eagles in the first round.  before the final regular-season game, coughlin stripped the offensive coordinator john hufnagel of his responsibilities and handed them to gilbride.  manning, the first choice in the 2004 draft, was inconsistent most of the season and showed few signs of progress from the previous season.  ''i've only had one quarterbacks coach in the n.f.l.,'' manning said during a conference call thursday when asked about his ideal coach. ''i'm just looking for someone who's obviously smart, intelligent. someone who we can have a good relationship and just really communicate well together and be on the same page with things. someone who has good drills and is going to be hard on me and coach me and make sure that everything that i'm doing, i'm doing to get better.''  pro football  