all areas open in new blueprint for new orleans   no neighborhoods would be off limits for development in a new $14 billion plan for this city's recovery introduced tuesday, the latest foray in a process that has been going on since shortly after hurricane katrina flooded new orleans 17 months ago.  the unified new orleans plan, as it is called, 556 pages long, was developed by consultants and planners for the city after months of meetings with citizens here, and is intended to be used by city planners as a guide to redevelopment.  the plan calls for spending millions on libraries, recreation, utilities, schools, transportation, flood protection, health care and other areas. the projected source of financing is unclear, however, as one of the consultants suggested tuesday that much of the money might come from the $110 billion already appropriated by the federal government, while another appeared to suggest it might not.  planners said that as part of a strategy to encourage people to return to depopulated areas like the lower ninth ward, they would recommend temporary structures -- schools or libraries in trailers, for instance.  ''we don't want to put permanent investment in capital facilities until the resettlement patterns are more clearly defined,'' said bobbie hill, a planner. ''temporary facilities will be a catalyst.''  the document was given to the city's planning commission on tuesday, and more meetings will be held to discuss it.  the plan avoids the recommendation that caused the downfall of an earlier recovery blueprint: that potentially dangerous areas, those most vulnerable to flooding, be turned into ''green space'' or left undeveloped.  that idea was rejected a year ago by the city's mayor, c. ray nagin, after some citizens criticized it as racist and its genesis by outside planning experts as elitist. the new document, more populist both in ideas and in conception, appears carefully designed not to anger citizens here. already given informal sanction by officials, it calls for giving incentives to homeowners, for instance, to raise their homes or to resettle in ''clusters,'' but it contains no mandates that they do so.  unlike the earlier document, the plan rejects reducing the size of new orleans, ''shrinking the footprint,'' a phrase that became a red flag to outraged citizen groups here.  ''from this plan's standpoint, there's no likelihood it will have a smaller footprint,'' troy henry, one of the consultants who worked on the plan, said at a news conference tuesday. ''we have not green-spaced any neighborhoods.''  darren diamond, another consultant, said, ''we are giving incentives in all areas.''  individual neighborhoods have also developed their own recovery plans, and consultants on tuesday were careful to say that the unified new orleans plan did not supersede these efforts.  much of the language of the new planning document is nonspecific and expresses generalized hopes for new orleans rather than mandates. but it also appears to reflect the city's current patchy repopulation, in which some of the fears of the earlier, rejected team of planners are being realized.  some neighborhoods, for instance, are already showing what was referred to by the earlier planners as the ''jack-o'-lantern'' effect: individual houses that have been reoccupied but are surrounded by a sea of blight, or abandonment.  one part of the new plan, much insisted on by the consultants tuesday, appears to address that phenomenon by calling for incentives for homeowners and small businesses to encourage the creation of ''sustainable clusters within their neighborhoods.''  