killing puts focus on corruption in chinese news media   lan chengzhang sat in a car outside the office of a mining company while a colleague ventured inside to make inquiries.  it was his first month of work with the newspaper, and he had decided to take on what anyone in the area knew could be a most dangerous subject, the illegal coal mines that proliferate in the sooty hill country of shanxi province.  within minutes, a band of men armed with lengths of pipe and other crude weapons set upon him, beating him so badly that within a few hours he succumbed to his injuries. though severely beaten, his colleague from the china trade news survived to tell the tale.  attacks against journalists are not uncommon in china, even if deaths are rare. but in ways that few could have expected, the killing on jan. 11 of this untested reporter for an obscure publication has become a watershed event, with reporters and editors around the country seeing in the murky contours of the case a cautionary tale for their booming but deeply troubled profession.  that mr. lan's death has become a national event was helped in no small measure by china's leader, hu jintao, who in an unusual statement a few days afterward demanded that justice be done.  but it also highlighted the culture of corruption that many journalists acknowledge pervades the industry, particularly the practice among some reporters of demanding money from subjects to avoid damaging articles.  mr. hu, who has spoken often of the need for the government to strengthen its control over the news media, has been seen as anything but a friend of journalists. given that, many here said, and after several days of intense commentary about the killing in the international news media and on chinese blogs and web sites, mr. hu may have been moved to protect his country's image.  ''hu jintao is very much concerned about china's international image,'' said zhan jiang, dean of journalism at the youth politics institute in beijing. ''since this incident has been widely reported both at home and overseas, he had to do something.''  inside the chinese news media, introspection over the killing of mr. lan, 35, has been unusually forthright, mixing criticism of the government with harsh self-examination. beijing is condemned for limiting the scope of honest, aggressive journalism, and the journalists themselves are condemned, indeed by themselves, for giving in to corruption as a professional way of life.  ''this kind of control and degeneration are inseparable,'' said zhang ping, a veteran reporter at southern metropolis magazine. ''the control dims the hopes one has for a career in journalism, and many reporters, like people at xinhua, don't have any honorable feelings from being a journalist. they get no rewards the normal way and discover that in china only lie-telling can bring you income.'' xinhua is the main government news agency.  huang liangtian, who was recently dismissed as editor of bai xing magazine because of its probing investigative style, was even more caustic in his assessment.  ''china basically doesn't have any journalists in the real sense,'' he said, dismissing the hairsplitting that many have engaged in over whether mr. lan was properly credentialed or not. ''everybody is part of the machine, a propagandist for the party's policy.''  in fact, the scope for reporting has expanded significantly in the last decade, clearly worrying the government. but along with the explosion in the number of titles have come strong commercial pressures, bringing about what many describe as a compulsion to mix news gathering and advertising.  many reporters say they are given revenue quotas they must meet by selling news coverage to the subjects they write about.  the issue of that sort of corruption has emerged as a major subtext of the discussion of mr. lan's death, albeit with bitter disagreement over the facts. in datong, the city where he was killed, he was quickly labeled an imposter, the implication being that he had visited an illegal coal mine to shake down its owner, promising not to write about him in exchange for a payment. the city quickly threatened to start a campaign against ''fake journalists.''  mr. lan's newspaper has added little clarity to the picture. while acknowledging that he was employed there, the paper denied that he had been assigned to write about illegal coal mines. it even declined to describe him as a reporter, using the more ambiguous formulation of media worker.  the police report about the killing said chang hanwen, the beaten colleague of mr. lan's who had teamed up with him in the coal mine reporting, had stated that mr. lan had promised that the mere display of press credentials at the mine would produce ''at least 1,000'' yuan, about $130, in payoffs. but in a telephone interview, mr. chang strongly denied that. ''i don't know where they got that from,'' he said. ''when i saw it on a web site, i was really mad.''  amid this confusion and lacking any real evidence, a great many journalists seem to have concluded that mr. lan was indeed a swindler.  that rush to judgment, in turn, appears to reflect their recognition of the dismal state of their profession. in one interview after another, veteran reporters gave detailed anecdotes of pervasive corruption in the industry.  ''we have to admit that the public image of journalists is increasingly depressed, and the causes for this should give all of us reason to reflect,'' said liu wanyong, an investigative reporter with the china youth daily, in beijing.  ''in 2005 i went to a courthouse liaoning province and said i am a journalist, and the court official's response was 'are you here on some commercial business?' '' mr. liu said. ''i showed my papers, and they said, 'are you representing the plaintiff or the defendant?' the fact is they are used to seeing reporters who represent one side or another -- usually whichever has the most money.''  even as they acknowledge the industry's low repute and the dangers that often accompany their jobs, many journalists said they would stick with the profession, which they see as the best hope for their country's peaceful development.  fan youfeng, 38, a reporter with the hebei youth daily, was chased out of henan province after uncovering a scandal involving the handling of a coal mining disaster there.  ''i've already paid a high price for this job,'' he said, recounting how he had been forced to flee his previous newspaper. asked what he would do if his investigative work made him a target again, he said: ''it doesn't matter. china is big, and there's got to be a place for someone with a conscience.''  