a jail break, but not to fear   the bronx house of detention was reduced to little more than a mountain of rubble by last week. a high-reach excavator clawed ferociously at the last of its steel beams, adding them to a heap of brick and stone.  but salvaged from the art deco-detailed jail were various architectural flourishes that are to find new life in a setting very different from the old one. the elements will be installed in a new shopping mall, the gateway center, which is being built on the site.  the 350-cell jail, designed by joseph freedlander and located a few blocks south of yankee stadium, was built as a works progress administration project and opened in 1937 as the bronx county jail. although the inside view failed to gladden its tenants for the obvious reasons, its exterior was highly regarded for the noble heft and the stately ornamentation of granite and limestone, including a frieze of corinthian columns and eagles in bas-relief near the top of its central pavilion, and two prominent eagle statues.  the jail closed in 2000, and the city later struck a deal with the related companies, a major developer, to demolish it and build the $500 million gateway center, which will include 1 million square feet of retail space and a new park along the harlem river. ground was broken in august for the project, which will also encompass the site of the bronx terminal market.  as the approval process advanced, the new york state office of historic preservation recommended saving some of the jail's distinctive ornaments. as a result, the eagles, parts of the frieze and the jail's gatehouse have been cleaned, crated and placed in a bronx storage facility.  robert ursini, the senior vice president for related retail corporation, said the ornaments will be positioned in the gateway center's plaza along river avenue, and the frieze bands will be installed directly in the new mall's exterior architecture.  ''it gives the project a unique flavor,'' mr. ursini said.  additionally, he said, a plaque will be installed in the plaza describing the significance of the bronx house of detention and of mr. freedlander, the architect, who also designed the nearby bronx county courthouse.  some of those interested in the city's corrections past were pleased that at least part of the bronx jail's memory is being preserved.  ''it was part of people's lives,'' said thomas mcmurphy, a former corrections officer who runs the new york correction history society. ''my hat is off to the people who saved the day.''  jennifer bleyer  neighborhood report: south bronx  correction:  february 4, 2007, sunday  an article last sunday about architectural decorations salvaged during the demolition of the bronx house of detention misstated the surname of the new york correction history society's general secretary, who commented on the effort. he is thomas mccarthy, not mcmurphy. the article also misstated his former position. he was a civilian employee of the city's department of correction -- not a corrections officer.  