seeing futures in the super bowl   greg barnes called it the best investment he ever made. on sept. 18, 2005, he spent $72 on the chicago bears' potential to reach super bowl xli.  now the bears are going to miami, and so is barnes, a longtime fan from iselin, n.j.  while surfing the internet for bears tickets in 2005, he spotted an advertisement that read, ''purchase denver broncos super bowl tickets for $32.'' the ad was for ticketreserve.com, a futures web site for tickets to big games. the site charges a fee -- called a fan forward -- to reserve tickets to a playoff or championship game involving a certain team; the price fluctuates over time to reflect the odds that the team will qualify.  if a person invests in a team that makes it to a championship, as barnes did, he would then pay the face value of each ticket to attend the super bowl. if that team fails to qualify, the investment in the reservation is lost.  ''it's basically a gamble, just like playing the stock market,'' barnes, 48, a limousine driver, said. ''but for me, an extra $72 was a small price to pay for a chance to see my team in the super bowl.''  when he bought four fan forwards for the 2007 super bowl at $18 apiece, the bears were coming off a 5-11 season in 2004. barnes sold two last june for $200 each.  as the bears compiled a 13-3 regular-season record, the value rose. when the ticketreserve.com market closed last sunday after chicago defeated the new orleans saints for the national football conference title, a bears fan forward was valued at $1,450.  andy leach, the executive vice president of ticketreserve.com, which is based in chicago, said the site ''is sort of a faith-in-your-team concept.''  ''this isn't about the corporate guys who can afford to pay $4,000 for a super bowl ticket,'' he said. ''it's about guys who drive a school bus or other blue-collar types, real fans who deserve real access to tickets.''  one new england patriots fan, mike robertson of newburyport, mass., experienced what he described as ''a financial roller-coaster ride'' after he bought two fan forwards in early october for $500 each. as the patriots cruised toward the playoffs, their stock rose. so on the morning of the american football conference championship game, robertson decided to play the futures market. he asked for $2,000 apiece, never expecting anyone to bite.  after the patriots took a 21-6 halftime lead, however, robertson checked to see that his offer had been accepted. then the indianapolis colts stormed back to win the title, and the person who accepted robertson's offer had lost $4,000.  ''at first, i was depressed when i saw that my futures were gone,'' robertson, 45, said. ''but by the end of the game, i was relieved.''  robertson will get another chance to invest in the patriots starting tomorrow at 11 a.m. eastern, when ticketreserve opens its super bowl xlii market.  ticketreserve.com, which made its debut on dec. 1, 2003, does not have an agreement with the national football league, but leach said it had always secured enough super bowl tickets independently to satisfy customers. the site has working agreements with the major college football bowl games and several n.b.a. and n.h.l. teams.  steve schanwald, the executive vice president for business operations with the chicago bulls, said his team's tickets had been available on ticketreserve.com for three years. the bulls allotted 50 tickets for playoff games the first two years and 300 tickets for playoff games this season, he said.  ''expectations for us to go far in the playoffs haven't really been high the past two years,'' schanwald said. ''the higher the on-court expectations for our team, the more exciting it will be.''  barnes's excitement is palpable.  ''i already have my super bowl clothes laid out for miami,'' he said. ''i'm wearing my bears cap and my orange t-shirt that says 'da bears.' when we beat the colts, i want to be dressed appropriately.''  cheering section e-mail: cheers@nytimes.com  