news summary   international a3-15  europe resists u.s. calls to limit business with iran  european governments are resisting bush administration demands that they curtail support for exports to iran and that they block transactions and freeze assets of some iranian companies, officials on both sides say. the resistance threatens to open a new rift between europe and the united states over iran. a1  new strength in china's market  after a crash that disillusioned many chinese, china's stock markets are almost going mad, with the leading shanghai composite index approaching 3,000 and chinese investors flocking to buy shares in record numbers. a1  suicide bomb in israel resort  after nine months without a suicide bombing in israel, a palestinian blew himself up inside a bakery in the red sea resort town of eilat, israeli officials said, killing three israelis and further complicating israeli-palestinian peace efforts. it was the first time that eilat had been hit by a suicide bombing. a14  militia nearly bests iraqi army  the iraqi army was surprised and nearly overwhelmed by the ferocity of an obscure renegade militia in a weekend battle near the holy city of najaf and needed far more help from american forces than previously disclosed, american and iraqi officials said.  a3  national a16-19  white house asserts right to more agency control  a new directive issued by president bush gives the white house much greater control over government rules to protect environment, civil rights and privacy, strengthening its hand in shaping policies that have often been generated by civil servants and scientific experts.  a1  ex-aide testifies in leak case  ari fleischer, the former white house press secretary, provided testimony contradicting defense accounts in the trial of vice president dick cheney's former chief of staff, i. lewis libby jr.  a1  hurricane policies criticized  three senators, including the presidential candidate barack obama, criticized federal officials about the slow pace of recovery from hurricane katrina at a hearing in the french quarter.  a16  minimum wage disagreement  the senate plans to clear the way for a vote on a minimum wage bill. but a disagreement between the house and senate over whether to include tax cuts with the wage increase may delay bigger paychecks.  a18  errors with sat and mcat  a student in south korea had part of the sat exam before the test was given last weekend, and a medical college admission test contained questions that did not belong.  a16  new york/region b1-7  spitzer proposes more aid for new york schools  governor spitzer declared that he would propose a major increase in state aid for new york's public schools. in exchange, he is seeking vastly expanded state oversight of local school districts.  a1  union president resigns  the president of new york's most politically powerful health care union, announced that he would be stepping down and issued a pointed broadside against governor spitzer's planned cuts in health care spending.  b1  neediest cases  b4  sportstuesday d1-7  race horse euthanized  barbaro, who rocketed to a six-and-a-half-length victory in the kentucky derby last may but sustained a catastrophic injury in the preakness stakes, has been euthanized. a1  business day c1-12  finding software weakness  software vulnerabilities -- like stolen credit-card numbers and spammable e-mail addresses -- carry real financial value and are commonly bought, sold and traded online.  a1  business digest c2  editorial a20-21  editorials: a faith-based fuel initiative; canada's good example; a day without guns; one horse dies.  columns: stacy schiff, nicholas d. kristof.  crossword e4  tv listings e9  weather d8  