directors who go together, like blood and guts   stuck in traffic here some months ago, the director robert rodriguez -- many of whose films had already dabbled in cannibalism, torture and murders of every degree and then some -- began wondering how to get attention for his next effort. the answer, he decided, was a machine-gun leg.  as mr. rodriguez's notion evolved, the leg became a stump on the body of the 33-year-old actress rose mcgowan. ms. mcgowan's character, a go-go dancer, has lost her limb to zombies. her ex-boyfriend, played by freddy rodriguez (no relation to the director), helps her fight back, attaching an automatic weapon to what's left. the result is spattered throughout ''planet terror,'' a movie within the forthcoming meta-movie ''grindhouse,'' from mr. rodriguez and his collaborator quentin tarantino, both of whom have been laboring for months to shock and amaze an audience that thinks it has seen it all.  ''i thought, 'nobody's ever thought of that before,' '' mr. rodriguez said of his high-caliber epiphany during an interview at his troublemaker studios here last month. ''your mind just goes to the craziest idea to lure people into the theater, and then you write your script around those elements.''  for mr. rodriguez and mr. tarantino, the central problem of ''grindhouse,'' due from the weinstein company on april 6, is a nettlesome one: how to top yourself when you've built a career on going over the top. mr. rodriguez had already tried killing as fast as he could -- most recently in ''sin city'' -- as had mr. tarantino with a guest-directing spot in that film and his own ''kill bill.'' lethal stump notwithstanding (and, yes, the director sam raimi played with a similar idea in ''darkman''), the solution, they perceived, would lie not simply in violence but also in breaking through the walls of the medium.  ''grindhouse'' is being billed not as one movie, but two for the price of a single ticket. ''planet terror,'' from mr. rodriguez, is 80 minutes long, and tells a story of, well, biochemical terror. mr. tarantino's ''death proof,'' clocking in at 90 minutes, has to do with a murderous stuntman and his car. the films are connected by trailers for four movies that do not exist, by four directors who do -- eli roth (whose most recent real film was ''hostel''), rob zombie (''house of 1,000 corpses''), edgar wright (''shaun of the dead'') and mr. rodriguez himself.  the experiment, if it works, will be a triumph both for the filmmakers and for weinstein, which is readying the largest promotional push since its founders, the brothers bob and harvey weinstein, established the studio on their exit from the walt disney company's miramax unit in 2005. to hear bob weinstein tell it, the industry itself has something riding on the exercise. ''the whole theatrical business is looking for something new, a little showmanship,'' he said recently. ''these guys took something old and are making it new.''  even in the era of all-knowing fandom, the reinvention to which mr. weinstein refers may take some explaining, a process that will get help from a partnership with yahoo and ''as big a tv and marketing campaign as possible,'' mr. weinstein said. the film also stands to benefit from a series of grindhouse movies currently appearing every friday on ifc.  by the filmmakers' lights ''grindhouse'' is a gift to moviegoers who miss, or missed, the experience of watching b-grade genre pictures of the sort that in the '50s, '60s and '70s sold what the big studios wouldn't: usually sex and gore. the films, often shown back to back, were plugged with garish posters that promised more than their pathetically low budgets could deliver. (in that spirit ''planet terror'' isn't about another planet at all, but our own, at a particularly bad moment.) the theaters too were sometimes a fright.  ''grindhouses were usually in the ghetto,'' mr. tarantino said in a phone interview. ''or they were the big old downtown movie theaters that sometimes stayed open all night long, for all the bums. at the grindhouse that i went to, every week there was the new kung fu movie, or new car-chase movie, or new sexploitation movie, or blaxploitation movie.''  audiences aren't supposed to be comfortable with this new film. as part of the game, the two directors have ''aged'' their movies, adding scratches, dust and dirt to the prints. ''that's part of the lurid quality,'' mr. rodriguez said. ''it feels like it's a popular film that's been screened a bunch of times. the texture, all the scratches, makes it look really creepy, like you're watching something you're not supposed to, where anything could happen at any moment.''  and since the old grindhouse films were often missing reels, both filmmakers have purposefully cut out a segment of their movies. ''my whole thing is to play with the audience,'' said mr. tarantino. ''i guarantee you, when it pops up 'missing reel,' the entire theater is going to scream. they might very well be screaming my name: 'quentin, you bastard! we hate you!'  ''and then the next reel starts, and all of the sudden, people who don't like each other suddenly like each other now. 'what happened to that guy?' the only way to do a missing reel is, it's got to be something you can't wait to see.''  on visiting troublemaker studios, it became apparent that such self-conscious cinematic slumming takes a lot of work. remains of the shoot were scattered about: supply trucks in military garb were huddled in one corner; across the lot a collection of smashed-up automobiles were piled on top of one another, defeated, while two menacing black muscle cars lurked nearby, white skulls painted on their hoods.  in a darkened office mr. rodriguez tinkered with one of his computers, deciding which sequences of ''planet terror'' to show. ''this section is so creepy,'' he said, cueing up a hospital scene in which josh brolin takes revenge on his wife, an anesthesiologist played by marley shelton, by slowly and deliberately pricking her hands with her own needles.  in the film a biochemical weapon is released from an abandoned military base -- thus the army trucks -- in a small texas town outside austin. residents quickly become infected and crowd the local hospital. the virus has a gruesome effect of course: not only do the victims' bodies start to disintegrate (lots of bubbly skin, pus-filled sores and tumors), but they become murderous zombies.  mr. rodriguez said ''planet terror'' was inspired by the early-'80s movies of john carpenter, who directed seminal horror films (''halloween,'' ''the thing'') as well as action movies (''escape from new york''). and like mr. carpenter's movies, ''planet terror'' is ''very brooding.''  mr. rodriguez added: ''it takes place at night, and weird things happen, yet everything is played very seriously, so you buy into it. even though she's got a machine-gun leg, it's not jokey in any way.''  mr. tarantino, when thinking about his contribution, was fresh from having viewed a run of slasher films. ''i thought, 'wow, i want to do a slasher film,' '' he recalled. ''but what's good about the slasher-film genre is that it's so specific. this has to happen, then this has to happen. they're all very similar, and that's kind of what you like about them.''  knowing he couldn't just copy the classic format -- a killer on the loose with a knife, the ''final girl'' left at the end (''that would just be too self-reflective'') -- mr. tarantino devised his own version. ''part of my fun in doing genre cinema, since everyone knows the rules well, whether unconsciously or not, is leading you down a road and giving you all the information that you've gotten in other movies, and then using your own information against you,'' he said.  in ''death proof'' a sociopathic stuntman played by kurt russell stalks and kills women with his car, the black one with the white skull. ''this was something i'd had in the back of my mind from making movies: that stuntmen can reinforce a car and pretty much make it death-proof,'' said mr. tarantino. ''you could drive it 100 miles an hour into a brick wall just for the experience.''  citing the fast and furious 1971 car-chase film ''vanishing point'' as inspiration, mr. tarantino said he hoped that ''death proof'' would include ''one of the greatest car chases, if not the greatest car chase ever made. i'll take top three.''  but most of ''death proof'' isn't action or dismemberment. it lies in the interplay between women who, in the course of evening bar hopping in austin or joy riding in rural tennessee, meet the stuntman, mike. ''i always loved it in horror films when you actually got to care about the characters so much that you almost resented that the horror was going to come in,'' mr. tarantino said. ''you don't want these people to die.''  his ''girls,'' as he lovingly refers to them, include the actresses rosario dawson, sydney tamiia poitier, mary elizabeth winstead, jordan ladd and ms. mcgowan, and the new zealand stuntwoman zoe bell (uma thurman's double in ''kill bill''), who plays herself. mr. tarantino called his female characters' dialogue, which simultaneously evokes both ''sex and the city'' and teenage girls' myspace profiles, ''some of the best dialogue i've ever written in my life.'' after finishing the script he sent it to bob dylan, because he thought mr. dylan ''would appreciate the wordplay.'' he has not yet heard back.  the filmmakers are counting on younger viewers to be considerably more responsive to what mr. tarantino calls their ''subversion from within.'' they expect to direct or produce a series of such double features for the weinsteins. ''we've thrown around so many ideas, it's just a huge concept to wrap our brains around,'' said mr. rodriguez.  mr. tarantino was a bit more cautious about the likelihood of future installments. ''who knows if we'll do it?'' he said. ''we say we're going to do all this stuff. i was going to do a bunch of japanese animation sequels and prequels to 'kill bill.' haven't seen them lately, have you?''  film  