casinos reaping anti-blight cash   seven years after new jersey legalized gambling in 1977, state lawmakers created an agency called the casino reinvestment development authority to redirect some casino revenue to blighted areas in atlantic city and across the state.  but the agency, contending that the gambling industry's success is a critical component of the state's economic health, has handed about $400 million back to the casinos themselves, a sum that accounts for more than 20 percent of the money it has committed since its inception.  that approach began in 1994 and continued as gambling competition from other states intensified, atlantic city's chief legislative proponent expanded his political power, and the state eliminated the department of the public advocate, which had criticized the agency's move to distribute money to the casinos.  the authority has subsidized construction of 13,000 hotel rooms in the city, 800 of them planned for a tower under construction at the trump taj mahal. the agency spent $3.7 million for an imax theater to be built at the tropicana casino and resort, where its grants also helped finance three floors of elegant stores, restaurants and a spa. an additional $26 million went to help build the house of blues and to spruce up the facade at showboat.  the agency has also pitched in for ''parking lot beautification'' at showboat and road signs for resorts and the taj mahal. and in 2005 it put $4.5 million toward express weekend train service between manhattan and atlantic city, to be provided by a partnership involving the borgata, caesars and harrah's, in conjunction with new jersey transit.  ''that c.r.d.a. money is being used to grow the industry, protect the financial well-being of the state of new jersey and keep the development of atlantic city rolling forward,'' said thomas d. carver, executive director of the reinvestment authority. ''the growth of the industry, and the addition of more rooms, relates directly to the continued development of atlantic city as a resort destination, not just for gaming but for entertainment and other attractions as well.''  but david sciarra, who helped to write the legislation that created the reinvestment authority while working as a deputy public advocate, said that giving the money to the casinos ''really goes against the very purpose of c.r.d.a.''  ''it was not set up to finance industry-related projects because the industry clearly has the resources to do that on its own,'' said mr. sciarra, who now runs a nonprofit group in newark to help disadvantaged students. ''this is a betrayal of the very promise that was made to the citizens: that the casinos would have a social responsibility to invest a small percentage of their revenue through the c.r.d.a. to help make sure residents, especially the poor, had better housing and neighborhoods.''  established by the state legislature in 1984, the reinvestment authority takes in money based on the casinos' gambling revenues. the casinos, already required to pay 8 percent of their gross to the state's casino revenue fund -- which pays for programs to help the elderly and people with disabilities -- can choose to put an additional 2.5 percent in that pot or to pay 1.25 percent to the reinvestment agency. all have chosen the reinvestment route, which involves smaller payments.  the reinvestment authority has doled out $1.8 billion since starting operations.  in its initial years, the authority focused largely on developing affordable multifamily housing in the dilapidated inlet section of atlantic city, spending an estimated $130 million on the effort. now, including the aid to the casinos, atlantic city has received more than 80 percent of the money over two decades, though grants and loans have been scattered throughout the state, going to y.m.c.a. branches, senior centers, war memorials, housing developments, sports facilities and run-down neighborhoods.  but despite the authority's disbursements, atlantic city continues to grapple with blocks of dilapidated buildings and seamy motels that draw drug dealers and prostitutes, all within the shadows of towering, brightly lighted casinos.  in the past dozen years, a string of changes to the law that were championed by state senator william l. gormley, the gambling industry's leading backer in trenton, and some steps taken by the development authority have directed hundreds of millions of dollars back to the casinos to expand their operations.  the reshaping of the agency's mission has come as a result of a number of factors, not least the increasing influence commanded by mr. gormley, a skilled and maverick legislator who has pinned the rejuvenation of atlantic city to the vitality of its casinos. then there is the political and economic might of the gambling industry, which generated a record $5.2 billion in revenue last year and paid $417.5 million in taxes into the casino revenue fund.  the changes at the authority were put into motion around the time that the state legislature, then dominated by republicans, abolished the department of the public advocate, which had spoken out against efforts by the gambling industry to broaden the reinvestment authority's scope to include investments in casinos. at the time, republicans said that the public advocate's office had become too aggressive and liberal and had outlived its usefulness. under gov. jon s. corzine, a democrat, the department was re-established last year.  senator gormley, an atlantic county republican who has served in the legislature since 1978 -- the year the first casinos opened -- and is retiring from the legislature after his current term, says the atlantic city casinos have needed the money from the reinvestment authority to expand and diversify.  that, he says, assists them in competing with slot parlors and video lottery terminals in new york state, delaware and pennsylvania and from indian casinos in connecticut and new york.  he said that from 1990 to 1993, virtually no new hotel rooms were built in atlantic city, ''and in order to become a convention destination, you needed more hotel rooms.''  the legislation that created the reinvestment authority says the agency's purpose is ''to maintain public confidence in the casino gaming industry as a unique tool of urban redevelopment'' for atlantic city and ''to directly facilitate the redevelopment of existing blighted areas and to address the pressing social and economic needs of the residents'' of atlantic city and new jersey.  the first significant changes in the direction of the reinvestment authority came in 1993, when the legislature, trying to address an anticipated shortage of hotel rooms in atlantic city, required the agency to make $100 million available for casinos to add rooms. three years later, the law was amended again to make an additional $75 million from the agency available for more rooms. the casinos were to accommodate convention visitors with the new rooms.  ''we needed an incentive because we had enjoyed exclusivity on the east coast and knew gaming was going to expand in other jurisdictions, and that the atlantic city casinos could take their capital dollars somewhere else,'' mr. gormley said. ''not to take away from the mission of the c.r.d.a., but if we were just a town of $9 buffets, buckets of quarters and free bus tickets to atlantic city, we wouldn't have grown and c.r.d.a. revenue would have fallen flat, at best.''  nancy k. wattson, the chief financial officer of the reinvestment authority, said that with the casinos getting money back from the agency, legislation required them to continue to provide contributions to the agency for 50 years, rather than 25 years.  the casino reinvestment authority is the only agency of its kind in the united states, according to roger gros, editor of the magazine global gaming business.  meg worthington, a township council member in galloway township for the last 21 years, said that her community, nine miles from atlantic city, struggled to accommodate the growth the casinos have brought. its population has increased to 40,000 from 12,000 in 1984. but, she said, the township has been unable to obtain any money from the reinvestment authority to help it cope.  ''i don't begrudge the gaming industry for trying to find ways to grow, but there needs to be a more holistic approach to growth,'' ms. worthington said.  after the push for hotel rooms, lawmakers in 2001 created tax incentives for the gambling industry to provide more retail and entertainment amenities. in connection with this, the reinvestment authority offered cash inducements, committing $89 million for new retail and entertainment areas at the tropicana and caesars, and one that is planned for the trump plaza.  in 2003 and 2004, other legislation set up a $30 million fund for expansion at casino hotels and a $60 million fund for more nongambling projects at casinos, using special taxes levied on the casinos.  as for the weekend express train service from new york, which is expected to begin this year, ms. wattson said that the reinvestment authority had stipulated that one-quarter of the seats be made available to the public, rather than exclusively for people booked by the casino sponsors.  larry mullin, the president and chief operating officer of the borgata, said that just over a year ago, the authority mentioned that some of its money might be available for the project, which involves buying eight new rail cars. ''we were willing to fund our portion, but the fact that there were c.r.d.a. dollars available, why wouldn't we take advantage of that?'' mr. mullin said.  fred buro, the president and chief operating officer of the tropicana, said that the gambling industry in new jersey was facing new challenges and that the additional capital provided by the reinvestment authority was a positive step.  ''this mission must be ever-evolving; nobody has a crystal ball,'' he said. ''sometimes it is difficult for any business to allocate more capital beyond the business plan, so c.r.d.a. is saying, 'we are here to help.' ''  