nets' tinkering keeps reserves on their toes   eostjan nachbar said he must have heard the message 1,000 times. mikki moore said he was hearing it before he even arrived in new jersey.  it is a message nets coach lawrence frank delivers to all his players, especially to his reserves, one that can seem more deflating than inspiring.  be ready.  those words are at the crux of the philosophy that frank tries to instill in his bench players, whose playing time is often unpredictable. in frank's system, someone can go several games without playing, only to play 20 minutes on a given night.  frank has often been criticized for the approach, and his message has been met with resistance, skepticism and confusion.  but when a player like antoine wright has the kind of game he did saturday night against the denver nuggets, frank's rotation, or lack thereof, and his message seem vindicated.  after sitting out in 12 of the nets' previous 19 games, wright started and played 35 minutes against the nuggets, scored 11 points and played excellent defense against carmelo anthony, the league's leading scorer.  wright helped the nets snap a three-game losing streak with a 112-102 victory, a confidence booster entering monday night's game against the utah jazz, the finale of a five-game western trip.  ''i knew there could be a night like this where coach is going to call me to play,'' wright said after the game. ''so i just try to stay in shape. i think that helped me tonight.''  on saturday night, wright represented the drastic attitude improvement by the nets' reserves this season.  last season, several players complained about their roles. the grumbling has been at a minimum this season, and the bench is performing much better.  frank said wright represented what could happen if a player stayed ready.  ''it'd be easy to hold a grudge and hold a chip,'' frank said. ''in this league, part of being a professional is, when your number's called, being ready. i think you got to give him all the credit.''  wright, who played double-digit minutes in each of the nets' first 24 games this season before falling to the end of the bench, may have regained a spot in the rotation. or maybe not.  the rookie hassan adams, after going five straight games without playing, started the first three games of the trip. but he did not play against the nuggets.  such is the fickle nature of life as a reserve for the nets. but it is an unavoidable reality because frank typically does not go more than five players into his bench.  matchups and injuries contribute to the inconsistency in frank's rotation. he started adams at small forward in the first three games of the trip because he felt adams could play better defense against some of the quicker perimeter players.  frank started wright against the nuggets to try to match anthony's physical strength. anthony scored 23 points, but he shot only 5 for 14.  the starting small forward spot became available when richard jefferson had surgery on his right ankle last monday. he could be out until early march.  nachbar, who scored a career-high 22 points against the nuggets and has averaged 17.7 points over the past three games, knows how difficult it can be for a player to wait his turn on the bench.  nachbar came to the nets in a midseason trade last season and barely played. every day, he said, frank was telling him to be ready.  nachbar also heard the message daily during an eight-game stretch earlier this season, when he sat out five times and played only 18 minutes.  it was easy to let the words ''be ready'' go in one ear and out the other, nachbar said. but he listened to the advice on a subconscious level: on the sideline, he paid close attention to what was happening on the court, noting the nets' deficiencies and the things he could do to help if his number was called.  ''if you stay focused, you're going to be all right,'' nachbar said. ''you cannot afford to make mental mistakes. that's what coaches are looking for. they want to see if you are ready even if you didn't play.''  nachbar took advantage of his opportunity. over the past 21 games, he has been held out just once.  moore, an n.b.a. journeyman who said he used a lack of playing time as motivation, has been hearing frank's message since the nets traded for him last summer.  moore heeded the advice, and now he is one of the most improved players in the league. he is averaging 7.5 points and 5.2 rebounds, and he has started almost every game since center nenad krstic tore a ligament in his left knee dec. 22.  as nuggets coach george karl put it, moore has become ''a high priority on a scouting report for the first time in his career.''  pro basketball  