middle relievers are moving front and center   in an effort to raise the performance standards of their bullpens, teams have raised the standard of living for the pitchers who populate those bullpens. the more important they are perceived to be, the more money middle relievers are earning.  in an era when starting pitchers last fewer innings, middle relievers have become more important. a manager needs one or more pitchers to get him from the starter to the closer. with an increase in competition for good relief pitching, teams are offering relievers more money. that is a welcome development for a group that has always been the lowest paid on the field.  according to the players union's annual study of major league salaries, relievers had an average salary of $1,433,992 last season, up from $1,316,384 in 2005. the averages include the salaries of high-priced closers like mariano rivera and billy wagner.  average salaries for other players ranged from $2,793,608 for second basemen to $5,872,629 for third basemen. first basemen and designated hitters were also over $5.5 million, and starting pitchers and outfielders were just under $5 million.  the baltimore orioles did more than their share this winter to raise the average salary of relievers. they signed danys b치ez to a three-year, $19 million contract; jamie walker for three years and $12 million; and chad bradford for three years and $10.5 million. the mets signed scott schoeneweis for three years and $10.8 million. the angels signed justin speier for four years and $18 million.  ''omar always has been a believer in a good bullpen; i brought that belief here,'' jim duquette, the orioles' general manager, said, referring to omar minaya, the mets' general manager, with whom he worked in new york.  minaya, in his second year as the mets' chief tactician, built a strong bullpen for the 2006 season and needed it when injuries crippled the rotation late in the year. this year again, minaya has sought to bolster the bullpen.  besides schoeneweis, the mets have added ambiorix burgos in a trade with kansas city and jorge sosa as a free agent to go with wagner, aaron heilman, guillermo mota (after his season-opening 50-game steroids suspension), pedro feliciano and duaner s치nchez, who is coming back from a shoulder separation.  ''a good bullpen makes your starters better,'' minaya said. ''your starters have a different feeling knowing the bullpen is there.''  a strong bullpen, minaya believes, is a pennant-winning ingredient, and the mets fell one victory short of demonstrating that last season. the mets had the best bullpen in the national league, finishing the season with a .681 winning percentage (32-15) and a 3.28 earned run average.  besides the mets, the teams that have done the most to strengthen their bullpens this winter are the orioles, whose bullpen was 13th in the american league last season; cleveland (11th); boston (9th); and atlanta (10th in the n.l.).  ''we tried to invest dollars in a frontline starter,'' minaya said. ''we weren't able to get one. instead of investing dollars in a mediocre market, i said, 'who is the best reliever in the market?' and it was schoeneweis.''  the orioles needed a wholesale upgrade to their bullpen because it had a .432 winning percentage (19-25) and a 5.27 e.r.a.  ''we blew 18 games where we had a lead or were tied after six innings last year,'' duquette said. ''it seemed a lot worse having lived it. we felt we wanted to shorten the games.''  the indians have pursued the same goal with the signing of keith foulke, joe borowski, roberto hern치ndez and aaron fultz.  ''we scored the second-most runs in the league and our starters' e.r.a. was third in the league,'' general manager mark shapiro said. ''i knew what i had to do.''  shapiro said the offense that has developed in the american league has placed a greater strain on starting pitchers, making deeper bullpens necessary.  ''with strict pitch counts and starters not going far into games, you don't see guys throwing 280 innings,'' shapiro said. ''the need for a deeper bullpen is there.''  the indians traded their closer, bob wickman, to atlanta last season. shapiro said he expected foulke or borowski to replace him this year. the red sox are also looking for a closer because they want to make jonathan papelbon a starter.  joel pi침eiro, whom they signed as a free agent after seattle did not tender him a contract, could become the closer, or the red sox could start him and leave papelbon as the closer. ''we don't have one person designated as the closer yet, but we certainly will by the time the season breaks,'' theo epstein, the boston general manager, said.  rollins is high on phillies  phillies shortstop jimmy rollins might have become a little too enthusiastic at the team's winter promotional tour last week. ''i think we're the team to beat in the n.l. east -- finally,'' he declared.  the phillies finished last season 12 games behind the mets. they scored the most runs in the league, but they tied for allowing the second-most runs. they cannot expect their best player of 2006, ryan howard, to have a better season.  rollins did not explain why he thought they were the team to beat, and in any event, phillies general manager pat gillick did not agree.  ''i think the team to beat is the incumbent,'' gillick said. ''the mets are probably the team to beat. i think we're going to be much better than we were last year, but the mets are the team to beat.''  injury clause for drew  in the wrangling over outfielder j. d. drew's contract with the red sox, the agent scott boras made sure drew would be guaranteed more money ($42 million) than he would have earned ($33 million) had he not opted out of the last three years of his five-year, $55 million contract with the dodgers.  the red sox have an out for the last two years or the last year of the five-year, $70 million deal. if drew winds up on the disabled list for 35 days with a baseball injury to his right shoulder in the third or fourth year, the red sox can terminate the rest of the contract  word out of the drew camp was it agreed to the out clause to allow the red sox' doctor to save face after a second opinion supposedly found nothing suspicious about drew's shoulder. but the final structure of the contract seems to enable boras to save face because he recommended that drew walk away from the dodgers' deal. had the red sox contract extended the out clause to the final three years, drew could have wound up with only $28 million.  on a conference call friday, boras and theo epstein, the red sox' general manager, called the contract issues minor.  if drew's shoulder could cost him $28 million, or 40 percent of the contract, a reporter asked, how could it be considered minor? ''every contract in baseball has certain contingencies that can turn it from guaranteed to nonguaranteed and you don't call those major parts of the contract,'' epstein said. ''they are minor parts of the contract.''  epstein was presumably referring to routine provisions that bar players from engaging in potentially dangerous activities like skydiving or racecar driving. a player's surgically repaired throwing shoulder does not quite fit into that category. boras was more determined with his spin.  ''when you talk about the status of the contract,'' boras said, ''guarantee provisions are not customarily applicable in normal major league contracts. in this contract, the guarantee provision is in place with the exception of a very, very myopic element of this, so this is something that is certainly treated for all intents and purposes as a $70 million contract.''  guarantee provisions ''are not customarily applicable'' in normal major league contracts? boras would be hard pressed to name one major free agent contract he has negotiated that-has not been guaranteed. the one for alex rodriguez? barry zito? drew's dodgers' contract?  on baseball  