big dreams under g.m.'s new tent   one of the most intriguing concept cars of recent years was never seen at an auto show. in fact, it was banned from them -- by the company that created it.  when the buick blackhawk first appeared in spring 2000, wayne k. cherry, the design chief of general motors at the time, was reportedly incensed. he decreed that the blackhawk, independently conceived by michael e. doble, then buick's special vehicles manager, and designed by steven d. pasteiner, an independent designer and former buick stylist, never be shown at a g.m. display at any auto show. neither was it to be shown at any official g.m. event.  so, the blackhawk, despite critical acclaim for its bold retro styling and big v-8 performance, was consigned to various unofficial buick club events and hot rod shows.  ''wayne hates this car,'' mr. doble said during a 2001 test drive in anaheim, calif. ''he said that since it was not created by his studio, it's not an official g.m. vehicle.''  the system at that time in g.m. was one of a silo mentality, where design studios in g.m.'s worldwide organization reported only to higher-ups within their regional organizations. this system had the side effect of spawning renegade designs, like the blackhawk. since mr. cherry's retirement in january 2004, that system, which could result in vehicles being churned out in one region that seemed to have no relation to vehicles produced by another, has been changed by his successor, ed welburn.  ''up until four or five years ago, it was like g.m. was four different car companies,'' mr. welburn said in an interview this month after the 2007 north american international auto show in detroit. ''i mean, there was some interaction, but not a whole lot. the design studios in the individual regions were not linked. now, we have one global design studio that i lead.''  the result, he said, is a more inclusive environment where a bigger pool of ideas from g.m.'s 11 design teams -- in germany, sweden, australia, india, south korea, brazil, china, california and michigan -- can be considered.  ''we can now link up all 11 studios and simultaneously consider a design,'' mr. welburn said. ''it really helps us understand the needs of the regions and what regional perspectives they can bring to the whole.''  g.m. also now rotates designers from studio to studio, much as administrative personnel can be rotated between international and domestic assignments.  a notable example is sangyup lee, the south korean-born stylist who was recently transferred from g.m.'s design headquarters in warren, mich., to its holden subsidiary in port melbourne, australia. there, mr. lee will be working directly with the zeta platform team that is bringing to production his design for the 2009 camaro. (holden specializes in large rear-drive cars like the caprice, a big seller in the middle east, where it is sold as a chevrolet.)  ''it helps in our recruiting of new designers to be able to say, 'come to g.m. and see the world,' '' mr. welburn said. ''diversity is very important here -- in experience, in cultures, in every idea.''  g.m. designers no longer feel as if they have to buck the system to have their ideas considered, he said. he pointed to g.m.'s international design showcase at the detroit show, where award-winning models from elsewhere in the world were displayed. these included the saab aero x sports car, chevrolet t2x crossover, chevy wtcc high-performance compact and the holden efijy retro coupe -- a crowd favorite at the detroit show.  ''its design theme goes back to late '40s chevrolets, though it is really based on the 1953 holden fj,'' said richard ferlazzo, the australian native who designed the efijy. ''the '53 fj is a design icon in australia. nearly everyone in australia had a connection to one at one time or another -- owned one, rode in one, or was conceived in one.''  the saab aero x, which won best-of-show honors at the 2006 geneva auto show, is meant to conjure images of the company's jet heritage. it was styled in pixbo, sweden, by alex daniel, a stylist for g.m. design europe. the t2x, the hit of the 2005 seoul auto show, was designed by another australian, max wolff, with a team at the g.m.-owned daewoo auto and truck advanced design studio in inchon, south korea. a wolff colleague, ewan kingsbury of g.m. holden, drew the exterior of the wtcc. that car may be the most global of the international concepts shown in detroit; it is a result of contributions from g.m. units in britain, switzerland, india, australia and japan.  mr. welburn said he did not feel that g.m.'s flashy showcase models drew attention away from the meat-and-potatoes american models at the company's display.  ''our design teams hated it because the other stuff is so good,'' he said. ''it generates competition, in a friendly way. they can't wait to get back in their studios and try to top what they've seen from their colleagues.''  the dream of every concept designer, of course, is that his or her idea will come to life as a production model. but the big-tent concept of g.m. design doesn't necessarily mean that dream is more likely to come true, even for a much-loved design like the efijy.  ''every concept has a different mission,'' mr. welburn said. ''it's a stake in the ground for a new direction.  ''it might explore a new theme or type, like the t2x. it might be a precursor to a production car, like the wtcc. the aero x, for instance, may never go into production, but it makes an incredible statement. all the saab designers have aero x images at their desks, and they take inspiration from aero x for the forms, colors and textures of the next generation of saab vehicles they're creating.''  the detroit show represented a special moment for g.m. design, mr. welburn said proudly. but he is not sure it will be repeated. the vehicles will return to their regions rather than show up at future auto shows in chicago, geneva or new york city, although that stance could be reconsidered.  but mr. welburn predicted that the most likely outcome from the positive response generated by the design showcase vehicles is that g.m. styling studios will be further emboldened as they fine-tune future models.  ''i can't even sit still,'' he said, ''thinking about the ones that are in the pipeline to come.''  will the efijy fly?  is the widespread public acclaim for the holden efijy concept car, based on the enduring 1953 holden fj, enough to propel it toward serious consideration for production?  ''you wonder, would it be one of those where there would be a couple thousand people that would kill to have it, but that would be the extent of its appeal?'' asked ed welburn, the design chief for general motors. ''i'm not sure. will we ever build it? i don't think so. could we? yes, it could be built; it's on a modified corvette platform, and all its major components already exist.''  though its recently introduced chevrolet hhr has been a modest hit, g.m. remains a little gun-shy of retro designs. that's after its experience with the slow-selling chevy ssr pickup, a 2000 concept. but somewhere between the popular concept and production, the ssr's charisma was compromised. the vehicle's original shape was retained for the most part, but its size grew and so did its price.  ''the main thing that grew on the ssr was the price,'' mr. welburn conceded. ''it got away from its original segment. that's one thing we will keep in mind, going forward on the new camaro. there's a difference between styling and designing. it not only has to look good, it also has to be priced right.''  jerry garrett  design  