boy on the bus   andy catlett  early travels.  by wendell berry.  140 pp. shoemaker & hoard/avalon. $23.  in this tender, slender, fictionalized memoir, wendell berry adds another chapter to his continuing account of rural life in kentucky. the novel's town of port william, as his elderly narrator explains, looking back to his childhood during world war ii, is ''the nucleus, the navel, of the country that was most intimately home to me then and has been home to me all my life, even in the years when i did not live in it. it is my motherland, the mold i was cast in.''  embarking alone on a gentle rite of passage, 9-year-old andy catlett boards a bus, going off to see his two sets of grandparents, who live about 10 miles from his home. what the grown-up andy recalls of that experience is transformed into ''a sort of homage'' to a now-vanished world. title characters from berry's earlier port william volumes -- jayber crow, old jack, hannah coulter -- appear here in affectionate cameos as the adult andy, echoing wordsworth, observes that ''in my memory, all who were there ... seem now to be gathered into a love that is at once a boy's and an aging man's.''  when those perspectives are fused, the novel has an elemental beauty. berry, who is also a poet, writes sensuously of grandma and grandpa catlett's house, which ''clicked and ticked in the nighttime cold.'' he describes grandpa catlett sitting in his armchair, thinking about the people he'd known when he was a boy, considering ''the history of his hands,'' which ''were hard-used and now almost useless.''  as though describing a painting by edward hopper, berry captures the mood of a general store abandoned by its owner, who has gone off to join the army: ''every shelf and bin and counter was as bare of goods as mother hubbard's cupboard. the store contained only its share of the surrounding stillness, and the light starkly shaped and shadowed by the deserted furnishings.''  sometimes, though, the aging man, not so much reflective as opinionated, crowds out his younger self. berry has long lived and farmed in port royal, ky., and his eloquent essays on honoring and working the land have been a vital force in the modern agrarian movement. here, though, he lets andy reach hasty conclusions, never allowing readers to understand what shocks or revelations have made this character go sour on change.  after relishing his memories of the daily toil on grandpa catlett's farm, andy sounds cantankerous when he announces that ''in only a few years the world of pavement, speed and universal dissatisfaction had extended itself into nearly every place and nearly every mind, and the old world of the mule team and wagon was simply gone, leaving behind it a scatter of less and less intelligible relics.'' remembering his other grandparents, the feltners, andy seems not so much visionary as dyspeptic, warning about the dangers of forgetting ''the timely world of nature or the eternal world of the prophets and poets. and i fear, i believe i know, that the doom of the older world i knew as a boy will finally afflict the new one that replaced it.''  thankfully, in other passages the spirit of the young andy -- and his sense of wonder -- prevail. in an early essay called ''a native hill,'' berry concluded that his probing questions about his life and its relation to his native land -- ''so full of my own history and so much damaged by it'' -- could only be answered ''in partial and fragmentary ways.'' ''andy catlett: early travels'' is one of those many fragments. richly drawn, if jagged, it's best seen as a small part of a puzzle most illuminating when all pieced together.  roy hoffman is a staff writer for the press-register in mobile, ala. his most recent novel is ''chicken dreaming corn.''  