the week ahead: jan. 28 - feb. 3; classical music   the mezzo-soprano susan graham is an eloquent interpreter of a large repertory, from german classicism to contemporary american music. i could listen to her sing the phone book, but she is devoting her recital at carnegie hall on monday to french art song, for which she has a particular affinity. with the pianist malcolm martineau supporting her, ms. graham will sing works, both beloved and obscure, by more than 20 composers, among them bizet, franck, fauré, lalo, gounod, debussy, chausson, duparc, ravel, honegger and poulenc. at 8 p.m., (212) 247-7800, carnegiehall.org; $25 to $80.  new music is plentiful this week, not least because the juilliard school's annual focus festival is under way. joel sachs, who assembles and directs focus, gives each year's concerts a unifying theme, sometimes stylistic, sometimes geographical. this year's series looks at contemporary hungarian music, with ''contemporary'' defined as post-bartok. several of the featured composers -- gyorgy kurtag, gyorgy ligeti, peter eotvos and istvan marta, most notably -- are heard frequently in new york, but many of the others on the program are not. that's where to look for the surprising unknowns that mr. sachs invariably turns up. monday through friday at 8 p.m., peter jay sharp theater, 155 west 65th street, lincoln center, (212) 769-7406, juilliard.edu; free, but tickets are required on friday.  coincidentally john scott is presenting the complete organ works of ligeti (and jonathan harvey) on sunday afternoon at st. thomas church. mr. scott's concert is part of the miller theater's ligeti tribute. at miller itself the big draw this week is a composer portrait concert devoted to frank zappa's classical works, as well as a few transcriptions of his experimental rock pieces, to be performed by the fireworks ensemble and the zephyros winds. sunday at 5:15 p.m., st. thomas church, fifth avenue and 53rd street, (212) 854-7799; free. friday at 8 p.m., broadway at 116th street, morningside heights, (212) 854-7799, millertheater.com; $25, $15 for students.  zappa is not the only rock star whose classical (or at least arguably classical) scores are being heard this week. david byrne is represented as well, by his ''songs from 'the knee plays,' '' composed in 1985 for a robert wilson production. thursday at 9 p.m., zankel hall, carnegie hall; $35 to $45.  