architectural skills: excellent. personal skills: not so good.   listening to friends complain about their contractors is a familiar trial of new york living. but how many can claim to have heard a bona fide genius hold forth on this riveting topic?  now's your chance. in ''frank's home,'' the new play by richard nelson that opened last night at playwrights horizons, no less an eminence than frank lloyd wright can be heard bemoaning at length the dubious practices of a builder who botched the construction of one of his houses. for what seems like a full half-hour of mr. nelson's play, wright denounces this cretinous contractor and his outrages while another architectural eminence, louis sullivan, wright's former mentor, looks on wearily.  occasionally, sullivan interrupts wright's screed to offer the same distracted murmurs of sympathy new yorkers are called upon to provide when friends and relatives get going on the agonies of their full-scale bathroom renovations.  this tedious speech may be the low point of mr. nelson's dreary drama, which travels a worn path in the bioplay genre, lingering lovingly as it does on its subject's feet of clay while paying occasional lip service to his artistic divinity. but then, highlights are few in this sloppily constructed work, which carefully parcels out plenty of facts but never manages to achieve the ring of truth.  peter weller plays the genius/louse, whom mr. nelson intercepts at a low ebb in his professional career. it is 1923, and wright has relocated to california, where he hopes to revive his flagging fortunes with a couple of small commissions. he is reunited there with his adult children catherine (maggie siff) and lloyd (jay whittaker), whom he had abandoned many years before when he left their mother, who has just recently granted him a divorce.  his current companion, miriam noel (mary beth fisher), may be matrimonially inclined, but it's hard to tell, as she's both a drunk and a crackpot. also on hand for this tension-riddled family reunion is sullivan (harris yulin), likewise booze-sodden after the death of his lover and hoping to cadge some work from his former protégé.  the quasi-chekhovian setup finds these characters and a few others lolling about, nursing old wounds and inflicting new ones, on a patch of ground in the hollywood hills, where wright is working on a schoolhouse commission for an idealistic young teacher, helen girvin (holley fain). mr. nelson's point of view on his subject accords with the standard assessment of him as a great artist who never quite made the grade as a human being. as wright himself rather baldly puts it when, having been handed a sketch pad, he is asked if he's drawing the comely young helen, who sits adoringly at his feet: ''i'm not good with people. i'm drawing a building.''  illustrating wright's lordly detachment from his ostensible loved ones takes up much of the play's running time of one and three-quarter hours, with no intermission. wright belittles lloyd with a bland viciousness and responds with indifference to catherine's rather bizarre fluctuations between giddy worship and peevish cracks about being neglected.  the hysteria of miriam, who blows in and out of the play in a storm of neuroses, doesn't get much of a rise out of him either, although the two occasionally can be heard flaying each other with abuse from offstage. only toward his colleague sullivan does wright evince some sympathy, although it is late in coming and apparently doesn't extend to giving him a job.  mr. weller's coolly imperious performance is in keeping with mr. nelson's vision of wright as a man who poured his heart into his work and had little love left over to distribute among his family members. unfortunately, mr. weller can't generate much heat from the speeches in which wright pontificates about the necessity of beauty and the moral purposes of great architecture, which sound generic and pompous.  ''beauty, son,'' he lectures lloyd. ''it's not just a decoration, a painted face. it's our life and death. our reason. our meaning. and what we are -- as human beings.''  the other roles in the play are even less rewarding, so it is hardly fair to blame the actors for the dimensionless performances. nor should robert falls, the estimable artistic director of the goodman theater in chicago, where the play had its premiere in the fall, be taken to task for the generally flaccid staging. it's hard to do much with a play so unrelentingly dour and lacking in either thematic or narrative shape, although it would have been nice if mr. falls could have found a way to provide visual proof of wright's artistry, rather than merely have people chat about it.  a slide show might not be the most theatrically vital answer, but at least the images of wright's masterly architectural achievements would give us some minor aesthetic reward for enduring mr. nelson's ill-conceived play.  frank's home  by richard nelson; directed by robert falls; sets by thomas lynch; costumes by susan hilferty; lighting by michael philippi; original music and sound by richard woodbury; production manager, christopher boll; production stage manager, barclay stiff. presented by playwrights horizons, tim sanford, artistic director; leslie marcus, managing director; william russo, general manager, in association with the goodman theater, chicago. at the playwrights horizons mainstage theater, 416 west 42nd street, clinton; (212) 279-4200. through feb. 18. running time: 1 hour 45 minutes.  with: chris henry coffey (kenneth), holley fain (helen girvin), mary beth fisher (miriam noel), maggie siff (catherine), jeremy strong (william), peter weller (frank lloyd wright), jay whittaker (lloyd) and harris yulin (louis sullivan).  theater review  