nickelodeon begins a web site focusing on interactive play   nickelodeon, the popular children's cable network, is pushing hard into the online world with nicktropolis.com, a new web site that will let its young users enter their own world of internet activities.  the web site, which is to be activated today, is aimed at children ages 6 to 14, and plays heavily to their appetite for games, the company said yesterday.  nickelodeon was prompted to join the surging world of online activities for children in part by research that showed that 86 percent of 8- to 14-year-olds were playing games online, more than 51 percent were watching tv shows and videos online and 37 percent were sending instant messages, the company said. the site will include various online security safeguards.  on the web site, nickelodeon, which is part of viacom, can take advantage of the fact that it owns much of its own programming.  ''over all, its internet activities are its fastest-growing business,'' said richard greenfield, who follows the media industry for pali research. ''it owns virtually all its content and can leverage it across broadband and internet. it is a big opportunity for the company.''  nickelodeon has already started nick.com, nickjr.com and a host of other web sites.  in virtual worlds like nicktropolis, visitors create alter egos -- termed avatars -- which then interact with other avatars and the web site environment, like people do in the physical world.  the new site, which will seek advertising support, will depend in part on some of nickelodeon's well-known programs, including ''spongebob squarepants.''  the site will offer several different environments, including the pier, an area that will offer games like bumper cars and fortune-telling.  another area, nicktroon boulevard, will let visitors create avatars based on particular nickelodeon properties like the video game spongebob squarepants: battle for bikini bottom.  stephen youngwood, the executive vice president for digital media for the mtv networks kids and family group and for nickelodeon, said the company did not think that the nicktropolis site would cannibalize audiences from nick.com but would instead interweave with the existing site.  the point of nicktropolis is to interact with the community of avatars on the site, whereas on nick.com, there is less interaction, he said. ''on nicktropolis, you are talking to other avatars in real time, but on nick.com, visitors use message boards.''  