suburban squall   arlington park  by rachel cusk.  248 pp. farrar, straus & giroux. $23.  it's the cooking, the cleaning, the crying!'' wails oscar in ''the odd couple'' when felix has pushed him too far. in rachel cusk's latest novel, it's the cooking, the cleaning and the fact that beyond one's own snarled household a million other women are doing the same. her characters are quietly going berserk. arlington park isn't the end of the world; it's just suburbia. but, with a little exaggeration, the two become interchangeable.  juliet was once thought exceptional and now is hardly noticed as she picks her way through traffic in the rain. her husband's failure to defend her against the oafishness of their host at a dinner party has led her to the conclusion that all men are killers. ''they take a woman, and little by little they murder her.'' juliet's impotent rage eventually finds expression in a haircut.  amanda has a nasty contretemps with her tiny son when he asks awkward questions about a deformed man. she really seems to hate this kid. her neighbor, jocasta, is much kinder, marveling at the taupe coffin her daughter has prepared for a pet rabbit. (''darling, how fashionable!'') amanda and her husband derive satisfaction only from the removal of interior walls: ''their conversations on the subject of knocking through were so numerous and so energetic ... that the walls seemed almost to fall down by themselves.''  maisie has a kitchen she cannot bear to enter and companions she feels nothing for. ''she'd get ... hysterical if someone stole her hair dryer,'' maisie says of a woman her husband has made the mistake of praising. ''she'd get pretty damned jumpy if her husband's salary didn't come rolling in like a pacific breaker every month, or if people stopped thinking she looked like felicity kendall.'' not overtly competitive, these women freely grind one another into the dust in private.  christine, nouveau riche and crass, is content -- not with her husband or children, far from it, but with arlington park, in particular the mall. she even likes the way it looks from the parking lot. cusk is hardest on christine, simmering with contempt for the woman's lowly concerns: spending money, wearing purple and writing to the local paper. by the last chapter, christine has more or less turned into the objectionable beverly from mike leigh's ''abigail's party.'' (but beverly was funnier.)  cusk's many female characters are far too similar, and you wish she'd stuck with one. each exhibits low-level feminist outrage and ambivalence toward her family, but these traits are so muted and ineffectual they only add to the ennui. the novel comes straight out of the kitchen-sink school of british realism, thrashing through any sentimentality you might harbor about family life and suggesting that very little holds such structures together besides routine, nostalgia, financial dependence and an unthinking sense of duty. these are empty experiences, on offer to people who are not empty and who therefore suffer inordinately. cusk laments this. ''to look at that view you'd think that a human life was meaningless. you'd think that a day meant nothing at all.''  the book eventually becomes one long postpartum gripe, though neither humane nor funny enough to be enjoyable as social satire. why must the wife of an obnoxious man be ''horse-faced''? another dope has a ''capacious chest.'' denoting character flaws through physical defects seems beneath a writer of cusk's intellectual bent. too often, she's grandiose when she could be friendly, convoluted when she needs to be clear, snooty when you want something tender. she's discerning about people and the passing thought, but she can be snobbish about class and overly fond of descriptive passages, telling us repeatedly of sagging skies and clouds. o.k., it's raining -- we got it!  there are some great moments, but she tends to over-egg the pudding with metaphor, simile and melodramatic hyperbole when all she's describing is a set of materially advantaged women getting through the day. none of the many hints of impending disaster lead anywhere. so when she writes: ''the empty black mouth of the fireplace stood open in frozen protest. in front of it an indian rug lay twisted in an attitude of torment,'' you wish she'd lighten up. there's nothing worse than wasted ominousness.  do these couples like one another at all? the husbands are a problem, but it's the children these women really can't stand. as in cusk's nonfiction book on motherhood, ''a life's work,'' children are seen here as vampiric usurpers of their mothers' bodies and souls. but sometimes the mothers fight back. ''i could kill you!'' fumes one woman at someone else's kid, who has just drawn on her white sofa with magic markers. ''you're ruining my life!'' rages another as she propels her daughter's lunchbox across the room. ''ella,'' says christine to her child, ''if you don't shut up i'm going to rip your tongue out of your throat.'' that's telling her.  ''arlington park'' is the kind of book that makes you burn things on the stove and berate your husband. cusk is good at identifying what she fears and reviles. the challenge would be to say what she cares about, even if it makes her sound silly. dignity isn't everything. honesty is.  lucy ellmann's most recent novel is ''doctors & nurses.''  