seeing red over the cable bill   q. i am a rent-regulated tenant in a co-op. for the last 20 years or so, the building has negotiated a bulk rate for cable services at prices that are considerably lower than the provider's retail rates.  but three months ago, my cable bill suddenly increased by more than $30 per month. when i called the company, i was told that when the new bulk-rate contract was renewed, the co-op told the cable company to charge rental tenants the retail rate. can the co-op board do this?  a. robert sokolski, a manhattan lawyer who represents tenants, said that since the letter writer's apartment was rent-regulated, he was probably a nonpurchasing tenant who was living in the building at the time of its conversion to a co-op. and state law requires a co-op's managing agent to provide to nonpurchasing tenants ''all services and facilities required by law on a nondiscriminatory basis.''  he said the tenant could argue that the co-op should have negotiated for cable services on a nondiscriminatory basis, just as it had been doing for 20 years.  in addition, mr. sokolski said, new york's public service law provides that a cable company cannot charge rates that are ''discriminatory or preferential as between subscribers similarly situated.''  and while a cable company may justify a lower bulk rate for shareholders based upon the co-op's guarantee of payment (or the co-op's pledge of some other benefit to the company), mr. sokolski said that he doubted that this would be enough to make shareholders and nonpurchasing tenants ''dissimilar'' as cable subscribers.  so, he said, the letter writer should ask the owner of his apartment to have the co-op include him in the bulk-rate contract. the writer can also file a complaint with the public service commission asking it to order the provider to offer the same rates to all residents in the building. the commission's web site is www.dps.state.ny.us.  do co-op candidates have to give notice?  q. is there a law that says that someone who wants to run for office on a co-op board must give notice before the annual shareholders' meeting? recently, at our annual meeting, a shareholder was told she could not run because she did not tell the president before the meeting that she wanted to.  a. arthur i. weinstein, a manhattan co-op and condominium lawyer, said that if the building's bylaws require nominations for the board to be made before the meeting, then the co-op could enforce that provision. but he added that such provisions were rare.  ''many boards adopt an informal procedure under which nominations are submitted in advance, and information about the candidates is distributed to shareholders prior to the meeting,'' he said. ''it is rare, though, that a co-op would have a bylaw provision that bars a nomination from the floor at the time of the meeting.''  so, mr. weinstein said, the letter writer should examine the co-op's bylaws to determine the requirements for board candidates.  jay romano  q & a  