editor's choice: other recent books of particular interest   the castle in the forest, by norman mailer. (random house, $27.95.) this remarkable novel, about the young adolf hitler, his family and their shifting circumstances, is mailer's first in 10 years and his most perfect apprehension of the absolutely alien.  house of meetings, by martin amis. (knopf, $23.) in amis's novel, a russian veteran of world war ii acquaints his american stepdaughter with his grim past of rapine and violence.  the race beat: the press, the civil rights struggle, and the awakening of a nation, by gene roberts and hank klibanoff. (knopf, $30.) two veteran journalists analyze in depth the way the news media came to play such an important role in the fight for racial justice. african queen: the real life of the hottentot venus, by rachel holmes. (random house, $23.95.) a gripping case of human exploitation in 19th-century london's theater of human oddities.  false self: the life of masud khan, by linda hopkins. (other press, $35.) this biography of the dashing anglo-pakistani psychoanalyst reveals a man who was himself deeply troubled.  the averaged american: surveys, citizens, and the making of a mass public, by sarah e. igo. (harvard university, $35.) how the social sciences changed the way america thinks of itself.  paula spencer, by roddy doyle. (viking, $24.95.) in doyle's novel, a dublin woman struggles to overcome alcoholism and abuse.  letters of e. b. white: revised edition. originally edited by dorothy lobrano guth. revised and updated by martha white. (harpercollins, $35.) the expanded edition includes additional correspondence by the new yorker writer.  the best seat in the house: how i woke up one tuesday and was paralyzed for life, by allen rucker. (harpercollins, $24.95.) at 51, rucker was stricken with transverse myelitis.  they call me naughty lola: personal ads from the london review of books. edited and with an introduction by david rose. (scribner, $16.) lonely hearts as a literary genre.  the full reviews of these and other recent books are on the web: nytimes.com/books.  