the pluses and pitfalls of job-seeking at work   on the surface, it seemed like the perfectly executed job search. every day, a 40-year-old saleswoman based in new york would scan internet job boards like monster, hotjobs and careerbuilder and would send e-mail messages to contacts and potential employers. she faxed her résumé and checked online trade news. in short, she did everything she could to find a more fulfilling job than the one she had held for seven years.  there was just one catch: she conducted much of her job search last year right under her employer's nose, using the company's computer, fax machine, business e-mail account and office supplies.  ''i was doing a lot of stuff that could have gotten me in trouble,'' acknowledged the saleswoman, who spoke on condition of anonymity because she was still working for the same small business. ''my opinion was, let them fire me. i would have been disappointed to hurt their feelings, but on the other hand i had to do what i had to do.'' she did erase her computer's history as often as possible to cover her tracks.  her story is not unusual. in workplaces where high-speed broadband internet access is typically available and 60-hour workweeks are commonplace, many employees believe that the office is the most convenient or effective place to do a job search. and people who are unhappy with their jobs sometimes believe that they are entitled to use the workplace to find something better.  there are no statistics on the extent of the practice, but according to workplace experts and employees, it is widespread. the problem is that such activity is often against company policy and may even lead to dismissal.  ''it's something that should be avoided, particularly when company employment policies specifically forbid resources and communication devices for any personal use, much less for a job search,'' said ben dattner, principal of dattner consulting, a manhattan-based firm with large and small corporate and nonprofit clients. ''it's important to abide by the terms of one's employment and not to burn bridges.''  the chances of being caught, mr. dattner added, have climbed as more companies monitor computer use and e-mail. he said that instead of using company time and property for a job search, employees could conduct the hunt on their own time with their home computers and cellphones. and it is not difficult to go to a nearby print center at lunchtime to make copies, he noted.  noah pickus, interim director for ethics at the kenan institute for ethics at duke university, recommends that job seekers use common sense in their pursuit of new employment while at the office. that means not spending hours job-searching while neglecting work duties or putting the office phone number on your résumé.  ''there is an important distinction between an occasional e-mail and spending half a day looking for another job,'' mr. pickus said. ''the most difficult ethical dilemmas are often between two rights. it's right to look out for yourself and your family and it's right that you have an obligation to your current employer.''  john a. challenger of challenger, gray & christmas, the placement firm based in chicago, says that most employees, especially those under 40, see themselves as ''free agents'' who will search for jobs from their offices as a matter of course. employees working 50- or 60-hour weeks, he said, are often too exhausted to look for jobs when they are outside the office.  he says he does believe that job-hunting from the office crosses an ethical line when employees begin using office supplies for résumés and cover letters.  it can also be dangerous. mr. challenger suggested that if an employer caught an employee job-searching on company time, it could lead to a loss of ''plum assignments and promotions.''  an organization that is downsizing may be quicker to fire an employee who has been caught faxing his résumé, and occasionally it may lead to dismissal of a worker who is already on thin ice, mr. challenger said. occasionally, though, it could have the opposite effect, he said -- spurring an employer to try to reconcile differences with a disgruntled but valuable employee.  there is one situation when it may be acceptable to look for a job from the office, mr. challenger said: when layoffs are expected or have been announced.  that was the case for adrienne lewin, 34, now a freelance writer based in new jersey who was a staff reporter for foxnews.com in 2001, when the company announced major layoffs. many of the employees to be laid off, including ms. lewin, remained in the company's offices in the chelsea neighborhood of manhattan for about two months after the announcements and took advantage of the opportunity to use foxnews.com resources to find another job, she said.  ''i searched job sites from the office,'' ms. lewin said. ''i also used the fax machine printer, copier and phone to reach journalism contacts and respond to job postings. and there was a small amount of satisfaction in using whatever i could from the employer who was letting me go, to find something better.''  ms. lewin said she would be too nervous about getting caught to use company computers or e-mail to hunt for jobs from the office again. but she has seen it done often at other jobs she has held.  ''i've found job listings and résumés resting on printers at work,'' ms. lewin said. ''though i haven't done it, i think people treat it like shopping online during work hours. it's not seen as an ethical violation.''  a 52-year-old hospital health care professional based in new york says she was initially torn about searching for new work from the office of an employer she has been with for 12 years. on one hand, she said, she occasionally felt guilty job-hunting from her office at lunch hour or using moments to update her résumé and to check online job boards.  on the other hand, she said the qualms she felt about looking for a new job while at work were superseded by anger toward her employers for making her feel ''anonymous and replaceable.'' she believes that her talent and master's-level education are not being utilized in her current job, she said, and that the two hours a week she spends job-hunting from the office does not affect her work.  while she is comfortable using her office computer to job-search, she said, she does not feel right sending e-mail messages to prospective employers.  just as job-seeking from the office often requires secrecy, so can going on interviews. in 2004, mary catanzaro realized after just two weeks that an office-manager job she took with a new york-based fashion showroom was a mistake. almost immediately, she began searching for another job and going on interviews. but the showroom's dress code was so casual that showing up in a work suit would have looked suspicious.  ''wearing a blue suit was a red flag that you were interviewing,'' ms. catanzaro, now 37, recalled. instead, she packed her blue suit into her gym bag and changed clothes and applied makeup in a nearby mcdonald's restroom.  ms. catanzaro, whose current job as an office manager for a new york photography studio includes interviewing prospective employees, said that she empathized with people who look for jobs while at work. ''if you're not happy with a place, you don't care about protocol,'' she said. ''you're trying to go forward with your own career. it's not necessarily ethical, but it's sometimes necessary.''  office space  