spotlight | n.b.a.; confusion in the transition game   prince is back and elvis may have never really left, but in the two n.b.a. middle markets made famous by those musicians -- minneapolis and memphis -- uncertainty reigns.  pau gasol, a 7-footer from spain, is unhappy in his sixth season as the memphis grizzlies' franchise player. he told the team's outgoing owner, michael heisley, that he wanted to play for a contender, not for the worst team in the n.b.a.  kevin garnett, a 7-footer from chicago whose tenure in minnesota has been twice as long as gasol's in memphis, may be frustrated, but he has not asked his team's owner, glen taylor, for a trade. and garnett will not, at least during the season.  the franchises are the only ones in the n.b.a. to have fired their coaches: not surprisingly, mike fratello by the grizzlies last month, then, surprisingly, dwane casey by the timberwolves on tuesday.  this could be the last season for the top executives of both teams, the grizzlies' jerry west and the timberwolves' kevin mchale: west, very likely by choice; mchale, perhaps depending on how (or if) the season turns.  turmoil has surrounded these franchises since the turn of the century.  minnesota's illegal contract with joe smith spiraled into five years without a draft pick and unfulfilled quests to surround the high-priced garnett with winners. heisley, who took the grizzlies to memphis from vancouver in a controversial move, recently terminated a bid to buy the team from a duke alumni group and is still waiting for offers.  what now? which team sorts its mess first?  look to the logo (west) to make one last signature move, even if he is not sure what it is yet.  ''we don't have to trade anybody!'' west said excitedly in a telephone interview thursday. ''a lot of players made demands -- although pau hasn't made demands; he had a meeting with his owner and expressed a desire to go somewhere else.  ''there is a small likelihood that he'll ever get traded. we have not seen anyone come rushing out of the weeds that has made any significant overture. even so, we're not giving anything away.''  amid the laughable offers west has received, chicago, boston and portland would seem to have the most intriguing pieces for memphis, with different combinations of young players, draft picks and expiring contracts. the bulls have the most assets and are the most desperate for a low-post scorer; how desperate will they get?  if the bulls do not have to give up luol deng (they do not want to trade their top scorer, ben gordon), they may have to part with andres nocioni -- whom west is said to admire -- to go along with p. j. brown and his expiring $8.5 million contract. even more attractive would be the first-round pick the bulls received from the knicks, and a young player like thabo sefolosha or tyrus thomas, each a rookie.  the grizzlies would have to include another player, like chucky atkins or hakim warrick, to make such a deal work.  if west trades gasol before the feb. 22 deadline, he will most likely not receive a player to satisfy the grizzlies' goal: ''we have to find a star here who will attract people,'' west said. but the deal could lead to one. with an extra $15 million next season, the grizzlies will try to sign a free agent this summer to go with what could be the top player in the draft.  west, however, does not sound as if he will be around to see those pieces in action.  at the end of this season, he's believed to have an option on his contract, and staying, perhaps as a consultant, would most likely not interest him.  ''the most important thing is to do what's best for me personally,'' said west, who turns 69 in may. he maintains he is being objective when making franchise decisions.  ''what's best for me may not be the best for the franchise,'' he said. ''hopefully, i would have an opportunity to work through the draft. there's still a lot of work to be done here. we're in a process of working in a bigger picture.''  as much as west would not mind retiring and relaxing with good books about subjects like government intelligence, he is as competitive as ever, making furious late-night notes after losses. leaving a lasting legacy after an illustrious career is important to him.  results have been mixed in memphis. the grizzlies, who won 28 games the season before west arrived as president, won 50 games, 45 and 49 over the next three seasons.  but west has also had five coaches (two of them interim) since 2002, and last summer he traded the city's favorite player, shane battier, for a talented but unproven player in rudy gay and the oft-injured stromile swift.  it was obvious that west's vision clashed with fratello's refusal to play up-tempo. he used a grinding style that turned off fans and players alike. after a 3-10 start, heisley realized it was no longer possible to stay with fratello.  the interim coach, tony barone sr., has guided the grizzlies (11-33 entering yesterday's game against portland) to a 5-9 record and lightened the atmosphere. gasol, who missed the first 22 games of the season while recovering from a broken left foot, has averaged 20.4 points, 11.6 rebounds and 6.4 assists in his last five games. he sat out friday's loss to the spurs with a strained hamstring.  ''i don't think we're nearly as bad as our record shows,'' west said. ''we've got very talented young players here. i don't think there's any question that the uncertainty of ownership, all the stuff creates skepticism internally.''  minnesota's internal skepticism came in the off-season with speculation the team would trade garnett. that has been replaced by external criticism for replacing casey, after one and a half seasons, with randy wittman.  wittman was 62-102 in two seasons as the coach of cleveland. he inherited a 20-20 team from casey, and has lost his first two games.  ''we were really inconsistent as a team,'' general manager jim stack said in a telephone interview friday, pointing to specific areas. ''randy will make that next level of adjustment, with his rotations and holding guys accountable.''  stack said that the organization hoped wittman would be the coach for ''a long time.''  but nobody's place in minnesota is guaranteed, especially because after the 2007-8 season, garnett can opt out of the final year of his deal (his salary that season would be $23 million). a cloud of doubt is already hovering.  ''we hope he stays and we're competing for a championship,'' stack said.  garnett's agent, andy miller, said friday in a telephone interview that in a climate of questionable loyalty in the n.b.a., garnett's ''brand of loyalty is subject to criticism and conjecture.''  miller added, ''he's focused on the season, on having as productive and successful a season as possible.''  after the season is a different story. garnett may finally be willing to address his future if minnesota does not improve. and to protect themselves from losing garnett, the timberwolves may be willing to explore a trade that would involve multiple teams to absorb his salary.  ultimately, every move mchale has made has been for and because of garnett, whether to surround him with talent (trading for ricky davis and mark blount) or to limit the payroll because of his high salary (trading sam cassell and not overextending his offer to latrell sprewell).  mchale signed mike james and troy hudson to weighty, long-term deals, creating a selfish backcourt with davis. randy foye looks like a winning lottery pick, but he is not a true point guard. mchale is trying to deal the disgruntled marko jaric, and the team is trying to cut ties with the troubled forward eddie griffin.  still, taylor has stuck by mchale. but training as an assistant general manager is fred hoiberg, who retired as a player last spring when he was unable to play with a pacemaker. he may still be too inexperienced to inherit the mess.  it is hard enough to win in the competitive west without such internal chaos. if nothing else, minnesota and memphis quietly lead the conference in intrigue.  