the nation: middle-class appeal; looking for the angry populists in suburbia   in his confrontational response to president bush's state of the union address on tuesday, senator jim webb of virginia said that he was going to focus on only two topics. one, as everyone knew it would be, was iraq.  but before he turned to the war, the new senator spoke about something else: an economy that he said made it seem ''as if we are living in two different countries.'' in one, stock prices, corporate profits and executive pay are rising. in the other, the middle class is barely scraping by.  mr. webb said the situation was reminiscent of the early 20th century, when robber barons were raking in wealth and ''dispossessed workers at the bottom were threatening revolt.''  it was the sort of speech that one might have expected during a deep economic slump. yet it came instead as most workers have started receiving significant pay increases for the first time in years and as polls show that most americans think the economy has grown stronger.  this contrast was arguably the most significant part of the speech. as they plan their strategy on capitol hill and begin the 2008 presidential campaign, the leaders of the democratic party are betting that the temporary swings of the economic cycle no longer have the political power they once did.  instead, they say, the economic shocks of recent years -- technological change, globalization, the decline of labor unions and business icons like ford motor company -- have left many swing voters feeling anxious and insecure about the future.  after years of fighting losing battles against tax cuts, democrats argue that this economic anxiety has altered the political landscape, making swing voters open to a new role for government -- a form of what representative rahm emanuel of illinois has called ''suburban populism.''  with issues like energy policy, immigration and health care having gone largely unaddressed in recent years, democrats see a way to define themselves as the party that can help americans survive the 21st-century economy.  an unanswered question, though, is whether suburban populism can still have appeal during good economic times.  ''the little ups and downs of the economy are not what's bothering the average american, as much as it is the feeling that there are large forces that buffet them around,'' said senator charles schumer of new york, whose book laying out an agenda for the party was published last week. ''in the past, the attitude was, 'get government out of the way.' and now it's, 'gee, i may need it.' ''  amy klobuchar, a freshman senator from minnesota, pointed out that her state had one of the strongest economies in the country, yet she still based her winning campaign largely on people's economic worries. ''they feel insecure,'' ms. klobuchar said last week. ''and the point of this is, they're right.''  this strategy certainly has risks. tax cuts -- with a heavy dose of optimism thrown in -- have been a much better political bet than populism for decades now, and republicans are sticking to this script. during his address last week, mr. bush described the economy as being ''on the move,'' and he is scheduled to visit peoria, ill., this week to call attention to recent wage gains. republicans are pushing for an extension of the tax cuts passed during mr. bush's first term that they say are a major cause of the current boom.  the economy emerged from a recession in late 2001, after the first tax cut went into effect, but wages for most workers still did not keep up with inflation for much of the next few years. only in recent months has that changed.  in 2006, the average hourly pay of rank-and-file workers, who make up about four-fifths of the work force, rose 4.2 percent, while the consumer price index increased only 2.6 percent. the net result -- an inflation-adjusted increase of 1.6 percent -- was a bigger annual raise than any that workers received from the late 1970s to the mid-90s.  the direction of wages has historically been one of the best predictors, if not the best, of the public mood, and it, too, has been brightening. in a gallup poll conducted in mid-january, the share of respondents calling the economy excellent or good -- 52 percent -- reached its highest level since the clinton administration.  but even with the recent increases, the real hourly pay of rank-and-file workers has risen only 3 percent since mr. bush took office, according to the bureau of labor statistics. over the same span, productivity -- that is, the value of what the economy produces per hour -- has risen 18 percent.  except for a few years in the late 1990s, in fact, pay increases have been modest for most of the last three decades, which appears to be contributing to the anxiety. in exit polls on election day, fewer than one in three people said they expected life for the next generation of americans to be better than life today.  but even if suburban populism has some appeal, democrats have been less clear about how to translate it into policy. during their first weeks in control of the house, they have passed bills to raise the minimum wage, to cut the interest rate on federally subsidized loans to college students and allow government to negotiate with pharmaceutical companies over the cost of drugs sold through medicare.  but none of the bills has yet passed the senate, and even if they do, they are unlikely to have a big effect on most middle-class families -- the target audience of the new suburban populism.  some democrats, in the party's center and on the left, are starting to push for broader ideas. in his new book, mr. schumer calls for biometric employment cards to reduce illegal immigration and a crackdown on tax evasion by the wealthy, among other measures. tom vilsack, the former iowa governor who is running for president, is arguing for a push on new energy technology partly to ''elevate our economy above global competition.''  it is still not clear how much can be done by a party that, for at least another year, will lack a clear leader. in his speech last week, senator webb cited two populist role models, andrew jackson and theodore roosevelt, both of whom were presidents, not congressional leaders.  but the coming year will give the party's leaders a chance to hone its message -- and to see how long the current economic boom will last.  middle-class appeal  