former press secretary dispels many illusions   as white house press secretary, ari fleischer was the omnipresent television face of government power, the confident insider who spoke for president bush and seemed to know everything but reveal only what he chose.  in fact, as mr. fleischer disclosed in court testimony on monday, he only knew what the truly powerful chose to tell him, and sometimes that was not much. on occasion he would pronounce with great authority the administration's position on a topic only to find it had changed and nobody had bothered to let him know.  in july 2003, for example, after mr. fleischer had spent months defending a 16-word sentence in the president's state of the union address asserting that iraq had sought uranium for nuclear weapons in africa, he was directed not to repeat his assurances that the information was correct. but his bosses had not yet decided on their revised view.  ''the worst place to stand as press secretary is where the ground is shifting,'' mr. fleischer told the jury in the perjury trial of i. lewis libby jr., vice president dick cheney's former chief of staff. ''you can't say yes, and you can't say no.''  when pressed by reporters on the issue, he said, ''i basically punted.''  mr. fleischer, 46, looking a little balder, a little plumper and a little less commanding than while he served in the white house from 2001 to 2003, often turned to the jury to explain white house ways. but he made a marked contrast with his once-familiar presence as master of administration spin.  in more than two years at the white house, he had deftly avoided saying ''i don't know.'' now, on the witness stand, it was clear that he often did not know. the job of spokesman placed him in a kind of no man's land between the news media and the policy makers. sometimes, he suggested, he got no respect from either side.  mr. libby, for instance, generally would not tell him much.  ''mr. libby was not someone i used as a source in the white house,'' mr. fleischer tactfully put it. (the exception was at a farewell lunch with mr. libby for the departing mr. fleischer -- their first and only one-on-one lunch, he said -- that resulted in his being called as a prosecution witness.)  and reporters, for their part, either challenged what he said or ignored it entirely, mr. fleischer testified.  mr. fleischer recounted, for instance, how he pulled aside two white house reporters on a presidential trip to uganda to tell them what he saw as a choice news morsel. joseph c. wilson iv, the former ambassador who was attacking the administration as twisting the prewar intelligence on iraq, had been dispatched to niger on a fact-finding trip not by mr. cheney, as mr. wilson had suggested, but by his own wife, valerie wilson, who worked at the central intelligence agency, mr. fleischer told them.  the reporters, david gregory of nbc news and john dickerson, then of time magazine, were unimpressed, mr. fleischer recounted.  ''they didn't take out their notebooks,'' he said. ''they didn't ask any follow-up questions. it was a great big 'so what.' ''  this, mr. fleischer acknowledged, was not unusual.  ''like a lot of things i said to the press, it seemed to have no impact,'' he said, provoking loud guffaws from the score of reporters in the courtroom -- including mr. dickerson, now with the online magazine slate.  mr. fleischer's description of his experience as chief white house flack -- the journalists' slang for a spokesman -- echoed in some ways the testimony of the previous witness, cathie martin, who served as a spokeswoman for mr. cheney from 2001 to 2004.  ms. martin described how she and other ''communicators'' -- that is, press officers and other members of the white house communications staff -- had been excluded from high-level discussions about how george j. tenet, then the c.i.a. director, would publicly take responsibility for the ''16 words'' on iraq's quest for uranium. a harvard law school graduate, she seemed a bit miffed about the implied humiliation.  ''everybody was sort of in the dark,'' ms. martin testified. mr. libby, she added, ''told me there had been a decision not to have communicators involved.''  on another occasion, ms. martin told the court, she was ''aggravated'' that mr. cheney had directed mr. libby to talk to certain reporters and had not given the job to her.  but if the trial is exposing the diminished reality behind the job of white house spokesman, it is also offering an unaccustomed inside look at the news media. when mr. dickerson was named in testimony and his mug shot was projected for the jury, all eyes turned toward the man himself, taking notes in a back pew. a wave of whispers passed through the reporters present, and mr. dickerson shook his head, uneasy to become the focus of attention.  that moment is only the beginning of what is likely to be an extraordinary excursion by a criminal trial into the work habits and confidential contacts of the washington press corps. judith miller, the former new york times reporter who was jailed for three months for initially refusing to testify about her contacts with mr. libby, is expected to testify as early as tuesday and to be the first of several high-profile reporters to be questioned on the stand about their work.  