for hungary's avant-garde, a memorial and (almost) a birthday   joel sachs does nothing by half measures, it seems. last year mr. sachs, the director of the juilliard school's annual focus! festival and a mainstay of new york's new-music scene, felt it was time to present a series devoted to contemporary hungarian music. soliciting the advice of colleagues was not enough, nor was traveling to budapest: mr. sachs, according to his program note, spent july learning hungarian.  a daunting prospect, but it speaks to the immersive approach that has long informed his focus! events. this year's series, which got under way on friday with a performance by the new juilliard ensemble, was planned as a tribute to gyorgy ligeti, the senior figure of the hungarian avant-garde. when ligeti died in june, the festival became a memorial. it also celebrates the birthday of another prominent composer, gyorgy kurtag, who turns 81 in february.  in a chamber music concert held on monday night in the juilliard school's peter jay sharp theater, ligeti was represented by three of his études for solo piano. these dazzling pieces have become staples in the repertory of many an adventurous pianist lately, both for their technical challenges and their refined effect.  in no. 3, ''touches bloquées,'' the pianist's flying right hand is blocked by an obdurate left. no. 5, ''arc en ciel,'' is gently impulsive, filled with elegant daubs of jazzy harmony. no. 6, ''automne à varsovie,'' is filled with daunting polyrhythms meant to be dispatched at breakneck speed. the pianist chaun qin handled these selections ably, growing more confident with each.  mr. kurtag's ''officium breve in memoriam andreae szervanszky,'' for string quartet, was canceled because of a performer's illness; in its place mr. sachs programmed ''locomotive symphony'' (1998), an electronic work by laszlo sary. the piece was ingeniously constructed from the sounds of locomotives. steam whistles tooted a merry melody like a wheezy calliope; track rhythms were fashioned into a percussive tattoo that might have been a steve reich phase piece for two marching bands.  in marcell dargay's ''albumblatt -- varosligeti fasor 33,'' gyu young huh, a flutist, blew airy multiphonic chords over lines played by the pianist matthew odell, whose instrument had been partially modified to timbre-distorting effect. despite its unusual sounds and oblique tonality, the brief piece conformed to the contours of a melancholy ballad.  ''tundragobelin,'' by gyula csapo, evoked with a series of pithy miniatures the terrain of northern canada as seen from a low-flying aircraft; the clarinetist sean rice, the violinist eric siu, the cellist kaiwen liu and the pianist michael brown offered a polished, committed account.  jeremiah bills, a flutist, and elizabeth lara, a cellist, interacted with chiming electronics in gyula bankovi's bittersweet ''silver-winged butterflies.''  the evening's most commanding performance came in jozsef sari's ''prae- inter- and postludium,'' whose intricate rhythmic demands were once beyond human capability, according to the program. not only did the unflappable pianist you you zhang manage the furious barrage of notes, she also did so with abundant style and evident wit.  the juilliard school's focus! festival runs through friday at the peter jay sharp theater, 155 east 65th street, lincoln center; (212) 769-7406 or www.juilliard.edu.  music review  