the week ahead: jan. 28 - feb. 3; theater   cynthia hopkins started working on ''accidental nostalgia,'' the first part of a planned trilogy, by researching memory and forgetting. the plot, script, music, choreography and costumes all gradually followed. now ms. hopkins is back with part 2, ''must don't whip 'um,'' which uses music, theater and video to tell the story of cameron seymour, a fictional and forgotten '70s pop star who is supposedly being watched by the c.i.a. and who later disappears under mysterious circumstances. the details of seymour's bizarre life dribble out in ''whip 'um,'' presented as a documentary about seymour and the farewell concert of her band. backing her is ms. hopkins's real-life band, gloria deluxe, which plays a divine mix of country, cabaret and blues. as the action whips between past and present, ms. hopkins's distinctive voice can be heard throughout. through feb. 4, st. ann's warehouse, 38 water street, at dock street, brooklyn, (718) 254-8779, ticketweb.com; $25.  many of the great women's roles from antiquity were written by euripides. there's medea, who murders her children and sets fire to her ex's new bride in order to get back at him, and iphigenia, who is sacrificed -- and then saved. but sophocles, in ''women of trachis,'' wrote a juicy and puzzling female character: deianira, wife of heracles. in this rarely performed tragedy, she gives her faithless husband a robe that she thinks has been treated with a love potion but is really drenched with poison. in target margin's new version, adapted by kate e. ryan and directed by alice reagan, the play has been updated, compressed to 60 minutes and, as unlikely as it may seem, laced with laughs and pop tunes. there are only a few performances left of this delightful and energetic production, in which deianira (played by heidi schreck) wears a leopard-print dress and is married to a skirt-chasing celebrity. the wrongdoers get what's coming to them in an ending that turns out to be very b.c. through feb. 3, ohio theater, 66 wooster street, soho, (212) 352-3101; $10.  