f. y. i.   the first singular sensation  q. it's a delight to see that ''a chorus line'' is back and doing well. now, please tell me: what was the first american musical?  a. you can get an argument about this. some purists, for example, may contend that the first modern musical was ''oklahoma!'' or ''show boat.'' others point to minstrel shows or even to an english ballad opera, ''flora,'' presented in charleston, s.c., in 1735.  but the most often mentioned ancestor of the musical and its predecessor, the leg show, is ''the black crook,'' which opened in manhattan at niblo's garden on sept. 12, 1866.  according to stanley green's encyclopaedia of the musical theater (dodd, mead, 1976), the musical came about by accident. a french ballet troupe had been booked into the academy of music, but it burned down before the opening. meanwhile, ''the black crook,'' a silly melodrama based loosely on faust, was set to open at niblo's, on broadway near prince street.  not trusting the melodrama, william wheatley, niblo's manager, hired the ballet company and combined it with the story line. the show ran more than five hours, but nobody seemed to care. the sight of 100 dancing girls was enough to ensure a spectacular run. if that weren't enough, preachers denounced it from the pulpit for its suggestive songs.  in 1954, a broadway musical, ''the girl in pink tights,'' was based on the circumstances surrounding the original production.  big production numbers and chorus girls -- two vital broadway features today -- came into their own with ''the black crook,'' prompting some writers to label it the first true american musical comedy.  they don't grow in brooklyn  q. walking around brooklyn, i see many varieties of trees. what i do not see are evergreens. why is that?  a. wrong shape, mostly.  ''you probably don't see as many because they aren't really appropriate for street trees or for small brooklyn front gardens,'' said anne wong, the parks department's director of landscape management at prospect park in brooklyn. evergreens, she noted in an e-mail message, tend to be pyramid-shaped, with their widest part at the bottom -- not good for sidewalks, where clear space counts.  furthermore, conifers, or evergreens, are more northern species. ''many of those species don't do well here,'' ms. wong said. ''we do use various pines and some spruce.''  besides, frederick law olmsted, who designed prospect park with calvert vaux, didn't want evergreens on the long meadow. ''they are, however, used to help screen the city out on the perimeter areas,'' she wrote.  when trouble is underfoot  q. whenever i stumble on a cracked sidewalk, i wonder: whose responsibility is it to repair sidewalks, and how bad does a sidewalk have to be to qualify for repairs?  a. the city owns it, but you have to fix it.  according to the department of transportation, the city owns the sidewalks, but it is the responsibility of the property owner abutting a sidewalk to maintain it.  the ''trigger'' for a violation is a half-inch rise between two slabs of sidewalk, or a one-inch horizontal gap between two slabs. you can report violations by calling 311.  michael pollak  f. y. i. e-mail: fyi@nytimes.com  