the curse of geography in the '08 race   viewed though a contemporary lens, the guy born in the church parsonage that now sits across the street from a dunkin' donuts on bloomfield avenue would face a few problems if he were running for president.  there's his jackie gleason physique. the admission that he fathered a child out of wedlock. the history of democratic futility (republicans had been in office for 24 years when he first ran). the propensity for failing to please his party's powerful populist wing. and worst of all was a double-whammy of geography: he was born in new jersey and became the democratic governor of new york.  a visit to the birthplace of grover cleveland, the only president born in new jersey, might not provide many definitive clues on american politics, but it's not a bad place to ponder a simple question.  at a time when candidates from the northeast are inexplicably falling over one another to run, can anyone from this part of the world really expect to be elected president these days? and the answer almost certainly is: only if he (or she) can overcome a lot of regional baggage, and perhaps if a few lessons are learned from cleveland.  once upon a time, we elected lots of presidents from the nation's chilly climes. from millard fillmore (lock township, n.y.) in 1850 to franklin d. roosevelt (hyde park, n.y.) in 1944, all except andrew johnson (who wasn't even elected and was impeached) were born or made their name in the northeast or midwest.  but the democrats haven't elected a president without a southerner on the ticket since f.d.r. the republicans have become a wholly owned subsidiary of southern and western conservatives.  so for all the local politicians either running, thinking of running, or getting sage murmurs from the great mentioner -- among them senator hillary rodham clinton, former mayor rudolph w. giuliani, senator christopher j. dodd of connecticut, gov. george e. pataki, mayor michael r. bloomberg -- there's not much in a half century of history (or the math of the electoral college) to provide a lot of comfort.  ''we suffer in the rest of the country as the seat of american secularism,'' said ross k. baker, a political science professor at rutgers university. ''and all the wrong images tend to get reinforced, like john kerry windsurfing off nantucket. the northeast should do better with democrats in control of congress, but as far as presidential politics, i don't think that's a very fruitful orchard if you're from the northeast.''  so while ronald reagan and george w. bush could, at least as candidates, evoke images of plain-spoken westerners whose idea of a swell time was going out and clearing brush, to succeed from the northeast, you first have to make it clear you're not really one of them. (that would be us).  that could work for mr. giuliani (a 9/11 tough guy, not an effete easterner), or mrs. clinton (illinois? arkansas? who knows where she's from?) were it not for all the other land mines still out there for both of them.  of course, it's possible that mr. bush's subterranean poll numbers could pave the way for a candidate who's the un-bush. but recent history suggests that republicans have been much better at creating anti-models than democrats have been. even if mr. bush ends up being judged a flop, that would not automatically discredit other plain-spoken guys hacking at mesquite.  which brings us back to cleveland, who in four years went from democratic mayor of buffalo to democratic governor of new york to democratic president. these days, a less likely political progression is hard to imagine. cleveland, of course, has a special role in history as the only president elected to nonconsecutive terms, in 1884 and 1892.  historians view him as a fairly successful president, not a giant but probably in the upper third. his main strength was a perceived ability to stand up to special interests and his own party on issues like high tariffs and maintaining the gold standard. cleveland's signature quotation was ''what's the use of being elected or re-elected unless you stand for something?''  maybe this is the year when a candidate can break the northeastern curse: republicans might win, but can't get the party's nomination; democrats can get the nomination, but can't win.  the ultimate sign that the regional worm has turned would be another president from new jersey. (the only other, sort of, was woodrow wilson, who was president of princeton and governor of new jersey, but was born in virginia).  gov. jon s. corzine may dream, but short of a fiscal miracle, the best-positioned candidate might be someone running against the state's image (hypothetically, someone like united states attorney christopher j. christie) or apart from it (equally hypothetically, mayor cory a. booker of newark). don't hold your breath.  ''stereotypes are unfair,'' said david p. rebovich, a political scientist at rider university. ''but, speaking as a lifelong new jerseyian, people think of new jersey and they think of political corruption and the sopranos. the general reaction in the south and midwest to voting for a guy from new jersey would be, ''give me a break. why?''  our towns e-mail: peappl@nytimes.com  correction:  february 2, 2007, friday  the our towns column on sunday, about the chances of a candidate from the northeast being elected president, referred imprecisely to millard fillmore, the first in an almost unbroken line of presidents, from 1850 to 1944, who were either born or made their name in the northeast or midwest. fillmore, then the vice president, ascended to the presidency when zachary taylor died in office; fillmore was not elected president. (two other presidents during that time span -- andrew johnson and chester a. arthur -- also took office upon the death of the incumbent, not by election.)  