saudi king invites palestinian factions to talks in mecca   king abdullah of saudi arabia called sunday on the rival palestinian factions to hold emergency talks in the holy city of mecca in the latest bid to halt some of the worst ever palestinian internal fighting.  as the two main factions, hamas and fatah, waged a fourth straight day of fighting in the gaza strip, leaders from both groups said they would take up the invitation by the saudi monarch, though no date was set.  ''i call on my brothers, the palestinian people, represented by their leaders, to put an immediate end to this tragedy and to abide by righteousness,'' the king said in an announcement carried by the official saudi press agency.  saudi arabia does not have a tradition of such direct involvement in palestinian affairs. but as one of the most important figures in the arab world the king, by his decision to hold the talks in mecca, could increase the pressure on the palestinian leaders to find a compromise.  however, efforts by other arab states have failed to stop the bloodshed. egypt has been acting as a go-between for months, and earlier this month, syria organized talks between mahmoud abbas, the palestinian president and leader of the fatah faction, and khaled meshal, the political leader in exile of the islamic militant faction hamas. but no breakthrough was achieved.  the feud between the factions has grown increasingly bitter since hamas, the radical islamic group, won parliamentary elections a year ago, unseating fatah, the dominant palestinian political movement for decades. hamas controls the cabinet and the legislature, but as president, mr. abbas has a range of powers, and many members of the security forces remain loyal to fatah.  in gaza on sunday, prime minister ismail haniya, of hamas, made a renewed plea to halt the fighting, but to no avail.  ''we call on all the palestinian people to protect national unity, to make the language of dialogue and reason prevail, to withdraw weapons from the streets,'' mr. haniya told an emergency session of the palestinian cabinet in gaza city.  gunmen from the two sides exchanged fire throughout the day in several gaza city neighborhoods, prompting residents in some of the hardest-hit areas to flee to the homes of relatives in less volatile areas.  a bomb exploded outside the front door of a home belonging to a bodyguard for muhammad dahlan, a senior fatah figure and an ally of mr. abbas. no one was hurt in the blast.  also, fatah blamed hamas for mortar and antitank rounds that were fired at the police headquarters in gaza city, which is controlled by fatah.  many shops were closed, and the streets were largely empty after the factions put up concrete barriers to block some roads. both hamas and fatah said members of their own group had been kidnapped by the other side, a tactic that has become common, though many of those seized are later released unharmed.  the latest deaths included a 12-year-old boy fatally shot late saturday, three hamas fighters killed sunday and one fatah fighter who died of injuries sustained previously, palestinian hospital officials said.  the violence spread to nablus, the largest city in the west bank, where several hamas members were seized in separate kidnappings, one at the city's education ministry and another at a bank, palestinian security officials said. most were later released.  the clashes, which have claimed more than 20 lives and wounded dozens since erupting on thursday, also forced a breakdown in the latest round of talks to form a unity government.  the palestinian factions have battled periodically in recent years, and there was a sharp rise in tensions after hamas defeated fatah in parliamentary elections a year ago.  months of negotiations failed to produce a unity government, and the internecine violence became an almost daily event in december. after a period of relative calm earlier this month, the gun battles broke out again this past week. more than 50 palestinians have been killed in gaza over the past two months, and there have also been sporadic clashes in the west bank.  mr. abbas has said on several occasions that he will propose early elections if the factions cannot reach agreement on a unity government. but holding elections would be extremely difficult at a time when the palestinian authority is broke and political tensions are boiling over.  while israel supports mr. abbas and refuses to deal with hamas, israel has sought to avoid direct involvement in the internal palestinian fighting. however, some israeli politicians are warning that the palestinian infighting could create problems for israel.  ''we cannot allow anarchy such as this, because in the end what will come out of this could act as a boomerang on us,'' zeev boim, a cabinet minister, told israeli radio.  in israeli politics, the cabinet approved the country's first muslim arab minister, ghaleb majadle, who said he would seek to help arab citizens identify more with the state.  ''the first step has been taken and this has given israeli arabs a feeling of belonging,'' mr. majadle, who will be a minister without a specific portfolio, said on army radio.  the center-left labor party nominated him for a cabinet post after one of its members quit the government. some right-wing politicians have spoken out against bringing an muslim arab into the cabinet, but mr. majadle won overwhelming approval in a cabinet vote on sunday.  israeli arabs account for about 1.2 million of israel's seven million people.  