coming-of-rage   john osborne  the many lives of the angry young man.  by john heilpern.  illustrated. 527 pp. alfred a. knopf. $35.  the year 1956 will be remembered in british history mainly for two events, both fatal in their different ways. in the autumn, anglo-french forces invaded and briefly occupied egypt in the debacle known as the suez crisis, which called time on british imperialism and saw off a prime minister. a few months earlier, at the royal court theater on the edge of chelsea, john osborne's ''look back in anger'' had its first performance. osborne was 26, a member of the generation that would oppose suez, and the attitudes of his first major play and the astonishingly irreverent and fluent invective of its young protagonist, jimmy porter, captured a disenchantment in postwar english life that had never been seen on stage before. it shattered the well-bred conventions of english theater -- to a large extent killed them off -- and in the wider world became a symbolic text for people who wanted a different kind of britain; one that, for example, would not have bombed suez. osborne, thanks to an alert theater press office, became the first ''angry young man.'' kenneth tynan wrote famously in his review, ''i doubt if i could love anyone who did not wish to see 'look back in anger.' '' mary mccarthy, the play's early american champion, compared jimmy porter to hamlet, who had also ''declared war upon a rotten society.'' arthur miller thought it the only modern british play worth seeing.  on the london stage in 1956, it was quite easy to be mistaken for a political radical. those were the days when plays still needed to be submitted to an antique monarchical institution, the lord chamberlain, for censorship and approval. outside a few comic or sentimental characterizations, the contemporary working classes were rarely depicted. typical stage architecture might be the inside of a country house, or a balcony overlooking the mediterranean. no character in ''look back in anger'' would have been recognized as working class by any member of it -- jimmy porter's off-stage job at a candy stall was entirely unconvincing -- but the most prominent feature on the set was an everyday household item, an ironing board, and it was frequently used for actual ironing by mrs. porter. in the era of noël coward and terence rattigan, where the most useful stage furniture was usually a cocktail cabinet, the sight was remarkable.  that and jimmy's vituperation of the repressed, torpid, humbugging nature of english life (especially english womanhood, though that wasn't generally noticed or condemned at the time) were enough to give ''look back'' a ''political'' reputation that now looks to be a category mistake. osborne wasn't a radical with an analysis, never mind a program for change. his play is almost pure autobiography, and as john heilpern makes clear in his biography, the anger in it is so deeply personal, with such singular causes, as to make nonsense of it as politics.  osborne wrote the play in a month, less than a year after his first marriage had ended bitterly. the onstage marriage of jimmy and alison porter faithfully reproduces the histrionics of osborne's marriage to the actress pamela lane. the script incorporates one of lane's letters, and the game of ''squirrels and bears,'' whose feyness never ceases to embarrass audiences, is the same playfulness that osborne and his wife devised to relieve their mutual hatred by escaping into a second childhood.  more important is osborne's father, to whom the play is dedicated. in the play, he becomes a victim of the spanish civil war, whom 10-year-old jimmy watched die from his wounds at home in england. (''you see, i learnt at an early age what it was to be angry -- angry and helpless.'') the 10-year-old osborne had also watched his father die, though more prosaically of tuberculosis. by using osborne's private notebooks, heilpern establishes beyond reasonable doubt that osborne thought of this death and that of his only sibling, an older sister -- also from tuberculosis, before osborne could remember her -- as the most formative events in his life and work.  being dead, and therefore idealized and uncomplicated, osborne's father and sister set a standard that few people in his life ever lived up to. osborne detested and ridiculed his long-surviving mother, a london barmaid whom he would often bring along to smart parties for comic effect (''a year in which my mother died can't be all bad,'' he wrote in 1983). wives came and went. after pamela lane came the actress mary ure and then the writer penelope gilliatt and then another actress, jill bennett. only with his fifth wife, the critic helen dawson, was the experience prolonged and agreeable. osborne married the first four before he was 40 and only lane reached the age of 65. when he heard of bennett's suicide in 1990, he hastily revised a volume of autobiography to include the wish that he could stand over her open coffin and ''drop a good, large mess in her eye.''  heilpern knew osborne slightly and this book was authorized by his widow, who died in 2004. it is, insofar as such a thing is possible, a sympathetic biography of an unsympathetic man. heilpern supplies plenty of ghastly detail, but does his best to balance it with evidence of osborne's financial generosity, shy charm, frequent depressions and underlying terror (''i was born with a sense of loss, a feeling of things withheld and banished''). even so, it's hard to reach any other conclusion than that osborne was inexcusably cruel to people in general, and criminally so to those who may have imagined they had some claim to his friendship and love. put simply, he was awful: a poor friend, a bad son and husband, a worse father. nolan, his daughter by gilliatt, came to stay with him when her mother was no longer considered fit to take care of her. four years later, when she was 16, osborne expelled her from the house after some ordinary adolescent behavior, cancelling her school fees and her bank account. they never spoke again. the long letter he wrote to her is lyrical in its high-flown damnation of her character (''the grasping ingrate you undoubtedly are''), almost as though osborne was enjoying the role of a villainous stepfather in a victorian melodrama.  the trouble lay in his gift for invective. his four best plays -- ''look back in anger,'' ''the entertainer,'' ''luther,'' ''inadmissable evidence'' -- all depend on a central character whose anger, grief and ridicule can't be shut up. similarly in life, osborne didn't know where to stop. he enjoyed articulating grievance and seized any excuse to manufacture it. he had a vicious self-pity. in the words of the director peter hall, ''when he had a pen in his hand it was like giving a kid a machine gun.'' to hall (and several others) he was ''a charmer, a sweetheart'' as well as ''a bastard and a liar'' and worse.  in the 1950s and '60s he was also easily britain's best-known playwright. he grew rich -- as co-producer and oscar-winning screenwriter of tony richardson's ''tom jones'' (1963), he earned more money than he knew what to do with. he bought a house in belgravia and a bentley, employed secretaries, servants and chauffeurs. by the 1970s, he was swallowing one bottle of vodka and a couple of bottles of wine every day, along with unreckonable amounts of champagne and codeine and amphetamine. he never again wrote anything so good or popular as the four plays mentioned above, the last of them finished in 1964, and spent his last years in a big house near the hilly welsh border, struggling with bad health and debts.  he died just after his 65th birthday, on christmas eve 1994, and was buried in his turnbull & asser smoking jacket with his old copy of ''hamlet'' stuffed in a pocket. (it had every part crossed out except hamlet's.) he died a club man, an anglican, a country gentleman, a collector of teddy bears. not the world he was born into, or that which his early work seemed to inveigh against, but a vanishing world that osborne identified as england. only those who had missed the nostalgia in ''look back in anger'' saw him as a sellout. as jimmy porter says of the remnants of edwardian england in 1956, ''if you've no world of your own, it's rather pleasant to regret the passing of someone else's.''  ian jack is the editor of granta.  