barbaro faces a new peril after surgery   barbaro's long, difficult convalescence has taken a significant turn for the worse after a risky operation was performed on his shattered right hind leg.  the leg had been healing properly for months and had given veterinarians little cause for concern. but he developed a ''deep abscess'' in the right hind foot last week, according to a statement issued yesterday by the university of pennsylvania's new bolton center in kennett square, pa.  his doctors said their only option was to put a skeleton of pins, bars and a plate around his right leg to take all the weight off the fragile bone structure, which is already held together with a matrix of screws.  the surgery was performed saturday at the george d. widener hospital for large animals by dr. dean richardson. barbaro, winner of the kentucky derby, has resided in intensive care there since may 20, when he shattered the leg in the opening yards of the preakness stakes.  richardson acknowledged that allowing the pins across the cannon bone to bear weight carries ''significant risk.''  ''the major risk of the external skeletal fixation device is that the bone bearing the weight can fracture,'' richardson said in the statement. ''we believed it was our only option, given the worsening of the right hind foot problem. unfortunately, we felt we needed to take this risk because this approach offered our only hope of keeping barbaro acceptably comfortable.''  he also expressed concern about the potential for problems in barbaro's front feet. if laminitis, an often-fatal disease caused by uneven weight distribution, were to develop, it could put barbaro in excruciating pain and threaten his life.  laminitis was discovered in his left hind foot in july, and richardson removed 80 percent of his left hind hoof; it takes about a year to regrow a hoof after such a procedure. after weeks of smooth recovery and steady regrowth, barbaro had his first significant setback earlier this month, and richardson removed damaged tissue from his left heel.  barbaro's latest problems arose last week, when he showed discomfort in his right leg. richardson said he tried several other treatments before performing surgery.  ''it is not laminitis, but the undermining of the sole and part of the lateral heel region are potentially just as serious,'' richardson said. ''we attempted to manage the right hind foot in a cast and then in a custom fabricated brace, but it was impossible to have access to the foot for treatment as well as acceptable stability and comfort.''  barbaro's owners, roy and gretchen jackson, did not return telephone calls for comment yesterday. barbaro's trainer, michael matz, said that he spoke to richardson yesterday about barbaro's condition.  ''he told me that he had a good night,'' matz said by telephone from florida, where he has horses running at gulfstream park.  in his statement, richardson said barbaro had a ''perfect recovery'' from the operation and was using a sling put in his stall to keep weight off his legs.  ''remarkably, his attitude and appetite were excellent,'' richardson said.  the jacksons have spent tens of thousands of dollars on barbaro's recovery in the hope that he can resume the life of a normal, pain-free horse in the pasture. they have instructed richardson to take any measures necessary to save barbaro as long as he is comfortable and demonstrates a will to live.  richardson and the jacksons have acknowledged that if barbaro is to recover he will have to overcome many setbacks over a long period of time. richardson re-emphasized his and the owners' commitment to barbaro.  ''we will continue to treat barbaro aggressively as long as he remains bright, alert and eating,'' he said. ''this is another significant setback that exemplifies how complex his medical situation remains because both hind limbs have major problems.''  horse racing  