serial child molester receives maximum term in california   a man who the authorities said had sexually abused hundreds of young boys in several states was sentenced monday in a california courtroom to 152 years to life in prison for molesting two 12-year-olds.  the man, dean arthur schwartzmiller, 65, was convicted by a santa clara county jury last year for sexually abusing the two boys at his san jose home from 2002 to 2005. on monday in san jose, he was given the maximum penalty for the 11 felony charges of child molestation and one misdemeanor charge of possessing child pornography.  the authorities have labeled mr. schwartzmiller, a former handyman, one of the ''most prolific child molesters'' in united states history.  at the time of his arrest in may 2005, a police search of his home led to the discovery of written accounts describing his sexual exploits with boys ranging in age from 8 to 18, some dating back decades. the manuscripts included at least seven spiral notebooks with 1,500 pages of log entries detailing the sexual acts he said he had performed on hundreds of boys.  ''if anyone deserved the maximum sentence, it was mr. schwartzmiller,'' said a santa clara county prosecutor, steven fein, who tried the case.  mr. schwartzmiller, who represented himself during most of the three-week trial, has already filed an appeal in the santa clara county superior court, said a defense lawyer who handled the sentencing proceedings. the lawyer, melinda hall, a santa clara county public defender, said the sentence should have been no more than 30 years to life.  ''the sentence wasn't unexpected,'' ms. hall said, ''but i don't know if it will survive on appeal.''  ms. hall said the united states supreme court on jan. 22 ruled on a california case that might favor mr. schwartzmiller on appeal. the court ruled that california's sentencing laws, which allow judges to weigh aggravating factors in setting a sentence, were unconstitutional. the court said that if additional factors were considered, a jury must first review them.  mr. fein said he remained confident that mr. schwartzmiller, who was convicted in several other states but eventually freed, would spend the rest of his life in prison. mr. fein said both the police and legal investigators were able to confirm a large number of the sexual abuses described in mr. schwartzmiller's detailed logbooks, which had category headings like ''blond boys'' and ''boys who just cried.''  mr. schwartzmiller argued that the entries were fiction.  the final tally of victims, mr. fein said, included 250 boys molested in idaho, oregon and several other states over the last 35 years.  in addition to the two boys in this case, six other former victims, now in their late 20s to late 50s, traveled to california to face their abuser in court.  mr. fein said it was difficult to listen to the testimony because mr. schwartzmiller went into ''excruciating detail'' during his cross-examination of the witnesses.  ''it was almost hard to sit through,'' mr. fein said. ''it was clear they were being victimized all over again.''  