in iowa, clinton tells crowd she is ready for battle   senator hillary rodham clinton began her presidential campaign road show on saturday by making an appeal along gender lines, telling a crowd of 2,800 iowans that she faced a ''double standard'' as a female candidate, yet hoped voters would look past ''stories about my clothes and hair'' to help her make history.  yet mrs. clinton also portrayed herself as something of a bare-knuckled fighter on her inaugural trip as a candidate to iowa, the first of the first-in-the-nation nominating caucuses. speaking to another group of democrats on saturday, she said she had learned from the failed 2004 presidential campaign of senator john kerry of massachusetts that a candidate always had to respond to attacks.  ''when you're attacked, you have to deck your opponents,'' mrs. clinton said to some laughter and applause. ''you can count on me to stand my ground and fight back.''  and after only touching on the iraq war for most of the day -- only a couple of iowans brought it up with her -- mrs. clinton criticized the bush administration's war policy during a party at a home in cedar rapids saturday night, seeking to show her tougher side and reach out to antiwar democrats.  ''i know how difficult the last six years have been, particularly because of this president's foreign policy, his preemptive war in iraq, his management of the war and his stubborn refusal to change course,'' she said. ''we have to get the balance right between defending our country and deterring those who wish us ill, as they still do, and ending the alienation toward us in the rest of the world.''  ''i know there are people who either say or wonder, would we ever elect a woman president? and i don't think we'll know until we try -- and i'm going to try, and i'm going to try with your help,'' mrs. clinton said to some of her loudest applause. ''we are good at breaking barriers and going places where no one has gone before.''  ''there will be more stories about my clothes and hair than some of the people running against me,'' she said.  ''i'm going to be asking people to vote for me based on my entire life and experience,'' said mrs. clinton, who walked around a stage surrounded by people, with a microphone affixed to the lapel of her pantsuit. ''the fact that i'm a woman, the fact that i'm a mom, is part of who i am.''  to which a woman in the audience shouted, ''you go, girl!''  in this, the first of what her advisers said would be many visits to iowa, she sought to re-introduce herself as a native midwesterner with a down-home political message that was emblazoned on colorful banners: ''let the conversation begin!''  ''i want to have this as a one-on-one conversation: just you and me,'' she said, and after pausing a beat, added, ''and several hundreds of national press.''  she bemoaned skyrocketing pay for corporate chief executives, stagnant wages and the rising costs of health care, education and energy. she also said she wanted tougher trade agreements that protected the worker's place in the economy.  ''there's something wrong when you have more bankruptcies in america last year than college graduates,'' she said.  the only real bump in the day came when msnbc broadcast mrs. clinton singing the national anthem before the town hall-style meeting began; her voice was, like that of many americans, off-key, and the moment was quickly captured for posterity on youtube.  mrs. clinton was introduced by representative leonard l. boswell, who drew an ovation when he called her ''a great first lady.'' he said that the day had meaning for women in his family and, surely, many women in the audience.  ''you can do it -- you can do it,'' mr. boswell said.  several women asked mrs. clinton about the challenges of running and winning as a woman and about the roles that women play in society.  there was only one question from an audience member about iraq, and it was a benign inquiry about her 2002 vote authorizing military action, which remains controversial with many liberals. yet at an earlier, smaller event with democrats, she said she took responsibility for her vote, but also said the president misused the authority to go to war. and at the party at the cedar rapids home on saturday night, she ripped mr. bush's handling of the war and said one problem in the white house was that no one had challenged him or other leaders over the war and other policies.  mrs. clinton ended up focusing on her support for veterans' benefits and health care.  most of the people who turned out wore ''hillary'' buttons or held campaign signs, and several said in interviews that they were true believers in the clinton candidacy.  ''i've been a longtime fan of hillary; i used to canvass for environmental causes, and i know she's a friend of the new york environment,'' said jessica anderson of centerville, iowa.  ms. anderson said she was not certain that mrs. clinton could win, adding that some democrats were skeptical that a woman could handle the pressure of being commander in chief.  ''if she doesn't get elected, it's because of sexism -- that's it,'' ms. anderson said.  mrs. clinton spent saturday morning attending the iowa democratic party's central committee meeting. she spoke there about the lessons from mr. kerry's campaign; in response to other questions, she reiterated her support for repealing the ''don't ask, don't tell'' policy on gay men and lesbians in the military enacted during her husband's administration.  she also said thousands of patriotic americans had been discharged. ''that to me does not make sense,'' she said.  on friday night, mrs. clinton had dinner in des moines at the home of a leading democrat, andrea mcguire, and was joined by several other influential party members: mr. boswell; the state senate democratic leader, michael e. gronstal; and bonnie campbell, the former state attorney general, among others.  mrs. clinton had not visited iowa since 2003, a calculated decision, her advisers said, to deny the news media one more reason to write about any presidential bid. early polls have shown her trailing john edwards, the former senator of north carolina, senator barack obama of illinois and tom vilsack, the former governor of iowa, each of whom have campaigned here recently.  