scalia dons the robes of a scholar for a day   antonin scalia, the first united states supreme court justice to speak at iona college, said on tuesday that he considered his approach to the law to be neither liberal nor conservative, but that he saw himself as ''one of a small group of scholars known as originalists.''  ''there are a few of us around,'' justice scalia said. ''originalism used to be orthodoxy, because the constitution doesn't change. it's the rock to which society is anchored.''  most judges, he said, consider the constitution a living document whose interpretation ''morphs'' along with societal changes. he argued, however, that ''the constitution is not a living organism'' but a legal document.  ''it says some things and doesn't say others,'' he said.  justice scalia appeared to relish saying that his approach cannot be labeled liberal or conservative.  ''do you think i know what evolving standards of decency are?'' he said. ''i'm afraid to ask. i live in a marble palace within the beltway. let congress decide.'' in his view, ''it is illegitimate to have the judges of the supreme court decide, since the court is a committee of lawyers,'' he said.  in describing a case in which one party was named gore, justice scalia demonstrated the wit and bluntness for which he is well known. he quickly explained that the case did not involve the former vice president, saying that ''one al gore case was enough.''  when asked about bush v. gore, the case that decided the 2000 presidential election, justice scalia said it was time for people to ''get over it.'' he explained that the court's 5-to-4 decision to end the recount in florida came down to upholding the constitution's right to equal protection and prohibiting what the majority viewed as a standardless recount.  alexander eodice, the dean of the college's school of arts and science, said that persuading justice scalia to take part in the college's visiting scholar program was relatively easy.  ''i simply wrote him a letter asking, and he graciously accepted and supplied us with available dates,'' mr. eodice said. ''i wasn't surprised that he would speak, but was surprised that he could fit us into his calendar.''  the 700 people in the audience comprised a mix of faculty, alumni and county politicians like district attorney janet difiore and the mayor of new rochelle, noam bramson, along with a smattering of students who had just returned after winter break.  isaac gilwit, a junior, said that ''although justice scalia's originalist views initially threw me for a loop, i think that more should follow his approach.''  ''he made it clear it's not about whether you're conservative or liberal, but it's about interpreting the constitution as it was written,'' mr. gilwit said. ''the example that struck me was that he voted that flag burning, which he was opposed to, was constitutional.''  noticed  