delight in science, then and now   growing up, i loved math and science. my father was a history professor who became a college administrator. he encouraged me to go for the biggest challenge.  my family moved around a lot. i had a brother who was two years older and a much younger sister and brother. when my older brother was 8 and i was 6, we lived in nebraska. we were always catching frogs in a little creek about a mile and a half from our house. we'd take cutlery from the kitchen and pins from my mother's sewing box and dissect them.  several years later we got it in our heads that we were going to build a bicycle built for two. we got used bicycles, and we took them apart, taking out the extra wheel and putting the two handlebars together. it worked, and we rode around on it for about a year.  we moved to miami when my father got a job at florida international university. it was culture shock for me. we had lived in fairly small communities in the midwest. i remember not feeling as safe. i became more focused on my studies. if i got an a- i thought i had failed.  i had my daughter when i was 19. i was attending miami-dade community college at the time and took off for one quarter before returning to school. my husband was also a student.  my mother was a real women's libber who said, ''don't give up your career.'' i remember sitting down and saying that this was not going to slow me down. whenever i was faced with a decision, i always chose education.  when i started at florida international university, i would bring my daughter to class in a special backpack. i had really great teachers who would let me. i decided to major in chemistry.  perhaps i was one of the fortunate few who encountered very little, if any, discrimination. i decided to pursue graduate work at iowa state and study with a professor named tom barton. i only knew him by reputation and the recommendation of my undergraduate chemistry professor. i had a strong interest in silicon chemistry. he treated men and women equally, by setting very high standards and demanding a high level of perseverance.  when i completed my degree, dow corning, the world leader in silicon chemistry, was a natural choice for me. the company hired my husband, gary, and me as a dual-career couple and supported our decision to pursue postdoctoral studies in france for about a year in 1982.  the three of us (my daughter was 9) lived in a studio apartment probably a 20-minute drive to campus and did quite a bit of socializing. we met a lady from provence who took us to visit her grandparents. it was the first time they had spoken to americans since world war ii. at dow corning i was the typical ph.d. chemist and did basic research creating new molecules. i was asked by the research director to become a leader in electronics. i thought i must have done something wrong to leave research and go into something else. i considered it a punishment.  in 1993 i was put in charge of leading women's health at the time of the controversy about the safety of silicone breast implants. i had a combination of understanding about business, health care and the life sciences, and i could communicate well.  when i appeared in court to testify, i was coming in as a scientist and felt the science was very clear and would prevail at the end of the day. junk science was getting into the courtroom. i was amazed at what i saw. at the end of the day i would leave the courtroom shaking my head.  my daughter (obviously, being raised by two ph.d. chemists) understood the relevance of science in our lives. still, the day she walked out the door to attend michigan state university she told us both: ''i'm not interested in a science degree; that's not for me. i want to do something else.'' she got a business management degree with a specialty in hospitality management.  she is making sure her own children learn about math and science. my grandson is 6 and my granddaughter is 4. my daughter and i have discussed experiments they ran during christmas. one dissolved chicken bones in lemon juice. so we might just get another scientist in the family yet.  stephanie burns  chief executive and president, dow corning  birth date  jan. 24, 1955  birthplace  torrington, wyo.  recently read  ''i feel bad about my neck: and other thoughts on being a woman'' by nora ephron  office space: the boss  