chinese children and adoption   to the editor:  re ''the mystery of the chinese baby shortage,'' by beth nonte russell (op-ed, jan. 23):  when i visited wanxian, china, in the fall of 2005, i talked to local chinese and visited an orphanage. one couple i spoke with had been relocated from the banks of the yangtze river with their village and were happy and thriving with the relocation. they approved of the one-child policy, and with a son in college were now financially able to adopt a little girl.  in other parts of china, i discovered that families were financially better off than they were when i visited seven years earlier, and they also supported the one-child policy and were adopting the little girls.  local chinese have been embarrassed by the adoption of children by other countries, and take pride in stemming that activity and keeping little girls in china, where they strongly feel they belong.  carole hite welch  hershey, pa., jan. 23, 2007  to the editor:  in ''the mystery of the chinese baby shortage,'' beth nonte russell asserts that the one-child policy is inhumane, and if revoked, all the suffering and abandonment would cease, resulting in the end of china's international adoption program.  i am the coordinator of a china adoption program. unfortunately, what ms. russell does not seem to consider is that china is a country with 1.3 billion people, and without population control, this booming economy would be overwhelmed by the need for jobs and food already difficult for some to procure within an even larger population.  while it is irrefutable that the one-child policy has resulted in thousands of abandoned children, many of them have found loving, supportive homes. without the policy, these very same children would likely face starvation and lives of little potential. making reproduction a social decision rather than an individual one has china doing what is best for its nation and people.  andrea l. albright  st. paul, jan. 24, 2007  to the editor:  beth nonte russell places most of the blame for china's gender gap on the one-child policy, and the chinese government itself has conceded that the policy has worsened the shortage of females. the suggestion to scrap the policy, however, does not seem to address the root of the problem: the cultural preference for male children.  i find it naïve to assume that eliminating the one-child policy will significantly reduce the incidence of female infanticide short of major cultural changes, and even if it does, there will be that many more unwanted female infants born who will likely not receive the same degree of nurturing and attention as their male counterparts.  i offer no suggestions as to how to transform a society's cultural beliefs regarding the ''value'' of female children, but short of such a transformation, any revision to the one-child policy will be purely cosmetic.  brandon wilkening  bloomington, ind., jan. 24, 2007  