army coach, citing a lack of energy, retires   bobby ross, who improved army's football program in his three years as the coach but could not produce a winning season, retired yesterday at 70. he will be succeeded by stan brock, an n.f.l. offensive lineman for 16 years and ross's offensive line coach at army.  in his three seasons, ross's teams finished 2-9, 4-7 and 3-9. they lost every year to navy but became more competitive. eight weeks ago, against a navy team bound for a bowl game, army was in contention until the fourth quarter, when it gave up three scores in less than three and a half minutes and lost, 26-14.  ''i think there's a point in time when you feel like it's your time to retire, and i think i've reached that time,'' ross said. ''i think there is an issue of having a certain degree of energy, which i feel is very important for anyone leading a college football program. i feel that i was lacking in that area.''  kevin anderson, army's athletic director, said he had a clue that ross would retire. at a hastily called news conference in west point, n.y., anderson said: ''he came back from a recruiting trip and had to go home one day because he was ill. he had coached 40 years, and before last week he had spent only one day home because he was sick. he has no immediate health issues.''  before coaching at army, ross was 94-76-2 in 15 years as the coach at the citadel (1973-77), maryland (1982-86) and georgia tech (1987-91). his 1990 georgia tech team shared the national championship with colorado.  his teams were 77-68 in his eight and a half seasons as an n.f.l. coach with the san diego chargers (1992-96) and the detroit lions (1997-2000), and his 1994 chargers reached the super bowl.  anderson noted that ross had taken over an army team that had lost its previous 15 games.  ''when he arrived, the football program was in very bad shape,'' anderson said. ''he leaves this program in much better shape than when he came here. he feels he has the program where he wants it now. it was hard for him to walk away and not see the program bear the fruit.''  brock, 48, played 13 seasons (1980-92) for the new orleans saints and 3 (1993-95) for the chargers. he was a head coach in the arena football league for four and a half years.  brock spoke of the mixed emotions of getting a new job while seeing his mentor depart.  ''i don't want him to leave because you want to continue to be around him,'' brock said. ''he can teach you about life, not just coaching football.''  brock said he would essentially retain ross's offensive and defensive strategies. the main difference?  ''there will be a 6-foot-6 guy as head coach,'' he said.  when ross took the army job after three years away from coaching, he said: ''you put your entire life into it. it's such a strong commitment, not an easy thing to change. it's part of you. you get tired walking the dog. i've got a lot of energy. you never stop being a coach.''  yesterday, he did.  college football  