cushy flights and fancy victuals when the nets go on the road   the perks of flying charter for the nets extend beyond the cozy seats and the flexible schedule.  in an era of commercial airline cutbacks that can make it difficult to get so much as a package of peanuts on a transcontinental flight, the nets enjoy the likes of gourmet chinese food, steak or lobster every time they fly.  the food culture around the n.b.a. can be a glamorous one. with the nets, that culture is best represented by the food the players receive every time they travel.  each time they leave new jersey, the nets order food from the chinese bistro p. f. chang's or the steakhouse morton's to be served on the plane. when traveling from another city, they order from a local restaurant to satisfy their tastes.  ''i didn't expect the type of food that we have on there,'' said josh boone, a rookie power forward.  but even before they get to the plane, the nets have ample options. as a tradition, their rookies must buy food from popeyes for the team to eat on its way to the airport. the order is typically 50 pieces of chicken, more than 20 biscuits, about 7 large portions of fries and a few large portions of mashed potatoes. (it makes one wonder how these world-class athletes keep from becoming plump.)  jason collins, the team's starting power forward, also sometimes picks up an order of baja fresh for the entire team. collins is a regional spokesman for that mexican food chain.  if those options are not enough, every n.b.a. player receives an allowance of $105 a day for food when his team is on the road.  cliff robinson, the nets' 40-year-old power forward, remembered a time when the food options were less plentiful. during the preseason of his rookie year, 1989, teams took commercial flights, having to settle for the laymen's food portions. they began taking charter flights in the regular season, he said.  the evolving food culture seems to have spoiled robinson.  ''i'm just tired of morton's,'' he said of the restaurant, which has steaks ranging from $35 to $48.  some players are not overly impressed with the takeout.  asked what his favorite in-flight meal was, forward bostjan nachbar said, ''the stuff that i bring from home.''  off the glass  