in politics, the camera never blinks (or nods)   beyond its fulfillment of a constitutional requirement, the president's annual state of the union address has come to provide much pomp. it's a prime-time gala where washington's best and brightest gather for an evening in the media spotlight, and where the nation tunes in with varying degrees of interest, cynicism or boredom at the bloated spectacle of it all.  oh, sure, there's the actual speech itself. but generally speaking, the odds for climactic elements -- for truly earth-moving, unexpected locutions -- are so low as to be negligible.  copies of the speech are customarily distributed to members of the news media ahead of time -- on the condition, of course, that they not be published until after the president begins his delivery. but in the age of the internet, even that handshake agreement between the press and president has broken down: copies of the speech could be found at sites like the drudge report and thinkprogress.org well before president bush began his address shortly after 9 p.m. last tuesday.  ''we'll start respecting white house embargoes when they start telling the truth,'' wrote the editors at think progress.  it is perhaps no surprise, then, that web gremlins would chuckle as the cameras panned the chamber oscar-style last week and alighted on what appeared to be senator john s. mccain of arizona, a presumed candidate for the republican nomination for president, in an unguarded moment of slumber.  it is, perhaps, also no surprise in the age of youtube -- where unscripted video clips have become political molotov cocktails -- that a ''mccain sleeping'' snippet was uploaded to the internet and was being discussed and linked in short order.  whether the original intent was political sabotage or simple humor is hard to say, but either way the clip went straight for mr. mccain's achilles' heel: his age. he is now 70 years old. by 2008, if elected, he would be the oldest president to move into the white house.  so a video of the elderly statesman appearing to doze during the president's speech -- and particularly during a portion of the speech where terrorism was being discussed -- seemed to put questions of his fitness for office in stark relief.  and in that sense, the video brouhaha -- a short-lived and misguided brouhaha, considering that he wasn't sleeping after all -- constitutes one of the first ''macaca moments'' of the 2008 campaign. it is also a sign that mr. mccain -- and every candidate who has, or will, throw a hat into the ring -- will have a very, very long road ahead.  now, for those who have been living under a rock, it was former senator george allen of virginia who was caught on video last august referring to an opposition aide -- who was of indian descent -- as ''macaca,'' a racial slur obscure to many americans, but potent enough to have caused a media frenzy when the video hit the internet. mr. allen was not re-elected.  reasonable people can disagree on the extent to which that single incident was to blame for mr. allen's defeat, but there was no question in anyone's mind that the youtube culture -- in which every public moment can be clipped, cropped and distributed instantly across the globe by anyone at any time -- had changed the rules of the game. as with the broken embargo on the state of the union speech, there is no longer the default expectation that exposure can be managed. all bets are off.  the theory of mr. mccain's supposed nap got an early boost from tucker carlson of msnbc, who was blogging the speech live at hardblogger.msnbc.msn.com.  ''if you're mccain, who will be over 70 by 2008, you'll want to make doubly sure to demonstrate your alertness and vigor,'' mr. carlson wrote just after 10 p.m. tuesday. ''you definitely won't want to slump in your seat, out cold, when bush starts talking about iraq. and yet that's exactly what mccain did tonight, napping on camera for 10 agonizing seconds.''  on wednesday morning, the drudge report carried the headline ''mccain eyes wide shut during bush speech,'' along with a link to a ''sleepy senator john mccain'' video clip that had been uploaded to youtube (and is still available of this writing: snipurl.com/mccain). it shows mr. mccain in a straight-on shot, sitting in the crowded chamber, chin to chest, with eyes that appear to be closed.  david all, who runs the david all group, a washington firm focusing on developing new-media strategies for republican campaigns, theorized at his web site, davidallgroup.com, that the original uploader -- a user going by the sobriquet monzsca -- was not likely a political operative himself, but rather someone who simply thought the clip was funny. mr. all suggests, however, that others seeking to damage mr. mccain saw an opportunity.  ''though the clip was not created by an opposing campaign, it was probably identified by at least one of those campaigns as a tool to swipe at mccain to help make the argument that mccain is 'too old' to be president, and passed it along to drudge,'' mr. all wrote on thursday, in a deconstruction of the ''sleepy john'' affair.  ''whether he meant to or not, the youtube user created a video that went viral, amplified by a coveted drudge link,'' he wrote, ''and is now getting a lot of front page treatment on a popular web community, youtube.''  from drudge, the clip and the discussion bounced around the blog circuit (including the screens blog here at the times as well as my own times blog, the lede), as did a swell of countervailing evidence, which ultimately won the day: it seems that mr. mccain was, like just about everyone else in attendance that night, simply glancing down at his copy of the speech and reading along.  mr. all gives high praise to swift action by mccain operatives, who uploaded a separate youtube video showing a perky senator mccain applauding heartily during the speech (snipurl.com/hearty). they also pointed bloggers to links of a video montage -- prepared by the folks at the hotline's on call blog -- demonstrating that others who were gathered in the house chamber that night, while clearly reading something in their laps, also appeared to be napping if shot at some angles (snipurl.com/readclips).  it was good political gamesmanship, and the thrust and parry provide an object lesson in the power of internet video, particularly in the political arena. a candidate, an elected official, even a journalist who remains ignorant of this weapon -- how to handle it, how to know when it has been unleashed and from what direction -- proceeds at a certain peril.  of course, even one's best efforts at damage control may go unappreciated.  said one commenter at mr. all's site: ''asleep or not, mccain et al. forgot one of the maxims of modern politics: when cameras are in the room, keep your head up and smile.''  link by link  