nets end 5-game trip by making their point   everything the nets would like to be was wrapped into their 116-115 victory over the utah jazz on monday night.  a team with a dominant star player: vince carter scored 33 points, including the winning 3-pointer at the buzzer.  a team with a balanced supporting cast: eddie house had 19 points, and antoine wright and marcus williams added 12 each.  a team with resiliency: the nets fought their way back from 13 points down in the second quarter and from 4 down with less than a minute and a half to play.  and then there was the performance of jason kidd, the face of the franchise, who had 22 points, 10 assists and 6 rebounds.  the nets displayed those characteristics throughout their five-game western trip, even if they finished with a 2-3 record. perhaps that is why they seemed to be feeling confident as they headed back to new jersey early tuesday morning one game below .500 (22-23).  ''the big thing is that we're not going to quit,'' kidd said after monday night's game. ''we're going to play hard.''  if nothing else, this trip will be remembered because four of the five games were decided by a point. the nets were three defensive stops short of having a nine-game winning streak. the nets became the first team in n.b.a. history to have five of seven games decided by a point and only the fourth team to lose by a point three games in a row, according to the elias sports bureau.  they lost each of the first three games of the trip -- against the sacramento kings, the golden state warriors and the los angeles clippers -- by a point on their opponent's final shot.  in the fourth game, the nets played stellar defense against the denver nuggets' carmelo anthony and allen iverson, two of the league's top three scorers. the nets won that game, 112-102.  on monday night, the nets appeared to be out of it when they were down by 2 points with 5.9 seconds left and with the length of the court to go. but carter jogged the ball up the court, used a screen from center mikki moore and drilled the winning shot from about 10 feet beyond the 3-point line.  ''sometimes, what comes around goes around,'' nets coach lawrence frank said. ''and i think our guys deserve a great deal of credit for staying together and fighting the fight, so to speak, and not getting discouraged and not wilting and not letting circumstances determine their behavior.''  perhaps more than anyone else, carter seemed motivated by the nets' early struggles on the trip.  against the kings, he scored a season-low 8 points and missed two crucial free throws down the stretch. against the warriors, he fouled baron davis on a 3-pointer late in the game and was later called for charging. against the clippers, he left cuttino mobley open for the winning 3-pointer.  after each of those games, carter put much of the blame on himself and appeared uncharacteristically down.  but he made a renewed commitment to attacking the basket. in the final three games of the trip, carter averaged 35.3 points and shot 66.1 percent from the field. he also averaged 12 free-throw attempts a game, evidence of his aggressiveness in the paint.  ''at the beginning of the trip, each individual had to step their game up, and i felt i had to do the same,'' carter said monday night. ''i felt that in the first three games, regardless of points, i didn't deliver because we didn't win the game. i'm just glad i could do it for my team.''  carter is playing his best at a time when he is the subject of many trade rumors. although the nets' president, rod thorn, has said that players are worth more in trades when they are playing well, carter might be making him think twice about any such decision.  the nets also need carter more than ever because they are without small forward richard jefferson, who missed the trip because of ankle surgery that could keep him out until early march. jefferson was the nets' second-leading scorer before he was injured.  another good sign for the nets was that their bench helped lift the burden of not having jefferson. in each game, a different reserve stepped forward.  the rookie hassan adams took jefferson's place in the starting lineup for the first three games, and wright started the last two. both were called on for their defense, and they delivered.  wright was especially impressive. before starting saturday night's game against the nuggets, he had not played in 12 of the previous 19 games. but he scored 11 points and slowed anthony.  the reserve forward bostjan nachbar was averaging 17.7 points over a three-game stretch but became ill before the jazz game and did not play. so house stepped in with his 19-point effort.  moore had a fitting description for what these all-around contributions said about the nets: ''we're a team.''  pro basketball  