decrunched   bear naked  one of the sturdy clichés of contemporary brand-building is the importance of avoiding an image that's too ''crunchy'' or, worse, too ''granola-y.'' that's particularly true -- and maybe particularly challenging -- for businesses that want to transcend green or health-conscious consumer niches. but it's really challenging if what you're selling is, in point of fact, granola.  the founders of bear naked were conscious of this when they started selling their product in 2002. it was ''an enormous issue,'' brendan synnott says, and for the first two and half years of the brand's existence, he and kelly flatley didn't even put the word on their packaging. ''i used to hate being called granola,'' he says. ''you hear 'granola,' and you think hairy legs and birkenstocks. that was the reputation.'' flatley had less of a problem with the word ''granola,'' partly because she likes granola and partly because that's what bear naked is. in fact, it's the top-selling granola brand in natural-foods stores, as ranked by spins, a data collector, and the no. 2 branded manufacturer in conventional stores, including places like target and costco, according to bear naked, which gets its data from acnielsen.  flatley, a healthful-living, outdoorsy type, liked to make her own granola while in college and later began to sell it at some local markets in darien, conn., her hometown. around this time, she happened to reconnect with synnott, a high-school friend who had done stints at an austin software firm and on the staff of ''saturday night live.'' they decided to go into business together.  they did stick with the name bear naked, which had ''personality,'' as flatley puts it: ''a playful, youthful, vibrant, athletic company.'' personality was important, since, strictly speaking, there isn't a whole lot to granola. it's a mix of oats, nuts, honey and perhaps other stuff like dried fruit, all of it baked. even synnott describes bear naked as ''ingredients that you could basically get out of your cabinet.'' getting people to pay $5 for a 12-ounce bag of it seems like enough of a challenge without the hairy-leg problem.  part of their strategy to bring some ''innovation'' to the category involved packaging: apart from eliminating the word ''granola,'' they also banished actual bear imagery and any graphics that resembled oats or connoted nature (too crunchy) in favor of a more minimalist design featuring three slashes suggesting claw marks. instead of a box (granola is positioned as cereal in most stores), they opted for a stand-up pouch with a transparent panel, so people could see the ingredients and squeeze the package. and instead of health and nutrition boasts, the pouch text played up the youthful, ''active lifestyle''-loving founders. (that's even more true on the company's web site, which includes pictures of them in high school and in the great outdoors, along with repeated reminders that they are in their 20s.)  beyond that, their main marketing tactic has been in-store sampling. after a breakthrough placement in stew leonard's, a grocery chain based in norwalk, conn., in 2003, the brand found its way into whole foods and then into more mass-market retail stores across the country, and expanded into hot cereals. more recently, bear naked has tried new tactics, like a promotion with stonyfield farm yogurt, and is pondering radio ads, distribution in convenience stores and new product categories that can, synnott says, ''leverage that granola equity that we've built.''  granola equity! this bit of business-speak sounds like an oxymoron, but of course bear naked has been helped along the way by steadily growing consumer interest in more healthful foods. bridget goldschmidt, managing editor of progressive grocer, a trade publication, notes that the granola category has grown steadily over the past two years. kashi (owned by kellogg) and other brands with more overtly health-oriented images have also raised their profiles. but as goldshmidt points out, plenty of consumers seem particularly interested in things that are ''not just healthy, but that they think are going to be good-tasting and fun, youthful. not like old hippies.''  flatley figures that bear naked's more approachable image is exactly what positions it to benefit from the broader eat-better trend: a not-so-granola-y granola serves as an easy bridge to a more healthful lifestyle, or at least the impression of such a lifestyle. she also figures lots of people are still looking for that bridge, and not just in places like whole foods but also in the not-so-rarefied contexts of big-box stores or even the gas-station snack aisle. that's why she and synnott insist that a granola brand can have, of all things, ''mass appeal.''  the way we live now: 1-28-07: consumed  