state finds serious problems at gibbs school in manhattan   the new york state education department said yesterday that it had found serious problems at a two-year commercial college in new york city, katharine gibbs school - new york, and that it would close the college if the deficiencies were not corrected.  in a letter delivered to gibbs new york on monday and released yesterday, johanna duncan-poitier, the state's deputy commissioner for higher education, said that among other issues, the college did not have enough full-time faculty members, did not have enough remedial classes to prepare students for college-level work and assigned teachers to classes outside their fields of expertise. the letter also said that the college, which has 1,946 students, must sharply limit new enrollment.  the department gave the college 60 days to report on steps it is taking to improve.  founded in 1911 as a secretarial school, katharine gibbs has nine campuses in the east and is owned by career education corporation, a publicly traded company based in illinois. among those campuses unaffected by the education department's action are two in new jersey, one on long island and one in connecticut. gibbs new york, on west 40th street in manhattan, is the largest of the campuses. fashion merchandising and criminal justice are among its course offerings.  lynne baker, a spokeswoman for career education, said yesterday that wynn f. blanton, the president of gibbs new york, was unavailable for comment. last summer, responding to a peer review that formed the basis of those findings, mr. blanton said he accepted many of the criticisms, but considered others ''highly subjective, clearly unsubstantiated and objectionable.''  ms. baker said that since the summer, the college ''has implemented substantial changes that directly address the concerns.''  in november, career education said it would sell the gibbs division, a task that could be complicated by the department's action and by a new regents policy that sales of commercial colleges be pre-approved.  the department closed the taylor business institute late last year and placed interboro institute on probation in 2005. it has also directed other commercial colleges, including another career education school, briarcliffe college on long island, to make substantial improvements.  