streetscapes/louis seitz; three singular brooklyn buildings, each with a second chance   in the 1890s, louis seitz built three singular apartment houses in brooklyn: the imperial, at pacific street and bedford avenue; the alhambra, at nostrand avenue and macon street; and the renaissance, at nostrand and hancock street.  as decades passed, each building went to a different owner. but all followed the downward path that overtook much of brooklyn; a century later, they were disintegrating.  under the supervision of the city's department of housing preservation and development, they have now been rebuilt by developers who have remained faithful to the originals, at least on the exterior. the buildings in their infancy catered to a wealthy clientele, but today most of the apartments are for moderate- or low-income tenants.  born in 1860, mr. seitz left school at 16 and worked in a wholesale business of some sort before going into real estate in 1884.  the masterpiece of his trio, built in 1889, was the wild and woolly alhambra. the blocklong building was set back 15 feet from nostrand avenue, with six towers, arcaded balconies, a garden and a croquet lawn. it mixed several styles, and in 1890, the brooklyn daily eagle said it ''might best be described as morrisian,'' an allusion to the pyrotechnics of mr. seitz's architect, montrose morris. the five-story building, which cost $200,000, had a resident engineer and 32 apartments of 8 to 10 rooms. it was instantly one of brooklyn's best apartment houses.  two years later, mr. seitz and mr. morris completed two near twins: the imperial, several blocks south in crown heights, and the renaissance, a block north of the alhambra.  according to an 1892 issue of the eagle, mr. seitz told mr. morris to prepare plans for the imperial regardless of cost, in order to make ''a monument handsome beyond compare.'' and that monument, at pacific and bedford, is wonderfully rambunctious, its triple outsize turrets and pointed roofs like the three musketeers backed into a corner, swords flailing.  although the exterior walls meet at right angles, the plot is slightly acute -- perhaps only 80 degrees instead of the usual 90 -- which animates the facade in a way seen in few other buildings. the whole is dominated by triple-height arches, topped by an irregular attic story, its slate roofs crowded together as if jockeying for position.  the alhambra is in a moody palette of orange and brown and red, while the imperial turned the corner of the new renaissance style, airy and light in soft yellow and buff brick and terra cotta. two-story-high fluted columns give the later building a roman pomp. in 1892, the eagle called it ''an architectural dream in cream and white,'' generally patterned after mckim, mead & white's hotel imperial, which once stood at 32nd street and broadway in manhattan.  the 1892 renaissance, at nostrand avenue and hancock street, is essentially the same as the imperial, although less operatic.  an 1893 book, ''the eagle and brooklyn,'' singled out mr. seitz's efforts, noting his ''discriminating artistic sense'' and saying he had revolutionized the brooklyn apartment market. andrew scott dolkart, who has studied the career of montrose morris extensively, calls him one of brooklyn's great 19th-century architects.  in an 1899 account, the eagle called the imperial ''one of the finest apartments in brooklyn''; in 1901, it reported that the 25 seven-room apartments each rented for $60 a month. according to the 1905 new york state census, tenants had occupations like lawyer, exporter, engineer and stockbroker.  by the 1970s, all three buildings were on the skids. the city took possession of the imperial in 1979, because its taxes had not been paid. an article in the new york times in 1983 estimated the building's expenses at $67,000 a year, while reporting that the rent roll could not have exceeded $57,000.  the buildings were designated landmarks in 1986, but within a decade the renaissance was vacant, the alhambra had only stores as occupants (much of its roof had collapsed from a fire), and the imperial had only a few tenants.  rebuilding work on the alhambra and the renaissance took place in the 1990s, but the imperial did not reopen until last october, after a $6.3 million gut renovation similar to the those at the alhambra and the imperial.  there is no longer anything historic about any of the interiors, which are plain white and could be in a postwar building on third avenue in manhattan. but in the imperial some of the two- and three-bedroom apartments retain some original character because they occupy the turrets. a fifth-floor apartment at the northwest corner, with distant views of the manhattan skyline, is now available at $1,800 a month at market rate, or as low as $700 for prospective tenants who meet certain income guidelines.  outside, the building's developer, larry hirschfield, the president of elh management, has delivered interesting results. the masonry has been cleaned, but not too harshly, preserving the dings and nicks of time that give a building character. the slate roofs were kept intact, not rebuilt in modern materials, which would have removed more of the building's patina.  mr. hirschfield also had to reproduce much of the copper work in the triple-height window bays. but instead of either cleaning the old copper to look new, or patinating the replacement copper to look old, he left old and new together, so some parts are aged green and others are shiny brown -- a bit odd, but that's how old buildings often look in real life.  so the department of housing preservation and development has saved the shells of mr. seitz's three signature buildings from disaster and now can make some claim on the same kind of revolution he created in the 1890s.  streetscapes | louis seitz e-mail: streetscapes@nytimes.com  