therapy for paralysis: controversial film   ''cinema saved my life,'' catherine breillat said on a recent afternoon at her converted warehouse loft off the canal st.-martin.  in late 2004, at the age of 56, ms. breillat, the writer-director of challenging, sexually explicit films like ''romance'' (1999), ''fat girl'' (2001) and ''anatomy of hell'' (2004), suffered a cerebral hemorrhage that paralyzed her left side. in the hospital she refused wheelchairs and antidepressants. but she willed herself to walk again, and after five months she was released. then she got to work on her 11th film, ''une vieille maîtresse'' (''an old mistress''), a costume drama based on an 1865 novel by jules amédée barbey d'aurevilly.  ''if i hadn't decided i was going to make this film, i never would have been able to bring myself to do all of this work just to be disabled,'' ms. breillat said as she walked, unaided but with considerable effort, through her home in this gentrified industrial district. (she uses a cane outdoors.) ''it wouldn't have been worth it. except maybe to learn to walk so that i could take the few steps required to throw myself out the window.''  ms. breillat's new film, a departure from her recent work, is the ''les liaisons dangereuses''-style story, set in 19th-century paris, of a man who is married off to an aristocratic young woman despite his long secret affair with a courtesan, played by asia argento. made for about $10 million -- almost four times the budget of her last film -- ''une vieille maîtresse'' is her first adaptation and first period film. she said she hoped it would be considered for the cannes film festival, a party to which she has yet to be invited.  ms. breillat speaks in a husky voice that shapes complex paragraphs of thought. she is an outspoken and well-known figure here, a frequent guest on talk shows who is both respected and reviled by her compatriots, many of whom object to her starkly unromantic portrayals of human sexuality. her accident and recovery made news, but there was no subsequent outpouring of public affection or support.  ''there is a lot of hatred toward me in france,'' she said with characteristic stoicism. ''there is a discourse about me, that i am sulfurous, scandalous. abroad they say i'm controversial. that, i don't mind. in any case, if everyone who criticized me had actually bought a ticket to see my films, i'd be rich.''  ms. breillat said she had been able to continue making movies thanks largely to her close-knit longtime crew, which includes her producer, jean-françois lepetit. ''i was in the hospital, really paralyzed, i couldn't move,'' she said. ''nobody knew if i would walk again or even if my head was intact. jean-françois came to me and said, 'you'll see, we'll do ''une vieille maîtresse.'' ' ''  mr. lepetit said in a phone interview that while he had doubts, he kept them to himself. ''i knew that the only thing that would bind her back to living was to say that we were going to make the film,'' he said.  during the three-month shooting schedule,  which ended in june, an assistant shadowed ms. breillat to make sure she didn't hurt herself. ''i always direct with my body,'' she said, laughing as she closed her eyes and swirled her arms in wide circles. ''i need to arrange the actors in my own choreography. and while filming, it was funny, i did plenty of movements i was supposedly not able to do.''  ms. breillat insisted repeatedly that she did not wish to be seen as heroic. ''i have absolutely no courage,'' she said. ''for me, the accident has no importance. i've stayed myself. it has not prevented me from making films. it was only important for the insurance.'' (the insurers insisted on a stand-by director, just in case.)  mr. lepetit confirmed that it was business as usual during production, despite the logistical challenges -- multiple sets, costume changes and numerous extras -- presented to an auteur used to shooting intimate dramas in single rooms.  ''apart from her motor problems, psychologically she was in great form,'' mr. lepetit said. ''she has the same intellectual capacities.''  he added that ''une vieille maîtresse'' was a new level of filmmaking for ms. breillat, a way ''to prove to those who have this idea that she's stuck in a certain kind of filmmaking that she is capable of other kinds of work, even if she has the same obsessions. she's still mostly interested in the relationships between men and women.''  while shooting on location in and around paris and on an island off the coast of brittany, where she owns a house, ms. breillat rested on a mattress during lighting setups and costume changes. ''i was reasonable,'' she said.  ''i know she suffers, even if she doesn't say it,'' michael weill, ms. breillat's casting director and assistant director, said in a phone interview. ''but i think that cinema is like oxygen to her -- and today even more so. it allows her to forget.  ''she's always had this way of making her personality disappear when she's working. the cast and the crew become an extension of her own body. the sound engineer, for example, virtually becomes her ear. she becomes the film.''  ms. breillat's legendarily intense working relationships with her actors was the subject of her film ''sex is comedy'' (2002), which observes as a female director attempts to film sex scenes.  previously, she said, she identified with the women in her films, but in ''une vieille maîtresse,'' for the first time, she projected herself onto the male lead, played by fu'ad aït aattou, a 25-year-old unknown, whom she said she had spotted in an outdoor cafe on the champs-elysées and proclaimed a new alain delon.  ''he has something of a dandy about him,'' she said. ''his is the face i've always dreamed of filming. when i saw him, i said to my assistant, 'he's mine.' i have a manner of inventing my actors that belongs only to me. they have to have total trust in me, to allow me to utterly possess them.''  in a telephone interview mr. aït aattou demurred. ''i wouldn't say i felt possessed by her,'' he said. ''i let her carry me. she knows exactly where she is going all the time. as an actor, that gives you enormous freedom.''  he added that, in his recollection, it was he, an aspiring actor, who approached ms. breillat. he wanted to work with her for a simple reason, he said: ''she is uncompromising; she says what she has to say absolutely, even if it's raw or violent. she has a rare and real sincerity, and she is merciless about making sure that we project that same emotional sincerity.''  mr. aït aattou added that while ''une vieille maîtresse'' was a departure in terms of form, it was still classic breillat, ''at once burning with passion and cold as ice. that's catherine's thing.''  ms. breillat has had four epileptic seizures since the accident, ''like dostoyevsky,'' she said. she now wears an emergency beeper around her neck. ''the whole body shakes, which is horrible. but at the same time it's so strange that it's interesting. the problem is that if you have them in succession, they're lethal.''  she said her doctor had warned her to stay away from the potentially seizure-producing stimulation of the television and the computer screen, though she was watching television and writing a new screenplay on her laptop a day after being released from the hospital.  ''people say i'm too intellectual,'' she said. ''but i totally defend intellectuality. if i hadn't been cerebral and an intellectual, i'd be dead. making this film was a challenge against death in fact.  ''it's the doctors who had the doubts,'' she added. ''i've always said that i'm like a phoenix. it's always in the worst moments that i rise from my ashes.''  film  