the prince, in the city, dribbles and scores   prince charles and camilla, duchess of cornwall, were a bit later than expected in arriving at the gymnasium of the harlem children's zone yesterday, where two teams of seventh and eighth graders were nearing the end of a basketball scrimmage.  at least twice, the timekeeper restored a couple of minutes to the game clock, to ensure that the guests didn't show up to find the game in garbage-time phase. all of which was moot, anyway, because as soon as their royal highnesses entered the gym, play stopped.  the prince and the duchess pressed in close to the throng, shook hands, asked the children questions.  handed the ball in the middle of the key, the prince bounced it once, twice, then attempted a one-handed shot that hit nothing but net (literally -- the ball peaked about a foot below the rim).  he tried again and sank the shot off the backboard. the children cheered wildly.  ''i asked him what sports were popular in his country, and he named some things i didn't even know,'' said christopher velazquez, 13. cricket? ''maybe.'' polo? ''yeah, polo! he said basketball wasn't very big over there, but he'd been practicing.''  after spending saturday in philadelphia, charles and camilla headed to manhattan for a nine-hour, two-stop publicity tour, which began around 1:30 p.m. at the harlem children's zone on east 125th street, and made its way to the harvard club on 44th street, where charles received an environmental award presented by al gore, whom the honor went to last year.  the prince, who had chosen the harlem educational organization because of his interest in urban renewal, arrived in a double-breasted medium blue suit and black leather lace-ups. camilla wore a brown skirt, brown suede pumps, a double strand of pearls and a long chocolate-brown coat that despite its leopard-skin trim and beaded embroidery on the collar, did look a bit linsey-woolsey, as they say.  among the men and women who turned up to greet the couple were lt. gov. david a. paterson and his wife, michelle paige paterson, and william f. weld, the former governor of massachusetts. mr. weld has lived in manhattan for 10 years, and for the last 7 he has been on the board of the harlem children's zone.  as charles and camilla moved through a short receiving line in the lobby of the building, mr. weld took the opportunity to inform the prince that he was an oxford man (a postgraduate degree, between harvard and harvard law).  ''it's very kind of you to tell me that'' said the prince, his eyes crinkling cheerfully. ''because you know, i went to cambridge, which is superior.''  mr. weld played along with his guest. ''well, oxford is second-best, at least,'' he said.  a moment later, when charles had moved on, mr. weld added: ''i actually prefer cambridge. i really do. oxford the town is an industrial town. and the luxury at oxford is embarrassing.''  it wasn't clear, despite the turnout of nearly 120 youngsters who participated in a tightly organized battery of activities for their english guests -- including an investment class, a tour of the center's health clinic and a math carnival -- that many of the children fully comprehended the significance of their guests of honor.  ''he's rich and he rules in england,'' alhamodou nimaga, 12, said of prince charles. and the duchess? ''oh, so she's dutch.''  his sister, mariam nimaga, was grateful for the prince's presence. ''in new york, we don't have a prince or a queen, we just have a president,'' she said, ''so it's really nice of him to come here.''  in a second-floor classroom, charles and camilla watched the harlem children's zone theater troupe run through a scene from ''a midsummer night's dream,'' the play it performed at the national black theater for two nights last month. fittingly, it was the play-within-a-play sequence, in which the six ''rude mechanicals,'' or laborers, perform ''pyramus and thisbe'' for theseus and hippolyta, the royal couple.  the actors, who mostly ranged in age from 12 to 14, performed in modern-day workmen's uniforms, but held close to the original dialogue. the prince and duchess sat with their hands clasped in their laps, her legs pressed together, his stretching wide of his shoulders and pointing wider still, horseman that he is.  they laughed much more heartily than they had to when trevor campbell, a 13-year-old playing nick bottom, delivered his show-stealing monologue toward a wall, which in this case was merely a brick that he held in his hand. (''o wall, o sweet and lovely wall/show me thy chink to blink through with mine eyne!'')  when they were finished, the prince looked to his wife and said, ''shall we go have a word?'' he then put his hands on his thighs and stood to have a little one-on-one with each of the actors.  ''he asked me, do i get to do other plays besides this one, and i told him yes, sir, i have,'' trevor said afterward, beaming. ''he asked if i liked reading shakespeare and said it was important to perform it as well as reading it.''  in the evening, charles received the global environmental citizen award from the harvard medical school center for health and the global environment.  the menu at the awards dinner, in keeping with the theme of the evening, involved six courses of ''environmentally sustainable food,'' each dreamed up by a different chef.  andré soltner, the chef and founder of the now-defunct lutèce, devised the fish course: maine lobster and day boat scallops en feuillete, with ''sauce à l'americaine.'' dan barber, of blue hill, got the menu-sweepstakes equivalent of the fuzzy end of the lollipop: cocktail-hour appetizers, billed merely as ''a variety of local seasonal hors d'oeuvres.''  under the soaring ceilings of the harvard club's dining room, with the mounted heads of an elephant and an elk peering down on them, mr. gore and meryl streep -- who sits on the board of the harvard environmental association -- presented the prince with the award.  ''when i was a little girl growing up in new jersey, one of my goals was to marry the prince of wales,'' ms. streep said, drawing laughs. ''now, as i look at you through my reading glasses, i have to appreciate you in other ways.''  when he took the podium, prince charles responded by telling ms. streep that her remarks ''entirely made my year.''  mr. gore said that he had begun discussing environmental issues with the prince 20 years ago, and had admired his varied work for the cause since then -- promoting organic farming, urging people to consider the consequences of their consumption, and writing and speaking about the need for businesses to be more concerned with their impact on the planet's natural resources.  the prince, in his prepared remarks, focused in particular on global warming. ''perhaps we should see this as a war we simply have to win,'' he said.  correction:  february 7, 2007, wednesday  an article on jan. 29 about prince charles and his wife, camilla, who were visiting manhattan for a publicity tour, referred imprecisely to the royal title for camilla at one point. (the same error appeared in the picture caption.) she is the duchess of cornwall; the phrasing ''camilla, duchess of cornwall,'' is properly used only for a royal widow or divorcée, according to a spokeswoman for the royal household. the article also referred incorrectly to the necklace she was wearing. it was a triple stand of pearls, not a double strand.  