big plan for small courts: seeking money to fix them   new york state's top court officials plan to ask the legislature for at least $50 million over the next five years to revamp the state's threadbare system of town and village courts -- more than five times the amount they had previously discussed, the state's chief administrative judge said during legislative testimony on monday.  ''ten million a year is conservative in terms of upgrading these courts,'' jonathan lippman, the chief administrative judge, said during testimony before a state senate panel exploring possible changes to the statewide network of more than 1,250 courts, known as justice courts.  the court officials said in november that they would ask for $10 million this year to improve courtrooms and security, to provide equipment so proceedings can be recorded, and to increase training and financial accountability. but judge lippman's remarks to the senate judiciary committee made clear that court officials had concluded that the job would be long and costly.  the town and village courts, run by part-time justices who are poorly trained and minimally supervised, handle two million criminal, domestic-violence, traffic and small civil cases each year. they have changed little since they began 300 years ago, but have recently come under criticism from prosecutors, defense lawyers and citizens. newspapers in rochester, albany, utica and elsewhere have called for reforms.  judge lippman also disclosed for the first time on monday that his agency, the state office of court administration, would propose legislation to require training for justice-court clerks, who often have responsibility for handling the substantial sums of money that flow through the courts. the state comptroller has said many court clerks have never received even rudimentary financial training. and while the state provides some classes for clerks, they are not mandatory.  an article in the new york times on monday told how money has often been lost, stolen or mismanaged in the justice courts, which handle more than $210 million a year in fees and fines. in many of those cases, state officials and local prosecutors concluded that the court clerks had been responsible.  in an interview after judge lippman's testimony, richard szarowicz, a former president of the new york state association of magistrates court clerks, which represents the clerks, said his group had been pressing to make the training mandatory since 1999, but had been told by state officials that it would be too costly.  the hearing was called by senator john a. defrancisco, a syracuse republican who is chairman of the judiciary committee, to explore whether the legislature should consider changes in the justice courts.  justices are elected to four-year terms; three-quarters of them are not lawyers. the hearing included proposals by lawyers' groups to require that all justices have law degrees. some critics urged that courts be combined into larger courts, or replaced with a system of district courts.  that drew impassioned testimony from some justices who said the system should be improved and better monitored but should remain in place.  they said the courts provide efficient justice that often benefits from the judges' knowledge of their communities. one justice, edward g. van der water of van buren, n.y., acknowledged that some justice courts have been hampered by inadequate courtrooms -- with ''sometimes not even bare essentials'' -- and poor training.  ''we've been struggling for a long time,'' he said. but he added that any problems stemming from poor financing and monitoring should not be used as an argument to try to abolish the courts.  some senate panel members, including the chairman, were openly skeptical of proposals for major change.  ''there are bad apples in every single profession,'' senator defrancisco said, adding that mistakes by some nonlawyer justices should not be used ''to reform a system to the point where the great qualities are being thrown out.''  but greg d. lubow, a tannersville lawyer who is a vice president of the new york state association of criminal defense lawyers, said the system was beyond repair. he said criminal courts run by justices without law degrees were unconstitutional, and no increase in training would change that.  ''part-time judges,'' he said, ''give us part-time justice.''  