money trail often murky in small-town courts   as court clerk in the western new york village of perry, ruth milks was in a prime spot to see the kind of big money that moves through the state's smallest courts. her husband was the village justice, and mrs. milks -- a former justice herself -- collected the fines and fees.  she was also in a prime spot to cash in. mrs. milks started adding $35 to parking fines, recording the extra charge on the driver's receipt but not in her court files. by the time state auditors caught up with her in 2003 -- only because she had fined one of them -- they estimated she had pocketed at least $60,000, which investigators said she spent on gifts and a trip to a casino.  it is no secret that new york's justice courts -- an unwieldy system of 1,250 town and village courts that dates back to colonial days -- have been troubled for a long time. three-quarters of the justices are not lawyers, and state disciplinary records show that some have jailed defendants illegally and denied people basic legal rights. in recent months, the legislature and state judicial officials have been scrambling to fix some of the courts' more obvious failings.  but one of the most intractable problems those officials face is the courts' miserable record with money, which has been lost, stolen or mishandled in case after case. state investigators have discovered financial records in disarray, missing or simply nonexistent.  it is easy to see why. more than $210 million passes through the justice courts each year in bail, fines and fees. but the part-time justices who are elected to preside in them, many with a high school diploma or less, receive about an hour of initial training in how to safeguard and keep track of the money. they and their clerks, if they have any, often get little supervision or resources, and the justices' pay can be as low as $2,000 a year.  the towns and villages that pay them are required by law to review the courts' books, but often fail to take even a cursory look. the officials who run new york's court system say they have neither the power nor the staff to carefully oversee the justice courts' finances, and even state disciplinary officials can do little more than punish the occasional justices whose crimes or errors come to light.  small wonder, then, that some court officials have helped themselves. a clerk in patchogue, a long island village with a busy justice court, was discovered stealing only after a new justice noticed a sharp drop in court revenues. a subsequent state audit in 2005 revealed that the clerk, deborah gustam-williams, had made off with $37,500.  patchogue's mayor, paul v. pontieri jr., laid much of the blame on lax oversight at every level. ''give the fox the key to the henhouse,'' he said, ''and he is going to eat hens.''  size of problem is unclear  the sums that have been reported lost to fraud or ineptitude have tended to be small, but they loom large in the tiny budgets of the villages and towns. and state officials can only guess at the real extent of the problem, because the courts are so rarely scrutinized and the records are so often a shambles. a simple search of local newspaper accounts for this article showed that at least 23 justices or local court clerks have been charged with theft since 1986. and an examination of little-noticed reports by state auditors and disciplinary officials -- who have punished 79 justices for financial misdeeds since 1979 -- turned up every type of transgressor, from the mundane to the outlandish. cases range from the niagara town justice who billed both the state and the town for his judicial-training expenses, to the justice in the hudson valley town of ancram who fled to montana when faced with a 144-count indictment for methodically embezzling at least $9,000.  a saratoga justice stashed court funds in his freezer, his shoes and several other unorthodox places. a justice in the finger lakes town of ovid stowed thousands of dollars in a briefcase at home, while another, in the catskill town of shandaken, told investigators he had kept more than $1,000 in the trunk of his car. then, he said, he gave the car away.  a justice in gouverneur, near the canadian border, let state disciplinary officials in on his unusual approach to the bail posted by defendants. ''i used the money,'' he said. another justice, in the southern tier town of allegany, told them he saw nothing wrong with using court funds for his own purchases.  and in 2005, auditors from the state comptroller's office not only turned up a bookkeeping mess in the southern tier town of genesee, but also unearthed undeposited checks that people had written to pay their fines. some were nine years old.  for many years, those auditors were the state's best hope for maintaining some level of financial order in the justice courts. the comptroller's office audited each court every three or four years.  but the office abandoned that sweeping approach in the 1980s, partly in response to staff cuts and new pressures to monitor larger agencies, said mark p. pattison, a deputy state comptroller. now, even as the number and complexity of the courts' transactions have increased, it conducts only a handful of justice court audits every year -- 5 in 2005 and 14 in 2004 -- though nearly every one has uncovered evidence of systemwide trouble.  the comptroller's office connected the dots last may, sounding an alarm that ''the pervasiveness of these problems'' was so great that the legislature should make fundamental changes, like combining courts or forbidding many of the smallest courts to handle money at all.  the cry was taken up by the state's chief judge, judith s. kaye, who issued a report in november saying the losses and thefts ''raise difficult questions about the justice courts' financial integrity.''  she imposed some modest new rules to tighten financial controls, and promised more training and resources for justices and clerks. but her report conceded that state court officials were powerless to do much more because the state divides responsibility for fiscal supervision among the towns, villages and several state agencies, none of which has the power to fully police the courts.  the money flows in constantly, much of it in cash: fines for speeding, fees paid by litigants in civil cases, bail and restitution from defendants. state rules require that courts quickly bank the payments, keep careful records, then forward the money and financial reports monthly to the state comptroller. the state sends some of the money back to the towns and counties, which helps lighten the load on local taxpayers.  it sounds straightforward enough. but it was apparently too much for kerry r. lockwood, a legal secretary and a high school graduate who in 1999 was elected justice in plainfield, a town of 1,000 people near cooperstown.  although she handled, on average, fewer than four cases a month, her financial reports to the state were routinely late, some by nearly two years -- even after the comptroller's office told the town board to stop paying her in may 2005 because of the chronic delinquency.  the state commission on judicial conduct chased her, and her records, for an additional year and a half. she did not respond to several letters. when a commission investigator made an appointment to view her files, she stood him up, leaving a letter at the court saying she could not find many records. and when the commission called her in to testify as to why she should not be removed from office, she did not show up.  she resigned last year before the commission ordered her removal for fiscal negligence. ms. lockwood, like many justices and clerks, did not respond to a call seeking comment.  even in as small a town as plainfield, her story was familiar. in 1999, the commission removed another plainfield town justice who was routinely late with remissions and reports: joseph w. kosina, a cattle farmer and high school graduate who fell so far behind in his paperwork that he asked the town's other justice to file financial reports on his cases. she fell behind, too.  in an interview last week, mr. kosina, 73, explained that he was ''computer illiterate'' and had been trying to juggle two other jobs. ''i was raising beef and delivering the newspaper at 6 o'clock in the morning,'' he said.  a longtime town councilwoman, larraine mcnulty, said it was nearly impossible to find qualified candidates for the local judgeship, which pays $2,000 a year in plainfield.  ''these judges are in over their heads,'' she said.  those with the luxury of court clerks sometimes turn over all the money matters to them. but the clerks are not much better prepared; though many receive some state training, it is not required. many receive no guidance or oversight from their justices, and some do not want it.  in 2003, when state auditors told amy p. hontz, a justice in angola, south of buffalo, that her court's records were in disarray, with cash stuffed into some files and money missing, she told them quite a story herself: the court clerk, who had resigned, had kept all the records in her basement and limited the judge's access to them.  in its report last may, the state comptroller's office said that there were accounting and financial-review problems in all 12 courts it had studied, and that 10 justices did not understand some of their most basic financial responsibilities, like balancing accounts or determining the amount due to the state.  even conscientious justices can get lost trying to dig out from the mistakes of past judges. when state auditors found flaws in the financial practices of the arcadia town court, east of rochester, in 2004, the two justices explained that they were carrying on a long tradition.  ''our books were maintained,'' they wrote, ''as they were by our predecessors and their predecessors before that.''  for many towns and villages, the money generated by the justice courts is an important source of income. so it stands to reason that they would take a keen interest in the courts' books.  but judge kaye's report in november noted that ''many, if not most, localities do not perform full annual audits of justice court finances.''  a few months earlier, the comptroller had revealed that only half of the town and village boards conducted audits, and that many local officials were unaware they were supposed to provide any fiscal oversight at all. he estimated that more than $5.2 million could be missing statewide, from about 430 justice courts, or more than one-third of the system.  local governments pay a steep price for their lack of vigilance, as some towns have found again and again.  in palermo, a small town north of syracuse, local officials called in state auditors in 1998 after their justice, kimberly sesso, resigned and the court's canceled checks could not be found. the auditors concluded that $3,439 was missing, and advised the town board to do everything possible to step up its oversight.  seven years later the auditors were called back, this time to examine the work of the court clerk, andrea busko-price, who pleaded guilty last may to falsifying court records and stealing at least $1,990. despite their warning, the auditors concluded, court business had continued as usual.  the town supervisor, ellen m. jamerson, apologized and promised to do better. and the two sitting justices admitted that the court clerk had been given complete control over the money. but, they wrote, ''in a small township such as palermo with limited financial and human resources, it is not always feasible to do otherwise.''  a limited proposal  in what she has called sweeping changes, judge kaye said her office would require towns and villages to audit their courts. but the punishment for not complying is less than sweeping: the list of delinquent local governments will be sent to the state comptroller's office -- which long ago backed away from comprehensive policing of the courts.  to help fill the gap, judge kaye has directed the office of court administration, which she heads, to hire 12 new auditors just for the justice courts.  for now, though, the task of policing the justices falls mostly to the commission on judicial conduct. although it investigates complaints about judges in all of the state's courts, more than 12 percent of its cases in the last three decades have involved financial mismanagement and theft in the justice courts.  but in legislative testimony last month, the commission's administrator, robert h. tembeckjian, said the lack of regular audits by the comptroller had left his investigators with few leads, and staff cuts over the years had put his agency ''close to a breaking point.''  even when the commission suspects mismanagement or fraud, proving it can be difficult. some justices have stonewalled, claiming their records are lost or refusing to meet with investigators.  state officials pursued the town justice in paris, south of utica, for nine months in 2001, with letters complaining that financial reports and deposits were late. the state persuaded the town board to stop his pay. still, the justice, john r. jarosz, did not bother to check his court clerk's financial records, the commission said, even though he had listed his occupation on a state questionnaire as ''accountant.''  eventually, the commission found that the clerk had falsified her books to cover up for missing money. the clerk was the justice's wife.  she resigned. he paid back $3,200, and in 2003 the commission found he had failed to supervise her adequately and censured him, the most stringent punishment short of removal.  the paris supervisor, joseph f. jerzak, said town board members were not pleased that the justice kept his job, but the town's lawyer told them they could do nothing about it.  six months after his censure, justice jarosz was re-elected to another four-year term. the supervisor is a bit stumped. ''it certainly doesn't seem very rational,'' mr. jerzak said.  