a serialist island thrives in a sea of minimalism   in 1988 the composer charles wuorinen was profiled in the new york times on the occasion of his 50th birthday. the article, ''wuorinen's bleak view of the future,'' written by the music historian joan peyser, painted a grim picture of mr. wuorinen's fortunes. the thorny, demanding style of serialist modernism for which he had long been known was being eclipsed by minimalism, and the group for contemporary music, the influential ensemble he helped found in 1962, faced financial crisis.  the problems mr. wuorinen, now 68, faced then have not disappeared. modernist composers still struggle for a foothold in concert programs, challenged not only by minimalists but also by neo-romantics and all manner of pan-stylistic eclectics. prominent figures have declared modernism a dead issue, hailing its downfall in terms not unlike those used after the collapse of the soviet union. and though the group for contemporary music eventually rebounded from its fiscal straits, it is far from the active force it once was.  but neither has mr. wuorinen disappeared. he retains a caustic opinion of those composers he views as opportunistic: whose facile, pop-oriented efforts, propped up by marketing departments, have grabbed most of philanthropic resources. still he has had plenty of cause to celebrate lately. recent seasons have included a steady stream of major premieres, many of them due to the emergence of a singularly powerful advocate: the conductor james levine, music director of the metropolitan opera and the boston symphony orchestra.  two weeks ago mr. levine offered the premiere of a new symphonic poem by mr. wuorinen, ''theologoumenon,'' in a concert by the met orchestra at carnegie hall. the piece was commissioned as a 60th-birthday gift for mr. levine by ronald a. wilford, his longtime manager and the chairman of columbia artists management. on feb. 15 at symphony hall in boston mr. levine will conduct another premiere: mr. wuorinen's eighth symphony (''theologoumena''), commissioned by the boston symphony for its 150th anniversary.  the works are linked in more than name, mr. wuorinen said during a recent conversation in his upper west side apartment. ''theologoumenon'' was a musical response to a text provided by mr. wilford, a theological epigraph by the neo-platonist philosopher maximus tyrius. although the term ''symphonic poem'' traditionally indicates a programmatic work, like liszt's ''tasso'' or strauss's ''don quixote,'' mr. wuorinen intended his piece as an abstract contemplation. yet mr. wilford, mr. wuorinen said, claimed to sense the text in the music.  what ''theologoumenon'' evokes may be a matter of personal interpretation. anthony tommasini, reviewing the carnegie hall performance in the times, wrote, ''the music could be described as depicting the mind state sought during meditation, when you strive for contemplativeness and let intrusive thoughts just register and then float right by.'' what the restless music unquestionably revealed was mr. wuorinen's skill at handling large orchestral forces, with especially inventive use of the percussion section.  the symphony draws on the same musical materials used in the tone poem but represents ''a directed kind of continuity in the symphonic tradition,'' mr. wuorinen said. the two pieces, which were commissioned at roughly the same time, were conceived as parts of a larger whole: a single four-movement work of some 50 minutes' duration.  ''levine intends at some point to put them together,'' mr. wuorinen said. ''he understood that from the very beginning. we discussed this aspect in connection with both of these commissions.''  that mr. levine is already contemplating revisiting these new works is characteristic of his method. after he and the boston symphony gave the premiere of mr. wuorinen's fourth piano concerto in boston in 2005, they repeated it immediately at carnegie hall and some time later at tanglewood.  ''it sat for three or four months, and then in tanglewood we rerehearsed it,'' mr. levine said by telephone. ''and we all felt that it was in another place. so much more of it was available, accessible. this is what happens if you get that chance. the piece, which might at first hearing have seemed to go by so quickly or so slowly or with this or that striking effect, when you really have a chance to hear it some more, already it starts to be a different thing.''  other works by mr. wuorinen have figured heavily in mr. levine's programming during recent seasons. ''if i get excited by the music of a given composer, i need to know all of it,'' mr. levine said. that holistic approach prompted his earlier immersions in the works of berg, mahler and ives.  ''if i was very excited by the first piece, then i wanted to see what the range and spectrum was in the rest of the pieces,'' mr. levine said. ''and also i figured that if i knew what the whole picture was, it would give me more insight into properly interpreting one work.''  mr. levine is certainly not mr. wuorinen's sole champion. in april the miller theater at columbia university will offer the premiere of ''spin 5,'' a work it commissioned for the violinist jennifer koh. now in the planning stages are works for the orpheus chamber orchestra, the pianist anne-marie mcdermott, the brentano string quartet with the pianist peter serkin, and the new york new music ensemble.  even so mr. levine is precisely the kind of artistic opinion leader whose prominence might persuade organizations and audiences alike to reconsider composers whose worth has been widely questioned in recent decades: not only mr. wuorinen but also milton babbitt, elliott carter and even the father of them all, arnold schoenberg. such conversions do not occur overnight. mr. levine has been working patiently and persistently over several seasons, his faith seemingly unshakable. ''charles writes a quantity of music that is absolutely astonishing, which is only possible because of his extraordinary gift and talent,'' mr. levine said. ''i've never seen anyone whose result is more enthusiastic and beautiful, but i think an audience that wants to get that on one hearing is going to have a difficult time. i try to tell them that what they need to do is, don't have a fight with the piece on the first hearing. just relax and listen. if you think there's nothing there for you, o.k. but if you find something that makes you curious or engaged, then work out a way to hear the piece again as soon as possible, and see whether it starts to take hold.''  it helps that a steady stream of mr. wuorinen's music has appeared on cd lately. definitive recordings of his chamber music, recorded in the 1990s by the group for contemporary music and originally issued by koch international classics, have been reissued recently on naxos, a budget label with global distribution. during the same weekend that the met orchestra gave the premiere of ''theologoumenon'' mr. wuorinen supervised a new recording of songs and chamber works that will be issued on naxos.  recordings of large-scale pieces like the ones mr. levine has championed have been harder to come by. but there is cause for hope.  ''we have media agreements in boston which will allow us to do this properly,'' mr. levine said. ''by 'properly,' i mean not that great rarity when we could put a symphony orchestra in the studio. but we can keep improving our live performances and the way they're recorded, and make available in all kinds of ways recordings of live things.''  mr. levine suggests that the interest andenthusiasm expressed in letters to the orchestra from audience members justify his efforts on behalf of mr. wuorinen and his ilk.  ''in boston it works very well, because the public is so enthusiastic and so supportive of the orchestra and generally so knowledgeable,'' he said. ''even though you always get a handful of letters from people who don't like x or y, you get four letters from people who either love it or respect it or are glad the orchestra had a chance to do it for them. i think charles is not going to be subject to what's fashionable. in the long run, as people hear it and play it, some of those pieces will stay there and lead the way to others.''  mr. levine may be an anomaly among veteran performers, but mr. wuorinen takes heart in what he sees as a steady stream of young musicians who are following his lead.  ''i've been active in this profession for more than 50 years, so i've seen a lot of changes,'' he said. ''but that's not one of them. as far as i can see, there are the same number of players with the same level of enthusiasm and commitment when they are young. and it isn't the development department, it isn't the marketing department and it isn't the management that determine what happens to music. it's the composers and the performers. if the performers stop caring about real music, then it's over. but i don't see any sign of that.''  classical music  