murder trial hears account of marital war's last fight   an upper east side man testified at his murder trial yesterday, describing what he saw as his wife's decade-long mental breakdown and admitting that he grabbed a knife and stabbed her in the kitchen of their home.  but the man, ben odierno, said it was his wife who stabbed him first, several times in the stomach, as they argued over his refusal to sign a separation agreement that would have given their country home in the catskills to her, rather than to their two sons.  ''she took the knife, she attacked me, and she was stabbing me, several times in my belly,'' mr. odierno testified, standing up, at his lawyer's request, and miming being stabbed below the navel.  ''i reacted,'' mr. odierno said.  ''i put my hand on the butcher block. i grabbed a knife and went forward to her. i didn't mean to kill christine. it just happened like that. it was fast. i really thought she was going to kill me. i don't remember anything after that.  ''i stabbed her. i know that.''  mr. odierno's contention that he acted in self-defense was the climax of about two and a half hours of testimony yesterday in which he described the progressive breakdown of nearly 30 years of marriage.  mr. odierno, a tall, portly man in a gray suit who described himself on the witness stand as ''72, going on 73, hopefully,'' faces 25 years to life if he is convicted of second-degree murder in the death of his wife on a sunday in april 2005. prosecutors say he stabbed his wife, who was 57, in a rage because she wanted to divorce him, and then turned the knife on himself.  the prosecutor, kerry o'connell, has suggested that mr. odierno secretly abused his wife, noting that once when she had a broken wrist, she told a neighbor that her husband had broken it.  mr. odierno testified that his wife broke her wrist when she slipped off a stone wall near their country home.  the defense has been building a case that it was not mr. odierno but his wife who was the aggressor.  mr. odierno said he met his future wife in 1972, when she rented an apartment in a building he owned at 1520 first avenue. beginning in 1996 or 1997, mr. odierno said, she became increasingly paranoid and aggressive.  detail by detail, his account of the breakdown of their marriage was perhaps most striking in its banality.  his wife gradually stopped celebrating christmas, complaining that the tree was ''dirty,'' he said.  he said she took their son's cocker spaniel to the backyard, to relieve himself on mr. odierno's prized fig tree. soon she was hoarding, ''bars and bars of soap, cologne by the carload, picture frames.''  he traced the change to a sort of midlife crisis, when his wife became upset about her appearance. she had surgery for bunions and spider veins and banished him from their bed because she was afraid he would hurt her legs, he said.  she never allowed him to return to her bed, he said, and she rebuffed his advances, even when he brought her flowers.  although he cooked, she refused to pick up his plate after dinner, complaining, ''i'm not your maid.''  ''i'm telling you, this was the house of hell,'' he said.  a few days before she died, she gave him a proposed separation agreement. he testified that he wanted to sign it, but his sons insisted that he see a lawyer, who advised him not to sign.  at that point, he said, his wife told him that she would mutilate his genitalia if he did not sign the agreement. he called the police, but could not bear to have her arrested, he said. so he withdrew his complaint, he said.  on april 24, 2005, they argued over the country house, he said. he wanted her to promise in writing that when she died, she would leave the house to their sons; she told him he would have to trust her, he said.  then, he said, ''she took the knife, she attacked me. ''  