multitasking at sundance: haven't i seen you before?   the sundance film festival wraps up another frenzied edition sunday, dispensing dozens of prizes among the competition. but anyone who made a sizable dent in the 60 or so american fiction features on view might be excused for thinking there was also an unofficial contest for hardest-working actor in american independent movies.  as the days wore on, and the films began to blur together, the same faces kept popping up: sam rockwell as a harried soccer dad (''joshua'') and an unstable born-again christian (''snow angels''); vera farmiga as a young wife trying to get pregnant (''never forever'') and a mother with postpartum depression (''joshua''); justin theroux as a narcissistic television star (''broken english'') and a spanish-speaking jesus (''the ten''); and the up-and-coming young actor mark webber as an angry, alienated misfit in dead-end suburbia (''weapons'') and in a nebraska football town (''the good life''). among the others pulling double duty: zooey deschanel, drea de matteo, samuel l. jackson, samantha morton, adam brody, liev schreiber and thomas jay ryan.  the multitasking actor is not a new phenomenon here. if anything, it's something of a tradition. mr. rockwell had three films here in 1997. so did parker posey, who happens to be here this year with two films. in 2003 patricia clarkson arrived with three films and left with a special jury prize. the sundance version of the parlor game six degrees of kevin bacon, named in honor of the prolific actor, would be something like three degrees of, say, steve buscemi, also here this year with two films (three if you count his appearance as a talking head in a documentary about his friend, the clash frontman joe strummer, who died in 2002).  to the casual observer the impression is one of an insular club. but even for the heavyweights of the indie star system, the reality is not always so glamorous. it is tempting to romanticize the idea of the indie stalwart, but many of these actors are not staying small by choice. a glass ceiling still separates the indie and hollywood spheres. and they may not even be cozily entrenched, given the constant pressure to get a-list names in indies and the corresponding trend toward stunt-casting.  further complicating matters, an ever growing number of hollywood a-listers regard sundance as a kind of boutique spa where they can order up an image makeover. this year's biggest names: michael douglas (''king of california'') and meryl streep (''dark matter'').  kerry barden, a veteran casting director whose sundance credits this year include ''snow angels'' and ''never forever,'' said recognizable stars had grown increasingly important even for smaller productions. during the indie heyday of the mid-1990s most of the standout films ''were not dependent on getting names,'' he said. ''it was just about getting the right actor.''  ''but the market was different then,'' he continued. ''if you made a film for under $2 million, you were almost guaranteed your money back from video sales. now you need names that can assure some kind of theatrical distribution deal.''  ''and everyone wants last year's academy award winner,'' he added.  ms. posey, casually deploying an appellation that has often been assigned to her in the news media, said: ''being an indie queen, people think i have all these choices. like i've just been sitting around waiting for the best indie film that i deem acceptable. there are a lot of independent films i've wanted to do that i haven't been cast in.''  even so, ms. posey has done plenty of subversive, inventive work on the margins of studio movies, from ''scream 3'' to ''superman returns,'' even if the roles have not always been satisfying. ''i'm the character actor in hollywood movies, the girl who has to be annoying so the guy can go to the other girl,'' she said.  speaking here on the morning after the premiere of zoe cassavetes's romantic comedy ''broken english,'' in which she is, for a change, the girl who gets the guy, ms. posey pointed out that she had not been in a prestige indie film since 2002, with rebecca miller's ''personal velocity.'' both ''broken english'' and her other new sundance film, hal hartley's ''fay grim,'' were shot in digital video on a relative shoestring.  ''it feels like financing is getting harder,'' said mr. buscemi, who has experienced the numbers game as both an actor and a director. ''they want to give less money, but you still have to get a star.'' he was at sundance with his fourth feature as director, ''interview,'' a remake of a talky chamber piece by the murdered dutch filmmaker theo van gogh. mr. buscemi stars in it opposite sienna miller and also plays the lead in tom dicillo's paparazzi satire, ''delirious.''  the current economics of filmmaking make it more difficult than ever for unknown talent to break out. ''it's that old catch-22,'' said patricia dicerto, the casting director on ''joshua.'' ''you can't become a name until you have a lead role in a successful film, but you can't get a film until you're a name.''  the stars of ''joshua,'' mr. rockwell and ms. farmiga, were the highest-profile actors at this year's sundance, each with a pair of lead roles in the dramatic competition. in that film, a witty haute-yuppie variation on ''the bad seed'' directed by george ratliff, they appear together as a manhattan couple terrorized by their creepily precocious 9-year-old. in david gordon green's bleak small-town drama, ''snow angels,'' mr. rockwell plays another troubled father, this time deranged by grief and excessive piety. both roles are striking departures for an actor who has so far specialized in oddball comedy.  ''in 'snow angels' you really get to chew the scenery,'' mr. rockwell said over coffee in his east village loft a few days before heading to sundance. ''and in 'joshua' i get to be the straight guy, which is a nice change from all the weirdos i play.''  both of ms. farmiga's roles are notably unsentimental portraits of motherhood. in ''joshua'' her depressive character must confront the possibility that her own child is bent on destroying her. ''i felt very close to her,'' she said of her character by telephone before sundance.  the experience left her so drained that she considered pulling out of gina kim's torrid melodrama, ''never forever,'' in which her character deals with her korean-american husband's infertility by paying a stranger to inseminate her. ''i didn't know if i had anything left to give, but i couldn't say no,'' she said. ''it was one of the most visceral love stories i'd ever read.''  ms. farmiga is one of sundance's most resounding success stories, having erupted from near obscurity three years ago with her performance in debra granik's ''down to the bone.''  mr. rockwell was also discovered at sundance, back in 1996 with ''box of moonlight.'' the last time he was at the festival was in 2001, for a short film. ''i went to try to get my mind off a girl, which didn't quite work,'' he said. but he did meet the directors anthony and joe russo, who cast him in their 2002 film ''welcome to collinwood,'' which was being produced by george clooney. that led to one of mr. rockwell's best-reviewed performances, the lead in mr. clooney's chuck barris biopic, ''confessions ofa dangerous mind.''  the rare indie character actor who has somehow managed to avoid sundance all these years, mr. theroux is here for the first time, and in multiple capacities. he's a scene-stealing member of the ensembles of ''broken english'' and ''the ten'' but is more concerned with his role as a first-time director, with ''dedication,'' a brisk romantic comedy starring billy crudup and mandy moore.  speaking a few days before his premiere, a nervous mr. theroux said he was not planning to sit through any of the ''dedication'' screenings. at previews in new york, he realized, ''you start holding people to a viewing standard you would never adhere to.'' he added, ''laughter will be bad, silence will be bad.''  like mr. rockwell, mr. theroux has played a villain in a ''charlie's angels'' movie. (''a blast,'' he said.) but more often than not, ''the bigger the film, the worse the part,'' he said. ''when you've done bad parts that are time-consuming on studio movies, you want to blow your brains out. for the guys who stay close to independent film, it's about creative necessity.''  but there is also the issue of financial necessity. ''my accountant keeps telling me to take one for the bank account,'' ms. farmiga said.  mr. barden, the casting director, put it more bluntly: ''most actors wouldn't be able to pay their rent if they just did indie movies.''  mr. rockwell confirmed this. '' 'matchstick men' and 'hitchhiker's guide to the galaxy' are paying my mortgage,'' he said, referring to two recent studio projects. ''although now the studio movies aren't paying a lot either. a lot of that money goes to the a-list and not to guys like me.'' (he admitted that he nearly dropped out of ''joshua'' when it looked as if he might get cast in a coen brothers film.)  as for ms. posey, her notion of the artist's life is at once breezy and pragmatic. ''i just follow the jobs,'' she said. ''i freelance, basically, and whatever comes my way seems to be just in time to give me a paycheck.''  indie queen or no, she said, there's little point plotting a career path: ''no one is behind a desk putting pins in a chart, like indie, studio, indie, studio. the perception that i have control over it makes me laugh. it's all so out of my hands.''  film  