fighting eases on first day of a cease-fire by gaza factions   after five days of clashes in the gaza strip, palestinian factions on tuesday mostly observed the latest cease-fire, though one hamas member was shot dead.  also, the israeli air force bombed a tunnel near the eastern edge of the gaza strip, saying that palestinian militants were digging it to enter israel and carry out an attack. the tunnel was near the karni crossing, which is used to move goods between israel and gaza.  the two main palestinian factions, hamas and fatah, held late night talks on monday and agreed on a truce that took effect at 3 a.m. tuesday. while gaza was mostly calm during the day, several previous cease-fires have broken down and there were doubts about this one as well.  in one incident, a local hamas leader was shot dead in the southern gaza town of khan yunis. the shooting appeared to be a revenge attack by a family aligned with fatah, which recently had a relative killed in the fighting, according to palestinian residents of the town.  more than 30 palestinians have been killed in gun battles since thursday, and about 60 have died over the past two months.  egypt, which has often mediated between the palestinian factions in recent years, helped broker the latest truce.  while gazans welcomed the reopening of shops and the semblance of normalcy that prevailed on the streets on tuesday, many said the truce would remain vulnerable unless hamas and fatah could agree to work together in the government.  a good deal of the fighting has involved members of the palestinian security forces. many members are loyal to fatah, which long dominated palestinian politics, but hamas created a security service, known as the executive force, after it came to power a year ago.  months of negotiations have failed to produce a deal between hamas, the radical islamic group that controls much of the government, and fatah, led by the palestinian authority president, mahmoud abbas.  mr. abbas, speaking in cairo after a meeting with the egyptian president, hosni mubarak, said hamas's executive force was ''illegitimate and illegal.''  mr. abbas also condemned a suicide bombing on monday by a palestinian in the southern israeli resort town of eilat, which killed three workers at a bakery.  the palestinian leader said the bombing was ''not in the interest of the palestinian people.'' al aksa martyrs brigades, which is linked to fatah, had claimed responsibility for the bombing with islamic jihad.  israel has given no indication that it plans a major military response to the suicide bombing, the first such attack in israel in nine months.  ''the initiative will be ours, and we have no intention of relaying what we plan to do,'' amir peretz, the defense minister, said during a visit to eilat.  however, israeli newspapers, citing political and military officials, said no large-scale operations were planned.  in a separate development, israel's deputy prime minister, shimon peres, met in qatar with the emir, sheik hamad bin khalifa al-thani. that was the highest-level meeting in years between officials of the countries.  the emir urged israel to hold talks with the palestinian government, according to the web site of the israeli newspaper haaretz, which had a reporter traveling with mr. peres. israel, which classifies hamas as a terrorist group, refuses to deal with the organization, and hamas does not recognize israel.  israel and qatar do not have diplomatic relations, though there is an israeli trade mission in the qatari capital, doha. mr. peres visited qatar when he was prime minister in 1996.  