the neediest cases; family copes with a disease it well knows can be fatal   she lost joey to asthma shortly before he was to turn 11 -- a searing memory for earline sierra, who recalls that as her son was having another of his many asthma attacks, ''he was talking to me, and he turned blue, and he stopped breathing.''  now she fears for jaime, 16, another son who has the disease.  despite her fear, ms. sierra, a 36-year-old single mother, says that she maintains the same approach with jaime that she did with both asthmatic sons before joey died three years ago: permitting them to participate in the normal activities of childhood, no matter how physically strenuous, even though vigorous exercise is among the conditions that can trigger an asthma attack.  the attack that killed joey was not set off by physical activity. it came as he was trying to get a night's sleep in the east harlem apartment where ms. sierra and the boys were living with her third son, jeremy, now 12, who does not have asthma.  ''i never stopped them from doing anything,'' ms. sierra said recently of joey and jaime, speaking in the apartment, also in east harlem, to which the family moved soon after joey died. ''i never stopped them from living their lives.''  despite the severity of his asthma, joey ''played football, baseball, soccer, rode his bike,'' she said, and jaime is similarly active.  ms. sierra, a credit clerk for a company in the bronx that supplies food products to grocery stores, lives with jaime and jeremy in a two-bedroom apartment filled with reminders of joey. he was one of the approximately 5,000 people a year in the united states who die from asthma, out of 20 million people in the country estimated to have the disease.  the threat to jaime, while it is ms. sierra's predominant concern, is not her only worry related to the disease. in her job, which she has held for seven years, she brings home $1,800 a month, after taxes. ''but that's when i get a full check,'' she said, and many times she does not.  jaime is often hospitalized for severe asthma attacks, and she said she takes days off from work to be with him in the hospital, where his lungs are treated with pure oxygen as well as medication.  last year, she used up her three weeks of paid vacation and seven paid personal days -- and then took off additional days without pay -- to be at his bedside, she recounted. in october, jaime was hospitalized twice, for a total of three weeks, after two separate attacks.  her unpaid days add to the financial strain caused by her out-of-pocket costs under the health insurance plan provided by her company. ''every emergency room visit has a $50 co-payment,'' she said. ''every doctor's visit has a $20 co-payment, and he sees a lung specialist every week.''  jaime's father, from whom ms. sierra was divorced months after jaime was born, does not contribute to his son's support and has never had a relationship with him, ms. sierra said.  the father of joey and jeremy has a strong relationship with both boys, she said, visiting them regularly and buying some of what they need.  despite this help, ms. sierra said, she has often found herself in tight spots. she is more than $1,500 in arrears on her $722 monthly rent. but she expressed confidence that she would be able to catch up.  the children's aid society, one of seven agencies supported by the new york times neediest cases fund, has dipped into the fund to assist the family. last may, it used $150 from the neediest cases to buy jeremy a suit for his sixth-grade graduation ceremony. later, $83 from the fund paid the fee for a passport for jaime so that he could be part of a group from the hope leadership academy of children's aid that visited germany in september, a trip that the academy arranged and organizations in germany paid for.  ''it was fun -- i got to try new things, eat different food and make friends,'' said jaime, an articulate, soft-spoken youth with a ready smile. he and his mother said they had been ''a little'' afraid that he might have an asthma attack in germany, but he did not.  now a high school junior, jaime is in the normal grade for his age, despite having ''missed a lot of school'' because of his illness, ms. sierra said. ''but he does his work and makes it up,'' she said. both his and jeremy's grades fell for a time after joey died, she added. both received psychological counseling to help them cope.  despite that very close reminder of his own mortality, jaime speaks of a rewarding future for himself. ''i want to go to college,'' he said. ''i want to be a computer technician or computer engineer.''  how to help  checks payable to the new york times neediest cases fund should be sent to 4 chase metrotech center, 7th floor east, lockbox 5193, brooklyn, n.y. 11245, or any of these organizations:  brooklyn bureau of community service  285 schermerhorn street  brooklyn, n.y. 11217  catholic charities, diocese of brooklyn and queens  191 joralemon street  brooklyn, n.y. 11201  catholic charities of the archdiocese of new york  1011 first avenue  new york, n.y. 10022  children's aid society  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  community service society of new york  105 east 22nd street  new york, n.y. 10010  federation of protestant welfare agencies  281 park avenue south  new york, n.y. 10010  uja-federation of new york  church street station  p.o. box 4100  new york, n.y. 10261-4100  no agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for the new york times neediest cases fund.  donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (800) 381-0075 or online, courtesy of nycharities.org, an internet donations service, at www.nytimes.com/neediest or www.nycharities.org/neediest.  for instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.  the times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.  contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.  to delay may mean to forget.  previously recorded: $7,377,194.28  recorded friday: 32,611.18  total: $7,409,805.46  last year to date: $6,593,664.83  