a plan to revive trade talks is offered at forum   leading trade ministers on saturday embraced an unusual game plan for reviving trade talks, saying they would try to hash out details on technical issues, rather than first agreeing on the broad outlines of an accord.  during a meeting at the world economic forum, officials from 30 countries including the united states, the european union and emerging markets like india and brazil vowed to move forward in the doha round of world trade organization talks, which began more than five years ago in the persian gulf emirate of qatar but collapsed in july because of disagreements about farm subsidies and tariff cuts. they hope to reach a deal within a year.  to resuscitate the talks, the ministers endorsed a strategy that is highly unusual in these negotiations, but now appears to offer the only chance to conclude the trade round. instead of creating a framework for agreement and then working out details on technical issues like tariffs and subsidies later, countries will aim to work out most specifics up front. then, they will decide whether a final push is warranted at a meeting of all world trade organization members in geneva.  pascal lamy, the organization's director general, said the process would have to achieve a genuine breakthrough in ''months, not quarters,'' for a meeting of all the group's members to occur. apart from agriculture, it would also have to address tariff cuts for industrial products and services like finance and telecommunications.  after the geneva meeting, mr. lamy said countries would tackle other, less contentious issues, including simplifying customs procedures, environmental rules and antidumping rules.  the w.t.o. negotiations would dovetail with a bid by the bush administration to extend the united states trade negotiating authority that expires on june 30. next week, president bush will give two major addresses on economic policy calling on congress to take that step, american officials said.  