you can teach a spy a novelist's tricks   e. howard hunt jr., who died last week at 88, is best remembered as the man who helped plan and bungle the 1972 watergate break-in. an ex-c.i.a. officer with a background in dirty tricks, sabotage and other skulduggery, mr. hunt was particularly qualified to be a ''security consultant'' for president richard nixon. in 1954, he helped overthrow the government of guatemala, and he was later involved in the bay of pigs fiasco.  he was also the author of more than 80 espionage and detective novels, many written under pseudonyms. did his life imitate his art, or vice versa? it's not always easy to tell.  thomas vinciguerra  mr. hunt was a maverick who attended the naval academy in annapolis. so is the deputy director of central intelligence in ''dragon teeth'' (1997):  vice admiral usn (ret.) logan ''buck'' doremus had acquired his nickname as a famed naval academy fullback whose ball-carrying trademark was bucking an opponent's defensive line. and within the agency it was often remarked that he really should have worn a helmet while playing.  in 1971, mr. hunt tried to discredit dr. daniel j. ellsberg, who had leaked the pentagon papers, by burglarizing dr. ellsberg's office.  in ''on hazardous duty'' (1965), mr. hunt had already explained the art of stealing secrets:  mentally he saw them opening the door, masking the windows with black plastic and tape, setting the suction mike near the safe dial, and feeding its output into the base computer as harry went through dial-rotation procedures. with the safe open they would polaroid-photograph the interior to guide them in replacing the contents. then the laborious work of photographing page after page of documents by the illumination of the argon flashlight, methodically repositioning documents by the polaroid picture, locking the safe, undraping the windows, and moving out.  after a highly checkered career, mr. hunt left the c.i.a. in 1970. in ''the berlin ending'' (1973), the fictional narrator, neal thorpe, describes leaving the agency:  i could have had a good career there, too, he reflected, but i felt things closing in, becoming too circumscribed, too stratified and bureaucratic. i wanted more freedom, so i got out.  maybe my problem isn't in making decisions but in making too many of them. is my dissatisfaction valid or is it only restlessness -- like the typist who quits her job and reapplies for it two weeks later? i'd hate to think that, but what's the answer?  mr. hunt was fascinated by spy hardware and technology, as he demonstrates in ''murder in state'' (1990):  ''last year we were waiting for a defector to come out of the un building. a man jabbed an umbrella tip in his butt and our guy died on the un steps. we saw the poison injected, but whatever it was, the forensics couldn't detect it. verdict: heart attack. the moral,'' he said with a grim smile, ''is to avoid umbrellas.''  gumming up the opposition's works was mr. hunt's specialty, as he relates in ''body count'' (1992):  he leaned over the speedboat transom and unscrewed the gas tank cap, emptied the pouch of mothballs into the tank, and replaced the top. there was enough gasoline in the fuel lines to back the boat into open water, after which the naphthalene-gasoline mix would foul the carburetor and stop the engine. it was the first sabotage trick he had ever learned.  president nixon's downfall came after revelations of secret tape recordings and demands by mr. hunt and others for ''hush money.'' in ''angel eyes'' (1961), cash and recordings also intersect in a case of political blackmail:  i said, ''there's something for sale, zellerhaus. something new on the market. yesterday it was offered for the first time. the asking price is $10,000.''  ''wha  what is it?'' he burbled.  ''you're the wizard with the built-in radar,'' i sneered. ''figure it out. it's what got peachy bolac killed. it's the recording she made of you and quinby that afternoon not so long ago. made public it's enough to put you and quinby on the rock pile until they run out of rocks. the killer's got it, zellerhaus. he wants ten thousand skins.''  during watergate, there were reports that mr. hunt kept a gun in his white house office. his alter ego, jack novak, packs heat in ''sonora'' (2000):  at a gun shop where i was well and favorably known, i bought four boxes of .45 acp ball ammo for the tommy gun and a box of black talon .38s for my h& k pistol. from a large selection of rifles i chose a .308 caliber fal with flash suppressor and 20-round magazine, and had it fitted with an 8-power leupold scope while i waited.  like mr. hunt, david morgan, the hero of ''the hargrave deception'' (1980), is an ex-intelligence agent involved in an illegal covert operation. and like mr. hunt, he testifies before a senate committee:  ''a little while ago i was asked to comment on a question of morality,'' he said. ''your inquiry raises deep moral issues, senator -- at least for me -- since i gave my word as a representative of the united states that their participation in an activity in which this government was a coequal conspirator would never be made public by me. these men,'' he went on as a wave of sound swept up around him, ''were brave men, patriotic in their own view and responsive to what they felt to be the call of a higher moral duty.''  word for word | spilt ink thomas vinciguerra is a deputy editor of the week.  correction:  february 4, 2007, sunday  because of an editing error, the word for word feature last week excerpting passages from the fiction of e. howard hunt, who died last week, referred incorrectly to a burglary he committed. mr. hunt burglarized the office of the psychiatrist of dr. daniel j. ellsberg, not dr. ellsberg's office.  