judging goalies, ranking brodeur   martin brodeur has been the rock-solid foundation of the devils since his rookie season in 1993-94, when he backstopped them to the second overtime of an unforgettable game 7 against the rangers in the conference finals. now, with his name engraved on the stanley cup three times to ease the memory of stéphane matteau's series-winning goal that wild night at madison square garden, brodeur is having what may be the best season of his career.  at the all-star game break, brodeur's .928 save percentage -- the most important goalkeeping statistic -- was second best in the n.h.l. that efficient work sparked the rising devils to second place in the eastern conference as they closed steadily on the buffalo sabres.  his performance also revived the discussions usually heard around playoff time: that brodeur is the best goalie of this era. it is hard to argue with the evidence: three cups; game-in, game-out consistency through 13 seasons; exemplary conduct on and off the ice. but is he really the best?  his main rivals for those laurels would have to be patrick roy and dominik hasek. roy had four stanley cup championships to his credit by the time he retired in 2003, two with montreal and two with colorado -- one more than brodeur. hasek has won only one cup, but unlike brodeur, he rarely has had a highly skilled team in front of him. for most of his career, hasek has faced a storm of pucks, yet at one point recorded the n.h.l.-leading save percentage a remarkable six years in a row, an achievement unmatched in the 54 years that shot-and-save records have been kept.  the devils, long the model of a strong defensive team, have always diligently limited the quantity and quality of shots that get through to brodeur. that may be one reason he almost always finishes among the league leaders in save percentage.  but he has never led the league in that category. the odd thing is that this season, with the devils' defense finally looking a bit porous, the 35-year-old brodeur is registering the highest save percentage of his career.  the accompanying chart shows brodeur's yearly statistics for shots against per 60 minutes and save percentage, compared with the annual averages for all n.h.l. goalies in those categories. (empty-net shots and goals are excluded.)  the chart illustrates how brodeur and his teammates have worked together to create a nearly impregnable defense. brodeur has faced fewer shots than the n.h.l. average every season of his career, often far fewer. the six shots that eluded him in wednesday's defense-free all-star exhibition are irrelevant. in 11 of his 13 seasons, brodeur's save percentage was better than the league average, often much better -- and never below average.  debut of the new fall line  the all-star game generally provides little more than a free-scoring pond-hockey exhibition, but this year's event in dallas offered one widely anticipated -- or dreaded, by some -- development: the league's new uniform design in partnership with reebok. the n.h.l. promoted a radical change, standardized for all 30 teams and featuring a sleek aerodynamic look.  many fans feared that players would have to suit up in some sort of speedskating unitard, or at least in something as untraditional and unpopular as the cooperall design of the mid-1980s. before the unveiling, the league described the new uniforms as ''anatomically correct.''  but casual observers might not have even noticed the changes. the sweaters, made of a slick, stretchy, moisture-resistant fabric, feature large mesh inserts and a more snug fit, which gives players a somewhat shallow-chested, wide-hipped look.  other elements of the new sweater design, obvious only to some fans, include an oddly curved hemline, a fixation with vertical striping and the n.h.l. crest displayed below the collar, all of which are at odds with the traditional designs worn by several teams, particularly the original six franchises. the league has said, however, that each team will be allowed to determine how to adapt its colors, crest and striping to the new sweater template. third jerseys are also being eliminated for next season, when all teams will begin wearing the new design.  two late bloomers  some players burst onto the n.h.l. stage as ready-made all-stars. some take a bit longer to develop their star power, after careful nurturing by their teams.  a few, however, arrive despite being largely unappreciated. at least two of the standouts from the 2007 all-star game fit that description.  phoenix center yanic perreault was a quebec league all-star who was regarded as a bit too small and too slow for the n.h.l. he spent the first four years of his pro career bouncing between the minor leagues and fourth-line duties in the n.h.l. perreault was traded four times, cut loose by nashville last summer and went a month into this season without receiving an offer from another n.h.l. team. but he scored twice for the western conference all-stars on wednesday and was a team-high plus-5 in its 12-9 victory over the eastern conference.  buffalo wing daniel brière had a similar story while playing for a previous management team in phoenix: another quebec all-star deemed too small for the rigors of the n.h.l. brière, for most of his first four years, was relegated to the minors and to fourth-line ice time in the n.h.l., and was finally discarded in a little-noted trade in 2003. with a goal and four assists wednesday and a team-best plus-5 mark for the eastern conference, brière was named the game's most valuable player.  schedule is unchanged  the n.h.l. board of governors convened in dallas during the break and discussed an increase in interconference play. but the league schedule, which heavily favors intradivisional and intraconference games, will continue for at least another year.  proposals to have each eastern conference team play each western team once at home and once on the road, or to have each team meet every team from the other conference once, each fell one vote short of passing. the five atlantic division teams voted against both plans.  hockey: sunday shootout  