clock expires as comeback by knicks falls short   on the play that essentially decided the game, knicks guard stephon marbury did everything right defensively. he stepped around a high screen set by ruben patterson, milwaukee's muscular forward, and forced the right-handed guard mo williams to dribble left.  but williams, who had missed the previous nine games with a sprained left shoulder, made an off-balance 20-footer sunday to give the bucks a 4-point lead with 3.1 seconds to play. that basket, and a foul shot that williams was actually trying to miss, enabled the bucks to overcome 17 fourth-quarter points from jamal crawford and hold off the knicks, 107-105, at the bradley center.  ''he made a good shot,'' marbury said of williams. ''i wouldn't call it a lucky shot.''  had the knicks defended the first 47 minutes 50 seconds as well as marbury did on that play, the struggling bucks might not have broken their six-game losing streak, and knicks coach isiah thomas might not have turned his postgame news conference into a lamentation on his team's failure to make free throws.  the knicks finished 14 of 24 from the line (58.3 percent) after a 10-for-20 start. the numbers 14 and 24 remained on the locker room dry erase board long after thomas pulled on his dark wool overcoat and headed for the team bus.  ''our inability to convert when we get to the foul line is killing us right now, and all season,'' thomas said.  center eddy curry, who shot 6 for 9 and had 15 points in his return from a strained left calf muscle, and the backup forward david lee (19 points, 14 rebounds) gave the knicks a strong presence inside.  but thomas and his players used words like ''strange'' and ''weird'' to describe a game that the knicks, who gave up too many layups and easy baskets inside, nearly pulled out.  ''it was definitely a strange game from the beginning,'' curry said. ''it wasn't one of those games where we were clicking early and rode a wave the whole game.''  the knicks' performance mirrored that of crawford, who was ineffective until the final quarter.  coming off his career-high 52 points against miami on friday night at madison square garden, crawford did not touch the ball the first four minutes as the knicks worked it inside to curry. then he missed his first six shots.  the knicks trailed by as many as 11 before crawford scored his first basket, a pumping layup from the right with 1 minute 12 seconds left in the first half.  ''i think the first game after a game like that is probably the hardest,'' crawford said, referring to his big night. ''by my teammates kept encouraging me.''  when the fourth quarter began, the knicks trailed, 78-69, and crawford was 3 of 13 from the field. but over the next 10 minutes, he and the rookie reserve forward renaldo balkman led the knicks back.  crawford scored 14 points, including two 3-pointers, while balkman added 8 points inside and a block. then, two foul shots and a 3-pointer by marbury cut the bucks' lead to 102-100 with a minute to play.  but williams, who finished with 30 points and 10 assists, proved too tough. he had a hand in milwaukee's final 11 points. over the last 4:03, williams hit three jumpers and one free throw and had two assists.  williams and marbury exchanged baskets before williams sank the critical 20-footer. the knicks called timeout to advance the ball to the forecourt, where mardy collins inbounded to crawford, who made a quick catch-and-shoot 3-pointer. even though no knick touched the ball before crawford, the game clock ran down to 0.8 from 3.1.  thomas argued that the play could not have taken that much time, but the officials let it stand.  ''it was their call,'' thomas said.  crawford fouled williams on the inbounds play, leaving four-tenths of a second left.  then, more weirdness. williams missed the first of two free throws. on the second, he stepped to the left side of the foul line and tried bank the ball off the rim to keep play alive and run out the clock. instead, he swished it.  ''i guess i'm too good of a free-throw shooter,'' williams said, laughing.  after another knicks timeout, crawford shot an air ball on a turnaround 3-point attempt from the left corner. the shot would not have counted because crawford stepped on the sideline as he spun.  ''i was just trying to rush to get it up there,'' crawford said.  marbury was left to explain how the knicks, after routing the heat with dwyane wade and shaquille o'neal, could lose to an undersized milwaukee team without its leading scorer, michael redd (strained left patellar tendon). the bucks had been 0-4 at the bradley center in january after going 7-0 in december.  ''we have to come out more prepared at the beginning of the game to make the plays, so we don't put ourselves in these situations,'' marbury said.  rebounds  guard nate robinson had a halfcourt 3-point basket at the end of the first quarter disallowed on video review, because the clock showed time had expired before the ball left his hands. undaunted, robinson tried again just before halftime and made it from three-quarters court, easily beating the buzzer.  the knicks deactivated kelvin cato to activate eddy curry.  pro basketball  