september in january: school bus changes sow confusion   george a. bonanno, a manhattan professor, was startled to learn that under new city school bus routes going into effect yesterday, he would have to take his two children to separate bus stops about a mile apart, only so they could be ferried to the same elementary school.  ''i was completely baffled,'' said dr. bonanno, adding of the new routes: ''it looked as if a monkey had done it. it looked as if someone had done it randomly.''  so he took matters into his own hands, putting both children on the same bus.  parents throughout the city offered similar tales yesterday, complaining of confusion, crowding and lateness from the changed routes, which were the new york city department of education's latest effort to cut costs. earlier this school year, officials said that at the advice of a private consulting firm they hoped to save $20 million by consolidating routes and making sure that buses were supplied only for children who used them. the city has budgeted $1.06 billion for student transportation this fiscal year.  education officials said yesterday that the city had eliminated 116 of 2,156 daily bus routes for students who do not receive special education services, for a savings of about $12 million a year. mayor michael r. bloomberg defended the changes, saying that the city had tried its best to notify parents and that in the past, money had been wasted, especially because buses were supplied for children who did not need bus transportation. the city said that 99,000 public school students were listed as eligible for free transportation, and that 80,700 of them had responded to requests for information under the new system. of those, 54,000 were routed on yellow buses.  ''what we're trying to do is have bus routes where the kids need them and not to pay bus companies for routes where the kids don't,'' mr. bloomberg said. ''but we only have a certain amount of money in this city, and if you want to make sure that your monies are well spent and that we help those we can, it requires looking at programs and seeing whether they are effective.''  margie feinberg, a department spokeswoman, said yesterday's problems were sporadic and ''no different from those we heard on the first day of school.''  but across the city, parents and other public officials saw it differently.  in queens, a group of parents who had received conflicting messages about whether their children would continue to receive bus service to robert f. kennedy community middle school in flushing set up a morning news conference at their bus stop; three city council members showed up, but the bus never did.  in brooklyn, a bus to a coney island middle school for gifted children was so crammed that some students were forced to stand in the aisle; one boy accidentally hit isabella cipriano, 11, in the face with his book bag.  ''we were all squeezing,'' isabella said. ''there was no room to move.''  dr. bonanno, an associate professor of clinical psychology at columbia university's teachers college, said that according to the new routes, his children are also to be dropped off at different places and as much as an hour later than they had been dropped off before.  ''you could walk to the school and back in the time they're telling us it's going to take to drive the kids back in a bus,'' he said. ''it's at a level of frustration and insult that's really hard to bear.''  in queens, kimberly pirro, a graduate student, waited at a bus stop with her two daughters for a half-hour. the bus, she said, never came. instead, she drove the girls and two other children to school. but she said that her girls missed breakfast. ''i think it's horrible,'' ms. pirro said.  matthew busacca, 12, a classmate of isabella cipriano's at mark twain intermediate school, shivered at his morning bus stop for 40 minutes before calling his father to pick him up.  ''we kept on seeing all these buses pass,'' matthew said. ''i was freezing. my feet were numb.''  matthew's mother, judy licausi, said she had filled out the appropriate paperwork and had not been notified of any changes in matthew's route.  some parents said they were told that they were not eligible for bus service, and that their children, some of them as young as 5 or 6, would receive metrocards instead. many said they got word of new bus stop locations and pickup times only last week, leaving little time to rearrange schedules. the changes also affected about 28,000 nonpublic school students, mostly at parochial schools, who receive busing from the department.  ms. feinberg, the department spokeswoman, said the department had intended to change the bus routes in september but postponed the move several times ''to provide more time to notify parents,'' and after the private bus companies the city contracts with sought a court order blocking the changes.  parents, she said, were notified multiple times in multiple languages, and a telephone line set up to handle busing concerns received 16,568 calls since friday. the hot line number is (718) 482-3700, and the department said that information is also online at opt-osfns.org.  still, numerous politicians jumped into the fray to criticize the department for changing routes midyear, on a frigid morning.  betsy gotbaum, the public advocate, said in a statement, ''this midyear bus route shuffle is another example of the department of education being clueless to what it is to be a parent in new york city.''  councilman tony avella, who joined the kennedy middle school parents at a bus stop, without the bus, on willets point boulevard in whitestone, queens, said: ''parents and the kids stood there for about an hour. it really is shameful.''  