state is investigating lobbyist about source of contributions   the state lobbying commission is investigating whether an albany lobbyist masked the source of some of his clients' political contributions by charging the clients for appearing at fund-raisers and then making campaign donations in his own name, according to court papers filed here monday.  the lobbyist, james b. crane ii, made a $350 donation on april 8, 2003, to a republican state senator, thomas p. morahan, according to the court papers and campaign finance records. the court papers state that mr. crane's lobbying firm billed one of its clients, duane reade, $350 for attending a fund-raiser for senator morahan that day. the papers say that the firm regularly charged clients for appearing at fund-raisers.  ''if, in fact, there was some effort here to pass election contributions in a manner which, intentionally or otherwise, hides the actual donor or otherwise evades the election law, there are obvious ramifications under the lobbying act where, as here, a client was billed for such sums by a lobbyist,'' david grandeau, the executive director of the lobbying commission, wrote in papers filed in state supreme court in albany.  mr. crane currently works at a lobbying firm with former attorney general dennis c. vacco, a republican. at the time of the donations that attracted the attention of the lobbying commission, mr. crane worked at powers, crane & company with william d. powers, a former state republican party chairman.  neither mr. crane nor a lawyer said to be representing him responded to phone calls or an e-mail message seeking comment on monday.  the court papers, which were filed as part of an effort by the lobbying commission to force mr. crane to comply with a subpoena, pull the veil back a bit on the secretive world of lobbyists and the large campaign donations they make.  lobbyists are among the biggest campaign donors in albany, and they are the main target for the many fund-raisers that lawmakers hold in the capital on nights when the legislature is in session -- a practice the spitzer administration would like to ban. several lobbying firms have their own political action committees to make donations.  but the court papers state that mr. crane's firm regularly sent invoices to clients for appearing at fund-raisers -- and sometimes billed more than one client $500 to appear at the same fund-raiser.  the court papers state that the lobbying commission has received invoices showing that powers, crane & company billed duane reade, the new york state laborers political action committee and delaware north companies for attending fund-raisers.  the invoices sent to duane reade show that the firm charged from $350 to $1,000 for attending the fund-raisers, according to the court papers. the papers state that the expenses do not appear on filings that the firm made to the lobbying commission.  the commission turned up no records with the board of elections showing that duane reade had made political contributions on the dates of the fund-raisers, but did find a number of contributions made by mr. crane.  