coast guard is criticized on overhaul; waste is cited   frustrated by reports of ships with cracking hulls, design flaws, cost overruns and construction delays, lawmakers demanded tuesday that the coast guard's leadership overhaul its $24 billion effort to rebuild its fleet or risk the program's cancellation.  at a hearing of the house subcommittee on coast guard and maritime transportation, committee members delivered a bipartisan lashing to the coast guard, which has spent several billion dollars for a new fleet but now has fewer ships available for patrols than it did in 2001.  ''our subcommittee will not allow taxpayer money to continue to be wasted for failing projects,'' representative elijah e. cummings, democrat of maryland and chairman of the subcommittee, told the coast guard commandant, adm. thad w. allen. ''we must stop the waste.''  lawmakers were perhaps most disturbed over reports that the coast guard's first national security cutter, the 425-foot flagship of the new fleet, had more than doubled in cost and had design flaws that could cause cracks in its hull or deck within a few years.  richard l. skinner, the inspector general of the homeland security department, in a report issued monday blamed the coast guard for poor oversight of the design and construction of its vessels.  already, eight smaller patrol boats rebuilt under the coast guard overhaul program, known as deepwater, have been pulled from service as unseaworthy, even though the government paid $100 million for them to the coast guard's contractors, led by lockheed martin and northrop grumman.  ''now you have eight pieces of junk sitting at the yard,'' representative gene taylor, democrat of mississippi, said at the hearing, his voice cracking with anger.  admiral allen, who took over the coast guard last may, did not dispute that deepwater, which is intended to replace or modernize 90 ships and 200 aircraft over the next 15 years, was off to a disappointing start. ''deepwater is essential to the coast guard's future,'' he said. ''we have to get it right.''  to deliver on that promise, admiral allen said the coast guard would be more assertive in monitoring lockheed and northrop, which were hired in 2002 not just to build the ships and the planes, but also to manage the program.  the coast guard's chief engineer now has the power to review all aspects of the program and demand changes, admiral allen said. if serious disagreements occur, he added, the coast guard's senior managers and lawmakers are to be informed.  members of the subcommittee expressed confidence in admiral allen, who replaced michael d. brown, the much-criticized director of the federal emergency management agency, in leading the federal response to hurricane katrina in new orleans.  but they made it clear that they had no tolerance for more mistakes, and that they wanted the coast guard to demand payments from lockheed and northrop if it could be documented that they had been responsible for some of the problems.  ''we never had much of a margin of error,'' said representative frank a. lobiondo, republican of new jersey. ''we have none left at all. we can't sustain any more bad news.''  philip a. teel, president of northrop grumman ship systems, and leo s. mackay jr., president of the partnership that northrop and lockheed created to manage the deepwater program, defended their performance. mr. teel and dr. mackay disputed assertions that the national security cutter was flawed, saying that the first ship they built, at a cost of nearly $500 million, would last 30 years as required.  but the coast guard, at a still undetermined cost, is planning to make major structural enhancements in the first and second ships, and then to change the design for the remaining six.  lockheed and northrop have been told that their contract will be extended until at least 2011, but admiral allen said the coast guard was still negotiating the terms of that deal.  committee members asked admiral allen to return in four months to document that the promised improvements had been made.  ''the deepwater program seems to be in, well, deep water,'' said representative rick larsen, democrat of washington.  