few views are forever   douglas pinter, a san francisco real estate developer and the former chief executive of a long-forgotten internet start-up, is used to the ups and downs of the business world, but his introduction to the pitfalls of new york city real estate has been a bit abrupt.  just last month, mr. pinter closed on his $2.4 million 10th-floor apartment in a notable new condominium, the urban glass house, the last residential commission of philip johnson, modeled loosely on the architect's own home in connecticut and marketed as a ''modernist luxury residence.''  mr. pinter liked the building's light and airy look, even though its location, at spring and washington streets, was in a grungy no-name land between greenwich village, tribeca and soho. it is across the street from ventilation shafts for the holland tunnel. still, some upper-floor apartments have views to the south, and most of the apartments have views of the river to the north and west. at least for now.  but in the last month, with most of the 40 apartments in the building sold or in contract, the new york city sanitation department said that it planned to take over a large parking lot just to the north and diagonally opposite the urban glass house. it would put up a garage as tall as a 15-story building and longer than a football field that promises to block much of the view of the river from many apartments.  having a view blocked by a newer, bigger building is an old story in new york. but seldom has the view from such a distinctive building been threatened so soon after the ink on so many sales contracts has dried. the building opened in october.  since then, mr. pinter and his neighbors, an affluent mix of models, minor celebrities and wall street executives who spent $2 million or more for their apartments, have been gathering information and organizing.  mr. pinter, who calls himself semiretired, said he was looking for ''like-minded residents'' to join him at a hearing called by the sanitation department to discuss plans for the new garage.  ''it's a shame,'' mr. pinter said. ''invariably something would have been built there, but here is a building that was critically acclaimed architecturally, modest in size and scale and not gaudy, facing a consolidated sanitation garage.''  the sanitation department plan was put forth in a 46-page document posted on the department's web site. the document was dated dec. 28 but was first spotted in early january by residents of the neighborhood. the plans call for putting up a garage 140 to 150 feet high on the lot, which is bounded by spring, washington and west streets and to the north by a large office and warehouse building. the urban glass house tops out at 137 feet.  the garage's ground floor would be used by the united parcel service, which now parks its trucks on the lot, while the rest of the building would be used by the sanitation department, consolidating three garages. a smaller garage just to the south of the parking lot and next to the ventilation shafts would be turned into a truck wash and refueling depot, storing 13,000 gallons of fuel and oil.  vito turso, a deputy sanitation commissioner, said that the garage was needed to replace garages along the river in the newly established hudson river park. ''we are trying to be as understanding and as good a neighbor as we can to that community,'' mr. turso said, ''recognizing that we still need to provide refuse collection, recycling and snow removal to that part of town.''  abe shnay, a partner in the group that developed the urban glass house, said that buyers were still signing contracts and that most were aware that the parking lot could someday be developed. at one point, he said, there were rumors that a high-rise would go up on the site. ''the reality is that on the upper floors the best views are to the south, incredible views of the upper harbor and the statue of liberty,'' he said.  but michael shvo, the president of shvo marketing, a real estate company that is not involved with the urban glass house, said he always tells buyers, ''there are only two views in new york that are guaranteed: if you are on a park, or if you are facing a brick wall.''  search results: condo in the raw  craig nevill-manning, the director of engineering at google's rapidly expanding new york office, knows how to find needles in what he calls a ''20 terabyte haystack.''  mr. nevill-manning, who invented google's froogle shopping service, has now also threaded the real estate needle and landed one of downtown's most unusual and, for a while, hardest-to-sell properties: the rooftop english castle topped by a live-in copper dome at 150 nassau street, an ornate turn-of-the-last-century building that was once new york's tallest skyscraper.  mr. nevill-manning and his wife, kristin, who also works at google's new york office, have just closed on one of the most expensive condominiums in the financial district, paying $6.45 million for the penthouse, which has 6,400 square feet of space spread over three floors atop a romanesque and renaissance revival building, according to brokers briefed on the transaction.  the apartment has a 30-by-30-foot outdoor deck, a private terrace that winds around the steep copper-clad roof, huge semicircular windows, 18-foot ceilings and a 360-degree view -- at least until the developer forest city builds a 75-story skyscraper on the site of a parking lot for new york downtown hospital nearby. it has one major drawback, however: the space has no plumbing or electricity or interior walls, and it needs work estimated to cost $2 million or more, depending on the detail, before anyone can move in.  but if you want to know one version of what it might look like, you might look at the spike lee film ''inside man,'' released last year and starring denzel washington. the space was dressed up and appeared as the office of jodie foster's character, a mysterious power broker.  the apartment was the last unsold unit in the 23-story building, a city landmark, built in 1895 as the american tract society building. it happened to go on the market just days before the attack on the world trade center in september 2001.  over the last few years, the apartment was offered through some of the largest brokerages in the city, prudential douglas elliman and brown harris stevens. it was finally sold by adam modlin and reuben davis of the modlin group, a small firm. along the way, the asking price went from $12 million, including a $2 million credit toward the cost of the interior, to $6.9 million.  estimating celebrity value  how much is celebrity really worth? only two years after the actress gwyneth paltrow and her husband, chris martin, the british rocker, paid $7.95 million for a 7,000-square-foot condominium in tribeca, they have put it back on the market for an even $14 million.  the apartment on harrison street has 1,600 square feet of gardens and outdoor space, including a rooftop soaking pool, an elevator, a steam shower, six bedrooms and four and half baths. it also has a finished basement with two washers and two dryers.  the listing broker, carter wilcox of the corcoran group, did not return telephone calls. but stephen huvane, ms. paltrow's publicist, said ''considerable'' work had been done on the unit. ''i really doubt there is such a thing as 'celebrity' value at that price range,'' he said. ''but i am not a real estate professional.''  big deal e-mail: bigdeal@nytimes.com  