deal struck on claims of nazi era   after nearly 10 years of struggling to have a big italian insurance company pay claims on life insurance policies sold to victims of the holocaust, lawyers who say they represent most of the victims are giving up the fight.  they say they have struck a deal with the insurer, assicurazioni generali, that will give holocaust victims and their relatives far less money than they had originally hoped. but the lawyers say that their chances of winning a lawsuit seemed increasingly unlikely and that many of their clients are old and, in some cases, in poor health.  ''it's a compromise,'' said robert a. swift, a lawyer in philadelphia who began working on insurance cases from the holocaust in 1997. ''in a perfect world with more leverage, maybe i could have negotiated a better formula. but i'm playing the hand i was dealt.''  judge george b. daniels of federal district court in manhattan has called a hearing for this morning to determine whether the settlement is fair to all parties.  if he approves the agreement, it will close a painful chapter in the insurance company's history. it could also provide perhaps several million dollars more to victims of the holocaust and their heirs.  judge daniels will also hear arguments from lawyers who are refusing to participate in the settlement, contending that the deal will prevent tens of thousands of other holocaust victims and their heirs from ever being compensated -- just as new evidence on the holocaust is being uncovered in europe.  last may, officials of a multinational group said they were taking steps to open half a dozen warehouses in bad arolsen, germany, that have been sealed for 60 years and are filled with documents compiled by the nazis and by american and allied forces.  samuel j. dubbin, a lawyer in miami opposing the agreement, said the settlement should be postponed until the german material is examined. but lawyers who worked out the deal -- both for the survivors and generali -- want it to go ahead.  ''the possibility of finding something in those records, at this point, is remote,'' said lawrence kill, one of the lawyers who negotiated the settlement with generali.  in the settlement, generali does not acknowledge assertions by survivors that it, like many other european insurers, routinely refused to pay death benefits for jews who died in concentration camps and sometimes demanded copies of policies and death certificates from families that had lost everything. generali says it was never the company's policy to deny valid claims and, in the settlement papers, it denies any wrongdoing.  the settlement includes generali's reasons for resisting payment. it says, for example, that its offices in much of europe were seized by communist governments after world war ii and that those governments -- rather than the insurance company -- should be held responsible for paying holocaust claims.  generali also argues that its insurance policies became all but worthless as a result of steep devaluations in european currencies after the war, that united states courts do not have jurisdiction over the holocaust dispute and that the statute of limitations has long been expired for holocaust victims.  european insurers over the years declined to publish the names of policyholders, a step that would have helped survivors determine if relatives had bought life insurance and whether they might have reason to make a claim. generali permitted the publication of many names, its representatives said. but, advocates for the survivors counter, the lists were far from complete.  in the settlement, there is no provision that generali publish the names of all its holocaust-era policyholders.  ''where is the historical justice?'' asked thane rosenbaum, a son of holocaust survivors and a professor at the fordham university school of law. ''tens of thousands of holocaust survivors are being shut out of the process. this is an abuse of the class-action process.''  christopher j. carnicelli, a generali executive in london, said in an e-mail message that the company was proud of the settlement and that only a handful of people opposed it. ''the objections of a very small number of individuals with a track record of finding fault with any holocaust-related settlement cannot obscure this settlement's important benefits,'' he wrote.  lawyers first began investigating holocaust insurance claims in the late 1990s and filed lawsuits against more than 20 european insurers. all the lawsuits except those against generali were eventually dropped or, in the case of german insurance companies, resolved through a settlement negotiated between the united states and germany.  mr. swift, the lawyer in philadelphia, and lawyers at three other law firms began drafting the agreement after two courtroom defeats. in 2003, the supreme court ruled that a california law pertaining to holocaust survivors interfered with the ability of the president of the united states to resolve international disputes.  a year later, judge michael b. mukasey, in federal district court in manhattan, cited the supreme court decision as the basis for dismissing the class-action claims by mr. swift and his colleagues, along with several separate lawsuits.  mr. swift and his colleagues and the lawyers pursuing separate cases appealed judge mukasey's decision. the appeal is expected to be argued in a few months. but mr. swift said he and the other class-action lawyers decided over the summer that the odds were against them and that they could do better by settling.  sidney zabludoff, a holocaust insurance expert, estimated that 850,000 jews were insured by european carriers at the time of the holocaust. he put the value of those policies at $18 billion in today's dollars.  mr. zabludoff estimated that generali had coverage on about 110,000 jews and that the policies could be worth $4.5 billion in today's dollars.  in court papers, generali says it has paid $135 million on about 5,200 claims. marco e. schnabl, a lawyer for generali in new york, said the insurance company also paid $40 million through various international funds related to the holocaust.  generali agreed to pay about $35 million of the $135 million on about 700 claims as a result of the settlement, mr. schnabl said, and it has been accepting new claims over the last few months. generali had received nearly 1,000 claims by monday, mr. schnabl said, and plans to accept additional claims until the end of march, under the settlement.  on claims with no evidence of a policy, nothing will be paid. but survivors or relatives with at least some proof are expected to receive at least $1,000.  generali has paid more to holocaust victims than any other insurance company and provided more than a third of the $288 million that a holocaust insurance commission in washington has said was offered on more than 46,000 claims.  the average payment offered on a claim -- many involving more than one policy -- has been about $6,200. but generali says it has paid some claims for hundreds of thousands of dollars and more.  william m. shernoff, a lawyer in california who represents several holocaust survivors, said he and his clients did not want any part of the settlement.  ''we have policies that we think are worth, instead of a few thousand dollars, would be worth hundreds of thousands of dollars,'' mr. shernoff said. ''and punitive damages could be substantial. a jury could be so outraged that it could come in with a blockbuster award.''  