hollywood monster rampage: art vs. egos   bambi vs. godzilla  on the nature, purpose and practice of the movie business  by david mamet  250 pages. pantheon. $22.  david mamet's ''bambi vs. godzilla'' takes its title from a two-minute animated short (actually ''bambi meets godzilla'') in which the monster crushes the innocent little fawn. this would make a fine metaphor for the way the film business treats artists if it didn't mean miscasting mr. mamet in bambi's role. as the lacerating essays in this uneven but icily hilarious collection make clear, he is far better suited to stomping on tokyo.  ''bambi vs. godzilla'' is devoted to pet peeves, some of them standard. no surprises here: mr. mamet abhors crass producers, meaningless spectacles, focus groups, ambitious studio drones and specious screenwriting. about one particularly bad sequel, he says: ''jewish law states that there are certain crimes that cannot be forgiven, as they cannot be undone. it lists murder and adultery. i add this film.''  that jewish law is invoked more than once here. and the book repeats itself on certain points, like mr. mamet's boundless admiration of ''the godfather.'' perhaps the repackaging of redundant journalism in book form (much of this material comes from his column for the guardian of london, though some originally appeared in harper's magazine) belongs on the same list of transgressions, but no matter. mr. mamet writes with insight, idiosyncrasy and a godzillian imperviousness to opposition.  like sidney lumet's ''making movies'' and william goldman's books of advice on filmmaking, mr. mamet describes the process from the ground up, with a keen eye for evidence of the absurd. he claims to have seen a sign on a movie set reading, ''gum is for principal cast members only,'' since this is a business that never forgets about pecking order. and after promising to offend several groups with one thesis, he suggests that the hallmarks of asperger's syndrome (''early precocity, a great ability to maintain masses of information, a lack of ability to mix with groups in age-appropriate ways'') add up to the job description of a movie director.  mr. mamet, who has nothing but disgust for the emphasis on backstory and characterization that can turn a movie into mush, also notices how much the idiom of the modern screenplay overlaps with that of the personals column, so that a character may be described as ''beautiful, smart, funny, likes long walks and dogs, affectionate, kind, honest, sexy.'' this filler, he says, winds up ''replacing dialogue and camera angles, the only two aspects of a screenplay actually of use.''  much of ''bambi vs. godzilla'' is devoted to separating useful and useless aspects of the filmmaking process. ''it is enough to drive one to the fainting couch,'' he says about hollywood's paralyzing practice of making films of increasing expense and diminishing worth. when he sees a poster that lists the names of 18 producers, he wonders whether ''the film, perhaps, is being made no longer to attract the audience but to buttress or advance the position of the executive.'' if this kind of bureaucrat has replaced the old-fashioned intuitive mogul, ''it is not that the fox has taken over the henhouse but, if i may, that the doorman has taken over the bordello.''  with entertaining bitterness mr. mamet skewers the kind of person destined to succeed in this corporate culture. and a figure skewered by him winds up sounding as tough and treacherous as someone from a mamet play. ''the young bureaucrat-in-training'' is apt to learn ''that success comes not from pleasing the audience but from placating his superiors until that time it is reasoned effective to betray them.'' as for the screenwriter-in-training at film school, ''one can study marching, the entry-level skill of the military, until one shines at it as has none other,'' he writes. ''this will not, however, make it more likely that one will be tapped to be the secretary of the army.''  if such opinions are apt to disappoint anyone looking to mr. mamet for career advice, they will delight those who share his cynicism. is there a worthwhile message to be found within the big, vacuous blockbuster? yes: ''you are a member of a country, a part of a system capable of wasting two hundred million dollars on an hour and a half of garbage. you must be somebody.'' he finds this brand of wastefulness equally conspicuous in current moviemaking and military strategy.  if hollywood's idea of entertainment is actually ''tincture of art,'' and if studio executives ''want, in effect, to find the script for the hit of last year,'' how can a serious filmmaker stay afloat? by recognizing the vital difference between stimulation and drama, for one thing. (''one may sit in front of the television for five hours, but after 'king lear' one goes home.'') by resisting demands for arbitrary alterations in one's work, the kinds of changes that raise doubts about the work's seriousness. what would happen, he asks, to an architect who was similarly accommodating? (''would you mind moving the staircase? thank you. now would you mind moving the skylight?'') and by understanding the etiquette of betrayal, hollywood style. ''should the project go awry,'' he writes, ''you will be notified by a complete lack of contact with those in whose hands its administration has rested.''  some of ''bambi vs. godzilla'' is painfully contorted. (''what shibboleth, you wonder, will i list to augment your umbrage?'') some of it goes nowhere. but most of this sharp, savvy book is amusing and reassuring. somebody with a keen knowledge of gamesmanship knows exactly how hollywood's games are played. and refuses to play by the rules.  books of the times  