spitzer to offer larger budget, but with property tax cuts   gov. eliot spitzer will propose a budget of more than $120 billion wednesday that would increase overall spending by more than 6.3 percent, a larger increase than his predecessor, george e. pataki, proposed last year but significantly lower than the budget enacted by the legislature, people briefed on the plan said.  after talking for months about the need to rein in spending, the governor had to reconcile his campaign promises to substantially increase funds for education and lower property taxes, while also moving to make health insurance available to all of the state's children and increase aid to distressed municipalities.  to pursue those goals, the governor will propose changing much about the way the state does business, including overhauling the way the it allocates medicaid dollars and education aid.  mr. spitzer's budget will include $1.5 billion worth of property tax cuts in the coming fiscal year, which begins in april, and $1.4 billion in new statewide school aid. the governor is also proposing to hold the growth of medicaid costs to under 2 percent, far lower than in previous years, by making more than $1 billion worth of cuts to certain programs, the people familiar with the proposal said.  last january, mr. pataki proposed a 4.1 percent spending increase over his previous budget, but the budget that was enacted called for an increase of more than 9 percent. while mr. spitzer's overall budget includes federal dollars; the general fund, which encompasses most but not all state spending, will increase by 4.2 percent.  whether the governor can get his budget through the legislature remains to be seen. he is expected to try to take a hard line with the lawmakers on not adding to his spending proposals, a goal in which mr. pataki was often frustrated.  he is already at odds with democrats who control the assembly because of a bitter disagreement over picking a new state comptroller. and on tuesday, battle lines were being drawn with the republican-led senate.  in a speech to county executives from around the state tuesday morning, mr. spitzer said that he would keep his campaign pledge not to raise taxes and to cut property taxes by $6 billion over three years.  but not long after the governor spoke, the senate majority leader, joseph l. bruno, fired some carefully aimed shots across the new administration's bow during a press conference.  tellingly, even on the topic of property tax cuts, a major priority of senate republicans, mr. bruno chose to emphasize the contrasts between his plan and the governor's.  ''we're in different places in terms of timetable, we're in different places in terms of who the recipients are,'' he said. the senate recently passed a property tax plan providing $6 billion of relief in two years, instead of three, as the governor is proposing. mr. spitzer's plan is specifically designed to help the middle class, while the senate prefers a broader approach.  the governor's plan to overhaul the way the state allocates medicaid money to health care providers will also likely be a flashpoint, because the senate has close ties to health care workers' unions and hospital groups that have been critical of proposed medicaid cuts.  ''i'm just concerned that everybody have affordable health care,'' mr. bruno said.  he said he was also ''very concerned'' about the governor's education agenda. mr. spitzer is proposing to increase state education spending by $7 billion annually within four years and to tie the increases to new accountability requirements for school districts.  ''we have to make sure that the dollars that go into education don't build a bureaucracy that is intended to look at accountability and methods. that's what we have to be careful of,'' mr. bruno said. ''i'm concerned from what i heard, but i want to be fair. i don't know until we see the specifics.''  he emphasized that the senate was willing to increase spending on education -- and, as if to illustrate the point, he made increasing spending on higher education the focus of his press conference on tuesday.  perhaps the biggest education battle, however, will be over the governor's plan to overhaul the way state education aid is allocated to various regions, a touchy subject for the senate, which is dominated by upstate and suburban republicans, who want to make sure that their districts' share of aid is not diminished.  on monday, mr. spitzer, after announcing his education plan, said he expected resistance from the legislature. ''does that mean there may be a battle?'' he said. ''you bet. it's fine. we welcome it.''  asked about the governor's prediction, mr. bruno said, ''he's right, he's absolutely right. he's very astute.''  the governor's plan for property tax cuts is aimed at the middle class, adding $6 billion over three years to the existing school tax relief program, known by the acronym star. benefits under the plan decrease for upstate households with incomes exceeding $60,000 and households in new york city and its suburbs with incomes exceeding $80,000.  some senate republicans criticized his proposal for not doing enough to help constituents with higher incomes.  ''the governor is going to be talking about property tax cuts, the governor is going to be talking about reform, but all he's doing is raising property taxes for our constituents,'' said senator dean g. skelos, a long island republican, who is the deputy majority leader.  the governor also said in his speech on tuesday that he one of his goals was a full state takeover of medicaid costs now borne by counties, a proposal that past governors have floated and that has long been the holy grail of local elected officials. such a move would relieve localities of one of their biggest budget burdens. new york city, for example, will spend $5.2 billion on medicaid during the next fiscal year, nearly one-tenth of the city's budget.  jeffrey gordon, a spokesman for the governor's budget division, described mr. spitzer's idea as ''an aspirational goal'' and said there was no timetable to take such action.  