hoping that winter x games can turn white into green   born in backcountry mountain terrain a decade ago, snowmobile freestyle, the newest event in the winter x games, made its prime-time debut thursday on espn.  with a few thousand frozen fans looking on, 400-pound snowmobiles hurtled several 100-foot jumps as riders did aerial stunts on a snowy course on buttermilk mountain.  the 10 invited riders, trying to qualify for four finalist positions sunday night, put on a spectacle of arcing back flips and bone-rattling crashes. the display represented another impressive feat: the successful marriage of sports and commerce at the x games.  the arrangement offers mutual benefits. the snowmobile industry, which had sales of $2.2 billion in 2006, including accessories and parts, has been troubled recently by flat sales and an aging market; and the x games offers exposure to a young, hip audience.  for its part, the x games and espn inherit a large motor-sports audience for its prime-time programming.  ''not only are we an action sport,'' said joe duncan, the snowmobile sports organizer at the x games, ''but we're an action sport that brings in motor-sports enthusiasts.''  duncan is a founder of the world power sports association, which runs a national race series for snowmobile snocross, a discipline similar to motocross. professional snocross riders often have budgets of half a million dollars or more, a necessity as they travel to races with a team, including mechanics and a manager, in 18-wheelers.  the x games has had snocross races every year since 1998.  ''snocross is our top marketing tool,'' duncan said about the snowmobile industry. ''it's been a great fit with the x games, which has been a huge boost for the interest of snowmobiles.''  the hope is that freestyle can lift snowmobile sales that have remained fairly flat for the past decade, mostly because of poor snowfalls and warmer winters throughout the midwest.  according to the international snowmobile manufacturers association, 164,860 snowmobiles were sold worldwide in 2006, down from 239,000 sold in 2000.  and snowmobile owners have been getting older. in 2006, their average age was 42, compared with 37 in 1997.  one reason snowmobiling skews older is that the average cost of a sled is $8,269. and according to the manufacturers association, 80 percent of enthusiasts spend their time touring and trail riding, not pulling freestyle moves while launching off cornices in the backcountry.  but some would like to see that change.  steve cowing, the competition and media director for ski-doo, one of the largest snowmobile manufacturers, said he wanted to avoid what happened to skiing during the 1990s, when the sport was viewed as a stodgy activity for older people.  meanwhile, snowboarding boomed, luring younger participants with its emphasis on fun and freestyle maneuvers.  to change its image, bombardier recreational products, which owns ski-doo, unveiled its freestyle model last year, an entry-level sled priced at $4,000. and the company has sponsored two freestyle riders at the x games, jay quinlan and heath frisby.  ''we're marketing to a younger crowd, the kind that would be exposed to the x games,'' cowing said.  and the x games freestyle event offers a marketing opportunity.  ''it's exposure for the sport,'' cowing said. ''we jumped on it from the very first this year.''  so did yamaha, which has a new sled aimed at younger riders and sponsors the x games freestyle rider jimmy fejes.  ''when you're talking about snowmobiles, just like motorcycles, you need a commitment from manufacturers,'' said ron semiao, the senior vice president for espn original entertainment and the creator of the x games. ''snocross has been good for manufacturers, and we think freestyle will be, too.''  with the addition of snowmobile freestyle to the x games, the two most recent additions have been motor sports. rally car racing was added to the summer x games in 2006 and was a big hit.  snowmobile freestyle replaced a freestyle motocross best-trick event that took place on snow. freestyle motocross will remain a part of the summer x games.  snowmobile freestyle was tried as a demonstration at the 2004 winter x games but was deemed not ready for prime time.  still, outside of the x games, snowmobile freestyle remains a kind of barnstorming activity, and nearly all its participants work second jobs.  a competitive freestyle snowmobile series folded two years ago because of what several riders termed poor management. some snowmobile manufacturers may be reluctant to endorse freestyle riders fully because of potential liability by imitators who could be injured or killed.  fejes, a 25-year-old from anchorage, was eliminated thursday when he underrotated while performing a back flip and slammed his sled nosefirst into the top of a banked landing. fejes was thrown facefirst to the snow and remained down for several minutes but walked off the course on his own.  like many top riders, fejes began his involvement with snowmobile freestyle in the backcountry among snowboarders searching for fresh terrain rather than riding groomed trails at ski resorts.  fejes and his friends would build jumps for their snowmobiles. by 2000, they began attracting attention in the growing market for videos of snowmobile stunts.  but the sport made its greatest leap forward when the professional snowboarder jim rippey landed the first documented snowmobile back flip in 2001. the move, featured in the video ''slednecks 4,'' received mainstream attention.  chris burandt, 28, who finished first in qualifying thursday and will compete in the finals, works for his sponsor arctic cat as a district sales manager for utah and idaho.  in a telephone interview, he summed up the ambitions of his colleagues.  ''i'm hoping the x games will help build our sport,'' burandt said. ''i really hope they see what we're capable of, and maybe we can get it to snocross's level, where there's multimillion-dollar sponsorship from companies outside the industry.''  winter sports  