at march, worshipers brace to fight closing of a church   scores of parishioners of a catholic church in east harlem took to the streets yesterday to protest its imminent closing, while an activist from boston warned of a ''tough fight'' of vigils, lawsuits and prayers.  the church, our lady queen of angels, is one of 21 parishes scheduled to be closed by the roman catholic archdiocese of new york. the archdiocese is closing parishes and opening a few new ones in response to a shift in the church's membership, mostly toward the city's northern suburbs.  ''you don't go in and sing 'kumbaya' and the world admires you,'' peter borré, the activist, who successfully fought parish closings in boston, told the marchers. ''it's not a walk in the park.'' our lady queen of angels, on east 113th street, mainly consists of parishioners from puerto rico, the dominican republic and ecuador.  most of the marchers yesterday were elderly women clutching rosary beads. but at the head of the march, taking turns holding a staff with a crucifix on one side and a depiction of mary on the other, were melinie martinez, 12, a former altar girl, and her cousin, jose rodriguez, also 12.  ''i'm an altar boy,'' he said. ''we're marching because our church is closing. i was baptized there and i had my first communion there and i want to make my confirmation there.''  mr. borré, 68, co-chairman of a catholic group in boston called the council of parishes, told the protesters that of 83 boston parishes scheduled to be closed since 2004, parishioners had successfully lobbied to keep open or to reopen only 10.  the most successful tactics, he said, were attracting media attention; filing appeals under church law; filing lawsuits under civil law; and holding public demonstrations ranging from short-term vigils to round-the-clock sit-ins and occupation of church buildings.  five parishes in the boston archdiocese remain under 24-hour occupation, with dissident parishioners sleeping on the floor, in chairs and on benches, he said. ''i've slept with women whose names i don't even know,'' mr. borré said, to applause.  mr. borré also has been in contact with parishioners at mary help of christians in the east village, another of the churches to be closed.  yesterday, a parishioner asked when our lady queen of angels was set to close, and another answered, ''march 1,'' prompting gasps.  but carmen villegas, a march organizer, said the parish had not yet received an official letter with a closing date.  