here come china's women (and one rising star is just 12)   for decades, the best women in chess came from eastern europe, partly a result of state support of chess. but since the soviet union's collapse, while eastern european men have maintained their place among the elite, the women have slipped. of the top 10 active women, half are from eastern europe.  chinese women have rushed to fill that vacuum. three of the top 10 are from china, although one, zhu chen, no. 4, who was world champion from 2001 to 2004, now lives in qatar.  chinese men have improved, too, taking the silver at the world team championships last year, but haven't kept pace with the women. the best chinese man, wang yue, is no. 60.  mao banned chess during the cultural revolution, and it was not until the late '70s that it began to gain a following. up to then, chinese had played a (still popular) version of chess that has several big differences, including having pieces called canons, but no queens.  the first great chinese player, xie jun, easily made the switch to the western-style game. in 1991, she won the world championship by beating maya chiburdanidze of georgia. xie held the title until 1996, lost it, and then regained it in 1999 before ceding it to zhu in 2001.  the newest talent is hou yifan, who is just 12. the world's eighth-ranked female player, she already has a rating high enough to qualify for the grandmaster title (not the watered-down women's title, but the men's). she had been turning in an impressive performance at the elite corus tournament, which ends today.  in the third round, hou displayed calm beyond her years, defending a difficult position against the dutch grandmaster john van der wiel. unable to crack hou's defense, van der wiel pushed too hard and lost a piece. hou quickly wrapped it up.  hou chose the najdorf variation of the sicilian defense, and van der wiel responded aggressively.  hou's 7  qc7 is not considered the main response to 7 f4 (more usual is 7  be7), but it is playable.  with 9 f5, van der wiel sought to open the position, but this move has generally not had good results for white. more common is 9 qd2, seeking to complete his development.  after 10 fe, black's king was destined to stay in the center, but experience has shown that black does quite well in this position.  hou's 11  nd4 took the game into almost uncharted waters. after 16  rd7, the players had bishops of opposite colors, a situation that favors the attacker. van der wiel improved his position steadily, but after 22  kd7, hou was still o.k.  van der wiel miscalculated with 29 ef, overlooking that after 31  bf6, he cannot take the bishop with the queen because then the rook on g4 is unprotected and he cannot take it with the rook because of 32  re1.  after 37 rf5, he gave up.  chess  