bears hope takeaways lead them to a title   if the chicago bears win the turnover battle sunday, they believe they will win the super bowl.  no team in the n.f.l. forced more turnovers (44) than the bears during the regular season, and their ball-hawking style has continued during the playoffs. during their 39-14 victory against the new orleans saints in the national football conference championship game, the bears produced four turnovers -- three fumble recoveries and an interception.  the indianapolis colts have not lost a fumble in three postseason games, but peyton manning has thrown six interceptions. if the bears can force takeaways against manning and the colts' offense, chicago likes its chances.  ''get the ball out of their hands, any way possible,'' bears linebacker lance briggs said monday when asked about his team's season-long approach to defense. ''it's preached. if we go in the meeting room to look on film, and we're not running in to get the ball out, we're going to hear about it all day.''  support for rooney rule -- bears coach lovie smith remains a supporter of the rooney rule, which requires n.f.l. teams to interview a minority candidate for every head-coaching opportunity. smith and tony dungy of the colts are the first african-american coaches to reach the super bowl, and 6 of the league's 32 teams have an african-american head coach. the cowboys are still seeking a coach to replace bill parcells, who retired last week.  last week, the pittsburgh steelers hired their first african-american coach, mike tomlin. smith used that example to support the rooney rule.  ''i would like to think owners would hire the best coach, but i'm here because of the rooney rule,'' smith said. he added: ''it's good that guys like mike tomlin have gotten an opportunity to be a head football coach. i think mike would have gotten an opportunity still, but i think it may speed up the process a little bit. whenever you can get in front of someone is good, and of course the rooney rule allows you that opportunity.''  it's good to be home -- bears defensive end adewale ogunleye is enjoying the super bowl experience because he lives in miami during the off-season. after the bears arrived in miami on sunday, he went home.  ogunleye also acted as a tour guide sunday night, taking some of his teammates out on the town.  ''that was the only night that we're going to be able to do that,'' ogunleye said. '' i had most of the guys on the team there, most of the single guys. i don't want to get the married guys in trouble.''  singletary to interview in dallas -- mike singletary, a hall of fame linebacker, will be interviewed tuesday for the cowboys' coaching job. singletary will meet with jerry jones, the team's owner, as the eighth candidate considered to replace bill parcells. (ap)  around the league -- chris palmer was hired as the quarterbacks coach of the giants.  the raiders hired the former atlanta offensive coordinator greg knapp to fill the same job in oakland. the cardinals hired maurice carthon as the running backs coach and richie anderson as the tight ends coach. (ap)  n.f.l. roundup  