with leading scorer on bench, irish help erase cruel memories   the banner hanging above the notre dame basketball team's bench shows that the last time the irish reached the n.c.a.a. tournament was in 2003. since then, notre dame has endured a long string of close calls, cruel losses and trips to the national invitation tournament.  ''so much heartbreak in so little time,'' said russell carter, one of the team's two seniors on scholarship. ''no one can really say they've had that kind of concentrated heartbreak.''  but in a season in which notre dame was picked to finish 11th in the big east and given little chance of reaching the n.c.a.a. tournament, the no. 22 irish have emerged as one of the biggest surprises in college basketball.  they have done so by overcoming their arch nemesis -- the close game. the irish pulled out an improbable 66-63 victory against villanova on saturday, overcoming a 7-point deficit in the final seven minutes with carter, their leading scorer, on the bench.  villanova (14-6, 3-4 big east) had two chances in the final 10 seconds that could have tied the score. but reggie redding's 26-foot heave from the right wing and curtis sumpter's contested look from the left side each caromed away.  ''i think this was a big step forward for us psychologically,'' irish coach mike brey said. ''for us to have to scratch and claw and grind. we haven't had to do that against a good team here.''  the senior swingman colin falls led the irish with 23 points, including the game's most important basket, which capped off the game's defining sequence.  notre dame led by 2 points with just over a minute remaining when irish forward luke harangody launched his 6-foot-8, 250-pound frame on the floor near midcourt to dislodge a ball from villanova guard scottie reynolds. (in the stands, the play drew a smile of recognition from charlie weis, notre dame's football coach.)  falls picked up harangody's tip near midcourt and coasted in for a layup that gave notre dame a 64-60 lead with 1 minute 5 seconds remaining.  ''that was the play of the game,'' brey said of harangody's dive to force the turnover.  notre dame has been able to overcome the demons of the past three seasons thanks to the strong leadership of falls and carter, and the efforts of young players who haven't experienced the heartbreak endured by the seniors.  three years ago, the irish barely missed the n.c.a.a. tournament; they wound up looking back in regret and pinpointing an early-season loss to central michigan. the next season, the irish were left out of the tournament after losing to a struggling rutgers team in the first round of the big east tournament. the game came a week after the irish blew out the scarlet knights at home, but the star guard chris quinn was hurt in the game's first five minutes.  last season, notre dame lost five games in overtime, done in time after time in the final seconds by other big east teams.  ''i've really seen everything but the n.c.a.a. tournament,'' falls said. ''i've seen huge conference wins. huge nonconference wins. i've seen a lot of letdowns, a lot of disappointments.  ''i've had the highs and lows.''  the highs on saturday came thanks in part to the sophomore swingman ryan ayers, who drained a 3-pointer from the left wing to tie the score at 60-60 with 2:29 left.  ayers has joined harangody and the freshman point guard tory jackson, who had only one turnover in 36 minutes, in the youth movement that has helped the irish exorcise their bad memories.  notre dame's record (17-4, 5-3 big east) and out-of-conference victories over maryland and alabama have the irish poised to see the star-crossed careers of falls and carter end in the n.c.a.a. tournament.  ''that's what's driving me,'' brey said. ''i want to coach those guys in the n.c.a.a. tournament.''  college basketball  