trenton assembly votes to ease state's property tax burden   a half-year after legislative leaders and gov. jon s. corzine vowed to provide relief for the highest property tax rate in the nation, the assembly voted on monday evening to give a 20 percent credit to most homeowners and to put a 4 percent cap on future local property tax increases.  although mr. corzine admonished state legislators months ago to be bold in restricting local tax increases, slashing public pensions and consolidating municipal governments and school districts, those changes and others approved monday evening were viewed by many here as little more than a few steps in a very long journey. the senate is to take up the measures next week.  the assembly speaker, joseph j. roberts jr., attributed the outcome to mixed signals from the public and to the general messiness of the legislative process, which he said was not even as clean and orderly as making sausage.  ''the public message we heard was shake up the status quo, but stay the course,'' mr. roberts said before the vote. ''the best place to be is right smack in the middle of a contradiction, and that is where we are. the question is whether the public believes that these changes go far enough.''  to get the job done on monday, assembly leaders placed the body ''under call,'' a legislative maneuver that barred lawmakers from leaving the chamber, forcing them to vote without abstentions.  the assembly debated into the evening before voting 71-8 to approve the 20 percent credit and the 4 percent limit on local property tax increases.  in a session that went more than eight hours, the assembly also approved a number of changes in the laws governing pensions and pension forfeiture that had been approved in the senate last week. in the end the measures passed easily.  final passage was given as well to a bill that would create a commission to study consolidation of municipalities and school districts in an effort to end wasteful duplication. it was approved 70 to 8 with one abstention.  more grudgingly, the assembly gave final approval, 47 to 30, to a measure creating the office of an appointed comptroller.  all of the measures were part of what governor corzine said was his multipronged attack on property taxes, which have been rising a significant 7 percent a year.  the senate president, richard j. codey, who was following the assembly debate, said the state's effectiveness in reining in property taxes would depend on how successful governor corzine is in trimming pension and health care benefits for state employees during contract negotiations -- something he specifically asked lawmakers to leave to him.  in the end, mr. codey said, what really matters to voters is how soon they will get the relief on their property taxes. the 20 percent credit would replace the state's homestead rebate program with a richer plan. the credit would be financed from state sales tax revenue and would send about $2.2 billion back to 95 percent of the state's 1.9 million property-tax payers, and about one million of its renters.  ''when i go out and talk to voters, that's what they tell me matters most,'' mr. codey said.  in the area of pension reform, the biggest items are those affecting state employees. after the legislators recommended several changes at mr. corzine's urging -- like raising the retirement age and reining in pensions for new employees -- he said unexpectedly in early december that he would try to win givebacks and changes through collective bargaining.  the state senate did establish a 401(k)-type pension for future elected officials that would scrap the current defined benefit program and would limit the way lawyers, architects and other professionals can combine part-time jobs with multiple municipalities to enhance their pensions.  the senate also passed a measure stripping officials convicted of corruption of the portion of their pension associated with the job in which the misfeasance occurred. the assembly approved all three matters.  although both chambers are controlled by the democrats, the measures fell short of what even some democratic lawmakers wanted. those legislators had wanted pension benefits denied to officials convicted of corruption, and more limits on municipal workers who increase their pensions with multiple jobs.  ''it is disingenuous to say that this is reform,'' said state senator nicholas p. scutari, a linden democrat who was chairman of a special legislative commission that looked into pension reform last summer. ''the reform saves no money, and to think that the governor can negotiate with the unions what the legislature had a hard time agreeing on is a mistake.''  in the area of consolidation of school districts and municipal services, lawmakers said they received mixed signals from communities. the result in the senate was a measure that would leave the decision on shrinking the number of local governments up to local voters.  ''these people want a mercedes-benz, but they only have oldsmobile money,'' said state senator stephen sweeney, a democrat from west deptford. ''and you know oldsmobile went out of business.''  