songs from sweden by way of britain and two epochs   peter bjorn and john kept flipping between two eras -- the merseybeat mid-1960s and the new wave early 1980s -- during their sold-out set at the mercury lounge on monday night. both were times of crisp, upbeat, tuneful pop-rock: the first bright-eyed and fresh, the second more knowing and self-conscious. peter moren (on guitar), bjorn yttling (on bass) and john eriksson (on drums) don't set out to revolutionize their chosen styles, only to give them a brisk, smart workout.  peter bjorn and john are from stockholm, but they sing in english and sound largely british. their stage clothes hinted at an alliance of mod (mr. moren in a suit), rocker (mr. yttling in a leather jacket) and punk (mr. eriksson in black with close-cropped hair). all three are songwriters, and they take turns on lead vocals, but leave most of them to mr. moren, whose voice has touches of john lennon.  they understand pop songs as nuggets of emotion delivered in mechanisms of riff and hook, repetition and surprise. and they sing about falling in love and (more often) breaking up with concise verses -- ''your tongue is sharp, but i miss the taste of it'' -- and reprises that don't wear out their welcomes. they also like to whistle many of their hooks, like the one in their european hit ''young folks,'' a wary lovers' duet. on monday they brought along victoria bergsman, until recently of the concretes, another swedish band.  the trio's analytical side, its artisanal delight in the formulas of pop, comes through on its albums. its new one, ''writer's block'' (almost gold), captures the songs with schematic clarity. onstage, peter bjorn and john were casual between songs -- they introduced themselves as ''peanut, butter, jelly'' -- yet utterly precise during them, locking into every riff.  live, the songs were no longer just neat exercises in pop structure. on monday, peter bjorn and john hugely expanded the dynamics of their music. there was tension in an exposed bass riff, diffidence or resentment or triumph in the vocals, a fiercer attack as mr. moren laid on bursts of guitar. ''the chills,'' which harks back to the postpunk minimalism of joy division, was extended and revved up with furious guitar tremolos and cymbal crashes, sounding far less resigned to the breakup it describes than it does on the album. the craftsmanship of the song was still fully displayed, but so was the passion behind it.  music review  