an over-the-top z4   for centuries, the perfect makeover has been a reliable theme. and from ''pygmalion'' to ''pretty woman'' -- and today's coarser version, in which the too-real faces of reality tv win a date with the surgeon -- the transformation is as fascinating as the end result.  now, the automobile has its own cinderella story, in the bmw z4 coupe.  in its original incarnation as a convertible, the z4 looked, if not ugly, then certainly awkward and fussed-over.  yet somehow, sticking a fixed roof on top has turned this stylistic pumpkin into a magic coach, creating one of the most lovely and distinctive sports cars of recent years. and from the roadster's somewhat lifeless personality, engineers have coaxed vivid performance with a serious mean streak.  this is especially true of the $58,070 model i drove from bmw's high-performance m division, the m coupe. (the m coupe starts at $50,795.) its 330-horsepower, 3.2-liter engine is a fierce-revving wonder, one of the most technically elite in-line 6's ever. a hydraulic steering rack replaces the convertible's vague electric unit; sticky performance tires stand in for the roadster's run-flats. with a stiffer body, redesigned suspension and stronger brakes, the m coupe feels like a different animal -- emphasis on the animal.  (most buyers will be content with the z4 coupe 3.0si, which offers similar styling and a more agreeable ride for about $9,000 less. it starts at $41,095, and with 255 horsepower from a 3-liter 6, it's plenty fast).  these coupes look hot from every angle. details that seem extraneous on the roadster, including bmw's signature ''flame surfaced'' body panels, suddenly come together under that sleek fastback roof. the cabin, drawn sharply back as if by the wind, plays up the classically stretched hood. and the so-called ''bangle butt'' -- a derisive reference to the bulging trunk lid of some current bmws, a signature touch from bmw's top designer, chris bangle -- is beautifully integrated with the new hatchback tail.  the m coupe was a terror on the taconic parkway north of new york city, howling like mad to its lofty peak of 8,000 r.p.m. the z4's minimalist interior has been nicely upgraded, with standard leather seats and door trim, along with generous swaths of brushed aluminum. a silky six-speed manual shifter is standard; a six-speed automatic with paddle shifters is available.  compared with the angelic perfection of the porsche cayman's ride and handling, the bmw is more a monster, less forgiving of pokes at the throttle and stabs at the brake. but given a smooth hand, it is thrillingly fast and responsive, and its hard-core attitude is crucial to its appeal. the m coupe will also save a buyer about $12,000 compared with a cayman.  while the high-opening hatch and generous cargo well give the z4 excellent luggage space for a small two-seater, this purist car demands a like-minded driver. with its ultrataut suspension and handsome but unyielding 18-inch wheels and tires, the m coupe is downright brutal on choppy pavement; a four-hour drive left my spirit exhilarated but my body wrung out. the view out the narrow hatch is like peering through a medieval turret.  driven hurriedly, the m returned 17 m.p.g.; the e.p.a. rating -- 16 m.p.g. in the city, 24 on the highway -- earns it a $1,000 guzzler tax. (the z4 coupe 3.0si fares much better at 21/29 m.p.g).  from a driving perspective, the m coupe outdazzles its $106,000 stablemate, the m6. more faithful to bmw's traditional values, it's the m coupe that unites man and machine. it costs half as much as the m6, yet is twice as much fun.  inside track: from ugly betty to post-op princess.  