will bush's health plan work?   to the editor:  re ''the president's risky health plan'' (editorial, jan. 26):  forty-seven million uninsured americans is not only a crisis, it is also a scandal.  a crisis calls for a response that is equal to the seriousness of the problem, not a half-baked proposal like the one announced by president bush on tuesday.  even if his tax-cut plan were enacted and the number of uninsured was reduced by three million to five million, the potential estimated by white house officials, we would still have a crisis.  mr. bush's plan would be tantamount to treating cancer with a band-aid.  john chalmers  gresham, ore., jan. 26, 2007  to the editor:  you write that the greatest risk of the administration's proposal is that small and medium businesses might stop providing health coverage.  as a small-business owner, i can tell you that this is true and it's not necessarily bad.  the health insurance my company offers is a good plan, but it does not offer the best fit for each employee, and its expense prevents us from offering any retirement benefits.  putting the burden of selecting and paying for health benefits on employees would increase their cost sensitivity, allow better tailored coverage and allow small and medium-size employers to provide other benefits that are every bit as critical to the future of our nation.  saul j. stahl  brooklyn, jan. 26, 2007  to the editor:  your editorial, which is mostly critical of president bush's health insurance proposals, is very well thought out.  but there is another factor in the health care cost issue that you did not mention.  if more people are to become able to pay for medical care, then there have to be more people ready to provide the care. if not, then medical care costs will go up even faster than they are now.  it's economics 101, supply and demand.  what we need are more medical care providers to go along with the newly insured patients, and this is something that cannot happen overnight and will take lots of political courage to make happen.  lester ostroy  redondo beach, calif.  jan. 26, 2007  to the editor:  the president's proposed tax credit for health insurance would level the playing field for those of us who have ordinary health policies.  the only people who will lose are those who have gold-plated policies, like big company bosses and union members.  those of us who have high deductibles and co-payments -- the large majority -- will win under the president's proposal.  it is unfair to the average worker that big company bosses and union members not only get fat-cat medical benefits but don't even have to pay taxes on them.  if the democrats are truly sincere about looking out for the common man and reducing blatant inequalities, they should stand up to the unions and support the president's proposal.  christopher taylor  new york, jan. 26, 2007  to the editor:  your editorial ''the president's risky health plan'' ignores the possibility that president bush's health care proposals can be a first step in the demise of our antiquated employer-based health care system.  by taxing health care premiums greater than $15,000, the president's proposal will lead families and employers away from employer-sponsored coverage.  already, many mid-size and small companies currently do not offer health care insurance.  the employer-based system has given us job lock, where employees are reluctant to move to a more productive job where health insurance is not offered.  even if one has a job but is laid off, or the employer goes out of business, health insurance coverage can be lost.  obtaining health care insurance in the individual market tends to be prohibitively expensive unless one is young and healthy.  in contrast, under the private, individual-based health system in israel and the netherlands, in which there is no employer role, health insurers must accept any applicant regardless of health status and, in the netherlands, are paid greater amounts by the government for enrolling high-risk enrollees.  universal coverage exists in both countries, with health care expenditures under 10 percent of gross domestic product in each country, relative to the 15 percent of g.d.p. in the united states.  warren greenberg  washington, jan. 26, 2007  the writer is a professor of health economics at george washington university.  to the editor:  re ''the president's risky health plan'' (editorial, jan. 26):  you hit the nail on the head when you wrote that president bush's ''whole approach rests on the premise that comprehensive prepaid health policies are a major factor in driving up costs; the theory is that people will tend to use services if they are covered. there is probably some truth in that.''  there is; economists have known this since the days of lord keynes. further, it is seen as a good thing.  an individual's health is primarily valuable to the individual; it is in the aggregation of these individuals that it becomes more valuable to society at large.  this is why we call it a ''public'' health system.  i fail to see how these ''gold plated'' health care systems do not in the aggregate serve the public good.  katherine verleger  atlanta, jan. 26, 2007  to the editor:  george w. bush's health insurance proposal to create a standard deduction for health insurance spending of $15,000 for families and $7,500 for individuals will increase the tax burden for everyone, rich and poor, in the long run.  mr. bush predicts that only 20 percent will experience an increase at the outset of the plan in 2009, giving the reform the illusion that it is benign. but the rate of medical inflation increases so fast that in a few short years, most people on private insurance would exceed the limit and pay tax on a portion of their health insurance.  taxing insurance is not the way to decrease the number of uninsured.  adam e. block  somerville, mass., jan. 26, 2007  the writer is a doctoral candidate in health policy at harvard.  