hollywood parables, retold and rehashed   tonight a show about disappointment begins just right.  ''boulevard of broken dreams,'' the latest schadenfreude jamboree, fails to live up to the simplest expectation that it feature ''boulevard of broken dreams,'' the appropriate green day anthem of self-pity, as a theme song. would e! entertainment television not spring for the rights? in any case the show, which had its debut last week, starts with stupid chords instead. whatever. it's too bad.  e!'s ''boulevard of broken dreams'' is the myspacer's apparent answer to vh1's grand old warhorse, ''behind the music,'' which used to offer parables of musical careers gone wrong. ''boulevard,'' however, seems to be cultivating amnesia about its esteemed predecessor, even as it revisits the same cautionary tales that vh1 exploited first and better.  consider e!'s perfunctory gloss of leif garrett's surrender of his teenage fame to heroin addiction, for example. he entered rehab a year ago, and according to those interviewed in the segment, only his mother seems to believe he'll recover this time. this tepid rehash made me crave another look at vh1's pioneering 1999 episode on that fallen star.  back then mr. garrett's stagey reunion with roland winkler, an estranged friend he left paralyzed after driving on quaaludes in 1979, tore at the heart. mr. winkler seemed at peace; mr. garrett, who was professing sobriety for the cameras but would go on to more drug-related arrests, seemed tormented. mr. winkler does not appear on e!'s show, nor do any of the affecting vh1 interviews.  too bad, again, that e! hasn't more closely studied the ''behind the music'' playbook. it fails to take a respectful tone, make use of cultural history or (so far) arrange reunions.  come to think of it, what an achievement that old series was. you knew at the top of any ''btm'' that after gold records, gardening accidents and angel dust can't be far behind, and the pattern of rise and fall became almost comforting, proof that at least you were right not to have gone into rock 'n' roll instead of tax law or journalism.  at its best the vh1 series was able to connect pain, music and history in meaningful ways. it came to serve as an odd form of cultural redemption -- for the '60s and '70s in particular -- as well as the birthplace of the nostalgia for musical oddities that still determines a percentage of itunes downloads.  ''boulevard of broken dreams'' is unlikely to leave such a legacy. where ''behind the music,'' because it appeared on viacom's vh1, had access to music and music videos, ''boulevard of broken dreams'' has to content itself with crumbs from the tables of stars desperate to get airtime. and where ''btm,'' as a brand-new concept, operated without the collaboration of the principal figures in its episodes -- and thus told stories using history and archival material -- ''boulevard'' is determined to get as much access as possible, and thus ends up telling the stories of comebacks as much as downfalls.  on tonight's episode, for instance, the cast-off members of destiny's child -- letoya luckett, farrah franklin and latavia roberson -- complain about their ill treatment by matthew knowles, beyoncé's father. but they don't dwell nearly enough on old resentments. before you know it, they're plugging their new projects as if they were cruising down the highway of happy hopes.  ms. luckett is even talking about her solo album, which was no. 1 on the billboard 200 less than six months ago. by the end it's hard to see this lively, bright-smiling young superstar ever for a minute trudging along what green day calls ''this empty street  where the city sleeps  i'm the only one and i walk alone.''  similarly, in the first episode, niki taylor, the fashion model whose sister, krissy, died and who herself suffered injuries in a car accident, was stalwart about her return to modeling and now boutique-operating. (ms. luckett also owns a boutique.) ms. taylor appears fully recovered from the accident, which, we're told, caused some internal problems. neither ms. luckett nor ms. taylor could quite deliver this show. for starters, neither seemed like a match for leif garrett, whose life seems tailor-made for this boulevard. maybe he should be made mayor.  boulevard of broken dreams  e!, tonight at 10:30, 9:30 central time.  john dorsey, supervising producer; joel gooling, associate producer; john griffin, segment producer; john formichella and john shea, producers. produced by e! entertainment television.  television review  