what's on tonight   9 p.m. (fox) house -- dr. gregory house (hugh laurie, left, fresh off his screen actors guild and golden globe wins for best actor in a drama series) returns to princeton-plainsboro teaching hospital after a stint in rehab, and cuddy collects on the debt of perjuring herself for her colleague by assigning him to clinic duty, where a rape victim who should be seeing a psychologist insists on pouring out her heart to the curmudgeonly doc. doesn't she know he doesn't want to listen?  8 p.m. (fox) american idol -- southern discomfort as week 3 auditions begin in birmingham, ala.  9 p.m. (13) the cell next door -- last summer, 18 young men in toronto and two in atlanta -- most of whom had grown up in moderate, middle-class homes in canada and the united states -- were arrested on terrorism charges after being accused of plotting to blow up buildings and behead members of the canadian parliament and attending a terrortraining camp in ontario. in this ''frontline/world'' documentary, mubin shaikh, a fundamentalist muslim turned police informant, talks about his two years inside the cell.  9 p.m. (abc) big day -- it's time for the ceremony, but where are the bride and groom? in a stalled car in the middle of nowhere, that's where, with their plans to elope in shambles. but jane and steve have a romantic idea in this season finale.  9:30 p.m. (mtv) bam's unholy union -- if you thought bam margera, the professional skateboarder and ''jackass'' psycho, didn't seem the marrying type, think again. this new reality series follows mr. margera (above, at his bachelor party) as he prepares to undertake his latest death-defying stunt: tying the knot with melissa rothstein, whom he has known since childhood.  10 p.m. (logo) the outlaugh festival on wisecrack -- margaret cho warms up the audience for this gay, lesbian and transgender stand-up series. tonight's comics: jason duty, lisp, havania and suzanne westenhoefer.  10 p.m. (fx) dirt -- no action too low, especially when it comes to family: lucy (courteney cox) publishes photos of the action star jack dawson -- in the arms of her brother, leo. meanwhile, brent barrow (jeffrey nordling) is forced to break the golden rule of journalism, and julia mallory (laura allen, above) continues to come undone.  10:30 p.m. (mtv) wrestling society x -- fight club: mat warriors including jack evans, matt sydal, lizzy valentine, teddy hart, vampiro and sean (6-pac) waltman battle one another in an undisclosed bunker while accompanied by bands like good charlotte, three 6 mafia, new found glory, pitbull, black label society, jibbs, sparta, the clipse, quietdrive and styles p. in this new sports series. producers are betting that things get ugly.  kathryn shattuck  