starve football, feed athletics   with its stellar 2006 football season, rutgers university has been rejoicing. but not everyone is celebrating. at the end of this academic year, rutgers will drop its men's varsity tennis team and five other varsity teams: men's swimming and diving, lightweight and heavyweight crew and men's and women's fencing. the cuts at rutgers are symptomatic of a larger problem that many olympic sports are having at colleges across the country.  according to the university, the cuts are a result of state initiatives to reduce the budget for higher education. robert mulcahy, rutgers's athletic director insists that ''every possible alternative was evaluated.'' yet mr. mulcahy said that the football budget would increase by about $1 million -- more than the combined cost of the six teams to be cut.  the cuts don't make sense. the annual budget for the rutgers tennis program, including scholarships, is only four-tenths of 1 percent of the university's $36 million annual athletic budget. the football and basketball teams account for nearly half that budget. the per-athlete expenditure on the rutgers football and basketball teams is about $128,500, or $18 million for 140 athletes. the expenditure for the teams that will be cut is about $5,600 per athlete, or $850,000 for 150 athletes. and the football and basketball teams don't bring in nearly enough television and other revenue to cover their costs; in the aggregate, they lose millions every year.  in response to the cuts, the state assembly higher education committee held a hearing. patrick diegnan, the committee chairman, concluded that the elimination of the six teams was ''illogical'' and would not produce significant cost savings. yet, neither richard mccormick, rutgers's president, nor its board has reversed mr. mulcahy's decision.  cuts like these aren't being made just at rutgers. the intercollegiate tennis association estimates that as of dec. 1, 553 men's and women's varsity tennis programs have been dropped. sports like wrestling, track, swimming, diving, crew and fencing have been similarly eroded. some colleges rationalize their decisions by noting that their varsity programs have become club sports. but club sports do not offer the same rigor, training, experience and competition that varsity teams do.  this is a problem because in some sports, the athletes who come from these university programs constitute the bulk of the athletes on the united states olympic teams. these programs are vital to america's success in the olympic games not only because they identify talent, but also because they provide essential coaching development and athletic training.  while sports like tennis, swimming and crew may not provide either the big business for the n.c.a.a. in terms of television revenue or the alumni support campaigns for colleges and universities that football and basketball do, that doesn't mean we should cut them. diversity in collegiate athletics is important. it affords valuable educational experience for students and enriches the quality of campus life.  there is a solution. for the 2006-2007 season, 64 out of the 119 division 1-a teams playing in bowl games will receive bowl payments of $300,000 to $17 million. total conference payments will exceed $100 million. conferences should set aside a percentage of their bounties to finance and restore sports that don't bring in as much money.  additional cost controls could also be put in place. men's football teams in division i-a schools have about 115 players, and 85 of them are on full scholarships. even factoring in player injury, this is excessive. professional football teams have active rosters in midseason that are less than half this size. if division i-a football scholarships were reduced to, say, 75, the savings could help finance other sports, particularly those that feed into olympic teams. moreover, football rosters could be capped at no more than 90 to generate further savings.  across-the-board measures to curb excessive expenditures, like limits on the size of coaching staffs, bowl game travel expenses, pregame home team hotel stays and outside catering, could also help. no particular football team would be singled out, the quality of college football wouldn't suffer, rivalries would still flourish, viewer ratings would remain strong and the pressures produced by title ix gender-equity requirements could be alleviated.  with football's success, rutgers will receive a substantial financial boost from increased ticket sales, television appearances and a bowl payment. george zoffinger, a member of the rutgers board and head of the new jersey sports and exposition authority, which oversees the meadowlands sports complex, has suggested using some of that windfall to restore the sports that were cut. this is a step in the right direction, but officials at rutgers have yet to endorse the idea.  without intervention, this gradual marginalization of collegiate olympic sports programs will eventually lead to the programs' demise. the n.c.a.a. and colleges and universities must embrace the inherent value of having a wide variety of varsity teams on campuses. unless and until they make this a priority, many colleges and universities will continue to devote their resources to costly football and basketball programs at the expense of other teams.  meanwhile, all eyes should be on rutgers.  op-ed contributor jon vegosen, a lawyer, is a board member of the united states tennis association.  