carter gets 40 and support, letting nets exhale   high point totals are a common occurrence for vince carter, but they are not the true mark of his dominance. that is typically measured by how inclined he is to shun jump shots for a taste of the rim.  carter was that unstoppable high flier saturday night, scoring 40 points, 20 in the fourth quarter, to lead the nets to a much needed 112-102 victory against the denver nuggets.  the nets (21-23) won their first road game against a western conference team this season and snapped a gut-wrenching streak of three consecutive 1-point losses to start this five-game western trip.  ''the good part is we won,'' said nets forward bostjan nachbar, who scored a career-high 22 points. ''the sad part is we should be 4-0.''  carter outshone the other two superstar scorers on the court, carmelo anthony and allen iverson, who combined for only 41 points saturday night after scoring 70 a night earlier against the utah jazz.  the nets pointed to their commitment to team defense as the reason they were able to slow anthony and iverson.  what was also special about this performance for the nets was the contributions from all around. in addition to nachbar's scoring, antoine wright returned to the rotation for 11 points and played excellent defense against anthony. jason kidd scored 18 points and had 12 rebounds. and the rookie backup point guard marcus williams scored 11 points.  ''when you play a team like denver, you're going to need everyone to contribute, and our guys did a good job of that,'' nets coach lawrence frank said.  the contributions started with a lineup of reserves, led by nachbar and williams, pulling the nets back into the game in the second quarter after falling behind by double digits after the first. it continued with kidd, the team captain, showing his excellence in the third quarter with 12 points on four 3-pointers and 7 rebounds. and, when the game counted the most in the fourth quarter, the ball went to the nets' superstar, carter.  carter got 10 of his 12 free throws in the fourth quarter, a sign of his willingness to drive to the basket.  carter, who shot 14 of 23 from the floor and had 7 rebounds and 6 assists, has been criticized at times for settling for jump shots and not having the mental fortitude to be consistently dominant.  ''what, i think, vince has done, he's touched the specialness, but he doesn't quite comprehend the fundamental nature that he has to play at to be there consistently,'' nuggets coach george karl said before saturday night's game.  after the game, nachbar said of carter: ''when he plays like that, we're a different kind of team. he's basically unstoppable when he puts his mind to it.''  carter may have found some added motivation during the first three games of this trip. he had costly mistakes in each one. against the sacramento kings on monday night, he missed a pair of foul shots late in the game. he fouled the golden state warriors' baron davis on a 3-point attempt and gave up a costly charging foul wednesday night. and he left the clippers' cuttino mobley open for the winning 3-pointer thursday night.  carter took the blame after those games and got down on himself, something he does not typically do.  ''it's tough to lose by 1 point and then it's tough to be the one to let it happen,'' carter said after saturday night's game. ''i took that personal. i just can't let that happen. i wanted to erase that.''  the victory against the nuggets could help the entire nets team forget the mental burden of their three defeats.  the nets' team effort might have best been represented in their ability to limit anthony (23 points) and iverson (18 points). they did it by crowding the paint, smothering and limiting them to outside shots or off-balanced looks when they got close to the rim.  wright was the biggest beneficiary of the iverson-anthony duo. frank put wright, who had not played in 12 of the nets' previous 19 games, in the starting lineup saturday night for his defense. wright said his ability to make anthony struggle was more pleasing than a thunderous one-handed dunk he had early in the third quarter.  ''i knew there could be a night like this where coach is going to call me to play,'' wright said. ''so i just try to stay in shape. i think that helped me tonight.''  nachbar was once in wright's position -- a reserve who had fallen out of the rotation. but he has been one of the team's most significant contributors of late, benefiting from the attention carter draws in the form of open shots.  nachbar has averaged 17.7 points in the past three games and is a symbol of what the nets could be when everyone shows up.  pro basketball  