new york's public schools   new york lawmakers and the state board of regents are rightly nervous about the school reforms recently announced by mayor michael bloomberg. the third package of reforms to hit the nation's largest school system in five years, this one radically alters funding formulas and guts the existing management structure -- roiling a system already struggling to digest earlier changes.  the regents and state legislature have been fretting about the cold shoulder the city has shown to parents and communities since soon after legislators gave mr. bloomberg full control of the public schools. that's when the city did away with the longstanding system of 32 community school districts and combined them into 10 regions.  it may have saved money, but it also put more distance between the school system and families. schools chancellor joel klein has promised to rectify those problems. but the new reform, which sweeps away the 10 regions altogether, runs the risk of making the situation worse.  this page has long supported turning principals into school managers and holding them accountable for how staffs and students perform. but the young, inexperienced principals who have flooded the new york schools require guidance and support. sweeping away the remains of the regional system might make it harder for them to get the help they need.  urban school systems have a long and shameful history of dumping the least-qualified teachers into underfinanced schools that serve the poorest children. mr. bloomberg's proposal would drive more money to the neediest schools, but there are serious questions about whether it will be sufficient.  at the same time, an analysis by a nonpartisan group, the educational priorities panel, takes issue with a related scheme for changing the school personnel budgeting process. currently, schools are held harmless for teacher salaries. the new system would eventually chalk up teacher salaries against a school's budget. the panel believes that would penalize schools with the highest-paid, most-experienced teachers, driving principals to hire less-experienced teachers. the new formula would also be subject to tampering by politicians.  the bloomberg plan expresses some noble ideals. but reforms that affect the lives of more than a million schoolchildren should not be made in haste or on the basis of consultants' hunches. given the mayor's habit of ignoring reasonable criticism, the city council, the legislature and the regents should use what leverage they have to ensure that the reforms are closely scrutinized and modified where necessary to produce the best possible result.  editorial  