headstrong or pigheaded, carter paces the irish   russell carter has been thrown out of basketball practice at notre dame for a variety of reasons the past four years. there has been bad body language, a lack of interest in defense and a few confrontations with coach mike brey, who laughingly refers to the incidents as ''good theater for the players and staff.''  after brey tossed carter from the first scrimmage in the fall, carter came into the basketball office the next day and told the assistant martin ingelsby that he was going to have a great practice. after all, he reasoned, he always played better the day after being thrown out.  ''when he comes back for a reunion, there are going to be some great stories to tell,'' brey said, chuckling, during an interview in his office. ''when you have special ones, it's work. but it's well worth it.''  in his senior season, carter, a 6-foot-4 guard who chose notre dame over penn and william and mary while in high school in paulsboro, n.j., has emerged as one of the big east's best players and as an n.b.a. prospect. notre dame (17-4, 4-3) is ranked 21st.  carter heads into tuesday night's game at syracuse (15-6, 4-3) as the big east's second-leading scorer in league games (19.4 points a game) and in all games (18.4). he scored a career-high 32 last week in a loss against st. john's.  the irish recruited carter because brey thought the former guard chris thomas, a four-year starter, would leave early for the n.b.a.  carter played sparingly his first two seasons, but he proved to be a solid starter last season, averaging 11.5 points. brey and carter's teammates attribute his leap to an elite player this season to one defining character trait. ''he's stubborn,'' colin falls, a senior, said. ''he believed he was a great player and no one could tell him he wasn't.''  it is perhaps a paradox that the irish's most temperamental player is also their hardest worker. carter arrived at notre dame on his recruiting trip carrying a basketball. the former assistant lewis preston said it was the only time he had seen that in nine years of college coaching.  for the next two seasons, brey would find carter in the gym launching jumpers well past midnight after games in which he barely played. brey had to ask carter not to shoot so much after games this season because he wanted him to remain fresh. true to carter's stubborn form, brey said he had to ask him four times.  in the weight room, no irish player has worked harder. carter has the chiseled body of an n.f.l. safety and has emerged, brey said, as probably the best athlete on campus. all those struggles with playing time made him work harder.  ''to leave would have been giving up,'' carter said. ''i knew i could play at this level. i knew that all along. i said once i get my chance, i'm going to show everyone i can do this.''  but there was another reason carter did not consider leaving notre dame: his father. russell carter sr. said in a telephone interview sunday night that he and his wife had always stressed education first with their three children.  the elder carter played football at pittsburgh under jackie sherrill but left early because he did not take care of his schoolwork. a truck driver, he said he did not regret not graduating because had he done so, he probably would not have met his wife, tina.  ''i have three great kids and a beautiful lady,'' he said. ''i wouldn't change a thing.''  but his time at pittsburgh did convince him of the importance of education. so when russell called home unhappy about his playing time, his father reminded him he was there ''for that piece of paper.''  ''i'm happy about this season, but i'm happier that he's going to graduate in may,'' he said. ''that's the whole thing. when he goes across the stage, my chest is going to be pumped out.''  if things work out, carter will earn a degree in sociology, with minors in spanish and computer applications, and will play in the n.c.a.a. tournament. before the season, he tacked up his watch from the national invitation tournament in the locker room and wrote under it in magic marker ''no nit,'' a bold statement for a team picked to finish 11th in the big east.  carter then backed it up on the floor. no time was more critical than when a 10-point notre dame lead slipped to 3 late in the game against no. 4 alabama. he made a 3-pointer from the right wing and a fadeaway jumper from 18 feet that started a 14-0 run to close the game.  ''it was like he said, 'let's just end this,' '' brey said.  a few weeks later, the team captains, falls and rob kurz, set up a meeting with brey to ask if he could make carter a captain for the big east season. brey agreed without hesitation.  but it has not all been smooth. brey benched carter for the last seven minutes saturday against villanova because he was forcing shots. he was 3 for 11 from the field in the irish victory.  ''he's so stubborn,'' brey said. ''and that's what makes him good.''  years from now when this notre dame team reunites, that will make the stories even funnier.  basketball  