lift a wee dram all over town   if your knowledge of scotch begins with johnnie walker and ends at ''on the rocks,'' a weekend spent tasting expensive single malts at whiskey bars around the city might seem pointless, even intimidating.  but you would be underestimating the evangelical fervor of the new york city scotch enthusiast. unlike the wine world, where sophisticates frown upon bumpkins who cannot distinguish a muscadine from a super-tuscan, the inability to tell a highlands from an islay (or even a single malt from a blend) will hardly cause you grief. be it a bartender, a waitress or the guy grinning on the next stool over, there is always somebody ready to give advice (this is new york, after all), hoping to bring another drinker into the figurative folds of the scotch-lover's collective kilt.  no one may do it better than ethan kelley, the (kiltless) spirit sommelier at the brandy library in tribeca. the nightspot is warmly lighted, practically sepia-toned, and the male-female ratio is balanced beyond all expectations, given that it's a place that has 10 pages of single-malt scotches on the menu, including the 20-year bruichladdich, the 12-year cragganmor and the very rare 25-year talisker.  and mr. kelley is a down-to-earth guy with a knack for sensing your (pitiful) knowledge and tailoring his advice to your needs (and not pushing expensive whiskeys on those who would not appreciate them). he runs a free tasting every saturday from 5 to 8 p.m. the rest of the night, he appears to be connected to an alarm that sounds when a patron opens to the single-malt section of the menu.  you can't smoke inside the brandy library, though it will sell you a cigar. but those for whom scotch and cigars go together like beer and pretzels need not fear new york city's smoking ban: several places were grandfathered in and specialize in just such a lung-and-liver-damage combination.  at club macanudo on the upper east side, you can puff on a long list of cigars and choose from about 50 single malts. smoking a cigar with your scotch does come with a risk: the ash of your cigar falling into your scotch glass might add a few new (and unwanted) smoky notes to your 12-year laphroaig.  macanudo has just relaxed its no-jeans dress code (still no sneakers), but other places can be more annoying. lexington bar & books, also on the upper east side, sticks to its blue-blood neighborhood pedigree by sticking hard to the dress code posted at the entrance. (dress shirts tucked in, no sneakers, jacket preferred.) what's it like inside? um, couldn't tell you.  at least at its sister location, you don't have to dress up. hudson bar & books is worthy of the west village, and its 50 or so single-malt options worthy of a visit. but there is a two-drink minimum on weekends that might not work for those participating in a scotch hop.  those interested in the full scottish experience should head to st. andrews pub in midtown, where the bartenders wear kilts. saturdays from 9 p.m. to midnight the pub has live celtic music in the bar area. the menu has some scottish flair, with items like haggis -- ground sheep organs served at st. andrews with mashed potatoes and turnips. (don't worry, there are plenty of non-scottish items, too.) the waiters and waitresses are trained in scotch awareness, and your server would be happy to put together a three-scotch flight for the reasonable price of $15.  one place where the old-school décor oozes scotch (alas, not literally) is the bar at keens steakhouse near herald square, the perfect place for your post-macy's single malt. a crowd diverse in age and dress helps diffuse any stuffiness, as do the trivia questions posed on the chalkboard. even if you insist on japanese whiskey over all others, keens can still accommodate you.  keens even posts a list of whiskey's positive properties. it was written in the 16th century, so the medical science behind it might be bit outdated. among the curative properties? it helps digestion, eliminates lisping, prevents the heart from swelling and, most important, keeps the mouth from snafflying. (snafflying? the scotch whisky association in edinburgh says the document is probably suggesting that whiskey is good for clearing the throat.)  still, if you ask john hansell, publisher and editor of malt advocate, a quarterly magazine for whiskey enthusiasts that's based in pennsylvania, what his favorite scotch spot in new york city is, you won't get one of these places with leather seating, an air of sophistication or an upscale clientele.  he goes for d.b.a, an east village bar that is just a step above being a dive and is probably better known for its mind-boggling, if not mind-altering, beer selection. but its scotch collection is no slouch, and mr. hansell recommends testing d.b.a.'s stock of well-regarded whiskeys from defunct distilleries like port ellen while you still have a chance. the only disadvantage is that on weekends it might become too hectic to get sound scotch advice.  those who catch the scotch bug have nine months to tune their palates before the 10th annual whiskyfest new york, at the marriott marquis on oct. 30. there will be about 200 kinds of whiskey available to test your expertise, including plenty of single-malt and blended scotch. if it turns out that you still can't tell cutty sark from glenlivet, no problem: halloween is the next day, and you can at least masquerade as a scotch connoisseur.  scotland's gift to the world  brandy library 25 north moore street (hudson and varick streets), (212) 226-5545.  club macanudo 26 east 63rd street (madison and park avenues), (212) 752-8200.  d.b.a. 41 first avenue (second and third streets), (212) 475-5097.  hudson bar & books 636 hudson street (horatio and jane streets), (212) 229-2642.  keens steakhouse 72 west 36th street (fifth and sixth avenues; sign reads ''keen's chophouse''), (212) 947-3636.  lexington bar & books 1020 lexington avenue (73rd street), (212) 717-3902.  st. andrews pub 120 west 44th street (broadway and sixth avenue), (212) 840-8413.  weekend in new york: scotch hopping  correction:  february 18, 2007, sunday  the weekend in new york column on jan. 28, about places to drink scotch in manhattan, misspelled the name of a scotch. it is cragganmore, not cragganmor. the age of another scotch was misstated. the time that laphroaig scotch is aged in the barrel is 10, 15, 30 or 40 years; there is no 12-year-old laphroaig.  