using quickness, colts' freeney is spinning into control   dwight freeney remembers trembling as he stood on the manicured grass, so anxious he could barely focus on his target.  freeney, the indianapolis colts defensive end, cannot get any more nervous playing in the super bowl on sunday in miami than he did playing alongside lawrence taylor, the retired giants linebacker, in a charity golf tournament in the bahamas last january.  ''it was the most unbelievable and terrifying thing ever,'' freeney said in a telephone interview last week. ''i was a nervous wreck. i was hitting balls backwards, hitting them horrible.''  growing up in bloomfield, conn., freeney idolized taylor, who enjoyed teeing off on quarterbacks. he collected taylor's football cards and plastered posters of him on his bedroom walls. he wore his jersey. ''i was a fanatic,'' freeney said.  his pairing with taylor at michael jordan's invitational tournament in paradise island proved far less successful than his pairing on the football field with his fellow end robert mathis. that combination has produced 17 1/2 sacks in 16 regular-season games and 3 playoff contests. ''i just kind of learned a new swing,'' freeney said, ''and l. t. was like tiger woods.''  before that day, freeney, 26, had never met taylor. ''there were a thousand questions i wanted to ask him about football,'' he said.  but he held back, not wanting to risk spoiling the outing by talking shop. besides, who was he to interrupt taylor in the middle of a swing tip?  ''it was like: 'wow. i'm being instructed on the golf course by lawrence taylor!' '' freeney recalled, sounding less like a three-time all-pro selection than a star-struck child.  with a combination of strength and speed, taylor forced some opposing coaches to use two tight ends to provide more blocking and helped to create a high-end market for athletic left tackles. freeney, a two-year starter at syracuse, also creates matchup problems with his quickness and aggressiveness. he copied the chopping motion that taylor used to strip quarterbacks of the ball and added a twist -- a corkscrew really -- a 360-degree spin move that enables him to sweep through offensive lines like a cyclone.  he was drafted in the first round by the colts in 2002 -- no. 11 over all -- to be the cornerstone of coach tony dungy's revamped defense. his impact on the colts was immediate, just as taylor's was on the giants.  freeney reached double figures in sacks in each of his first four seasons before finishing with five and a half this season, a drop-off that can be attributed to the colts' porous rushing defense.  with their opponents looking to exploit the run, the colts faced the second-fewest passing attempts in the n.f.l. when presented with the opportunity, freeney has shown he can still spin his way to the quarterback as effectively as the former knick earl monroe spun his way to the basket and as the figure skater dorothy hamill spun her way to an olympic gold medal.  ''it's something that i know when i got to the league that a lot of guys weren't doing,'' freeney said. ''back then, every n.f.l. coach would tell you they did not believe in the spin move. at the end of the day, i kind of patented it.''  now, of course, there are players imitating freeney's spins the way he once imitated taylor's windmill chop. ''when i sit there and watch other guys do it, it's kind of flattering,'' he said.  when freeney is in public, his signature move is requested nearly as much as his autograph. ''people will say, 'let's see the spin move, freeney,' or 'show us the spin move,' '' he said. ''it's so funny.''  if football were like figure skating, freeney's spins would be called by a name that pays homage to their creator, a freeney spiral, perhaps, or the dwight spin. freeney's teammates periodically propose nicknames for his moves.  corkscrew is one of freeney's favorites, but he also likes it when his teammates rate his spins as if they were meteorologists assessing a tropical storm. ''they'll say, 'that was a category 4 or a category 5,'' freeney said.  with the super bowl in south florida, the climate would seem right for hurricane dwight.  pro football  