san francisco: tartine bakery   in a city known for bakeries, bread and breakfasts, the scene just continues to get better. for whatever reason -- gold miners ate big breakfasts? the hills build morning appetites? the sea air? -- san francisco has always had breakfast food worth traveling for. (the corned beef hash at campton place about 20 years ago was as interesting as any dinner entree served locally at the time.)  that breakfasts here are, or should be, the envy of every place else in the country strikes me as practically inarguable. it's not the sourdough bread (an overrated local aberration, one of the gold miners' true legacies), but the good dairy products (sonoma still produces them) and the love and respect for tender baked goods, whether sweet, savory or in combination.  san francisco now has one of the best french-style bakeries as well -- run by, no less, a transplanted new yorker named elizabeth pruitt. the place is tartine bakery, and it is -- like many things new and exciting -- in the mission district.  i first fell in love with tartine's scones last spring, when i was in town reporting a story, and several people insisted i get myself over there. logically, tartine's scones shouldn't be any better than anyone else's, because the recipe is pretty much standard: a ton of butter, some flour and sugar, not much else.  it could be that other bakeries don't use as much butter as they should, or it could be that tartine's ingredients are better: ms. pruitt and her husband, chad robertson -- who works mostly on the bread side -- insist they determinedly rely on local suppliers for nearly everything, and use organic ingredients whenever possible. in any case, the scones are tender (ms. pruitt knows enough not to overhandle the dough, of course), they're crumbly, they're just sweet enough.  and moving beyond them: the croissant is the best i've had on the west coast -- flaky, buttery, crisp, greasy. (yes. a croissant should leave you licking your fingers. it is butter fragilely encased in flour.)  and then there are the sandwiches, made with mr. robertson's exceptional bread, notable because it's a slow-fermented yeast bread in very french style that is a welcome change from the ubiquitous sourdough.  the sweets are right up there with the croissant and scones. the french classics like the layered opera cake and crunchy frangipane tart are awesome, but i crave the very american lemon meringue cake, brought to the point of overkill with a layer of caramel. i don't know the reason -- the quality (or quantity) of the butter? ms. pruitt's touch? the beguiling nature of the city, as they call it? -- but this is my favorite bakery in the united states.  tartine bakery, 600 guerrero street at 18th, (415) 487-2600; www.tartinebakery.com.  mark bittman  bites  