paid notice: deaths   sternberg, beverly   sternberg--beverly, a resident of brooklyn, ny, died at her apartment in new york city, following a courageous battle with cancer. she was 80. beverly was born august 25, 1926 in brooklyn, ny, to edward and estelle tartell. on february 23, 1947, she and samuel sternberg were united in a marriage that would last for 57 loving years. together in 1968 they cofounded the pillow shop in brooklyn, ny. her greatest joy was spending time with her family. she enjoyed playing cards, reading, knitting, and sewing. skilled in the craftmanship of her needle, bev had the rare ability to stitch masterpieces out of anything she touched. everyone always prized her perfectly hand knitted sweaters. bev had a green thumb, and enjoyed tending to her many plants. she was the greatest mom and grammy, and her family was totally devoted to her. everyone that met her always commented that she was a bright and witty lady who always had a huge, contagious, warmhearted smile on her face. she loved traveling the world, and had the ability to strike up an engaging conversation with everyone she met. beverly is survived by her loving family: her daughter wilma mooney and husband charles; her daughter marcia beck and husband michael; her son stuart sternberg and wife lisa; two siblings, sister joan stupler and brother joel tartell; and six grandchildren, marissa and morgen beck, and sanford, jake, natalie and ella sternberg. she is further survived by nieces, nephews, other relatives and many friends. funeral services will be held on wednesday, january 29th, at 11:15am at riverside memorial chapel, amsterdam avenue and w. 76th st. in lieu of flowers, the family suggests that donations be made to nyu cancer center lung research, in memory of beverly sternberg. donations can be mailed to charles mooney, mccanliss & early llp, 88 pine st., 21 fl., nyc 10005. beverly's family would like to sincerely thank all of the doctors and staff of nyu hospital for their extraordinary care, compassion and support.  