manning handles questions as easily as a pass rush   propped up on a podium at what is known as super bowl media day, peyton manning handled the questions as easily as he riddles opposing defenses.  ''pressure?'' he was saying. ''my father once told me something that chuck noll said, that pressure is something you feel only when you don't know what you're doing.''  as the coach of the four-time super bowl champion steelers three decades ago, noll surely knew what he was doing. and on sunday against the bears in the pressure cooker of super bowl xli, manning will discover if he knows what he is doing as a quarterback. but as he sat on display in dolphin stadium yesterday before a revolving total of several hundred notebooks, tape recorders and cameras, he surely knew what he was doing.  in answering some 150 questions during an hour in what may as well have been a witness chair, he always said the right thing the right way.  he is too smart to guarantee a victory, as jets quarterback joe namath did before super bowl iii against the baltimore colts nearly four decades ago.  but he is too competitive to ignore questions about how critics charged that he couldn't win the big game until he directed the indianapolis colts' 38-34 victory over the new england patriots in the american football conference championship game.  ''there were a lot of games,'' he said sharply, ''that weren't big until we lost it.''  asked about the burden of the big game that now hangs over sunday's outcome, he jokingly said that if he gets 100 percent of the blame when the colts lose, then he deserves 100 percent of the credit when they win.  ''win or lose, it's a team game,'' he said, ''but there's no tougher job in sports than quarterback.''  he is too modest to compare himself to other famous quarterbacks, but not too modest to ask some of those quarterbacks for advice on how to cope with his first visit to the circus maximus of super bowl week.  ''some i called and some called me,'' he said. ''they told me to enjoy the week, but keep your preparation the same.''  he wouldn't identify any of those quarterbacks, but tom brady probably was one. they talk every so often anyway, and brady could speak with the experience of having won three super bowl rings with the patriots.  one famous quarterback he couldn't talk to about the super bowl is his father archie, who never even got to the playoffs with the saints.  ''my dad played 15 years, this is my ninth year,'' peyton said. ''he just talked about how hard he worked and how he never had a supporting cast.  ''but i've had other quarterbacks tell me about him. joe namath told me if my dad had a good supporting cast, he would be considered one of the greatest. roger staubach told me that if my dad had been the cowboys' quarterback, they would have won more super bowls than they won with roger.''  he remembered that when he played youth football, his father sat with his mother, olivia, in the top row of the bleachers.  ''he never said a word; my dad never tried to live his sports career through his kids,'' he said, referring to his younger brother, eli, the giants quarterback, and his older brother, cooper, whose career as a wide receiver at ole miss was ended by a spinal ailment. ''my dad knew more about football than any junior-high school coach i ever had, but he never talked to them. he never pushed his passion for the game, which is why i have a passion for it.''  through most of what was an interrogation rather than an interview, manning, in his white colts jersey, white uniform pants, royal blue stockings and black football shoes, sat with his hands folded easily between his knees.  he didn't squirm. he looked at his questioners. he spoke seriously when the subject demanded it, he laughed and smiled when it didn't. he had the same easy manner seen in his role as a spokesman in various television commercials.  ''when people see me,'' he said, ''they ask me to sign the melon or cut the meat.''  with a smile, he recalled how one of his commercials would sometimes appear on the screen while the colts were sitting around their locker room this season waiting to play a late-afternoon game.  ''that's when i leave the room,'' he said. ''my teammates really get on me.''  his locker is always among those of his offensive linemen, whom he took out to dinner monday night after the colts arrived at their fort lauderdale hotel. befitting a quarterback with a $98 million contract, he picked up the tab.  ''they're my guys,'' he said. ''they protect me.''  late in the colts' victory over the patriots, manning banged the thumb on his throwing hand against a teammate's helmet, but he soon minimized the damage. it didn't appear swollen or discolored yesterday, so he was asked if he had just rubbed some dirt on it, as he suggests to a restaurant worker in one of his commercials.  ''yeah,'' he said with a smile. ''i rubbed some dirt on it.''  sports of the times  