arrest revives memories of a violent era   on aug. 29, 1971, two armed men, members of the black liberation army, walked into a san francisco police station.  the first man fired a shotgun through a hole in a glass partition, killing sgt. john v. young and wounding a civilian. the second man tried to ignite a stick of dynamite with his cigarette lighter and tossed it toward the officers.  the dynamite never exploded, but the man left his lighter behind. recently, the authorities in san francisco said they had traced the fingerprints on the lighter to a portly, gray-haired queens man named francisco torres.  the police say that mr. torres, 58, a father of two who is married to a civilian employee of the new york police department, was the second man during the 1971 assault on the station house. he was arrested on tuesday.  on 145th street in jamaica, where mr. torres has lived in a two-story red brick row house for several years, people knew him as an unassuming man who liked to tend his garden -- not as a suspect in the killing of a police officer or a member of a radical group that preached violence.  ''oh my god,'' said michael brown, a retired house painter who lives across the street from mr. torres. ''i'm surprised. i'm very surprised. thirty-five years ago he killed a policeman? and they're looking for him all these years?''  but if neighbors were familiar with a genial side of mr. torres, the authorities described another side. in 1971, he and gabriel torres-rivera, his brother, were accused of the murders of two new york police officers, waverly jones and joseph piagentini, who were ambushed by members of the black liberation army at a harlem housing project.  their first trial ended in a hung jury, and their retrial ended when the judge threw out the charges against them because of insufficient evidence. later, mr. torres served time in prison for a bank robbery.  in the california case, mr. torres has been charged with murder and murder conspiracy. he was one of seven men arrested last tuesday in connection with the raid on the station house. an eighth man was held on charges related to other black liberation army activities.  thirty-five years later, the arrests have revived memories. in the early 1970s, new york city was a cauldron of racial tension. addicts lined up to buy heroin from street dealers, and finding dead bodies on doorsteps in the morning was not unusual in many neighborhoods.  ten officers were killed in 1970, 15 more in 1971. in 2006, no new york city police officers were killed while on duty.  ''i was in uniformed patrol at that time, and i remember the anxiety that everyone felt in going out to do their job,'' police commissioner raymond w. kelly said in an interview. ''it was an era of direct confrontations with the police and attempts to assassinate them and such. kind of a reign of terror.''  there were some buildings that officers never entered unless they had heavily armed backup, police officers who were on the force at the time said in recent interviews.  in 1969, in east harlem, residents blocked streets for several weeks with bags of uncollected garbage and set fire to abandoned cars to protest poor service by the city's sanitation department.  the civil rights movement and the vietnam war had unleashed frustration among many black americans angry about poverty, racism and instances of what they considered police brutality. the black liberation army broke off from the black panthers in the late 1960s and became a more radical offshoot.  its message of black empowerment through armed struggle prompted mr. torres and mr. torres-rivera, who had moved with their parents from puerto rico to a housing project in east harlem, to join.  the brothers had been involved with the young lords, a radical puerto rican group that had close ties to the panthers. in a 2004 interview with the new york times for a profile related to his later efforts to register new voters, mr. torres-rivera said he had joined the black panthers, and later the black liberation army, because the young lords had been too gentle.  the brothers served several years in prison in the 1970s for an armed bank robbery meant to help finance the group. a search of records did not yield more precise information about their convictions or whether francisco torres had other arrests. although the brothers were cleared of the murders of officer jones and officer piagentini, who were killed in harlem three months before the raid on the san francisco police station, two other members of the black liberation army were convicted and remain in prison for the killings.  on tuesday, mr. torres was led into police headquarters in lower manhattan in handcuffs and shackles. he called the charges against him in the killing of sergeant young in san francisco ''a frame-up.'' police officials declined to comment on the specifics of mr. torres's case.  according to law enforcement agencies, police officers were a primary target of the black liberation army. the group has been blamed for killing at least 13 officers in the united states, including two police officers and a brink's employee during an armored car robbery in 1981 near nyack, n.y. the subsequent arrests ended the group's activities.  robert bloom, a lawyer in california who has previously represented members of the black panthers and the black liberation army including mr. torres, sought to justify the existence of such groups.  ''why was he a member of the black panthers?'' mr. bloom said, referring to mr. torres. ''because cops were killing people, as they still are. they were torturing people.''  mr. torres-rivera and mr. torres's wife, carolyn torres, 58, a civilian supervisor in the police department's traffic enforcement division, refused requests for interviews.  friends said mr. torres is a vietnam war veteran who has not held a steady job for years because he has respiratory problems related to agent orange exposure. he receives disability payments from the federal government and supplements his income by working as a spanish translator for various lawyers, they said.  elizabeth fink, another lawyer who knows mr. torres and has represented members of the black liberation army, said prosecuting mr. torres after so many years was unfair. ''it was a different period, a time of rebellion,'' she said. ''these people should be left alone.''  those who live on mr. torres's block tend to agree.  they described him as a generally reserved man who had once coached youth baseball. he shoveled snow for neighbors in the winter and planted impatiens in his garden in the spring. he helped an elderly neighbor take garbage cans to the curb.  ''i cannot judge him from something that happened so long ago,'' said a neighbor who agreed to an interview on the condition that she not be identified. ''to me, he's a really nice person.''  but priscilla levine, 53, a retired clerical supervisor for the city's parole department who lives a couple of doors down from mr. torres, said he should be held accountable for his actions, no matter how long ago.  ''he led a good life after that,'' ms. levine said. ''but it catches up with you. it always catches up with you. they were fighting for justice. but they went a little too far. and if you've killed somebody, you've got to pay.''  correction:  february 2, 2007, friday  an article on monday about francisco torres, a queens man who was recently arrested on murder charges in connection with a 1971 raid on a san francisco police station in which a sergeant was killed included incorrect information from a police official in some copies about the evidence that was used to link mr. torres to the crime. it was a fingerprint from a cigarette lighter left behind at the scene, not dna from a cigarette butt.  