the faint hoofbeats? that's the dark horse   hillary rodham clinton dashed to iowa this weekend to hang an open-for-business sign on her new campaign operation. barack obama is besieged by admirers begging to join his team. and john edwards has already dipped his toes into each of iowa's 99 counties -- and started his second lap.  so is the democratic stable too full for a dark horse presidential candidate to emerge?  the current thinking suggests that only famous candidates, democrat or republican, can seize their party's nomination. but it has never been a wise bet to rule out the dark horse, a staple of american politics since james k. polk went to the democratic convention in 1844 and became the presidential nominee by accident after the favorite, former president martin van buren, lost southern support.  but perhaps more than any other presidential contest, 2008's could help determine whether the dark horse, a term borrowed from english racetrack lingo, is on the verge of extinction, particularly since the entry fee in the race for the white house has been raised yet again.  for the first time since 1928, neither a sitting president nor vice president will be a candidate in the race, theoretically creating a wide-open fight for both nominations and making it possible for a dark horse to pull stealthily ahead. but the contest is front-loaded as never before -- california and other big states are rushing to wedge their caucuses and primaries into early february -- so little-known candidates concede they have an even more difficult task.  already, the leading contenders are making plans to reject public financing in the primary and general election campaigns for the first time since watergate. the cost of preparing for a race, strategists believe, could swell beyond $75 million this year alone, which most dark horse candidates may struggle to meet, given the calendar.  ''it makes it almost impossible for a dark horse to win,'' said dayton duncan, who worked on the 1984 and 1988 democratic presidential races of walter mondale and michael dukakis and wrote ''grass roots: one year in the life of the new hampshire presidential primary.'' ''but it might be the only chance for a dark horse candidate if they really caught lightning in a jar and were catapulted to the national stage.''  the window will be narrow for a second-tier candidate. with rapid back-to-back primaries, a promising showing in iowa or new hampshire is critical to advancing.  but even before the rules and the calendar take shape for the 2008 race, dark horse candidates have one piece of storybook history to hold onto: jimmy carter, 1976.  after mr. carter declared his candidacy on dec. 12, 1974, a harris poll listed 35 prospective presidential candidates. mr. carter, a one-term georgia governor, was not among them. yet 13 months later, after spending day after day traipsing from the missouri to the mississippi, he won the iowa caucuses, that all-important first test of a candidacy. the victory replenished his bank account and sustained him through the rest of the primary campaign.  but now, with the campaign's cost significantly higher and less time to raise money and attract supporters between primaries, it is hard to imagine a candidate's emerging from the shadows on persistence alone.  ''without a doubt, it's more difficult for someone to emerge today since you've got people who can raise tens of millions of dollars at the drop of a hat,'' said senator charles e. grassley, an iowa republican, who as a young congressman watched the 1976 campaign with interest. ''little guys like carter could never compete with that.''  the iowa caucuses not only created the lore of mr. carter, but mr. carter added to the lore of the iowa caucuses. and for the last three decades, his out-of-nowhere victory has lured ambitious politicians convinced that they, too, could pull off the feat.  in 2004, the brief rise of howard dean again illustrated that little-known candidates could catch fire and raise money to compete with candidates blessed by the political establishment, but it also reinforced iowa's importance. he finished third, his chances to become the nominee collapsing.  mr. dean tapped into the promise of the internet like no other. and the next evolution of internet fund-raising and activism -- combined with old-fashioned discipline -- might resuscitate the dark horse.  ''the internet can spontaneously combust a dark-horse candidacy that can take everyone out,'' said joe trippi, who managed mr. dean's campaign. ''everybody is sure it's going to be hillary, edwards or obama, but my guess is that someone no one is talking about right now is going to give these three the scare of their life.''  the internet could be the great equalizer. first, candidates who struggle to raise money through traditional means could tap into the grassroots to close the gap. second, if a front-runner's stumble is caught on camera it is sure to be widely disseminated on youtube and its ilk, which could clear a path for an outsider.  with the rush of candidates announcing their bids in the last few weeks, you could almost forget that the first primary votes won't be cast for another year. mrs. clinton and mr. obama are among the hopefuls whose high profile will deny them the advantage of learning on the fly, a privilege reserved for the dark horse. if, for example, former gov. tom vilsack of iowa missteps, he might be able to pick himself up without attracting as much notice as one of his more prominent rivals.  ''a lot can change in a month,'' said senator tom harkin, also of iowa, who in 1992 sought the democratic presidential nomination. ''one of the problems of being a front-runner like hillary and barack, if they make a mistake, it will be magnified way beyond its own dimensions. if others stumble, it's not a big deal.''  as he left the senate floor to begin a weekend of campaigning, sam brownback of kansas, one of many republican candidates in the field, stopped for a moment to chat about his prospects. after describing himself as the ''true conservative in the field,'' he acknowledged finding solace in the legends of democratic dark horses.  ''you have people like jimmy carter, who came out of nowhere. and bill clinton! they were not household names when they started this process,'' mr. brownback said. asked when he was heading to iowa, he paused for barely a beat and replied, ''next week.''  the nation  