iraqi shiites attacked as holiday nears   shiite neighborhoods in baghdad came under fierce assault once again on saturday, following two weeks of violence that left at least 300 dead and many hundreds more wounded.  many of the recent attacks, nearly all of them in heavily shiite areas, have occurred during the period of commemoration that leads to one of the holiest days for shiites, an intense day of mourning known as ashura that falls this year on monday.  three american soldiers died when a roadside bomb exploded near their vehicle on saturday north of baghdad, reuters reported. the news service said that the military confirmed the deaths of two other soldiers who were killed thursday when their patrol was attacked in eastern baghdad, and said that two additional soldiers died in separate episodes on friday in diyala province.  sunni militants have previously staged attacks on shiites on ashura, and fears are especially pronounced this year because it will be the first observance of the holy day since the sharp rise in sectarian killings after the bombing of a revered shrine in samarra last february.  basim shareef, a member of parliament and part of the shiite coalition that controls the government, said the attacks might be timed to coincide with the shiite holy days. but he thought it was more likely that militants were taking advantage of the relative lull in activity by shiite militia leaders, who might be worried about becoming the targets of the new baghdad security plan.  ''i think the parties that might retaliate believe that they are targeted in the new security plan, and that is why they have not taken any retribution,'' he said.  in saturday's deadliest attack, at least 15 people were killed and 55 wounded when twin car bombs exploded near a busy market and movie theater in eastern baghdad, according to an interior ministry official.  the first car exploded after barreling into a crowded intersection, where many shiites had gathered to perform rituals common in the period leading to ashura, including self-flagellation.  a second bomb, in a vehicle parked nearby, exploded moments later. it was timed to inflict maximum damage just as a crowd gathered to help the victims of the first blast, according to an iraqi security official.  women in black chadors helped victims covered in blood reach rescue workers as militia members flooded the area.  at the time of the attack, the neighborhood, known as jadida, was being guarded by shiite militiamen as well as the iraqi army and the police, residents said.  although it is unclear who was behind the attack, coordinated car bombings are considered to be a hallmark of al qaeda in mesopotamia, which includes foreign fighters.  the spate of recent attacks appear to have been intended not just to inflict the maximum amount of civilian suffering, but also to grind all aspects of daily life closer to a halt. in a little over a week, schools, busy markets and even an animal market have been targets.  saturday's violence came on a day when president bush discussed the new security plan by telephone with prime minister nuri kamal al-maliki. according to a statement released by mr. maliki's office, mr. bush ''renewed his commitment to the iraqi government.''  despite the violence and the threat of even worse attacks, iraqi officials said they did not expect ceremonies associated with ashura to be altered.  ashura marks the seventh-century death of the prophet muhammad's grandson, hussein, in the battle of karbala, where the biggest gatherings will be held monday. last year's holy day was marked by scattered violence in which fewer than a dozen people were killed, but the two years before that were deadlier.  two years ago, on the eve and the day of ashura, 11 suicide bombers killed at least 74 people. in 2004, more than 180 people were killed during iraq's ashura commemorations.  in other violence in baghdad on saturday, gunmen killed five people from the same shiite family and wounded three more after storming a home in the amil neighborhood, the iraqi authorities said.  forty bodies were found around the city, most tortured and executed.  and in the shiite area of karada, gunmen stormed the office of a computer store and kidnapped at least eight people.  the attack began when four camouflaged s.u.v.'s swept into the crowded street of computer shops just outside the capital's technology university shortly after noon, witnesses said. men in camouflage commando uniforms poured out, witnesses said, fired into the air, shouted for people to get into their homes and stormed the al basra computer company, situated on the second floor of a nondescript concrete house on the main thoroughfare. they seized the workers and fled.  it was unclear whether the abductors were the police or iraqi soldiers, or impostors.  elsewhere, american forces continued to clash with militants, killing 14 insurgents in an airstrike early on saturday in diyala province.  the attack was directed against ''a known foreign-fighter safe house'' as the men inside tried to flee, a military statement said.  there was also an explosion in the early evening saturday in the green zone that set off alarms, activating a mechanized voice warning people to duck and cover. it shook houses blocks away and followed an attack on friday, when two rockets left six non-american workers wounded, according to an american official.  