robert wilson, beckett and a celebrity from the neck up   a long-anticipated encounter between two giants of avant-garde theater is currently taking place in new york city -- not on a stage but at an art gallery.  one of the works in robert wilson's ''voom portraits'' at the paula cooper gallery -- an exhibition (also at the phillips de pury & company gallery) of high-definition video portraits of celebrities posed nearly motionless in drolly theatrical costumes and settings -- is a 30-minute, continuously looped, stunningly beautiful video of winona ryder as the character winnie in samuel beckett's play ''happy days.''  the collection of portraits (which includes brad pitt, mikhail baryshnikov and isabella rossellini) is the product of a commission mr. wilson accepted several years ago from voom hd networks, a company devoted to high-definition television channels, which provided the technology and production expertise for the shows.  ''winona ryder,'' however, a 15-by-27-foot image projected in paula cooper gallery's large, main space, is truly a work apart. it shows mr. wilson at his most perceptive concerning the implications of both his means and his subject, and it deserves to be considered one of his most penetrating theatrical creations.  mr. wilson has made frequent admiring comments about beckett over the years but, to the disappointment of many, has never directed one of his plays. in a sense, the two are naturally matched, since both are known for punctiliously sculptured stage pictures and slow, deliberate action.  in other ways, though, they're an odd couple: the maestro of marathon performance with his famously damaged relationship to language might have reason to fear the self-effacing, nobel-winning wordsmith whose severe verbal economy gave new meaning to theatrical brevity.  as it happens, ''winona ryder'' employs no language. not a word from beckett or anyone else. the piece is nevertheless an exquisite distillation of beckett's worldview, made from some of the most unlikely material imaginable: celebrity and high technology.  in ''happy days,'' a woman buried up to her waist (and then her neck) in a mound of earth fills time, under unremitting light, with ordinary activities like brushing her teeth, telling stories and attempting conversation with her absurdly indolent spouse. in the wilson portrait, ms. ryder, wearing a flamboyant floral headdress, is alone and buried in a mound up to her shoulders, with several of winnie's signature objects (purse, gun and toothbrush) arranged with tantalizing precision in front of her.  mostly, ms. ryder stares forward, stock still, occasionally blinking, accompanied by vaguely pastoral, tinkling music by michael galasso. as the light in the picture cycles through excruciatingly slow changes, tinting the mound ochre, then chartreuse, then mauve and black as night falls, she gradually closes her eyes and turns her head to the side as if sleeping -- her half-obscured headdress then suggesting a nefertiti crown.  some of the poignancy in the portrait comes from the natural harmony of two major artists, both deeply invested in the literal passage of time and in its use as subject matter. the implications run deeper here, though, because of the juxtaposition of the vanity of celebrity with the memory of a play that famously undercuts human vanity. all beckett's dramas are ruthless exposers of egotism, the petty narcissism of stars, and mr. wilson's voom portraits turn their own different sort of microscope on stars.  in this case, a celebrity notoriously wounded by fame is framed as the pre-eminent figure of vulnerability (and indomitability) in modern drama. in that context, the immortality of stardom becomes an ironic reference, as does the technical perfection of the high-definition imagery. the piece, almost shockingly, forges a meaningful marriage between the most confident of apollonian expertise and ''the expression that there is nothing to express.''  ''voom portraits'' continues through saturday at the paula cooper gallery, 534 west 21st street, chelsea; (212) 255-1105.  art review  