'palestine peace not apartheid'   to the editor:  ethan bronner's review of jimmy carter's ''palestine peace not apartheid'' (jan. 7) mentions that the anti-defamation league took out advertisements accusing carter of propagating myths about jewish power. this deserves further comment.  we did so because charges of jewish control of the media and american middle east policy are surfacing too often and in respectable circles. carter's charges follow those of john mearsheimer and stephen walt in the london review of books, which themselves follow charges at the beginning of the iraq war about excessive influence of jewish neoconservatives.  in a world where anti-jewish conspiracy theories range from blaming jews for 9/11 to accusing jews of concocting the holocaust, it is particularly disturbing and dangerous that someone like jimmy carter is contributing to this atmosphere. the history of 20th-century anti-semitism, culminating in the holocaust, rested heavily on the power of such conspiracy theories. the dangers in this volatile world should be self-evident.  carter's anti-israel bias as reflected in his offensive and inaccurate use of the term ''apartheid'' is bad enough. contributing to conspiracy theories about jews is even worse and is playing with fire.  abraham h. foxman  new york  the writer is national director of the anti-defamation league.  to the editor:  ethan bronner criticizes jimmy carter for not once mentioning al qaeda in his book. al qaedais not relevant to the israel-palestinian conflict. during the 40-year occupation of the west bank and gaza, al qaeda was never involved in terrorist attacks against israel.although there have been reports of recent contacts between hamas andhezbollah, the influence of al qaeda isconsidered to be minimal.  the book is not about terrorism but about the history of the palestinian-israel conflict and the need for america to get involved to bring about a just solution. carter may be naïve, and even with american participation a solution to the conflictmay not be attainable. however, there is little doubt that if the united states showed a more evenhanded approach, our prestige in the arab world would get a much-needed boost.  bronner also criticizes carter for not challenging statements made to him by arab leaders. carter contends that these views have not been given adequate attention in the american news media. his purpose was to inform the american people about the views of arab leaderspast and present.  in my view the book is a must-read for those interested in the history leading to the present conflict, the situation as it stands today and the resolutions and agreements that have been made and broken.  marvin bograd  east windsor, n.j.  to the editor:  ethan bronner states that ''the biggest complaint against'' carter's book is its use of the word ''apartheid'' in the title, ''with its false echo of the racist policies of the old south africa.'' in fact, the comparison of israeli policies in the occupied territories with south africa is commonplace among informed commentators. for example, the editorial board of israel's leading newspaper, haaretz, observed in september 2006 that ''the apartheid regime in the territories remains intact; millions of palestinians are living without rights, freedom of movement or a livelihood, under the yoke of ongoing israeli occupation.''  in addition to haaretz, those sharing carter's view include the nobel prize winner desmond tutu, the father of human rights law in south africa; john dugard, a south african professor of international law; and the israeli human rights organization b'tselem, among many others. bronner's opinion demonstrates the truth of carter's assertion that americans get only one side of the story.  geoffrey v. gray  jupiter, fla.  