between a.f.c. and n.f.c., parity is only a six-letter word   the chicago bears won one more game than the indianapolis colts in the 2006 regular season. the bears outscored their opponents by 172 points, and the colts outscored theirs by 67. the bears won the national football conference championship in a blowout, while the colts needed a late comeback to beat new england in the american football conference title game.  yet most football fans believe the colts will win the super bowl, thanks to the a.f.c.'s well-deserved reputation as the n.f.l.'s superior conference.  this season, a.f.c. teams went 40-24 during interconference play. the bears (13-3) were no exception; until the final week of the season, their only losses had come against a.f.c. opponents. the four n.f.c. division champions went a combined 6-10 against the a.f.c., and dallas was the only n.f.c. team with a winning interconference record.  this imbalance of power is not limited to 2006. except for 2000, when the series was tied at 30-30, the a.f.c. has had a winning record against the n.f.c. every season since 1996. a.f.c. teams have also won seven of the past nine super bowls, beginning with denver's upset of green bay in super bowl xxxii.  most observers believe the dominance of one conference over the other is cyclical. after green bay won the first two super bowls, the american football league/a.f.c. won 11 of the next 13. during the '80s, the balance of power shifted, and the n.f.c. won 13 straight super bowls, from 1985 through 1997.  look past the super bowl, however, and the shift of power from one conference to the other is not quite so cyclical. when the n.f.c. was winning those 13 straight titles, its dominance was generally limited to a few successful franchises, not the conference as a whole. the n.f.c. had the better interconference record in only 6 of those 13 seasons.  buffalo's streak of four super bowl losses from 1991 through 1994 is often brought up as evidence of the n.f.c.'s superiority at that time. the bills won most of their a.f.c. playoff games by large margins, only to lose to the n.f.c.'s best season after season.  but 1991 and 1992 were the only two seasons since 1972 when the n.f.c. won at least 55 percent of the interconference games. by comparison, the a.f.c. has won more than 60 percent of interconference games twice in the past three seasons.  the highest point of a.f.c. dominance came between 1974 and 1980. the a.f.c. won at least 57 percent of the interconference games those seasons, peaking in 1979 when the a.f.c. was 36-16 against football's senior circuit.  an 8-8 team stumbling into the n.f.c. playoffs, like this season's giants, is nothing new. nine teams have made the playoffs despite only eight wins in a 16-game season, and seven were n.f.c. squads.  it is one thing to show that the a.f.c. has been the better conference, of course, and another to explain why. common theories about the a.f.c.'s current superiority may not apply to its overall dominance since 1972.  many experts believe today's a.f.c. simply has better talent, especially at one position. ''i think you can tie the success or failure to who has the best quarterbacks,'' said gil brandt, the longtime dallas personnel director who now works as an analyst for the nfl network.  ''that doesn't always hold true, but this year, tom brady is not going to the pro bowl, while for the n.f.c., tony romo is going to the pro bowl,'' brandt said. ''not taking anything away from tony romo, but which one would you rather have as your quarterback?''  the quarterback theory is commonly tied to the n.f.c.'s 13-year super bowl streak, when troy aikman, joe montana and steve young were all championship quarterbacks. it would also explain why the super bowl streak was not matched by similar n.f.c. dominance in interconference play. if one conference has most of the star quarterbacks, it does not necessarily mean that it has the best quarterbacks from top to bottom.  but the quarterback theory does not quite stand up. many of those a.f.c. championship teams were also led by great quarterbacks: dan marino, john elway and jim kelly. hall of fame quarterbacks started for 8 of the 13 champions during that n.f.c. streak -- but also for 8 of the 13 a.f.c. teams that lost to them.  another explanation for the a.f.c.'s recent dominance may be coaching continuity. five a.f.c. coaches in 2006 had been with their teams for more than five seasons, including three who were with the same team for 12 seasons or more: mike shanahan of denver, jeff fisher of tennessee and bill cowher of pittsburgh (who resigned after the end of this season). contrast that with the n.f.c., where only two coaches were with the same team for more than five seasons: andy reid of philadelphia and mike holmgren of seattle, eight seasons each.  on average, the 16 a.f.c. coaches last season were with their teams two years longer than their n.f.c. counterparts.  the n.f.c. did not have a similar advantage during its super bowl streak, however. from 1984 to 1996, the average a.f.c. coach had roughly one season more experience than those in the n.f.c. when the a.f.c. was dominant in the '70s, the n.f.c. coaches actually had a slight lead in average experience.  no matter which n.f.c. team won last week, the a.f.c. was bound to be the favorite in super bowl xli. and even if the bears win next sunday, the n.f.c. will probably be the inferior conference next season -- as it will be in the season after that, and as it has been for most of the past 35 years.  keeping score e-mail: keepingscore@nytimes.com  