waving the flag at bunny ranch   it's high time that the department of homeland security investigated ''hannity's america.''  this sunday night talk show, led by sean hannity, the conservative radio and television personality, may look like the kind of ultrapatriotic, blame-the-clintons-first program that is the lifeblood of fox news. but it's more likely a secular progressive front, a sleeper show sending dangerous hidden messages to the enemy.  underneath the flag-waving swagger, mr. hannity's show is riddled with leftist subliminal suggestion and degrading, un-american images of violence and pornography. last sunday mr. hannity toured the bunny ranch brothel in nevada and stood over two prostitutes lolling on a bed in skimpy lingerie, their hands placed between their legs, and asked them if they believed in god.  ''every week we will bring you a different side of the country you love,'' mr. hannity promised on the show's premiere on jan. 7. mostly, however, he seems to be exposing the worst excesses of godless capitalism.  the f.b.i.'s anonymous tip line must have been ringing off the hook when mr. hannity introduced a regular feature, ''enemy of the state,'' on his first show, and named the actor sean penn as that week's winner. the idea looked like a copycat version of the msnbc talk show host keith olbermann's ''worst person in the world,'' but the title sounded more like stalinist code aimed at fellow travelers.  mr. hannity has since changed it to ''enemy of the week'' (jane fonda won the honor on sunday), but other signs of a covert left-wing conspiracy abound.  mr. hannity has another show on fox news, ''hannity & colmes,'' every weeknight, in which he and the mild-mannered alan colmes, a liberal, debate issues. that show seems weighted to make mr. colmes look weak and ineffectual next to the louder, more bellicose mr. hannity.  but mr. hannity has dispensed with a co-host on his new show. in a regular feature, ''2 on 2,'' mr. hannity and a guest conservative spar with two liberals, a common fox news format. but authentic fox news shows stack the deck by pairing young, blond female conservatives like laura ingraham against elderly male liberals.  mr. hannity reverses the formula, allying himself with aging, not very articulate, white men, and selecting young, very pretty and poised women to speak for the left, like jane fleming, of young democrats for america, and laura schwartz, a former events coordinator in the clinton white house.  in a recent episode mr. hannity asked these two women how any feminist could justify the suggestion made by senator barbara boxer, a democrat from california, that secretary of state condoleezza rice had no personal stake in the iraq war because she had no children.  he must surely have chosen that gambit to give ms. fleming an opportunity to embarrass the white house. she accused mr. hannity of ''selective outrage,'' countering that laura bush had cast an even more direct aspersion on ms. rice's personal life in a recent issue of people magazine.  the first lady said she thought that ms. rice would be a good candidate for the presidency but was not interested in running. ''probably because she is single, her parents are no longer living, she's an only child,'' mrs. bush said. ''you need a very supportive family and supportive friends to have this job.''  perhaps the most damning evidence against mr. hannity is his insistence on attacking bill and hillary clinton. real conservatives welcome senator clinton's presidential candidacy, calculating that she is too polarizing a figure ever to win in a general election. but on the very weekend senator clinton made her first primary trip to iowa, mr. hannity headlined his show with an exposé of the clinton administration. showing an edited scene from the much-disputed abc mini-series ''the path to 9/11,'' mr. hannity made the case that mr. clinton failed to eliminate osama bin laden during his presidency, then pressured abc to recut the film to omit scenes that made his administration look ineffectual.  the segment subliminally underscored mistakes made by the bush administration. by focusing so intently on the government's failure to capture mr. bin laden in the years and months before 9/11, mr. hannity rather pointedly reminds viewers that more than five years after mr. bin laden ordered suicide-hijackers to drive airplanes into the world trade center and the pentagon, and after the deaths of more than 3,300 american troops in iraq and afghanistan, the qaeda leader is still a free man.  but it's the sex and violence that suggest that mr. hannity harbors a secret plan to undermine american moral fiber. despite president bush's assertion that the execution of saddam hussein was botched and disgraceful, mr. hannity repeatedly flashes some of the more gruesome video images of the hanging, pictures so ghoulish and unsettling that they could well be the fare for a snuff film.  sometimes he showcases violence that has absolutely no redeeming journalistic value. a recent feature about an indoor dodge ball tournament focused on whether players aimed at opponents' genitals, using a term that is too colloquial and vulgar to repeat here.  but the bunny ranch visit was the last straw. while mr. hannity, who attended roman catholic parochial school, interviews scantily clad prostitutes, ostensibly urging them to quit and go to law school, the camera slowly moves from prostitute to prostitute, lasciviously lingering over the one with the largest, most exposed breasts.  ''is it all about the money?'' he asks one young woman. ''yes,'' she replies patiently. ''any job is about the money.''  the tv watch  