carter's long 3 at buzzer sends nets home happy   for all the heartache the nets suffered in the early part of this five-game western trip, vindication came in the sweetest form monday night.  vince carter made a 3-pointer from 31 feet at the buzzer to lift the nets to a 116-115 victory against the utah jazz. his basket gave the nets a 2-3 trip after they lost each of the first three games by a point on their opponent's final shot.  ''sometimes what goes around comes around,'' coach lawrence frank said. ''our guys deserve a great deal of credit for staying together.''  the shot capped a magnificent 33-point night for carter, who over the past three games has played like a superstar that one would be silly to trade. carter scored 16 points in the fourth quarter.  he got the opportunity for the winner after jazz point guard deron williams, who had been terrific all game and finished with 25 points, made 1 of 2 free throws.  without any timeouts, the nets had to go the length of the court in five seconds. carter did just that, pulling up from way out. he was mauled by his teammates after the shot.  ''about midway, i felt it was going in,'' carter said. ''it's just a great feeling to actually see it going in.''  the nets also received a big game from jason kidd (22 points, 10 assists) and the reserve guard eddie house, who scored 19 points.  carter saved most of his aggression for a fourth quarter in which the teams traded baskets and played at a very quick pace.  during one stretch, carter scored 11 consecutive points. although it is difficult to take the ball from his hands when he is that hot, the approach might have become somewhat predictable.  on one possession in the final two minutes of the game, carter tried to work off a screen from the top of the key. when he reached the lane, the jazz clogged it and carter passed the ball to mikki moore, who gave it back to carter. with the shot clock running down, carter had to settle for a long fadeaway jump shot that missed.  the jazz marched down the court and williams made a jumper to give the jazz a 114-110 lead with 1 minute 22 seconds to play.  that was as far as the nets would fall in the closing minutes.  the nets (22-23) began this trip at .500 and with the news that one of their best players, small forward richard jefferson, could miss up to six weeks after ankle surgery.  under those circumstances, the expectations might not have been very high.  but the manner in which the nets lost the first three games of this trip, meant that they had a lot to play for in the final two games, namely mental stability.  that is exactly what they gave themselves.  ''it's just a relief for our team,'' carter said. ''we've been on the other side of the ball.''  they had a terrific defensive performance against the denver nuggets, who boasted two of the league's three leading scorers -- carmelo anthony and allen iverson. the nets also were able to see the super abilities of carter that have been missing at times. he scored 40 points against the nuggets.  in the jazz, the nets were facing one of the surprise teams in the league. utah entered the night leading the northwest division and with the fourth-best record in the western conference.  kidd kept the nets in the game in the first half with 20 points, 5 assists and 5 rebounds.  early in the second quarter, the nets' defense went sour and the jazz took advantage, scored on six of seven possessions in a stretch of about four minutes. utah received a boost on the inside from power forward paul millsap, who had 6 points and 6 rebounds in 15 minutes in the first half.  earlier in the day, jazz coach jerry sloan raved about millsap's performance against the hornets on saturday night. in that game, millsap scored 15 points and grabbed 17 rebounds, 10 on offense, even though not a single play was called for him. millsap kept several possessions alive for the jazz by muscling his way around the basket.  williams's jump shot with 6:16 to play in the first half capped a 13-5 run that put utah ahead by 13 points.  that is when kidd took charge. he had two 3-pointers, two layups and a pair of free throws during a 24-14 run to close the first half and cut the deficit to 56-53.  kidd received help in the third quarter from carter, who scored only 4 points and reached the free throw line once in the first half, and the nets were collectively hot on offense throughout the period. carter scored 13 points on 4-of-7 shooting and the team shot 64.7 percent in the quarter.  pro basketball  