bitter spirits   in daily life, obsessive, all-consuming, world-annihilating rage is not a healthy emotion, but for horror fiction it's mother's milk. in horror, very bad things have to happen to people -- or, at the least, to impend ominously -- and the perpetrators of those atrocities tend to be in extraordinarily foul moods, especially when, as in the case of ghosts and zombies, they have recently risen from the dead. they always wake up cranky.  it makes sense: having one's eternal rest interrupted is bound to be annoying. but the sort of rude reawakening that occurs in horror stories isn't usually involuntary. the genre's dangerous deceased have more typically roused themselves from the big sleep by an unnatural act of will, which implies a degree of motivation that a normal, well-adjusted ex-person would be unable to muster. to bust out of the prison cell of death, whose doors aren't meant to be opened from the inside, a soul has to be mighty uneasy -- angry as hell and prepared to do some serious damage.  a significant percentage of horror fiction, that is, consists of cosmic revenge fantasies, tales of wrath long nurtured and suddenly, catastrophically released. some of the genre's venerable monster species, like vampires and werewolves, are colder-blooded than that -- doing violence just because they're hungry, and losing their tempers only when they're thwarted -- but in the books i've been reading lately most of the agents of destruction are entities that feel, as the english say, hard done by: bitter, resentful, victimized. we live in angry times, and the chip-on-the-shoulder surliness of horror's current crop of supernatural avengers can seem disturbingly familiar.  but the level of real-world resonance in the genre's raging revenants varies widely. it's pretty low, for example, in joe schreiber's first novel, chasing the dead (ballantine, $16.95), and john saul's umpteenth, in the dark of the night (ballantine, $25.95), in both of which the choleric chickens coming home to roost are the spirits of dead serial killers and multiple murderers.  in saul's book, the aggregate lethal fury of jack the ripper, ed gein, jeffrey dahmer and lizzie borden is reanimated in a wisconsin lakeside resort at high season. in schreiber's shorter, livelier campfire tale, the mayhem is perpetrated by a fictional late-18th-century new england serial killer named isaac hamilton, who has managed to resurrect himself with some regularity for better than two centuries. these novels are constructed as efficient, relentless terror-  generating machines, and as such don't require (much less encourage) the reader to think about the sources of the florid homicidal rage they put on display. that's just as well, really. the grievances of narcissistic sociopaths, while impressively comprehensive, get old fast: narcissists are always aggrieved about something.  by relying on evildoers whose nihilistic anger is almost unrecognizable as an actual human impulse, however, these writers miss a chance to unnerve their readers more profoundly. ''in the dark of the night'' toys with the provocative notion that the malign spirits of famous old murderers have some sort of mysterious allure for the middle-class, well-brought-up teenage boys who are its main characters. but in the end saul prefers to transfer the bloodthirsty urges of the dead maniacs to an aging local maniac rather than to any of his young heroes, who snap out of their dark serial-killer enchantment before they've done anything that might raise a red flag on their college applications. to call this a failure of the novelist's nerve would be to understate the case. it's infuriating to read a horror story that sets up a genuinely disturbing premise and then pulls back from its nastier implications. (we readers can get a little hot under the collar too.)  schreiber doesn't run the same risk because the wrath of his isaac hamilton is never presented as anything but alien, aberrant, utterly beyond the pale -- nothing an ordinary person might feel sneakily attracted to, or find huddled in the dim, hard-to-get-at corners of his own miserable soul, which are the places horror fiction is supposed to illuminate. so ''chasing the dead'' isn't disappointing in the way saul's novel is -- just frivolous, like a teen-market slasher picture.  pure fear-mongering sensationalism has, of course, a perfectly honorable tradition in this genre, but these days it seems kind of beside the point. the problem with books and movies that traffic in what coleridge called ''motiveless malignity'' is that the malignities we're currently most afraid of are all overstuffed with motive, positively engorged with it. everybody's nursing a grudge; no act of violence comes without fervent self-justification; and rage with reasons -- feeding on itself, gathering awful strength -- is beginning to look like the fire that will consume the world.  in the burning (signet, paper, $7.99), the reliably apocalyptic bentley little imagines that sort of ferocious, score-settling historical anger as a network of trains that become ''a single supernatural force capable of crisscrossing the nation in endless pursuit of vengeance.'' these trains, it's quickly apparent, have a political agenda: one plows into the white house and another into mount rushmore. their passengers are ''the wronged, the massacred, the dead'' -- the spirits of the chinese immigrants whose ill-paid labor built the transcontinental railroad.  it's a well-chosen metaphor, and the fact that the vengeance being exacted is based on an unarguably legitimate beef gives ''the burning'' a nice edge of nervous ambivalence. the suspense of the narrative is actually less compelling than the suspense of the argument little seems to be conducting with himself: he's trying to reconcile his respect for the exploited people's urge for retribution with the proper revulsion at the expired victims' scorched-earth methods. mixed into this steaming compost of self-doubt, i suspect, is a pinch of guilt on the writer's part about having perhaps discharged his genre obligations too vigorously: it is, after all, little himself who dreamed up those terrible things for the dead chinese to do and for the book -- finally, dutifully -- to condemn.  and some of the requisite horror effects do feel a bit arbitrary. there's a fuzzy black mold that turns people into racists, a pair of naked chinese ghost nymphets who seduce a park ranger and a swarm of bees that arranges itself, for no earthly (or plausibly unearthly) reason, in the shape of george washington's face. the book is a mess, a snarl of half-formed ideas, but at least it has ideas, and little certainly can't be accused of failing to give rage its due. in a sense, his whole career -- 16 previous novels and a short-story collection -- has been an elaborate self-conducted anger management program, from which he has yet to graduate. ''the burning'' is just the latest in a series of little novels in which boiling-mad victims of one social injustice or another set out to redress the wrongs done to them, and go way too far. and in all his books the writer appears to be working extremely hard to keep his sympathy for these angry devils from getting the better of him. in every novel, he maintains a running auto-critique, heckling himself like a drunken doppelgänger in the audience, with the invective intensifying noticeably as the act nears its conclusion.  at the big, wild climax of ''the burning'' -- rather late in the game, you'd imagine, for second thoughts -- little allows one of his characters to muse: ''as crazy as everything else was, the concept of a politically correct monster seemed the most ridiculous and hardest to believe.'' little sounds ticked off at his own concept, steamed that his horror trains, with their cargo of righteous indignation, have somehow jumped the tracks. the fury of ''the burning'' is so deep, so anguished and so general that it refuses to spare even its author.  the most satisfying of the genre's recent rage extravaganzas, though, is sarah langan's first novel, the keeper (harpertorch, paper, $6.99). like little, langan is interested in the release of pent-up anger from reasonable gripes: in this case, the source is the indignity visited, year after grinding year, on the residents of a fictional new england factory town.  the story begins a month after the closing of the clott paper mill in bedford, me. the town -- what's left of it at the end of a decade or so of layoffs and wearying attempts to deny the writing on the wall -- is depressed, uncertain, quietly panicky. among the many unhealthy forms this collective unease takes, along with alcoholism, domestic abuse and a pervasive meanness of spirit, are shared nightmares, which focus on the most visibly wretched member of the community: a mute, disturbed, flagrantly promiscuous young woman named susan marley. while she's alive, she's the embodiment of her neighbors' fears for themselves -- and when she dies, her hold on the sad, sick town becomes even more powerful. in death, susan marley comes into her own, and so, in an appropriately abandoned, self-immolating way, does bedford.  ''the keeper'' -- which is richly populated with small-town characters at varying stages of emotional crisis, from numb puzzlement to unshakable bitterness to abject despair -- is as angry as any of the other novels i've been discussing, but it's the only horror story i've read recently that finds adequate metaphors for the self-destructive properties of anger.  ''their rage at what had been done to them had no place to go but within,'' langan writes of the people of bedford, and you can feel it throughout ''the keeper,'' growing like a cancer and debilitating the town until this entire complex social organism has no will but the will to merciful oblivion. and that's when rage becomes truly horrifying: when everyone has forgotten how the poison got into the system and no one knows, or cares, how to get it out.  horror  