today in business   finding flaws in software -- several companies are offering to pay researchers to find the holes in microsoft's new windows vista program, new software that goes on sale today. others with less legitimate intentions pay handsomely for the information, too. [page a1.]  bold predictions for vista -- steven a. ballmer, microsoft's chief executive, predicted that windows vista sales in the first three months would be double those of windows xp in 2001. hundreds of millions spent to market the software won't hurt either. [c1.]  china's surging market -- less than two years after a crash that disillusioned many chinese, china's stock markets are in a frenzy, with the leading shanghai composite index approaching 3,000 and chinese investors in record numbers flocking to buy shares. [a1. ]  rethinking trade policy -- a harvard professor and others argue that united states trade policy should not be focused simply on cutting tariffs and eliminating other barriers, but on offsetting the effect on wages and jobs from the spread of globalization and outsourcing. [c1.]  drug makers to merge? -- shares of bristol-myers squibb and sanofi-aventis are trading heavily on speculation that they might merge. but people close to the companies said there had been no merger talks. market place. [c1.]  pilots seek some payback -- as the airline industry returns to profitability, pilots are demanding to share in the industry's improved fortunes and get back some of the pay and benefits they gave up in recent years. the pilots' agenda is playing a big role in the merger talks involving delta and us airways. [c1.]  no inflation target yet -- as ben s. bernanke, below, celebrates his first anniversary as chairman of the federal reserve, the fed is still far away from his goal of setting an explicit target for inflation, which he has long argued would make its policy more transparent to the public. [c1.]  senate to vote on wage bill -- the united states senate is expected to clear the way today for an increase in the minimum wage that includes tax breaks for small businesses. that move will have to be reconciled with the house version of the bill. [a18.]  air america radio sold -- air america, the liberal radio network that had filed for bankruptcy protection, said that it had reached a tentative agreement to be acquired by stephen l. green, the chairman of a real estate investment trust. [c4.]  paper companies to merge -- two leaders of the struggling north american newsprint industry, abitibi consolidated and bowater, announced that they would merge through a stock-based transaction. [c9.]  verizon profit falls -- profit at verizon communications fell 38 percent in the fourth quarter, after one-time charges, but the company reported that it had narrowed the gap with at&t wireless in the race for new long-term subscribers. in fact, verizon's wireless businesses, which is jointly owned by verizon and the vodafone group, added 2.3 million new customers. [c4.]  citigroup buys online bank -- citigroup is buying egg banking, a british online bank, for $1.27 billion, a deal that will quadruple its credit card customers in britain. [c4.]  ads by those unknown -- marketers are turning to little-known personalities who offer the kind of novelty and freshness that young people might blog about, link to and comment on in chats; in other words, make viral on the internet. advertising. [c4]  nickelodeon's new site -- nickelodeon, the popular children's cable network, is starting a new web site, aimed at children aged 6 to 14, that plays heavily to their appetite for games. [c10.]  a planeload of angry fliers -- after weather delays in dallas on dec. 29, american airlines diverted flight 1348 to austin, tex. there it sat, with 100 or so passengers aboard, for 9 1/2 hours. now those passengers are fighting back. on the road: joe sharkey. [c8.]  hotel menus are changing -- with an eye to keeping up with their guests' increasingly sophisticated palates, nonstop work schedules and desire for healthful meals, many hotels are offering many more options for the discerning traveler ordering room service. everything from smoothies to a breakfast you can eat on a plane are offered. [c8.]  sticking to your guns -- nothing gives your principles a workout like a business trip. taking a stand for what you believe is not easy when you're traveling, but can be rewarding. frequent flier. [c9.]  online  view from the top -- some top-performing fund managers recently talked about some of their stocks and offered their thoughts about the year ahead. you can check their returns and read their philosophies at nytimes.com/business.  more than mere ads -- times square isn't just for billboards anymore -- advertisers are turning to on-the-ground marketing stunts to grab attention. an audio slide show is at nytimes.com/business.  a corpsman in iraq -- c. j. chivers travels with weapons company, second battalion, eighth marines and reports on a sniper shooting in anbar. audio and photos are at nytimes.com/multimedia.  speak, memory -- a 1930s diary, fished out of a dumpster, brings to vivid life the world of a new york teenager. an audio report and photos are at nytimes.com/multimedia.  