suicide attack is first in israel in 9 months   after nine months without a suicide bombing in israel, a palestinian walked from egypt across the open desert border, hitched a ride from a wary israeli motorist and then blew himself up on monday inside a bakery in the red sea resort town of eilat, israeli officials said.  three israelis who worked in the bakery were killed by the blast; it was the first time that eilat, isolated at the very southern tip of israel, has ever been hit by a suicide bombing.  the town was apparently a target because israel's web of defenses and travel restrictions on palestinians has made it extremely difficult for bombers to reach israel from the west bank, the source of virtually all suicide bombings in israel in recent years.  the attack complicated the latest effort to restart israeli-palestinian negotiations, which have languished for six years. the united states will be the host of talks on friday that will include european, russian and united nations officials, but the white house said in statement on monday that if the palestinian government failed to prevent terrorism, it would ''undermine the aspirations of the palestinian people for a state of their own.''  al aksa martyrs brigades and islamic jihad claimed joint responsibility for the attack, and identified the bomber as muhammad faisal al-siksik, 21, from northern gaza.  ''we shall draw the conclusions and learn the lessons, and instruct our security people to continue their ongoing and never-ending struggle against terrorists and those who send them,'' israel's prime minister, ehud olmert, said after the bombing.  [the israeli military said tuesday that it had responded with an airstrike on a gaza tunnel near the border with israel, the associated press reported. no one was injured.]  in recent weeks, most of the violence in the region has involved internal palestinian street battles in the gaza strip. the violence continued monday, with at least three palestinians killed in gaza, bringing the toll to about 30 since thursday.  early tuesday, the two main palestinian factions, hamas and fatah, announced a cease-fire after late-night talks in gaza city. [gunfire and explosions were audible in downtown gaza city on tuesday morning, after the talks took place, as gunmen from the rival factions apparently ignored the cease-fire,the a.p. reported.] several previous efforts have also collapsed.  relatives of the bomber, mr. siksik, said he left home three days ago and was upset because he had no job and his baby daughter recently died of an illness, the associated press reported. also, a friend of his was killed in a clash with israeli forces, they said.  in the northern gaza town of beit lahiya, dozens of people celebrated outside the family home of mr. siksik, and his mother, rowayda siksik, said she knew her son had set out on a suicide bombing mission. ''he told me, 'meeting god is better for me than this whole world,' '' the a.p. quoted her as saying.  islamic jihad said the bomber reached israel from jordan. but both jordan and israeli security officials denied that.  mr. siksik left gaza and entered egypt, said micky rosenfeld, a spokesman for the israeli police. he said the bomber then crossed egypt's desert border with israel, which is aggressively patrolled, but has no fence or other barrier for most of its length.  after entering israel, mr. siksik reached a road north of eilat on monday morning, and hitched a ride from an israeli driver, mr. rosenfeld said. mr. siksik, who was wearing a black coat and carrying a black bag, was acting suspiciously, the police spokesman said, and the israeli driver called the police immediately after dropping him on the northern edge of eilat.  the police were immediately dispatched to the scene, but before they could arrive mr. siksik reached the bakery, a few hundred yards from where he got out of the car, mr. rosenfeld said.  benny mazgini, an israeli who witnessed the attack, told israel radio that he saw a man wearing a black jacket and carrying a black bag on the street outside the bakery. ''i thought it was odd because it was very hot and i told myself, why is that idiot dressed that way?''  seconds later, the bomber detonated his explosive in the lechamim bakery, tearing the inside apart, shattering windows and leaving the pavement outside covered with blood and body parts.  in a gaza city news conference after the blast, a masked spokesman for islamic jihad said the bombing had been in retaliation for israeli raids against palestinian groups.  on its web site, islamic jihad also said the bombing was intended to redirect the focus away from the internal palestinian fighting in gaza. ''the operation has a clear message to the palestinian rivals,'' islamic jihad said on the site. ''it is necessary to end the infighting and point the guns toward the occupation that has hurt the palestinian people.''  hamas, the radical islamic group that leads the palestinian government, did not claim involvement in the bombing. however, fawzi barhoum, a hamas spokesman in gaza, described the attack as a ''natural response'' to israeli military operations against the palestinians. ''so long as there is occupation, resistance is legitimate,'' he said.  egypt's sinai peninsula, which is largely empty aside from beachfront hotels and fishing villages, has been rocked by a number of bombings in the past three years that have killed israeli and western tourists as well as egyptians.  israel and egypt have expressed concern that the vast, hilly terrain offers a natural haven for radical islamic groups to plan and carry out attacks.  islamic jihad has been involved in almost all of the suicide bombings against israel in the past two years. al aksa martyrs brigades, meanwhile, is linked to the fatah movement.  the palestinian authority president, mahmoud abbas, and other fatah leaders say they oppose violence against civilians, and al aksa militants say they act on their own. at a minimum, the bombing was an embarrassment for mr. abbas, again showing his inability to control factions that claim loyalty to the movement.  the last suicide bombing in israel was an islamic jihad attack on april 17, when 11 people were killed at a small restaurant in tel aviv.  while attacks in eilat are rare, three rockets were fired from the jordanian side of the border in august 2005.  