opening the gates at an army base   this huge military base in morris county boasts that it has developed and deployed virtually all the lethal weaponry currently used by the united states army. now, the base will become a generator of revenue for itself by turning some of its vast real estate holdings into a high-tech research and development park.  the base covers 6,500 acres bordered by the towns of rockaway, wharton and jefferson, most of it wooded hills and fields, with a few craggy cliffs and a couple of lakes. there are 64 army research labs and various weapons testing facilities scattered throughout the site, which is also home to several ball fields, a private golf course, a water park open to residents of rockaway and military housing for roughly 400 families.  plans call for breaking ground within the next three months on what will be called the picatinny applied research campus -- a nonmilitary complex designed to attract companies working with technologies that have both military and commercial applications.  the overall plan is to construct 1.1 million square feet of office or laboratory space on about 120 acres of army property.  the first phase of the project will create 100,000 square feet within the boundaries of the base's high-security enclosure. this space would be leased strictly to companies working on government projects.  future plans call for building as many as three structures on land outside the high-security gate. a new ''light security'' gate would set off this office park, intended for high-tech companies with projects that might benefit from use of the $1.5 billion worth of special equipment -- some of it one-of-a-kind -- housed on the base, and whose work might, in turn, benefit the military.  the new offices and lab space might also attract companies that begin as ''seed labs'' inside the base enclosure and then expand their products to commercial use, said david banashefski, who is chief of asset and technology capitalization for the base and the military's representative on the development project. some companies might maintain offices or labs both inside and outside the high-security area, he said.  the advance realty group, which is based in bedminster, n.j., the real estate firm handling the development project, said it expected that demand for space would come from research universities as well as communications, electronics, nanotechnology and emerging technology companies from around the world.  working through its forge technology affiliate, advance realty took a 50-year ground lease on the 120 acres, where it will build the office and lab space. the army negotiated the deal through insitech inc., a nonprofit company set up to spur development of technologies that have both military and commercial uses.  military officials decided some years ago to pursue a policy of ''base optimization'' -- making the most of the land and technology resources at picatinny -- according to the base's commander, maj. gen. paul s. izzo.  he said the 50-year lease included a revenue-sharing agreement with insitech and advance that could reap as much as $500 million for the arsenal over the next half-century.  representative rodney frelinghuysen, a republican from the district that includes picatinny, said ''this agreement just may become a model for other bases.''  at a time that the federal government is generally trying to reduce costs at its military bases, and closing some operations, mr. frelinghuysen said, enterprise arrangements may represent a lifeline at some locations.  margaret nordstrom, the director of the morris county board of freeholders, said local officials had been quite happy with the way picatinny was trying to revitalize and interact with the civilian community. the water park, built about six years ago, was one contribution. general izzo was honored this month by the county chamber of commerce for his community work, ms. nordstrom said.  more than 1,600 military researchers and scientists currently work at the base, as part of what is called the armament research, development and engineering center. in concert with military contractors, they develop and test all types of ordnance for the army -- for example, a remote firing system deployed to troops in iraq in 2005 that allows gunners to operate from inside a humvee.  the picatinny rail, a widely used bracket for mounting telescopic sights on firearms, was also developed at the base.  mr. banashefski said more than 90 percent of the army's armaments had been developed, procured or deployed through picatinny.  much of the work done for the military is classified, of course. mr. banashefski did, however, describe a research project that makes use of sensor equipment. the equipment is mounted on a lift that permits it to process a range of information to detect a hostile presence.  ''this is the type of specialized equipment that many developing companies might find highly desirable to have access to in their research,'' he said.  last month, mr. banashefski also said, the army broke ground for a new $11 million pyrotechnics lab and manufacturing plant at picatinny. pyrotechnical devices are used to light up battlefields and send up decoy flares for enemy missiles, but may have more generalized uses as well.  square feet  