sounds of the past echo in miami   lombardi, namath, swann, bradshaw, montana, young and elway. each famous and familiar name put his imprint on a super bowl in miami, where xli will engrave another name into pro football history sunday night.  miami is where vince lombardi coached the packers for the last time. in the minutes before super bowl ii against the oakland raiders, knowing that it would be his last game but not knowing that guard jerry kramer had secretly turned on his tape recorder for his book ''instant replay,'' he appealed to his players' pride in pursuing a second straight super bowl title after winning a record third consecutive n.f.l. championship.  ''boys, i tell you,'' lombardi barked during his pep talk, ''i'd be so proud of that, i just fill up with myself. i just get bigger and bigger.''  boys. all those packers in their green-and-gold uniforms were men. several were famous men who had won four n.f.l. titles in the previous six seasons, and a few were nearly middle-aged men. but to lombardi, they were still boys.  ''this is a club,'' he continued, referring to the rough-and-tumble raiders, ''that's going to hit you. they're going to try to hit you, and you got to take it most of the time. you got to be 40 tigers out there. that's all. just hit. just run. just block and just tackle. if you do that, there's no question what the answer's going to be in this ballgame. keep your poise. you've faced them all. there's nothing they can show you out there you haven't faced a number of times. right?!''  ''right!'' his players shouted.  ''let's go. let's go get 'em.''  the packers got 'em, 33-14. and after lombardi died in 1970, the silver super bowl trophy was renamed the vince lombardi trophy.  miami is where jets quarterback joe namath, accepting a trophy as the 1968 pro player of the year at a miami touchdown club dinner three nights before super bowl iii against the baltimore colts, silenced a heckler with: ''we're going to win. i guarantee you.''  the jets won, 16-7.  miami is also where an almost forgotten name, duane thomas, a cowboys running back, put the ''ultimate game'' in perspective before super bowl v.  ''if it's the ultimate game,'' said thomas, who later in his career did not talk to the news media, ''why are they playing it again next year?''  the cowboys lost to the colts, 16-13.  miami is where steelers wide receiver lynn swann, who had sustained a concussion against the raiders two weeks earlier, read before super bowl x that cowboys safety cliff harris warned that ''getting hit again must be in the back of swann's mind.'' swann replied: ''he doesn't know lynn swann. he can't scare me or the team.''  soaring like a circus acrobat, swann caught four passes for 161 yards and the winning touchdown in the steelers' 21-17 victory.  miami is where steelers quarterback terry bradshaw read before super bowl xiii that cowboys linebacker hollywood henderson joked, ''bradshaw couldn't spell cat if you spotted him the 'c' and the 'a.' '' after bradshaw threw four touchdown passes in the steelers' 35-31 triumph, he confessed later that he had been ''as nervous as a cat.''  asked to spell that, bradshaw replied, ''c-o-t.''  miami is where 49ers quarterback joe montana, after the bengals took a 16-13 lead with 3 minutes 20 seconds remaining in super bowl xxiii, leaned into the huddle early during the winning 92-yard drive and, having recognized an actor in the stands, told his teammates, ''hey, look, there's john candy.''  the 49ers won, 20-16, as montana hit all eight of his passes on that drive, notably a 10-yard touchdown arrow to wide receiver john taylor.  miami is where 49ers quarterback steve young, who had been in the shadows as montana's backup, stepped onto center stage. ''i was in the laboratory with joe every day,'' young said. ''if i was going to run this system, how could i get a better tutor? but there was a time when i felt like, o.k., i've got this down now, can i try it? that was tough, those years when i didn't get the chance to do that.''  when the left-handed young got the chance in super bowl xxix, he threw a record six touchdown passes in a 49-26 rout of the chargers.  miami is where john elway, who had feuded with coach dan reeves after the broncos lost in elway's first three super bowl appearances, not only confirmed that the diamonds in his ring from a super bowl xxxii triumph the previous year against the packers were genuine, but also completed his career with a 34-19 victory against reeves's falcons. he completed 18 of 29 passes for 336 yards, including an 80-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver rod smith.  of all the legendary pro football quarterbacks, only elway and otto graham earned two championship rings in their final two seasons.  and in miami on sunday night, another famous name will emerge. peyton manning? brian urlacher? tony dungy? lovie smith? or a name out of the blue -- the colts' royal blue, the bears' navy blue?  sports of the times  