starkest choice for jurors: mercy or death   and then there was nothing left to say.  the slain detectives had been buried, the tears of their widows dried, the contours of their loss placed on exhibition. the killer had been found guilty, his biography excavated, his apology given voice.  for the jurors assembled yesterday in federal district court in brooklyn to choose the fate of the convicted man, ronell wilson, 24, there remained only the heady question of mercy.  should all 12 deny it, mr. wilson will be ordered to die by lethal injection for killing detectives rodney j. andrews and james v. nemorin on staten island in march 2003. should one among them extend it, he will be sentenced to a life term in federal prison. the jury began deliberating yesterday afternoon.  slumped in a padded leather chair, dressed in a dark suit and striped tie, silent and still, mr. wilson watched the lawyers debate whether his life was worth sparing. no federal jury in new york has ordered a death sentence in half a century.  a prosecutor, jack smith, invoked the determination of the detectives and the grief of their wives and children. gripping a photograph, he asked the jurors to study the eyes of a woman who will never again look upon her husband.  ''those eyes, they have a look that says, 'i know you'll be there for me,' '' mr. smith said. ''rose nemorin will never have that look in her eyes again, because ronell wilson wanted $1,200 and to impress his gang friends.''  again and again, mr. smith called life imprisonment the sentence mr. wilson desired. he described mr. wilson as a violent gang member, a danger to prison guards and others. he called the apology mr. wilson had read aloud the words of a manipulative criminal. any fear, any motivation to quiet his violent impulses, mr. smith said, will leave mr. wilson the moment his life is spared.  ''mercy ceases to be a worthy issue unless it's reserved for those who deserve it,'' mr. smith said. ''do not be the water that washes the blood from his hands.''  a defense lawyer, kelley j. sharkey, told jurors their choice was momentous.  ''this is as great a moral decision as you may ever, ever be called upon to make,'' ms. sharkey said. ''ronell wilson will die in federal prison at a time either by god's choosing, or more quickly, by lethal injection.''  she dropped her voice to a whisper. she gripped the lectern. she displayed no charts, no screen projections, relying on the urgency of her voice. she recounted the parable of the sower of seeds. she recounted the childhood mr. wilson had suffered. and she characterized his apology as sincere.  acknowledging that mr. wilson had extended no mercy to a pleading detective, ms. sharkey asked the jurors not to follow his example.  ''you're better than that,'' she said. ''you are better than ronell.''  she sniffled and her voice broke.  ''mercy is strong,'' she said. ''mercy is the best that we have to offer in ourselves.''  in a rebuttal, a second prosecutor, colleen e. kavanagh, told the jury that mr. wilson had never acknowledged his crime.  ''he wants life when he took two; he wants mercy when he showed none,'' she said. ''we call for you to impose the ultimate sentence on ronell wilson, and that is a sentence of death.''  