50 iraqis die as holiday brings spasm of sectarian killing   women dressed in black had just set out large caldrons to cook the traditional feast on the holy day of ashura, a simple meal of rice and lamb in a tomato-based sauce. children crowded around the pots as men wailed in a ritualistic mourning ceremony and guards scanned the crowd at the shiite mosque near baquba for would-be killers.  then a bomb exploded.  ''i saw a head land a few feet from me,'' said muhammad saad, an 18-year-old student who was wounded in the blast. ''hands and legs were all around.''  at least 23 people were killed in the attack, the police said.  only 35 miles to the southeast, in baghdad, the sunni residents of the adhamiya neighborhood spent the day hiding in basements and under door frames, as explosions burst around them. at least 30 mortar shells rained down on the area, pulverizing homes and people.  by nightfall, police officials said that 10 were dead, while overwhelmed doctors at the local hospital said that at least 20 people had been killed and the number was likely to climb as bodies were dug out the next morning.  in all, more than 50 people died in scattered attacks across iraq on tuesday.  the day's violence, much of it driven by sectarian rivalries, and most of it directed at shiites, was by no means the worst iraq has seen. but it was one more grim reminder of just how deeply this nation has been cleaved in the past year.  as millions of pilgrims flocked to iraq's holiest shrines, and tens of thousands of government security forces and shiite militiamen fanned out to try to provide protection, ancient rituals transported worshipers back more than a thousand years, to the killing of the grandson of the prophet muhammad, imam hussein, by a sunni army in the battle of karbala in a.d. 680.  at ashura, shiites commemorate what is for them the most formative event of their faith, a celebration that had been banned under saddam hussein. in recent years, sunni militants, caught up in a renewed sectarian split, have attacked worshipers on the holiday.  in 2005, at least 74 people were killed and in 2004, more than 180 people died. this year was, however, worse than last, when fewer than a dozen were killed.  given the history of violence on ashura, the iraqi government deployed 10,000 policemen to guard karbala, where many of the millions of pilgrims gather, according to the governor of karbala province, aqil al-khuzaie. he said american and british fighter jets and helicopters patrolled the skies, and a security perimeter was set up several miles from the city center, placing the crowds out of reach of mortar shells and short-range rockets.  while the ceremonies in the holy cities of karbala and najaf proceeded without violence, militants still managed to kill large numbers of people.  the deadliest attack was at the shiite shrine near baquba, in balad ruz.  mr. saad, the 18-year-old student who witnessed the attack and was interviewed in the hospital where he was being treated for his wounds, described what he remembered.  ''i headed to the mosque around 10 a.m. and saw hundreds of people gathering,'' he said. there was heavy security, he said, but the rituals played out as they always do.  shortly after noon he heard the explosion.  ''i fell on the ground and lost consciousness,'' he said. when he came to, he saw victims being loaded into vans because there were no ambulances, and he heard gunshots.  a shiite neighborhood in baghdad, kadhimiya, was also hit by about 20 mortar shells on tuesday, according to the police, an attack that was most likely timed to ashura.  kadhimiya has generally been quiet, so much so that most of the government services work and residents have felt safe enough to venture out in the evening for tea and ice cream. the security has largely been provided by militias, not the government.  although police officials reported no casualties in the shelling on tuesday, residents said at least three people were killed in one explosion.  abu ali, 37, was standing near the main street watching an ashura procession when a mortar hit a nearby house, a few hundred yards from the main shiite shrine in the neighborhood.  ''people rushed to the house,'' he said. they found three people dead and two wounded. ''the house was burned to the ground because of the explosion.''  an american military official said later in the day that troops had been able to pinpoint the location of mortar fire and called in airstrikes to take out the guns. it was unclear if the mortars from that site had been directed at kadhimiya or adhamiya, which are near each other.  elsewhere in the city, four shiite pilgrims were killed and nine more wounded when gunmen open fired on two minibuses.  in khanaqin, a small town northeast of baghdad with a mixed shiite-sunni population, a roadside bomb exploded during a procession of shiite worshipers, killing at least 12 people, including three women.  aside from the sectarian violence, new details emerged about the fierce fighting over the weekend outside najaf, which served as a reminder that internal power struggles among shiite factions can also have bloody consequences. the battle pitted iraqi and american security forces against a fringe shiite group that the iraqi government said was planning an attack on the city and its top clerics during ashura.  a video released by the government showed hundreds of blindfolded prisoners being rounded up after the daylong fight and being taken away by iraqi security forces. another video showed stacks of dead bodies; the government said the bodies, many burned beyond recognition, were fighters killed in the battle.  after conflicting accounts of how many people were killed and captured in the battle, the ministry of defense said 263 people were killed, 210 wounded and 502 arrested on suspicion of being part of the renegade militia.  the struggle for iraq  