shell hits baghdad girls' school, killing 5 students, in latest attack on education in iraq   the girls had just finished taking an exam and were gathering in an inner courtyard at a school in a mainly sunni section of western baghdad on sunday when a mortar shell crashed down.  the explosion killed at least five girls, ages 12 to 16, and wounded at least 20, witnesses and iraqi officials said, tearing limb from limb, shattering glass, shredding the students' blue and white uniforms and leaving the survivors bloodied and confused.  ''she hugged and kissed me, then went outside and the bomb hit,'' a teacher at the scene said, referring to one of the girls. ''after a few minutes, she was dead.''  ''we just don't know what to do with the other girls,'' added the teacher, who did not want to be identified, fearing for her safety. ''they're young; they've never seen this.''  in a city seemingly numb to bloodshed, attacks on schools can still shock.  the mortar attack -- on a day when a battle raged between iraqi security forces and sunni militants in najaf, and the united states military announced the deaths of a marine and a soldier -- seemed to confirm that the violence here knows no boundaries. the attack, in the adel neighborhood, was the latest in a series of assaults on schools and those who educate the young.  two months ago, a teacher in a sunni area of western baghdad was raped, mutilated and strung up by her feet outside the school building, where her body hung for days, american military officers in the area said.  and in the past month, according to interior ministry officials, primary and secondary schools in and around baghdad have been attacked at least six times. in some cases, gunmen opened fire on schools during classes and guards fought them off. in other cases, mortar shells struck. at al gharbiya, for example, a secondary school in central baghdad, 10 people were killed in a recent attack.  principals and teachers have also been kidnapped and killed, repeating a pattern of terrorism that started with university professors and seems to have trickled down through the school system. in the past month, at least five school workers have been attacked or kidnapped.  a spokesman for the ministry of education, bashar al-khafaji, said this month that more guards would be added to primary and secondary schools in baghdad, a seeming acknowledgment that they were becoming a battleground. he declined to give reporters permission to visit the city's schools.  for many iraqi families, the risk of sending their children to school has already become too great, and promises of government protection may come too late. in many sunni areas, parents and teachers say, schools are emptying out as students go to class only a few days a week if at all.  isra qasim, 35, said she fled baghdad's mansour neighborhood, a former sunni middle-class enclave that now resembles a bombed-out wasteland, because she feared what might happen to her 6-year-old son at school. she left for amman, jordan, a few months ago, in time to register him for classes there.  ''i came here for him,'' she said two weeks ago, when she was interviewed in jordan. ''he said he wanted to learn.''  some schools have lost more than a third of their students as families leave the country. others, like al gharbiya, remain closed because of the violence.  the girls school hit on sunday, al khuroud, is near an office of adnan dulaimi, a senior sunni member of parliament. several of his family members live close by.  it was unclear if the mortar shell was intended for the school. residents of the neighborhood said that mortars had been raining down for days, possibly as retaliation for the heavy bombings concentrated in shiite areas, which are thought to be the work of sunni militants. those attacks have killed at least 300 people throughout the city in recent weeks.  whether intended or not, the result of the attack on the school was hard to fathom, even in a neighborhood used to violence. hours after the shell fell, windows were left shattered in the three concrete school buildings, and the schoolyard was covered with blood. not long before, about 100 girls had been standing there, chattering and laughing.  teachers and residents said they were not sure when or if they would return.  the reach of war  