amanda boyd, duncan yin   amanda morley boyd and duncan an-shea yin were married last evening in brooklyn. the rev. ron sala, a unitarian universalist minister, officiated at the palm house of the brooklyn botanic garden.  the bride, 33, is a freelance graphic arts designer in new york. she graduated from the parsons school of design.  she is the daughter of connie reeve boyd and george morley boyd of northborough, mass. her father is a senior counsel to the life insurance unit of john hancock in boston. her mother teaches science to seventh and eighth graders at the forest grove middle school in worcester, mass.  the bride is a descendant of william bradford, a governor of the plymouth colony.  the bridegroom, 46, was until october a portfolio manager at silver point capital, a hedge fund in greenwich, conn., after which he established his own firm, called yin harbor drive capital, a hedge fund operating out of the offices of the crt capital group in stamford, conn. he graduated from princeton and received an m.b.a. from harvard.  he is the son of dr. fay hoh yin of wilmington, del., and the late dr. theodore peng-jung yin. his mother retired as a senior research virologist at e. i. du pont de nemours & company in wilmington, where she studied a possible way of interfering the growth of the aids virus. his father also worked there, as a senior research chemist studying the properties of plastics.  ms. boyd and mr. yin met in november 2004 at the white horse tavern in the west village, where ms. boyd, who had been a waitress there during college, had stopped by for a drink. she was chatting with a group of people when mr. yin struck up a conversation with them. and at the end of the evening ms. boyd and mr. yin exchanged telephone numbers.  several weeks later, they went on their first date, to chez michallet, another west village restaurant. ''when he first walked into the restaurant, he was all dressed up in a suit with a james bond look,'' she said. ''i had a quick thought, 'i am going to marry this guy,' and then i discounted it.''  within a few months they started seeing each other exclusively, and last september, during a trip to newport, r.i., mr. yin proposed.  they began envisioning a spring or summer wedding, but every place they called in massachusetts and new york was booked solid for 2007 with the exception of some questionable dates like super bowl sunday.  when jan. 27 became available at the brooklyn botanic garden, a place that they had been particularly drawn to, they pounced on it.  ''all my life i wondered what kind of person chooses to get married when it's freezing outside,'' mr. yin said. ''now i know the answer: a man who proposes to his girlfriend too late to reserve a reception venue the following summer.''  then they stumbled on an auspicious fact: jan. 27 falls in the chinese lunar leap year of 4703, which continues until feb. 17. the current year of the dog is considered particularly conducive to weddings because it contains two lunar springs, a phenomenon that foretells a happy marriage and that has occurred only 11 times since 221 b.c.  ''when i found out that duncan and i were going to be married in the luckiest year possible, i thought, 'this is so perfect, it's so duncan,' '' ms. boyd said. ''he is just the sort of person on whom fortune seems to smile, and i feel fortunate to be along for the ride.''  weddings/celebrations  