red carpet syndrome   it is late january. the year is still fresh. so why do you feel so stale?  could it be, like me, you're already feeling awards season ennui?  last tuesday, on the heels of the golden globe awards and the producers guild awards, the announcement of the oscar nominations was cause for more concern than the state of the union message. tonight, you can watch the screen actors guild awards and the independent spirit awards nominations special on television. o.k., so you weren't able to score seats at this year's sundance film festival.  but that doesn't mean you aren't going to hear all about tonight's awards presentation tomorrow.  people's and teen choice awards. daytime emmys. grammys. billboard music awards. mtv video music awards. fifi awards, honoring the fragrance industry. clio awards for advertising. espy awards for sports. webbys. vloggies.  and last week, the golden raspberry awards, invented by a small-town california film buff, announced its razzie nominations for worst movies.  ''there's even a proliferation of award-giving in my field,'' said jeffrey greenberg, a professor of social psychology at the university of arizona. ''the media has created this great stage and we all want to be significant on it. everybody wants to show they're valuable. my local bakery now has awards on the walls for its bread.''  once, it was enough to have made a good living baking or doing anything well. awards were only icing on a cake. and of course, to be a movie star, already overpaid and valorized -- in a field ''not known for its rigor,'' as fran lebowitz once said -- would seem award enough. now it means little until you get the highly publicized honors, too.  ''so not only are there more and more awards,'' said albert nerenberg, a documentary filmmaker from toronto. ''but there are more and more stupid awards shows.''  so many that his personal response was to throw his own hat in the ring with the world stupidity awards. last year, when posterior décolletage received one of his many nominations, nearly a thousand people attended his awards event in montreal.  ''the only thing i know for certain,'' mr. nerenberg said, ''is that it seems like everyone in the world has won an award except me.''  not anymore. welcome to my first annual civvy awards, where i nominate little known civilians for doing little things that make an annoying little world a little better.  so, for drawing attention to the unseemly and possibly unhygienic exposed-buttocks fad, mr. nerenberg will receive a civvy for trend busting in costume design.  now for some other winners. envelopes please:  to all-inspiring teachers who cast themselves in a difficult role and stay with it (unlike the woman behind the book that became the movie ''freedom writers''): a civvy for vocational humility.  to people on trains and in movie theaters who remove their coats from empty seats without being asked: a civvy for best performance in a crowded comedy.  top performance by a dog owner goes to those who understand that buildings are not urinals and that expandable leashes that go from here to eternity are a menace to pedestrians. and for people who keep their umbrellas closed until they have exited the subway stairs (who are probably the same people who keep their soaking-wet umbrellas folded by their feet rather than dripping all over you): a civvy award for excellence in prop handling.  for achievement in sound, a civvy goes to co-workers who try to speak quietly in the next cubicle. for outstanding choreography in public spaces, a civvy goes to friends who know better than to walk three abreast on the sidewalk. and the civvy in editing goes to anyone who does not feel compelled to explain himself at length after making mistakes.  there are others for your consideration. but because i'm considerate (and the orchestra is telling me to get off) let's skip to the end.  drum roll please. the final civvy of the night is for unsolicited graciousness at a cash register. it goes to the elderly woman who quietly stepped aside at the corner store the other day so that i could buy my newspapers before she bought all her lottery tickets.  i was so impressed, i thanked her. ''it's nothing,'' she said.  perhaps. but it meant more to me than any performance i've seen on a screen. virtue is its own reward. but that doesn't mean it can't be applauded once in a while.  thank you. and goodbye for now.  the age of dissonance  