knicks inject the garden with a buzz and a win   the los angeles lakers missed kobe bryant's other-worldliness, fans at madison square garden missed his showmanship and the knicks, for once, did not miss the golden opportunity that was handed to them.  they rode eddy curry's offense, enjoyed a surprising resurgence by jared jeffries and beat back the lakers for a 99-94 victory last night. with bryant yanked from the stage by a league suspension, the evening lacked pyrotechnics, star quality and drama.  but for those who came to see the knicks (20-27) claim a rare victory against an elite team, the night ended with some satisfaction. all five starters scored in double figures, led by curry's 27 points. jeffries, who started for the injured quentin richardson, filled up the box score and had a game-clinching block with 12.1 seconds left to play.  the knicks, who had beaten just one team with a winning record in the past month, held on despite losing a 9-point lead in the first half and a 10-point lead in the fourth quarter.  ''you're never going to blow them out,'' coach isiah thomas said. ''they're a team with a great coach, who understands how to manipulate a game and keep his team close.''  thomas praised the lakers (27-18) at length for their resiliency and, with a smile, concluded: ''but i'm glad kobe didn't play. i'm really happy he didn't play.''  twice in the previous eight days, the knicks lost to teams missing their star players -- in milwaukee (michael redd) and miami (dwyane wade and shaquille o'neal). the lakers, who were also missing the starters luke walton and kwame brown, kept the game close behind lamar odom (25 points and 9 rebounds).  odom and vladimir radmanovic made 3-pointers to spark a late rally, knocking the deficit down to 96-94 with 45.8 seconds left. curry hit two free throws to extend the lead to 4 points. he finished 9 for 12 from the foul line -- no small thing, given his own struggles and thomas's recent rant about the knicks' poor foul shooting. the knicks shot free throws for an hour on monday.  ''it meant a lot,'' curry said of his late free throws, ''because i know how important free throws are to this team and especially to coach.''  after curry's free throws, the lakers' maurice evans had a 3-pointer rattle out of the rim, but they still had a chance after jamal crawford ran (or was bumped) out of bounds for a turnover. but jeffries reached out and blocked a 3-point try by brian cook in the corner, handing the lakers their first three-game losing streak of the season.  only a week ago, jeffries was benched by thomas and had his playing time slashed. jeffries had been ineffective for weeks. but with richardson nursing a sprained elbow, thomas turned back to jeffries, who responded with his best game in a month -- 14 points, 7 rebounds, 4 assists, 2 steals, 2 blocked shots and 1 turnover in 32 minutes.  ''i thought the way he competed was impressive, considering the ups and downs that he's been having,'' thomas said.  booed during pregame introductions, jeffries was cheered for his hustle several times throughout the night.  ''those kind of things are why i'm here,'' said jeffries.  stephon marbury scored 22 points but aggravated his sore left knee and sat out the last 35.2 seconds. he landed awkwardly after leaping to grab an errant inbounds pass from jeffries.  marbury recently sat out a game to rest the knee but said he would play tonight in charlotte.  ''i just landed funny,'' he said. ''i'm all right.''  the chance to see bryant had drawn a larger-than-usual cadre of celebrities, from the comedian jon stewart to the rapper eve, the singer nick lachey and the real-estate mogul donald trump.  bryant was suspended earlier in the day, for elbowing san antonio's manu ginóbili in the face sunday during a loss to the spurs. fans booed loudly when the suspension was announced before tip-off -- an unheard-of reaction, given that the punishment was for an opponent.  thomas did not share their disappointment.  ''i'm a big fan of kobe and i like him personally,'' thomas said. ''you hate to see anyone suspended. but i don't want to face him, i don't want to face shaq, i don't want to face vince carter, i don't want to face any of the best players in the league, because i know what they're capable of.''  what about the fans, who were denied their only chance to see bryant play here this season?  ''video games, television, catch him the next time,'' thomas said with a laugh. ''i'm sure they'll have a couple of national television games, and all of new york can tune in and watch him.''  rebounds  quentin richardson said that his right elbow injury was not serious and that he hoped to return to the lineup tonight in charlotte. richardson sprained the elbow in a practice last week and scored 6 points over his next three games, going 3 for 14 from the field. ''it just wasn't feeling that good,'' said richardson, who is averaging 13.3 points. richardson had a bandage on the elbow when he spoke with reporters, but he said he had not received an injection or had the elbow drained. ''it got scratched,'' he said.  pro basketball  