after shooting, amish school embodies effort to heal   nearly four months ago, a milk delivery-truck driver lined up 10 girls in a one-room schoolhouse in this amish farming community and opened fire, killing five of them and wounding five others before turning the gun on himself.  ten days after the shooting, amish leaders demolished the school building, which stood off a quiet two-lane road. and about a month later, amish residents, including relatives of the girls who had been killed, banded together to build a one-room schoolhouse about 200 yards from the old one, on an acre of land owned by an amish farmer.  the school, to be finished in mid-february, is set to open in march. brick with beige siding, it has a front porch and sits behind a set of farmhouses, shielded from view of those passing on the nearby road. there are ''no trespassing'' signs at the entrances.  for now, students are attending class in a local garage.  ''they wanted to get the kids in as protective an atmosphere as they could,'' said john coldiron, a zoning officer for bart township, where nickel mines is situated . ''it's very private.''  mr. coldiron, who has been involved with the construction since ground was broken this month, said the new schoolhouse had sturdier windows and doors and stronger locks than the old one.  ''this is kind of a washing -- getting rid of the old and putting up the new,'' he said. ''it's all really good stuff'' for the community.  for others, the school ''is a symbol of hope,'' said rita rhoads, 53, a mennonite who is a certified nurse midwife and helped in the births of some of the shooting victims. ''we want the kids to just quietly show up one day and go to school normally.''  four of the five girls who were wounded have returned to class. one remains in a coma and is being cared for at home, ms. rhoads said.  confronted with tragedy, the amish are taught to forgive and go on. and that is what the 2,700 residents of bart township have been trying to do since the attack, on oct. 2. ''people don't fuss about it,'' mary stoltzfus, 36, a member of the community, said outside fisher's houseware and fabrics. ''it has calmed down.''  ms. rhoads said that although the victims' families and friends had been devastated, ''there's no anger.''  ''there is a lot of 'why?' '' she said. ''but life goes on. the healing continues. it's not to say they're not sad. they are sad. they are mourning, but they're doing well.''  the amish and the non-amish have given the widow of the gunman, charles c. roberts iv, and the couple's three children comfort and unconditional support. neighbors put up a christmas tree at the local volunteer fire hall and decorated it with toys and gift cards for the family. soccer players at solanco high school in nearby quarryville made it a point to show their encouragement by attending soccer matches played by the robertses' young son brice.  donations from around the world have poured into funds set up to help pay burial expenses for the dead and medical costs for the survivors, ms. rhoads said. a pregnant teacher at the school whom mr. roberts allowed to leave before he started shooting gave birth to a baby girl and named her after one of the youngest victims, naomi rose ebersole, 7.  ''the whole world has been great to us with their donations and support,'' said chief h. curtis woerth of the bart township fire company. the schoolhouse had been a mile from the fire station, and chief woerth's eyes welled up as he recalled the day.  ''our hearts, they'll never mend,'' he said. ''it's just like it was yesterday to all of us. it's what we're trained to do, but when you sit in those classes all those hours, you never think it will be something so close to you.'' members of his department still receive counseling to help them deal with the shooting.  rich ressel, an emergency medical technician and a volunteer firefighter who was among the first to arrive at the school, said he was haunted each time he heard the sound of a horse-drawn buggy.  ''i'll never forget the pitter-patter of the horse hooves going down the street for the funerals,'' mr. ressel said. ''it was so quiet. we stood out front of the station when they went by. every time i hear that, it brings me back to it.''  on the wall in a firehouse dining room is a watercolor of the schoolyard painted by a local artist, elsie beiler. its title is ''happier days,'' and it depicts the amish children of nickel mines playing, without a care, before the shooting. five birds, which some say represent the dead girls, circle in the blue sky above.  ms. beiler said the fact that she knew some of the victims' families had inspired her to paint the scene and to donate some of the money from the sale of prints to the victims' fund. ''i pray for the families of the children,'' ms. beiler said. ''and i thought about what a struggle it was for them to live out each day in forgiveness.''  