an effort to get more fans to meet the mets   for more than an hour, five of the mets' better-known players had been posing for photographs, signing autographs, shaking hands and exchanging high-fives, when judi millar made a slightly less common request of tom glavine. her co-worker paul is a huge braves fan and, well, it would mean a lot to him if you said hi, she told glavine. millar handed glavine her cellphone.  ''what did i have to lose?'' said millar, of douglaston, queens, who works at sports professions high school in the bronx. ''he could say yes or no. he said yes.''  that sort of zany, free-for-all atmosphere permeated the diamond club at shea stadium yesterday as about 250 season-ticket holders and prospective season-ticket buyers (no braves fans) like millar and her sister-in-law tracy millar spent a frigid afternoon connecting with their favorite mets.  in one corner, josé reyes giggled as a few fans serenaded him with the ''josé, josé, josé'' cheer. in another, carlos delgado accepted congratulations for the coming birth of his first child. the only thing, perhaps, that the players, who also included david wright and john maine, did not do yesterday was directly ask fans to upgrade their ticket plans or scrimp together some extra cash for a weekend package in the upper box.  after smashing their previous attendance record, set in 1988, by having 3,379,551 pass through the shea turnstiles, the mets are aiming even higher in 2007. based on the increase that usually occurs the year after a team reaches the postseason and the expectation for similar success, dave howard, the mets' executive vice president for business operations, said he fully expected the team to surpass 3.5 million in attendance. he declined, however, to offer a projection.  advance sales of season-ticket plans have surpassed 1.5 million, a 50 percent increase from this time last year, and first-time season-ticket purchases are up 186 percent, howard said.  ''the early indications are extremely favorable,'' howard said. ''the team is perceived as very likable and attractive and that, coupled with the new network and new ballpark on the way, is driving people toward making season-long commitments.''  the mets were slightly held back last season by three rainouts, which forced them to play three single-admission doubleheaders and thus lose out on three additional games' worth of ticket sales, and, as it turned out, by their own dominance. by august, the mets were running away with the national league east, and howard acknowledged that the lack of tension might have kept some fans from shea.  fans stormed back for the team's first postseason appearance since 2000, however. a season-high 57,029 attended game 2 of the division series against the dodgers, and all six home playoff games drew more than 56,000.  the mets are indeed surging, in the stands and in the city's consciousness, but they would not mind narrowing the gap between them and the yankees. the yankees outdrew the mets by more than 860,000 last season, setting their own franchise attendance record with 4,243,780. and, in the first full season of their television networks going head to head, the yankees' yes network attracted a 4.3 season rating; the mets' sportsnet new york notched a 2.9.  could the mets ever get to where the yankees were last year? in the mets' favor is that the yankees have little room for growth. the yankees sold 91.2 percent of their seats last season, and the mets sold 75.5 percent of shea's capacity. to reach four million, the mets would have to draw 49,382 a game, which would be more than 6,000 tickets beyond their average daily sale last season. not easy, but not out of the question, either.  the mets did not hold their winter caravan, an annual weeklong tour of the city to drum up interest for the coming season. that is because the season lasted about three weeks longer than usual and it was difficult to get all the players in town. so the mets stuffed a few events into one day. call it a 24-hour caravan.  in the morning, some mets joined students in a wheelchair whiffle ball game on long island. in the afternoon, delgado visited the kips bay boys & girls club. in between, players mingled and schmoozed at shea, where their presence might have swayed some to purchase a few more season-ticket packages.  ''i'm young, so i can't get the big package,'' said brendan mulholland, 26, an insurance broker from hicksville, n.y., who was considering buying a weekend plan. ''i'll just have to scrap together the money.''  baseball  