vocal minority wants the stock tables back   in an effort to survive industrywide financial straits, many newspapers have made cuts both large and small, reducing newsroom staff, paper sizes and even the daily printed stock listings that are readily available online. but after torrents of reader complaints, two major papers said last week that they would restore some of those listings.  the washington post and the wall street journal both said last week that they would bring back some of the stock market tables to their papers. they and several other dailies, including the new york times, have recently trimmed those listings in their financial sections to reduce newsprint costs.  the cuts had seemed to be an easy, low-impact way to save money, as free, regularly updated stock indexes are available on both papers' web sites. but that did not satisfy readers accustomed to checking their stock prices in the morning papers.  ''we always had in mind that we would see what the reaction was,'' said sandra sugawara, the post's assistant managing editor for financial news. when the paper announced in november that it was reducing its stock listings, it urged readers to write or e-mail if their stocks or mutual funds had been cut -- and promised to consider restoring those listings. the post, which announced the latest change on tuesday, had already restored some of its stocks and mutual funds, one week after its initial cuts in november.  ms. sugawara said that while many of the post's readers simply went online, a large and vocal contingent of longtime subscribers ''had developed a habit of waking up and checking their stocks'' in the morning paper.  the post's restoring of some stock listings would not affect its cost-cutting goals. according to ms. sugawara, the newly restored listings will make up only another quarter of a page. ''the goal was always to save two pages, and that's what we did,'' she said.  the journal, which downsized its stock pages earlier this month when it decreased the overall size of the paper, said last monday that it would restore some tables after hearing from ''several thousand'' readers.  ''we have added data that are less widely available and that consume relatively small amounts of space, but that are of high utility to significant numbers of readers,'' a journal spokesman said in an e-mail statement. ''the addition of these few stock tables won't change our savings forecast.''  but the paper's announcement of the restoration couldn't repress a swipe at the readers who remained ''reliant on the print paper,'' noting that the ''vast majority'' of its readers ''now get those data free online.''  maria aspan  media talk  