state farm is there, right by the backboard   although it seems that the only thing madison avenue is doing this week is making commercials for the super bowl, marketers are still finding ways to fill other sports spaces with advertising. if you doubt that, look up the next time you attend a college basketball game or watch one on television, and study the framework behind the backboard.  at more than 40 colleges around the country, that space is for the first time being used for advertising signs, three feet long by one foot wide, affixed to what are known as the basket stanchion support arms. the signs, one at each end of the court, are perpendicular to the backboards; they bear the words ''state farm'' and the familiar red-and-white logo of state farm insurance.  state farm, a longtime sponsor of college basketball, is deploying such ads, in what it calls the basket profile program. the program was tested in late december and has been under way at colleges and universities since early january.  state farm made the deal -- for the 2007, 2008 and 2009 basketball seasons -- with anc sports enterprises, a marketing company in purchase, n.y., that represents more than 150 arenas, stadiums and other sports locations in north america.  although financial terms are not being disclosed, it is estimated that the agreement is costing state farm about as much as cbs is charging on average for a 30-second commercial to appear sunday during super bowl xli -- about $2.6 million.  the signs are further evidence, if any is needed, of the growth of commercial speech in the public realm. critics who decry it as ''ad creep'' complain it clutters and coarsens the landscape. despite the complaints, marketers are embracing such alternative methods because consumers are increasingly able to avoid traditional pitches like tv commercials and print ads.  ''alternative media is not really alternative anymore,'' said bob kantor, chief executive at hanger network in-home media, which provides 35,000 dry cleaners with hangers made from recycled paper that are embossed with ads from companies like airtran airways, dunkin' donuts, l'oréal, philips-van heusen and revlon.  ''i've worked with a lot of clients through the years,'' said mr. kantor, who has held senior management posts at agencies like lowe, publicis and rotter kantor, adding that they have become more determined to find ways to ''reach consumers at the times and places most relevant and most motivating.''  among those marketers is state farm, a corporate sponsor of the national collegiate athletic association as well as a sponsor of sports events at individual colleges and universities.  ''consumers consume media differently from three years ago,'' said mark gibson, assistant vice president for advertising at state farm in bloomington, ill. ''it's not enough to just run a 30-second commercial in a program.''  in seeking alternatives to traditional ads, state farm's goal is ''naturally, seamlessly integrating the brand into a venue in a way that doesn't take away from the event,'' mr. gibson said.  ''if it causes disruption or becomes something people don't like, it's an issue,'' he added, ''and consumers will let you know in their own way.''  so far, mr. gibson said, there have been no complaints about the signs. they are appearing at universities that include arizona state, auburn, baylor, brigham young, florida state, iowa state, marshall, miami, north carolina state, purdue, texas a&m, the university of colorado, vanderbilt and the university of california, los angeles.  ''state farm was very sensitive about the schools doing this and didn't push if a school felt it was not right,'' said greg brown, president at the learfield sports division of learfield communications in plano, tex., which represents 32 universities in their dealings with corporate marketers.  ''the college landscape is a much more reserved landscape than nascar or a variety of other sports enterprises,'' mr. brown said. ''there's headroom in what we do, by comparison, but we don't do something the schools won't agree with.''  mr. brown says he believes ''we've struck a nice balance'' with the state farm signs, because they are visible to fans at the games as well as viewers on tv but are ''not in your face.''  a year and a half ago, a competitor, allstate, signed a deal to place ads on the end zone nets at the stadiums of 39 n.c.a.a. colleges like army, boston college and the university of oklahoma. the agreement to put up the nets, bearing the allstate ''good hands'' logo, was made by dorna usa, a sports marketing division of van wagner communications.  ''in-game advertising is probably the single best way to reach the target audience'' sought by marketers affiliating themselves with sports, said david bialek, president of the anc sports marketing division of anc enterprises, because ''the advertiser's message is embedded in the content of the game.''  mr. bialek, who said he worked at dorna when the allstate agreement was signed, compared ads glimpsed during sports events to ads inserted in video games.  ''it's just part of the backdrop,'' mr. bialek said, ''as much a part of the game as students wearing sweatshirts with team logos.''  hmmm. now there is an idea: paying students to wear sweatshirts with advertisers' logos.  advertising  