senate adds tax breaks as it passes a wage bill   the senate voted overwhelmingly on tuesday to move ahead on a bill to increase the minimum wage, signaling that the measure is likely to pass this week.  but the vote also sets up a conflict with the house that is likely to stall any increase.  the senate bill includes $8.3 billion in tax breaks for small businesses that democrats who sponsored the bill said were necessary to obtain republican support.  the 87-to-10 vote on tuesday was to limit debate on the bill. democrats say they expect to achieve a similarly wide margin of approval on the final bill.  the house approved a simpler bill, including the wage increase but no tax breaks, this month. the democratic leaders there insist that it should not be necessary to offer tax breaks in exchange for the wage increase, the first in 10 years.  the two bills would raise the minimum wage $2.10 an hour, from $5.15 to $7.25.  democratic leaders from both chambers now have to figure out how to reconcile the measures. assuming that the senate bill passes, democratic leaders can hold onto it and negotiate with their house counterparts. or the senate can send the bill to the house, which could block consideration of it or strip out the tax breaks and send it back to the senate for another vote.  in the house, 82 republicans joined democrats to approve the wage increase. the senate rejected the bill without tax breaks.  senator harry reid of nevada, the democratic leader, said tuesday that he expected leaders of the two chambers to work out the differences.  ''there are many different ways it can happen,'' mr. reid said, although he offered no specifics.  democrats have accused republicans of trying to stall the bill by offering dozens of amendments. senator edward m. kennedy, democrat of massachusetts and the chief proponent of the bill, promised to press ahead until the wage increase passes.  ''if they're hoping we'll get tired,'' mr. kennedy said, ''they're sorely mistaken.''  republicans, however, insisted that the senate would not go along with the ''clean'' bill that the house wants.  ''clean means do it my way,'' said senator michael b. enzi of wyoming, ranking republican on the senate health, education, labor and pensions committee. ''that's not how we often do it in the senate.''  republicans noted that democrats went along with a combined package for raising the minimum wage and tax breaks 10 years ago and that president bill clinton applauded them for it.  ''and if it was o.k. in 1997, it ought to be o.k. now,'' said senator charles e. grassley, republican of iowa.  correction:  february 2, 2007, friday  the headline with an article on wednesday about a senate proposal to raise the minimum wage misstated the action taken by senators. by a vote of 87 to 10, the senate agreed to limit the debate on the bill, clearing the way for a final vote, which resulted in passage yesterday. the senate did not pass the wage bill on wednesday.  