city adding 22,000 slots for low-income rent assistance   the bloomberg administration intends to give out 22,000 new federal housing vouchers to help low-income new yorkers rent apartments on the private market over the next two years, officials said yesterday. to do that, officials are temporarily reopening the waiting list for the program, called section 8, to nonemergency applicants for the first time in 12 years.  twelve thousand of the vouchers will be given out this year and 10,000 next year -- more new vouchers than the city has had in years, officials said. three thousand will go to new yorkers on the brink of homelessness, but officials said that most would go for the first time in years to ordinary new yorkers struggling to make ends meet.  ''this is a huge opportunity to serve low- and moderate-income new yorkers who haven't had access to the resource for years,'' said tino hernandez, chairman of the new york city housing authority, which administers the program. officials say some 800,000 families in the city are poor enough to be eligible.  the housing authority currently uses 83,300 section 8 vouchers annually to help pay the rent for some 270,000 new yorkers in households with incomes of no more than 50 percent of the median for the metropolitan area, or $35,000 for a family of four. tenants pay their landlords up to 30 percent of their income in rent; the vouchers cover the rest.  the housing authority closed the waiting list for section 8 vouchers to nonemergency applicants in 1994 because of a drop in federal funding. there are now 127,000 people on the list. since that time, only emergency applicants, including survivors of domestic violence and families reuniting after foster care, were added.  the 22,000 vouchers became available in part because of a nearly $100 million increase in federal funds for the program nationally, approved in 2006, administration officials said. another factor, they said, was a 2004 bloomberg administration decision.  since the late 1980s, the city had used section 8 vouchers to help house families moving out of shelters. faced with federal funding cuts, the city replaced that system in 2004 with another program, housing stability plus, run by the city and the state. city officials say it has helped 10,000 families move out of shelters.  but advocates for the poor and homeless are critical of that program because they say the value of a tenant's housing stability plus voucher drops by 20 percent a year. since participants must be on public assistance to be eligible, they say, tenants risk becoming ineligible for the program if they get jobs in order to make up the lost rent.  ''i think that the thousands of families who were put on h.s.p. vouchers should be given every opportunity to switch to section 8 vouchers,'' victor bach, a senior analyst for the community service society of new york, said yesterday. ''it's a catch-22, a work disincentive,'' he added.  mary brosnahan sullivan, the executive director of the coalition for the homeless, said yesterday, ''this section 8 resource is so scarce, our argument is that it ought to go to the people with the most compelling need, and those are the homeless families.''  howard marder, a housing authority spokesman, said the present waiting list was badly outdated. many people are no longer eligible or cannot be reached. applications will be available starting today at any authority management or applications office. they will be accepted from feb. 12 through may 14, when the list will be closed again for nonemergency applicants.  