2 witnesses in queens killing cite pause amid 50 police shots   two men celebrating at a bachelor party for sean bell in november emerged from a grand jury in queens late yesterday and said they had testified that the many bullets fired by the police came in two bursts.  the men, larenzo kinred, 33, and hugh jensen, 30, said they testified that they heard a barrage of bullets, a short pause, then another barrage of bullets. five officers fired 50 shots that morning outside club kalua, a strip club in jamaica, killing mr. bell on his wedding day and wounding two of his friends.  ''they asked us questions about the night and anything that i remember,'' mr. kinred said. ''i just told the facts: a couple of gunshots, then a pause and more gunshots. it was just one night to remember.''  mr. jensen said: ''we just told what we saw and we heard. a barrage of gunfire, a pause.''  charlie king, a lawyer for the men, said that they heard the shots as they were walking from the club toward the street where mr. bell's car was parked. mr. kinred said that when he reached the corner, he saw a man, later determined to be one of the officers, firing his gun.  mr. king, who represents six men who will be called to testify, said his clients had told him that the pause in the gunshots lasted anywhere from two to five seconds. mr. king said that none of his clients could cite a reason for the pause. he said a third client of his, whom he would not identify, had testified yesterday. that client left the party before the shooting, then returned, mr. king said.  ''today, three of my clients testified before the grand jury and answered every question that was asked of them by the queens district attorney's office and by members of the grand jury,'' mr. king said. ''they will continue to cooperate fully and completely.''  the office of the queens district attorney, richard a. brown, declined to comment last night. the grand jury is weighing evidence in the case to determine whether the officers involved will face criminal charges. mr. bell, who was black and unarmed, was 23 when he died on nov. 25. of the five officers involved in the shooting, three are black and two are white.  the significance of yesterday's testimony was unclear. in the past, the police have said that one officer working undercover fired first, shooting 11 rounds. it is unclear when the four other officers fired and whether their bullets constituted a second barrage of shots.  the grand jury began its work last week, more than two months after the shooting. it is a panel that meets three days each week, and its proceedings are conducted in secret. mr. kinred and mr. jensen offered a glimpse yesterday of the makeup of the grand jurors.  ''it's a mixture of everything, not just one race,'' mr. kinred said. ''different races and ages and everything.''  