in high school football, crunch time can be literal   a bellow of southern pride, tinny in a cellphone speaker, sounds at the bedside of a sleeping teenager. it's ''sweet home alabama.'' this is morning in hoover, ala., home of sublime high school football, as well as of mtv's pious reality series ''two-a-days,'' which begins its second season tonight. the song is a wake-up call.  mark, the lunky and sweet defensive end, stirs. shutting off the phone, he also shakes off the memory of last night's loss -- by two touchdowns, on the home field. for the hoover high school buccaneers, this loss precludes a top national ranking. nothing the team does now, in mark's senior year, will make up for that loss. the best it can hope for is to win state, but hoover always wins state. so, actually, the best they can hope for is not to lose state. what a drag of a way to start the day.  and what a drag of a way, really, to start a show. ''friday night lights,'' nbc's as-yet-undefeated fictional series about high school football, also started by putting its team way in the hole: on the debut episode, the quarterback ended up paralyzed. but an existential blow like that is the kind that drama was invented to address. a disqualification from national rankings in game 1, on the other hand, is just a closed door. it puts dramatic limits, not possibilities, on a television series.  nonetheless, the boys of hoover who are also reality stars now obediently seek more reasons to play football. or should i say to play ''this ballgame,'' or ''this football game''? these phrases come from rush propst, the team's picturesque coach, who combines tough and tender so tastily that in him it seems to be a blend of pop.  the wonderfully nonterse, redundant way that sports people refer to their object of affection -- this ballgame, this ball club, this football program -- reaches a crescendo in his oratory style. coach propst is always ready to revisit first principles, to build the sport from the ground up. what are these padded kids even doing there? foot. ball.  just as ''laguna beach'' was originally mtv's reality answer to fox's fictional ''oc,'' ''two-a-days'' (the title refers to a team's days of double practice sessions) could be viewed as a documentary counterpart to ''friday night lights.'' like that nbc show, mtv's show features cheerleaders, an almost exclusively white southern team, and boys from modest homes who turn gladiatorial on the football field.  and, of course, there's a speechifying and self-sacrificing coach. at one point mark says, ''i do love friday nights, when those lights turn on.''  but don't expect ''two-a-days'' to wallop ''friday night lights,'' as ''laguna beach'' did ''the oc'' as a ''friday night lights'' obsessive, i intend to use ''two-a-days'' instead as a companion piece, and i'll watch it as long as ''friday night lights'' stays on the air. high school football makes a plangent subject for fiction -- particularly television and film -- but it requires art to cut against the sport's intrinsic wordlessness, as well as the reticence of the players. it needs art to give it lift.  without the script and generous camerawork of ''friday night lights,'' all the good lines on ''two-a-days'' go to the coach -- and the plays, unchoreographed and unmiked for the television audience, are hard to decipher.  two-a-days  mtv, tonight at 10, eastern and pacific times; 9, central time.  dave sirulnick and amy bailey, executive producers for mtv; jason sciavicco and jesse james dupree, executive producers, humidity entertainment.  television review  