new york lawmakers obtain $25 million for ill 9/11 workers   after impassioned pleas by members of new york's congressional delegation, the white house agreed yesterday to spend $25 million for the care and treatment of 9/11 rescue workers who became ill after being exposed to toxic dust at ground zero.  a preliminary federal estimate has put the total cost of treating all workers who need medical care at more than $250 million, but lawmakers said the $25 million would provide a reprieve through the end of the year for two treatment programs that last month warned they were running out of money.  ''i think it's a big breakthrough,'' said representative vito j. fossella, who met yesterday morning with rob portman, the director of the white house office of management and budget, and with dr. john o. agwunobi, the assistant secretary for health at the department of health and human services.  mr. fossella, who represents staten island and part of brooklyn and is the only republican house member from new york city, joined other lawmakers seeking federal aid.  also in the group are senators charles e. schumer and hillary rodham clinton; representative carolyn b. maloney, who represents parts of manhattan and queens; and representative jerrold l. nadler, who represents parts of manhattan and brooklyn. all are democrats.  the group obtained $75 million from congress last year, but that money is running out. mrs. clinton has called for a $1.9 billion program to help the workers.  ms. maloney said, ''i would have hoped that we would not have had to wait five years and a number of visible deaths before we got the administration to react, but it is an important step forward.''  mr. nadler called the $25 million ''a milestone'' but added that it was ''grossly inadequate.''  dr. agwunobi and dr. john howard, director of the national institute for occupational safety and health, are co-chairmen of a task force examining the needs of 9/11 workers.  mayor michael r. bloomberg issued a statement thanking president bush ''for taking this important step.'' the mayor said the treatment programs -- one run by the mount sinai medical center and the other by the fire department -- were ''working well, but will need vastly more support from washington.''  ms. maloney and mr. fossella both said they were told by mr. portman that the $25 million was only a starting sum and the findings of the task force could be the basis for additional aid.  sean kevelighan, press secretary for the white house office of management and budget, called the $25 million ''a good starting point,'' and said: ''we'll be paying close attention to the recommendations of the task force. we would be willing to reconsider the '08 budget level should the facts suggest that a different amount be appropriate.''  