air america radio agrees to be acquired by a new york real estate investor   air america radio, the liberal network that filed for bankruptcy protection in october, said yesterday that it had reached a tentative agreement to be acquired by stephen l. green, the chairman of a real estate investment trust specializing in office buildings.  mr. green, the chairman and founder of the sl green realty corporation, is no stranger to air america. he has been providing interim financing to help the network meet current costs, and his brother, mark green, the former new york city public advocate and past candidate for mayor and state attorney general, has frequently been the host of programs on air america.  mark green said yesterday that the sale would usher in a new phase for air america, focused on digital content distribution like internet programs and podcasts in addition to radio.  ''in this digital era, the tech changes by the day, and air america radio has to become something of a new-media company,'' mark green said. ''we look forward to an a.a.r. 2.0 that has sharp, smart content better distributed over a variety of platforms. and what better time to try this than with progressive and democratic values obviously on the rise?''  mark green said that it was undecided whether he would play an executive role at air america after the deal was completed and that he was speaking only as the brother of the purchaser. he also said no hiring or programming moves had been decided, should the deal go through.  at least one change is certain, however. air america also announced that its most famous on-air personality, al franken, would broadcast his last show on feb. 14. while air america did not disclose a reason for his departure, mr. franken has reportedly been considering a run for a united states senate seat in minnesota.  the full terms of the deal with stephen green's new company, slg radio l.l.c., were not disclosed. the progressive radio group l.l.c., led by terence f. kelly, air america's former chairman, will own a minority stake in the network. mr. kelly formed the group of about 20 investors in the fall after air america filed for bankruptcy protection. the deal is subject to approval by a federal bankruptcy court.  founded in 2004 as an alternative to conservative talk radio shows, air america has been plagued with financial problems since the beginning. several prominent people helped finance the network, including rob glaser, the chief executive of realnetworks, and sheldon and anita drobny, longtime democratic activists. the drobnys have since split off and founded their own liberal radio network.  mr. kelly, who was a board member of air america until the fall, said raising money for the network had always been a struggle.  ''the conservatives, they realized the value of media long ago, and today 95 percent of talk radio comes from the right,'' mr. kelly said. ''but it has been extremely difficult to keep air america funded in spite of the fact that we clearly had an influence on the past election.''  mr. kelly said air america needed to propose new political ideas rather than mainly be responding to assertions from the right. he said he hoped the network would rejuvenate its offerings with both entertaining programs and investigative reporting.  in august, air america lost its lease to wlib in new york and signed on with a lesser-known station, wwrl 1600. air america, which is run by a corporate parent, piquant l.l.c., produces 19 hours of programming each day and is heard on 81 affiliates.  