father weeps as he recalls learning of dancer's killing   the father of a young woman who came to new york from columbus, ohio, to pursue a career as a dancer, but ended up with her throat slashed in her upper east side apartment, broke down and sobbed yesterday as he told jurors in state supreme court how he had learned of his daughter's death.  ''my wife and i were sitting at home and the doorbell rang,'' jon woods, a soft-spoken man, testified. ''and it was three columbus police officers, all of them in tears.''  mr. woods's daughter catherine came to new york in 2002, at age 17. he was the first witness prosecutors called in the murder trial of paul cortez, who is accused of killing ms. woods on nov. 27, 2005, because she had broken off their relationship. they have cited a bloody fingerprint on her wall as their chief evidence.  mr. cortez, 26, was an aspiring rock singer and actor who worked as a yoga and fitness instructor. friends and clients have described him as a magnetic figure who was raised in the bronx and, by way of scholarships, attended the buckley school -- an elite all-boys school on the upper east side -- and poly prep country day school in brooklyn before he went on to earn a degree in fine arts from boston university.  in 2005, when he was working as a trainer at a branch of the new york sports club on the east side, he began dating ms. woods, who was 21. she lived on east 86th street and worked out there frequently.  ms. woods was an accomplished classically trained ballerina as a child; her father said she was about 4 years old when she announced her intention to dance for a living someday. she moved to new york right after high school. she struggled, however, to find work, and eventually took jobs as a topless dancer, first at a club called privilege new york, in chelsea beside the west side highway, and then at flashdancers, at broadway and 52nd street.  her father, who since 1984 has been the director of the ohio state university marching band, testified that ms. woods never told her family about this aspect of her life.  when laura miranda, mr. cortez's lead defense lawyer, cross-examined mr. woods, she asked when he first realized how she was earning a living. ''i think it might have come up later, through all of the murder and everything,'' mr. woods said.  he said mr. cortez told him she was working at privilege under the stage name ava in april 2005, but that he believed his daughter when she said it was not true.  that month, mr. woods said, mr. cortez, whom his daughter had never previously mentioned, telephoned him to say that he was ms. woods's boyfriend and was concerned about her welfare. ''he told me that she was a drug addict and that she was involved in prostitution,'' and also that she was working at a topless club, mr. woods testified. he went on: ''as any father would, i thanked him for the information. and then i said i will deal with this.''  mr. woods said he flew to new york the next morning and confronted his daughter, who denied everything. ''she was in very good condition, except that she was very upset at paul cortez,'' he testified.  while lawyers on both sides said that mr. cortez and ms. woods had had some kind of a romantic relationship, the prosecution and defense portrayals were vastly different.  peter casolaro, the assistant district attorney who is arguing the case for the government, said that in 2005, ms. woods ''made a very bad decision: she began to date paul cortez.''  when she broke off with him, mr. casolaro said, mr. cortez, who was already obsessed with ms. woods and telephoning her ''30, 40 times a day,'' began to stalk her.  in the defense's opening statement, a member of ms. miranda's team, dawn florio, said mr. cortez ''loved catherine woods,'' and then, raising her voice, added, ''and catherine woods loved him.'' she said that he had taken ms. woods to a hospital and called her father out of concern for her, and that he was trying to make her turn her life around.  the defense said it would raise the issue of ms. woods's on-again, off-again boyfriend from columbus, with whom she was sharing her east 86th street apartment, pointing out that he was with her shortly before her death. the boyfriend, david haughn, discovered the body and called 911, officials said. he had left the apartment a short time earlier to pick up his car, and has said he returned to give her a ride to work.  