booker tossing his political weight around   less than a year after being elected mayor of newark, cory a. booker, who sailed into office as a symbol of less boss-ridden politics, is showing signs of flexing his muscles politically. there are those who see contradictions and overreaching in his moves, but mr. booker defends them as necessary to ''move newark in a bolder direction.''  the mayor is strongly inserting himself into essex county democratic politics by supporting candidates against incumbents for state senate and assembly seats in districts covering parts of newark's west and south wards.  at issue are the seats held by senator ronald l. rice, mr. booker's opponent in the mayoral election last may, and assemblywoman oadline d. truitt, an ally of former mayor sharpe james, who remains a state senator.  mr. booker is supporting d. bilal beasley, an essex county freeholder who is a native of newark and lives in irvington, for the nomination against mr. rice. mr. booker's forces are also backing ralph r. caputo, a freeholder from belleville, against ms. truitt, who lives in the south ward.  mr. rice, a west ward resident, said the mayor and people around him were making a run at him and ms. truitt but added, ''i just don't let it bother me, and i'm too busy doing my job for my district to worry about the mayor.''  others were more critical, saying mr. booker's moves to support candidates from cities other than newark were inappropriate and a sign of inexperience.  mr. booker said his efforts against two incumbents were less about politics than self-preservation. he said he had had problems getting telephone calls returned by mr. rice and some other lawmakers when issues crucial to newark were before the legislature. and he said he had heard from people in and around the legislature that mr. rice was hard to work with.  ''this is not politics in the sense that the people we are supporting are not people we control, but leaders in their own right,'' mr. booker said.  he dismissed suggestions that it was unwise to back candidates who do not live in newark when the stakes for the city were so high in trenton.  ''drug dealers and gang leaders don't seem to care very much about where the boundary between newark and irvington or newark and belleville is,'' mr. booker said.  as for whom he plans to support in the races for the city's other senate and assembly seats, mr. booker was more circumspect.  the senate seat is held by mr. james, and there is much speculation as to whether he will run for re-election, retire or become mired in a federal investigation of corruption that is under way.  the two other assemblymen are william d. payne, the brother of a congressman and an uncle of one of mr. booker's city council allies, and wilfredo caraballo, the longtime incumbent usually supported by the city's powerful north ward democratic organization, with which mr. booker has an uneasy truce.  on politics  