for vandals, an ironic target: street artists   the block of williamsburg's north sixth street between kent and wythe avenues has long been a sort of street-art gallery. not long ago, a life-size head and torso of the children's character waldo perked up a corrugated-metal fence there, for instance, and beside it was a delicate mauve drawing of a sword-wielding woman with flowers for eyes. the caption read, ''flower face killah: fierce warrior.''  neighbors knew that the block had arrived last summer when a work appeared by the well-known but shadowy british artist known as banksy. in the stenciled drawing, a girl jumped rope on one side of a door and a boy reached for an electrical switch on the other. one end of the girl's jump rope, a line of neon-green paint, ran across the pavement, up the wall and into the switch.  ''on weekends, it's amazing how many people would come by to see that piece,'' said norman rabinovich, 29, a graphic designer who works in the building that served as banksy's canvas. ''there were tour groups coming by.''  but no longer. last week, waldo had been half covered by a drippy mass of teal paint, as had some tongue-in-cheek takeoffs of '50s comic book covers. the banksy stencils were obscured by gray paint.  ''art: the excrement of action,'' proclaimed a typed flier pasted nearby. after two nietzschean paragraphs, the flier concluded: ''the passion for destruction is a creative passion. we are all capable of manifesting our desires directly, free of representation and commodification. we will continue manifesting ours by euthanizing your bourgeois fad.''  whoever defaced the art on north sixth has been splashing paint on urban artworks in the city for more than a year. the vandal (or vandals) often leaves fliers, sometimes barbed with broken glass, that attack art as decadent or accuse street artists of ''selling out.'' (the paint-splashing on north sixth street was first reported on imnotsayin.blogspot.com, a williamsburg blog.)  those who make and follow street art accept that well-loved works eventually disappear. but many expressed irritation at the recent wave of vandalism.  ''i don't mind destruction, i don't mind debate, but i do mind something that comes off as being intellectual but is actually simplistic and juvenile,'' said marc schiller, whose web site, wooster collective, documents street art. someone, probably the north sixth street vandal, splashed paint on the exterior of a nolita building where mr. schiller had helped organize a street-art exhibition last month, and mr. schiller said that he had become wary of giving the locations of artworks on his web site. ''why give someone a road map?'' he said.  many street artists were reluctant to speak publicly about the destruction, for fear of gratifying the vandal. patrick miller, a member of a three-person collective known as faile, said that the banksy piece had been splashed with yellow paint, but that he and others had covered it with a coat of gray to deny the vandal attention. mr. miller, whose work has also been splashed, said his group would try to incorporate the splashes into its art.  ''we're going to start co-opting it and just embracing it,'' he said.  alex mindlin  neighborhood report: williamsburg  