pamela flood, kenneth morrison   pamela vanessa flood was married yesterday to kenneth maxwell morrison at wyndham sugar bay, a resort on st. thomas in the virgin islands. the rev. michael a. walrond jr. officiated, assisted by his wife, the rev. dr. lakeesha walrond. both are baptist ministers.  the bride, 36, is the controller for cornerstone promotion and fader magazine in manhattan. she graduated from pace university and received an m.b.a from dowling college. she is a daughter of the late ruthie m. d. flood and the late melvin w. flood, who lived in westbury, n.y.  the bridegroom, 39, is the vice president of lemor realty, a manhattan property management and development company that he owns with his father, leroy w. morrison, of the bronx. the bridegroom is also an owner of the essence bar and restaurant in brooklyn. he is also a son of catherine morrison, also of the bronx.  the bridegroom's previous marriage ended in divorce.  the couple met in september 2003 through rhonda lucas, a cousin of mr. morrison's and a friend of ms. flood's.  ms. flood had just purchased a home and needed help finding tenants, so ms. lucas gave her mr. morrison's number for advice.  it wasn't ms. lucas's first attempt at getting the two together, but when she had attempted a match-up before, ms. flood and mr. morrison were dating other people. now they were both unattached.  after a phone conversation that ms. flood described as ''very professional,'' they decided to meet at mr. morrison's restaurant. ''we chatted but i didn't feel any kind of connection,'' ms. flood remembered.  mr. morrison wasn't doing cartwheels, either. ''no sparks or anything like that,'' he recalled.  a month later, they met again, this time at a wedding reception.  mr. morrison was now in the mood to do that cartwheel.  ''she had a sense of style that i liked,'' he said of ms. flood. ''we danced and talked all night.''  ms. flood then left for an eight-day cruise to the caribbean. but when she returned, her cruising days -- and his -- were over.  ''we really connected at the reception, and i thought about him on the cruise,'' she said. ''he was different than all the other guys i had met in terms of personality. i knew he was the one.''  weddings/celebrations  