italian countryside, just as imagined   perugia, italy -- unlike many americans who decide to follow their dream of restoring an abandoned italian house in the countryside, douglas andrews knew exactly what he was getting into.  not only did he have experience restoring other properties in italy, he also had very specific requirements for his ideal home.  ''i had been living in rome for the past 15 years,'' mr. andrews said, ''and wanted to find a place in the countryside that could accommodate my ever-expanding collection of contemporary art.''  mr. andrews, 43, first moved to rome as a student in temple university's junior year abroad program. while he studied art history and did his share of the usual partying, he also began to dabble in real estate.  ''unlike some of my schoolmates,'' he explained, ''i made a lot of italian friends and it was through them that i discovered that rome had quite a lot of undervalued and nondeveloped properties.'' he was able to buy centrally located apartments and fix them up for relatively small investments. ''while i was able to turn them around pretty quickly, at a profit,'' he added, ''i also had the great pleasure in living in most of them.''  after 15 years in the city, mr. andrews decided to make a move to the countryside. ''by this time i had a rather large dog, argo,'' he recalled, ''and it just seemed like the right time to start looking for a weekend house.'' he and his partner chose umbria, which is close enough to rome for weekend commuting.  after eight months they found what they were looking for: an abandoned casa padronale. unlike run-of-the-mill farmhouses, which traditionally are on the small side and have living areas for both man and beast, case padronali are more formal -- mini-villas usually built by landowners.  his find, the casa dei frati (or house of the friars), was at the end of a farm road, and had privacy as well as sweeping views of the tranquil tiber valley.  originally built by priests, the structure later had landowners as tenants. it was during that period that a wing was added and a grand entrance hall created. but the most recent residents were farmers, so that much of the ground floor had been subdivided and given over to stables. a tobacco-drying tower -- 10 meters, or 32 feet, tall -- was an addition from the '50s.  ''we had very strong ideas about how we wanted to restore the villa,'' mr. andrews said. his partner, who had studied architecture and already had a lot of experience fixing up places in rome, drew a plan that restored the house's symmetry and, even more important, its wall space, which was soon put to use as a backdrop for their art collection.  ''the symmetry and formality of the house was something we really wanted to emphasize,'' mr. andrews said. ''we did this by creating a semi-enclosed courtyard between the main house and the 16th-century outbuilding in the back.''  low brick walls embrace that side of the garden, which has a bubbling fountain as its centerpiece.  because of building restrictions, the restoration project had to follow the footprint of the original structure. the main villa is on two levels, with 350 square meters, or 3,367 square feet, of living area.  a large eat-in kitchen and the formal living room both open onto a terrace with a panoramic view. on the upper level, there are four master suites, a den and an office, all of which look out over the valley.  two small buildings were also restored. one, measuring 90 square meters, or 969 square feet, is used as an artist's studio, while the other, slightly smaller, is a garage and also has a small staff room.  mr. andrews declined to specify how much they have spent on the house, but johannes hermel, whose real estate agency, casambiente, specializes in umbrian properties, estimates that a similar villa would sell for about 2.1 million euros to 2.5 million euros, or $2.7 million to $3.2 million.  ''it's hard to give a firm square-meter estimate of how much a house of this caliber would go for,'' mr. hermel said, but he added that, in certain parts of umbria, the price per square meter can reach about 4,000 euros.  according to mr. andrews: ''our idea originally was that this would be a weekend retreat. eventually, though, the weekends kept stretching from two days to three days, and finally we found ourselves spending most of our time in the country. i realized that it was time to give up the apartment in rome, and move full time to the country.''  ''this is our home base now,'' mr. andrews said as he walked through the fruit orchard, followed by argo and his two other dogs. when asked how he likes winters in umbria, which tend to be dark and dreary, he admitted: ''since my family is in the states, and i have a lot of friends in berlin and london, i tend to travel a lot. and in the summer we both like spending time at the sea.''  ''also,'' he continued, ''the restoration bug is biting again, so while we are calling this home for now, we never get too attached to the places we restore. we may be moving on to our next project soon.''  but mr. andrews recently sank his roots even deeper into the umbrian countryside, establishing an olive oil business, canonica verde, with a friend and neighbor, paula hughes. the company's web site, canonicaverde.com, also offers umbrian honey and spice blends.  ''we realized that, while the trees are beautiful to look at, the oil is unique, delicious and surprisingly hard to get in the states,'' he said.  