now, for $35, an insider's access to hot tables   people who go out to eat in new york can be divided in plenty of ways, but the division that matters most is this: you are either someone who can get a great table on a saturday night, or you're not.  now there is help for those who can't. pascal riffaud, an enterprising man with connections to some of the city's best restaurants, sells reservations through a company called primetime tables. want a table at jean georges or gordon ramsay at the london at around 8 this friday night? for as little as $35, you're in.  primetime tables has been quietly doing business for about a year, but an entry about it this month at www.urbandaddy.com, a blog about restaurants, followed by a flurry of breathless posts at eater.com, fanned a debate that has consumed new york's restaurant owners and diners alike.  mr. riffaud has been flooded with more than a thousand new requests to register for the service. at the same time, restaurant owners have readied the pitchforks and torches, accusing him of upsetting the delicate balance of their reservation books and worse, of scalping tables.  the restaurateur danny meyer called the service disingenuous and parasitic, saying it ''undermines the beauty of the dialogue that takes place when a restaurant and its patrons have a healthy, dynamic relationship.'' (reservations at three of mr. meyer's restaurants -- gramercy tavern, the modern and union square cafe -- are currently for sale at www.primetimetables.com.) some restaurant owners are trying to figure out how mr. riffaud obtained reservations so they can block his access.  the strength of the reaction to primetime tables points up an unattractive but time-honored reality in the restaurant business: people with special access play by different rules.  at the best restaurants, more than half of the prime weekend tables are unavailable to the ordinary diner before the reservation books open, typically about a month ahead of time. tables are set aside for the chef, the maître d'hôtel and friends of the house. danny meyer, for example, is required to reserve tables at the modern for trustees of the museum of modern art.  at per se, thomas keller keeps tables ready for his investors. he has another table at his disposal, but often gives it to the restaurant's concierge, who handles reservations. moreover, per se, like more than a thousand restaurants worldwide, has an agreement with american express to keep a table open for holders of their premium cards. ''a card member, he's going to buy a $700 bottle of wine rather than a $300 bottle of wine,'' mr. keller said.  per se has 62 seats, and typically serves 90 meals a night. mr. keller said he could make a similar profit by packing in 175 dinners a night, but then he would not be able to offer the same precise, personal experience.  ''if you want to maximize the restaurant you have to have the kind of guests who are really going to take full advantage of the restaurant,'' mr. keller said.  the well-connected hotel concierge is another source of last-minute tables. a concierge can sometimes get a same-day reservation at a restaurant that says it is fully booked, with the understanding that he will help the restaurant fill tables at slow times, like 5:30 p.m. on a tuesday in february, said andrew freeman, a hotel and restaurant consultant based in san francisco. opentable, an online reservation service, allows diners to make free reservations at 6,000 restaurants. its web site, opentable.com, generally offers the same tables available to a diner who calls a restaurant.  mr. riffaud is somewhat secretive about how he builds his stock of reservations, which varies from day to day. (he often makes the reservation under a false name, then later changes it to a member's name. for reservations made through primetime tables at babbo, however, diners must use the name under which mr. riffaud booked the table.) most reservations, he said, are acquired through persistence and by knowing how and when to call. in some cases, he said, he can secure tables through his longstanding relationships with several restaurants, some of which he cultivated over the past 12 years while running another business, personal concierge international. before that, he was a concierge at the st. regis hotel in new york and the ritz in paris.  although mr. riffaud cancels unsold reservations within the times requested by the restaurants, those tables, restaurant owners argue, could have been booked by people who actually wanted to keep them. and some critics believe that he is making money off his established relationships.  ''there's always that level of who you know,'' said jennifer baum, one of the city's most prominent restaurant publicists. ''i get calls all the time -- can you squeeze me in, can you get me a table? i try to accommodate, but sometimes i just can't. but i would never take money for a reservation. it's about a level of integrity.''  that isn't what's happening, mr. riffaud said. ''where is the difference from, let's say, a hotel concierge who gets the reservation for a tip from the client?''  mr. riffaud's wife is another new york restaurant publicist, karine bakhoum, and their relationship may have contributed to the uproar about his company. although he is listed as chief financial officer for her public relations firm at its web site, both she and mr. riffaud are emphatic that the two businesses are not connected and that she does not help him get reservations for primetime tables.  ''i don't know why everyone is losing their minds over this,'' ms. bakhoum said. ''my husband has provided a service. this is new york. everybody outsources everything, and now people have been forced to outsource their reservations. why? because it is a nightmare to get a table in new york at a good time.''  the unexpected popularity of primetime tables has presented mr. riffaud with a challenge. he will have to maintain his stock of reservations while weathering the ire of restaurant owners and publicists who accuse him of breaking the rules. but at least some of the criticism may be misplaced. selling restaurant reservations isn't akin to ticket scalping.  ''what's the crime?'' said barbara thompson, a spokeswoman for the manhattan district attorney's office. ''it would be different if they were making the reservations and not showing, or if they were harassing the restaurant. but generally speaking, who's losing?''  restaurateurs might say they are losing control over a system that helps them build relationships with regulars.  on the other hand, the service gives a little control to anyone willing to pay $35.  ''this is probably the most direct challenge we've seen, which is why it's galvanizing people,'' said steven a. shaw, a founder of the web site egullet and a food writer.  if the service succeeds, it could force changes in how restaurants handle reservations. securing a reservation with a credit card, now rare, could become standard practice. or restaurants might start charging a higher price for dinner during prime times, using the kind of dynamic pricing system that airlines use.  or it might make diners think about why they want those tables in the first place.  ''people place way too much emphasis on when they eat,'' mr. shaw said. ''why does the whole herd have to eat at 8 p.m. on saturday night?''  