verizon profit drops 38%, but wireless shows growth   profit at verizon communications fell 38 percent in the fourth quarter, after one-time charges, but the company reported yesterday that it had narrowed the gap with at&t wireless in the race for new long-term subscribers.  verizon's wireless businesses, which is jointly owned by verizon and the vodafone group, added 2.3 million new customers in the quarter, the bulk of them on long-term contracts. it added 1.9 million in the third quarter.  ''we have no intentions of slowing down growth,'' dennis f. strigl, verizon's president, said in a conference call with analysts. ''our goal is to continue to take share quarter after quarter.''  verizon's gain of 2.3 million wireless customers inched it closer to at&t, giving it 59.1 million subscribers at the end of 2006 compared with at&t's nearly 61 million.  verizon earned $1.03 billion, or 35 cents a share, down from $1.66 billion, or 59 cents a share, in the fourth quarter of 2005. the company said the decline was a result of taxes from the sale of its business in the dominican republic and costs related to the spinoff of the directory publishing business.  excluding the one-time charges, verizon earned 62 cents a share, slightly beating analysts' average forecast of 61 cents a share, according to analysts surveyed by thomson financial.  ''they had a very strong quarter,'' said christopher larsen, a telecommunications analyst with credit suisse. ''they are the owners of new- customer generation.''  shares of verizon increased 20 cents yesterday to close at $38.03. the shares have climbed from a 52-week low of $30.10 in may.  for the quarter ended dec. 31, verizon's revenue totaled $22.60 billion, an increase of 26 percent over $17.93 billion in the period in 2005, with much of that gain attributed to verizon's acquisition of mci's long-distance business.  about $10.10 billion of the revenue came from verizon's wireless business, up 16.3 percent from $8.69 billion a year earlier.  mr. strigl called 2006 a repositioning year. ''we have come out of 2006 a leaner, more efficient company, more focused than where we were a year ago,'' he said yesterday. ''we're very well positioned for a strong 2007.''  mr. strigl said verizon planned to announce today a new pricing option that would add wireless service to its list of services that already includes wired phone, television and internet, a move he says would give verizon an advantage over its rivals. however, he added, verizon has no plans now to match at&t's new unity plan that gives at&t wireless customers unlimited calling to at&t's wired-phone customers.  as with at&t, verizon's traditional telephone service has been shrinking. the number of phone customers in verizon's local network declined by nearly 900,000 in the quarter, to 45.1 million. the business services operation that was formed by the acquisition of mci generated $5.3 billion in revenue during the fourth quarter, up 2.7 percent from a year earlier.  verizon invested $23 billion to expand its high-speed network for internet and television, in an effort to compete with comcast and other cable companies moving into the telecommunications business.  during the fourth quarter, verizon's network, called fios, added 165,000 internet customers and 89,000 television customers. expanding the service reduced earnings by 10 cents a share in the fourth quarter, and during the first quarter will reduce profit by 11 cents, verizon said.  mr. larsen, the analyst, said that the investment was justified as a critical part of verizon's three- to five-year growth plan. the executives said the company expected 2007 capital expenditures of $17.5 billion to $17.9 billion. verizon executives declined to forecast earnings for the year ahead.  mr. strigl also confirmed a report yesterday in usa today that verizon had been in discussions with apple inc., starting two years ago, to sell the apple iphone, the combination cellphone, digital music player and organizer that apple announced this month.  a deal would have given verizon exclusive rights to sell the iphone instead of cingular.  mr. strigl said verizon turned down a possible deal with apple because it was demanding a share of subscriber revenue and control over servicing the device.  mr. strigl said he had no regrets about turning down apple.  ''we're happy to let someone else experiment with this phone,'' he said. when the time is right, mr. strigl said, verizon will have a ''very competitive offering.''  mark siegel, a spokesman for at&t wireless, would not provide details of his company's contract with apple for iphone.  