prospect of womb transplant raises hopes and red flags   the telephone calls and e-mail messages started streaming in just hours after the first news articles reported that a uterine transplant might be in the works. one caller was a 25-year-old alabama woman who was born without a uterus. another was a 33-year-old illinois woman who had a hysterectomy at 24.  all of the women, desperate to carry a child of their own, had heard that doctors at new york downtown hospital had harvested wombs from eight brain-dead human donors, laying the groundwork for the first human uterine transplant in the western world. they wanted to be candidates for transplants. (one caller even offered to be a living donor, saying she had already had children and no longer needed her uterus.)  the hospital has no immediate plans for a uterine transplant, but even the possibility has been greeted with opprobrium by many medical ethicists, fertility doctors and patient advocates. they said that a uterine transplant is a radical and potentially dangerous solution to a problem that is not life-threatening and that can be resolved in other ways, like using a surrogate. the risks, they said, extend not only to the mother but also to the unborn child.  when and where an actual transplant of a uterus might take place is anyone's guess. dr. bruce d. logan, the president of new york downtown hospital, said the hospital was supportive of the research but did not expect to perform a uterine transplant ''any time in the foreseeable future.''  the only human uterine transplant to date was carried out in saudi arabia in 2000 and used an organ from a live donor, which is not being considered by the new york researchers, but the uterus failed after three months and had to be removed.  still, dr. giuseppe del priore, the lead author of the study that described the uterus harvesting in this month's issue of the journal obstetrics and gynecology, said doctors needed to be able to offer fertility patients more options. dr. del priore, a cancer specialist, explained that he became interested in uterine transplants after seeing young women whose surgical treatments left them unable to bear children, and who were desperate to start a family. ''this is where we get our inspiration,'' he said.  while the risks would be enormous, he said, some women would be willing to assume them in exchange for the mere possibility of having a baby. many women who have had transplants of other kinds -- life-saving kidneys, hearts and lungs -- have been able to carry pregnancies to term.  ''you've got to put this in its proper context,'' dr. del priore said. ''transplant patients have babies, sick patients have babies, and it generally turns out well. the mothers-to-be are willing to take that risk.''  but while the desire to bear a child may be an intense and passionate one, fertility advocates and medical experts called for more research on animals before another uterine transplant is attempted in humans. ''for many women, experiencing pregnancy is a central part of being a woman, and they will go to many extremes to have that experience,'' said pamela madsen, executive director of the american fertility association, a nonprofit education and advocacy group. ''but just because we want it, does that mean it is worth the risks? there are two lives involved here.''  for women who do not have a uterus or a properly functioning uterus, ms. madsen said, ''it feels like a loss, and it is a loss.''  ''but how far do we go?'' ms. madsen said. ''especially when there are other kinds of solutions that may not fill the emotional gap of experiencing pregnancy but will result in a healthy baby, with very little risk.''  studies have yielded pregnancies and live births in mice that received uterine transplants, but the rodents received organs from donors that were very closely related or genetically identical, the experts said.  a transplant patient who became pregnant would face many potential complications. she would be required to take immunosuppressive medications that could be toxic and may harm the unborn child, she may develop infections or other complications from surgery, and there is always a risk the organ would fail or be rejected. about half of all kidney transplant patients who become pregnant have preterm births and low birth weight babies, and many of the women develop high blood pressure and pre-eclampsia, a dangerous condition in which a pregnant woman's blood pressure threatens her health and the child's.  with a uterus transplant, there is an additional layer of complexity, because the pregnancy would be occurring within the transplanted organ, and no one knows how the transplant would adapt to pregnancy.  ''this is very complex, and one woman dying from this is going to be really one too many,'' said dr. tommaso falcone, chairman of obstetrics and gynecology at the cleveland clinic and a reproductive endocrinologist who has done research on ovarian transplantation. ''if we were going to cure cancer and save humanity, i'd say take the risks and take it to humans as quickly as possible. but we're looking at patients with essentially a nonlethal condition.''  these patients are also a distinct minority, he said, estimating that fewer than 1 percent of his patients are infertile because they lack a uterus.  willing patients would be put through a grueling process, according to a description provided by dr. del priore and his colleague dr. jeanetta stega. any candidate for the surgery would first have to undergo in-vitro fertilization, and have a ready supply of frozen embryos for implantation after the transplant. the doctors said they would not want to put a woman through a transplant only to discover later that she was infertile for another reason, like an inability to produce eggs. and in any case, intercourse might be prohibited after the transplant, to minimize the risk of infection.  the surgery would have to take place quickly after a compatible organ donor was identified.  the transplant surgery would involve a vertical abdominal incision in the patient. the cervix of the donated uterus would be attached to the patient's vagina and the uterus would be connected to four blood vessels, two on each side, dr. stega said. she estimated that that part of the surgery would last one to two hours. after surgery, the patient would be started on a regimen of immunosuppressive medications to prevent rejection of the new organ.  once the woman's condition was stable, she could have embryos implanted in the uterus, a procedure that is not always successful. if she became pregnant, she would be considered a high-risk patient, and would be closely monitored by a team of medical experts throughout her pregnancy.  the plan would be to deliver the baby by caesarean section, and perform a hysterectomy to remove the uterus and prevent any additional risk of transplant-related complications, the doctors said.  one of the many unknowns involves the health of the babies. though registries that track pregnant transplant recipients report relatively low rates of birth defects, critics say the registries are voluntary, the follow-up on the children is spotty and little is known about developmental and cognitive delays in the children.  even dr. del priore says a uterine transplant is ''the last option.''  ''we want to discourage people from thinking this is an easy option,'' he said. ''the entire family unit needs to understand the magnitude of the decision and the experimental nature of the procedure.''  aimee sheppard, a 25-year-old from falkville, ala., said she was aware of the risks but still wanted a chance to bear her own child. she found out when she was 13 that she was born without a uterus; her sister served as a surrogate and carried ms. sheppard's daughter, who is now 18 months old.  ''i've read up about it,'' ms. sheppard said. ''to me it's a small price to pay to be able to carry my own child.''  