living in/ the theater district; those neon lights? just as bright as they say   some might find living in the times square area unimaginable. the traffic is often at a standstill, the sidewalks are often impassable and the lights are on -- and blinking -- 24/7.  to charles kipps, however, it is absolute paradise. a writer of novels and film and television scripts, mr. kipps moved last june into a two-bedroom, two-bath condominium at 1600 broadway, the only residential building in that gleaming swath of the great white way between west 42nd and west 53rd streets. he thrives on the pace and the bustle, and wonders why he spent 16 years renting in the relative calm of 48th street and eighth avenue, across the street from a busy firehouse.  ''it's exciting, and every night except one, the place is buzzing with activity,'' said mr. kipps, a virginia native, whose credits include segments of ''law and order: criminal intent.'' he pointed out, ''nothing says new york like a great row of neon lights.''  what may say it even more is the dropping of the ball on new year's eve, which otis davis, a neighbor of mr. kipps, watched from the terrace of his penthouse, along with the estimated million people gathered on the sidewalks outside. the parties inside the building were even more fun than the party below. ''everybody was home, everybody had their doors open and every single person had a party,'' said mr. davis, a court stenographer, who moved from a house on long island. ''you could just walk from party to party.''  what you'll find  completed last summer, the 25-story condo at 1600 broadway is the latest arrival on a growing residential scene in the theater district, which is roughly bordered by 41st street on the south, eighth avenue on the west, west 53rd street on the north, and the blocks between seventh avenue and avenue of the americas on the east, but not including the office buildings that line avenue of the americas.  on the border of hell's kitchen (also known as clinton), eighth avenue is gaining the most new buildings, almost all luxury high-rises. in addition to rentals like the biltmore, the ritz plaza, the gershwin and longacre house, there are the 215-unit link and the 654-unit worldwide plaza. brokers are marketing the 60-story, 550-unit orion as part of the theater district, though it is near the port authority bus terminal and outside the theater zoning district designated by the city.  future projects, all to be completed from 2008 to 2010, include the platinum, a 43-story, 220-unit tower being built by sjp residential properties, at the corner of eighth avenue and 46th street. there are also a 40-story, 120-unit condo at 785 eighth avenue being built by esplanade capital; a 46-story, 271-unit tower on west 46th street and eighth avenue built by tribeach holdings; and a 34-story, 400-unit rental being built by the witkoff group on 43rd street, with 20 percent put aside for low- and moderate-income families. the related companies has bought a parking facility on eighth avenue between 45th and 46th streets but has not finalized development plans, a company representative said.  on side streets between avenue of the americas and eighth avenue, many four- and five-story walk-ups contain rental units.  many longtime residents have been connected with the theater, but new arrivals buying into the luxury towers are a mix: young professionals working for financial companies in times square like morgan stanley or lehman brothers, and out-of-towners wanting pieds-à-terre, as well as people in entertainment. there are few families. but both newcomers and longtimers seem to choose the neighborhood for its easy connections to city and suburbs.  ''it's extremely convenient for someone like me who has to go to connecticut, long island and new jersey,'' said george stilo, an interior designer who moved to the ritz plaza from brooklyn 13 years ago. ''you have access to the subway, the l.i.r.r., port authority and the bus to the airport.''  according to mr. stilo, who also loves the restaurants, the only drawback to living in the area is the noise level. ''there are people who have moved out of my building who couldn't take the noise,'' he said. ''it can be very, very noisy, and that would be my only reservation.''  uzma akhand, a columbia university doctoral student who lives at the ritz plaza, got used to the noise. ''my parents live in connecticut,'' she said, ''and when i visit them, i can't sleep because it's too quiet.''  what you'll pay  at 1600 broadway, condominium prices range from $795,000, for a studio that measures about 600 square feet, to $1.45 million, for a 1,325-square-foot two-bedroom, two-bath unit with space for a home office. the 900-square-foot penthouse, with one bedroom, one bath, a home office space and a balcony, is listed at $950,000.  the link, on west 52nd street, has two apartments available, each with two bedrooms and two and a half baths. one on the 19th floor is listed at $1.745 million; a slightly larger one on the 41st floor lists for $2.3 million. the building's amenities include a fitness center.  the orion condominium has four one-bedroom apartments available, at prices of $715,000 to $735,000. the building has a gym, three exterior decks, pool and hot tub, and offers a free starbucks breakfast to residents every day, said jason karadus, a vice president for the corcoran group.  rentals run the gamut from old-style four- and five-story walk-ups on side streets to all-rental high-rises on and around eighth avenue, like the 53-story, 464-unit biltmore or the 44-story, 479-unit ritz plaza, which was one of the first residential towers in the area when it opened in 1990. according to marc kaplan, director of leasing at the ritz plaza, there is a studio available for $2,650 a month. he also mentioned two renovated one-bedroom, one-bath units, for $3,395 and $3,495.  extensive rental listings at manhattan apartments include a studio in a walk-up for $1,650 a month and a two-bedroom in a doorman building for $6,695, said adjina dekidjiev, rental operations manager.  the history  according to the encyclopedia of new york city, the times square area has been the theater district since just before world war i, when music, drama, cabaret, dance halls and the like moved uptown from the bowery and lower broadway.  once the preserve of families like the vanderbilts and the astors, times square proper was known as long acre square until the turn of the last century, when the name was changed to commemorate the opening of the new new york times headquarters in the square.  it was the times's publisher, adolph s. ochs, who staged the first new year's eve extravaganza. the area started to decline after the stock-market crash in 1929, when burlesque shows, penny arcades and the pornography business started crowding out the legitimate theater. erotic entertainment became increasingly popular during world war ii with the influx of servicemen on leave. the industry was largely forced out in the early 1990s.  what to do  pearl caruso and her husband, stephen, who works in the financial industry, have front-row seats at 1600 broadway for the macy's thanksgiving day parade and annual new year's festivities in times square, but it was the theater scene that brought the couple to the neighborhood. ''we go to the theater once or twice a week now,'' said mrs. caruso, a special education teacher who also volunteers for broadway cares, an aids charity. she wants her daughter, laurel, 2, exposed to the theater in the hopes that she will one day perform on broadway. mrs. caruso has scouted out children's programs at carnegie hall, jazz at lincoln center, alvin ailey and -- her favorite -- the school for strings.  duffy square, newly refurbished, will reopen this spring, and with it the theater development fund's tkts booth, the discount theater ticket sales center, relocated to the marriott marquis hotel during refurbishment. the area, called ''the bowtie'' because of the criss-cross intersection of broadway and seventh avenue, will undergo a $10 million renovation over the next few years, said tim tompkins, president of the times square alliance business improvement district.  chain restaurants like red lobster and applebee's dot the main arteries, but there are many more intimate places on eighth and ninth avenues. retailing on broadway is dominated by tourist spots like the m&m emporium, and chains like sephora cosmetics. there is a supermarket, a food emporium, on eighth avenue; the times square alliance is seeking more resident-oriented retailing.  the schools  there is one school in the theater district, the jacqueline kennedy onassis high school on west 46th street, but david diamond, chairman of community board 5, said more may be added as the neighborhood evolves. ''community board 5 probably has the fewest schools of any board because we are the central business district,'' he said.  the high school teaches grades 9 through 12. students in 2005 averaged 399 on the sat verbal section, versus 497 statewide, and 404 on the math, versus 511 statewide.  for middle schoolers, there is the clinton school for writers and artists on west 21st street in chelsea. of eighth graders in 2005, 67.6 percent scored at or above grade level in math, compared with 40.8 percent citywide, while 63.9 percent scored at or above grade level in english, compared with 32.9 percent citywide.  public school 212 on west 48th street teaches kindergarten through grade 5. of fourth graders in 2005, 88.5 percent performed at or above grade level in english, compared with 60.4 percent citywide, while 92.4 percent did so in math, compared with 78.3 percent citywide.  the commute  times square is manhattan's major hub for subway connections and buses out of the city from the port authority bus terminal on eighth avenue and 42nd street. subways stopping at times square include the 1, 2, 3, 7, 9, n, q, r, s and w trains. local buses include the m42, m104, m27 and m50 cross-town lines, which connect to lines going north on sixth and eighth avenues and south on broadway and seventh avenue.  what we like  it's busy, bright and bustles constantly. for theater buffs and night owls, no neighborhood offers more in the way of performing arts, bars and restaurants of all descriptions.  going forward  luxury residential towers mark the final phase in the gentrification of what for most of a century was one of the city's grittiest, flashiest areas.  living in | the theater district  correction:  february 11, 2007, sunday  the ''living in'' article on jan. 28, about the theater district in manhattan, misstated the prices of two apartments for sale at 1600 broadway. a 1,325-square-foot two-bedroom, two-bath unit with space for a home office is listed at $1.845 million, not $1.45 million; and a 900-square-foot penthouse with one bedroom, one bath, home office space and a balcony is listed at $1.375 million, not $950,000.  the article also omitted a school in the area. it is the professional performing arts high school, 328 west 48th street, which has grades 6 through 12. it also misidentified the company than owns a parking facility on eighth avenue between 45th and 46th streets that might be the site of a future development. it is the champion parking corporation, not the related companies.  and the article erroneously included a subway line among those that serve the neighborhood. the no. 9 line no longer exists.  