assimilating circumstances   i've taught english as a second language for eight years, and i'm no slouch. i've taught in korea and in new york city's chinatown. i've taken on classrooms of 50 high-school boys at a time. i wouldn't have guessed that one slim afghan girl would represent my most difficult challenge.  fareeba had survived the first formative years of her life as a refugee in pakistan. she eventually immigrated with her family to the states and set foot in her first real school at age 8, five years ago.  on one hand, when she arrived last year at the middle school where i now teach, fareeba was a fairly typical immigrant student. she spoke english well enough to attend regular classes, including standard academic english, but she still required supplemental instruction in reading and writing, which i provided in and out of a classroom setting.  on the other hand, fareeba had assimilated american culture with startling speed. she had picked up a sprinkling of hip-hop slang and traded her head scarf for low-rise jeans and a brass-studded belt. she was academically talented, preternaturally savvy, very lovely and fiercely stubborn. she also told fibs, paused languidly before following any direction, interrupted.  ''listen here, listen here,'' she would announce in my class, tossing her pencil down like a gauntlet. ''fareeba is speaking.''  she would push; i would push back gently. i hoped that in some small way i could help bring out the potential behind all her bravado. and as the days lengthened into months, her glowering gave way. she would throw a small orange on my desk, or arrive randomly during a study hall to show me henna designs on her hands. she also began bringing nearly every assignment she received in other classes straight to me.  ''fareeba, three sentences and a row of hearts six lines down is not a paragraph,'' i would say, smiling in spite of myself.  ''oh, snap. my bad.'' she grinned back.  she troubled me. yet her untapped abilities thrilled me. i dreamed of fareeba's future self, imagining her channeling energetic precocity into meaningful work. a teacher, maybe. a doctor?  then one day fareeba's regular english teacher pulled me aside. there was something i should know: fareeba had begun writing an original poem in class for an assignment, and for a second-language student, it wasn't bad: an elegy. the stanzas were for her father, who died of a heart attack in pakistan. but the next day, her teacher said, instead of turning in the poem she started, she submitted thomas gray's ''elegy written in a country churchyard.''  i imagined fareeba typing ''elegy'' into an online search engine -- for surely that was what happened. i tried to imagine what she might have been feeling: was she angry? giggling? wiping away tears? was there some kind of misunderstanding? newcomers to english can bring very different cultural expectations to schoolwork. did she even know what she had done?  but later i heard fareeba bragging about her exploits to her peers in a way that made their deliberate nature unmistakable.  ''oh, my god,'' she said joyfully. ''i'm in so much trouble.''  in the office the punishment was administered: a day of solitary study. it was a stiff penalty, brought on by fareeba's apparent remorselessness. her mother, who was there in full muslim hijab, wept. fareeba's t-shirt read, ''sweet baby.''  maybe fareeba wanted something like this to happen. maybe she wanted to let the world know that, compared to the poverty and hardship she had seen, copying poetry off the internet meant nothing. maybe her own poem was just too painful to let anyone see. there were a hundred reasons, and i supplied some of them to the vice principal when he asked me for my ''take on this.'' but all i knew was a kind of wounded pride. i couldn't understand why fareeba hadn't come to me with her poem. had i only imagined the progress we'd made?  on the day of our first e.s.l. class after the incident, fareeba walked in as if nothing had happened. afterward she picked up her books and started to leave. i reached out and stopped her. she pinned me with her eyes, black with defiance and pride.  it wasn't the poem i cared about anymore. i was concerned about other, less tangible things. i wanted to tell her how beautiful she was; how she was like an elegy. but i didn't.  ''why did you do this, fareeba?'' i asked at last. ''why didn't you let me help you?''  she stared out the window of my classroom. she closed her eyes. she did not answer.  lives dina strasser writes about education and child development.  