news summary   international a3-11  iran outlines new plan to expand ties with iraq  iran's ambassador to baghdad outlined a plan to expand its economic and military ties with iraq, which will almost certainly bring iran into further conflict with american forces who have detained a number of iranian operatives in recent weeks.  a1  250 killed in battle in najaf  an american helicopter was shot down and at least 250 people were killed as iraqi forces backed by american helicopters and tanks battled gunmen near the city of najaf for 15 hours in what appeared to be one of the deadliest battles in years, iraqi officials said.  a1  saudi proposes peace plan  king abdullah of saudi arabia called on rival palestinian factions to hold emergency talks in mecca in a bid to halt some of the worst palestinian internal fighting. as the two main factions, hamas and fatah, waged a fourth day of fighting in the gaza strip, leaders from both said they would take up the invitation.  a3  sinn fein backs police plan  sinn fein leaders gerry adams and martin mcguinness won approval to support a police force that would, over the next 15 years, move from being a protestant-dominated body to one where catholics and protestants are represented in proportion to the makeup of the population in northern ireland. a4  national  a12-16  levi strauss sues rivals over jeans trademark  the original design for a levi's pocket, 133 years old, has become the biggest legal battleground in american fashion. levi strauss says legions of competitors have stolen its signature denim stitches-- two intersecting arcs and a cloth label -- for their own pockets.  a1  a move toward 2008 race  former gov. mike huckabee of arkansas is forming a presidential exploratory committee, mounting an underdog campaign for the republican nomination. he enters a race dominated by better known rivals, and faces competition for the social conservative vote from senator sam brownback of kansas.  a15  gangs prompt police action  violence among african-american and latino gangs in some struggling los angeles neighborhoods is rising. the police have promised more officers chasing the worst gang members and more cooperation among agencies.  a16  portland tram opens to public  some say portland's newest and most exotic form of public transportation, the $57 million portland aerial tram, will give the city an aesthetic exclamation point it lacks, something like the space needle in seattle. some critics, however, have called the whole project a folly.  a15  new york/region  b1-7  investigators find flaws in justice courts' finances  one of the most intractable problems facing new york's justice courts is their record with money, which has been lost, stolen or mishandled, partly because part-time justices receive little training in how to safeguard the money.  a1  principals feeling squeezed  under mayor michael r. bloomberg's latest plans, school principals will gain power, but some complain about an emphasis on corporate-style management and that some teachers they supervise can now earn more than they do.  b1 neediest cases  b6  business day c1-8  the energy start-up lobby  silicon valley's technology investors have poured billions of dollars into alternative energy start-up companies in areas like solar and wind power and are pressing the bush administration and the energy department for tax subsidies and efficiency requirements.  c1  student voice in tv ratings  nielsen media research will begin to include the viewing of students living away from home in its television ratings for the first time.  c1  business digest c2  editorial a18-19  editorials: 23-month campaign; the true state of c.s.i. justice; a public memorial; adam cohen on congress, the constitution and war.  columns: bob herbert and paul krugman.  bridge e6  crossword e4  metro diary b2  tv listings e9  weather b8  