day 2 of new school bus routes fails to end confusion   for the second day, widespread confusion over changes in school bus routes roiled the new york city school system, leaving parents exasperated and bewildered.  on the rockaway peninsula in queens, kerry gresser said she still could not get any explanation as to why her 7-year-old daughter, amanda, was assigned a seat on the yellow bus to public school 114, but her 5-year-old daughter, sally, was deemed ineligible for bus service to the same school and given a metrocard to take public transportation instead.  ''they live in the same house,'' ms. gresser said. ''one is on the bus and one isn't. and the bus is running! that's the killer. it's coming at the same time. it's coming back from school at the same time. there were eight kids that were kicked off the bus. the bus was not really that full. how are you saving money? you are not saving money.''  while education department officials did not deny some mishaps and confusion, they maintained yesterday that the city would save about $12 million from the system's annual student transportation bill of more than $1 billion.  officials insisted that the problems were being overblown. officials said that no kindergartner should have received a metrocard while an older sibling was assigned bus service, and that such mistakes would be corrected. they also said they were aware of problems with bus routes in the rockaways, but said some of the problems were a result of parents' failure to submit applications for bus service.  at a public appearance last night in forest hills, queens, schools chancellor joel i. klein apologized to parents. ''we regret any inconvenience,'' mr. klein said. ''we urge our parents to call us if they have any problems. i am obviously sorry that this occurred.''  marty oestreicher, the chief executive of the office of school support services, said that as of 3:50 p.m., a telephone line for reporting bus problems, (718) 482-3700, had received 4,921 calls yesterday.  ''we got a lot of calls and complaints and people saying things aren't working, so we're making changes as we can,'' he said, comparing the adjustments to the inevitable changes that follow the first day of school every year.  mr. oestreicher estimated that about 7,000 students had requested bus service but were offered metrocards instead. generally, he said, those students lived more than a quarter of a mile from a school bus stop, making it impractical to provide service. officials conceded, however, that public transportation could be even farther away.  officials also denied students bus service if they lived more than five miles from their school or attended school in a district or borough other than the one in which they reside.  many parents said they did not understand these rules, which seemed to defy logic, especially when siblings were treated differently.  in the rockaways, ms. gresser said she and other parents were dumbfounded that things were not straightened out yesterday. ''i know it's only tuesday,'' she said. ''but i still feel like it's taking too long to resolve because every day you have to make a new plan.''  ms. gresser said she could testify that the same yellow bus has been making the same run to p.s. 114, picking up children in her neighborhood of roxbury and in nearby breezy point, for at least 30 years. ms. gresser said she rode the bus herself as a kindergartner in 1975.  but on friday, she got a notice saying that sally, who is in kindergarten, was supposed to take the q22 public bus to school, while amanda, who is in second grade, would continue to ride the yellow bus.  denise neibel, whose son, sam, 8, and daughter, isabella, 5, live in the same neighborhood and attend the same school, said they were also told that they could no longer ride the bus. yesterday, ms. gresser, ms. neibel and other parents put all of their children on the bus in the morning, defying the department's instructions.  ''we didn't know if they were coming back on the bus today,'' ms. neibel said. ''we all planned that we were going to the bus stop together, and if the kids got off, great, that means the school recognizes that the kids should be on the bus. and if they get left at school, we'd get a phone call.''  the children all came home on the bus together. and even as they used the regular bus, the department, in response to the complaints, sent extra buses that went unused, ms. neibel said.  ''the kids have settled into their routines and schedules,'' ms. neibel said. ''the parents have done that as well. the school has done that. to make these changes now, it doesn't make sense.''  