they are refugees. who are we?   to the editor:  thank you for ''outcasts united: on a small town's soccer fields, refugees find hostility and hope'' (front page, jan. 21). by showing your readers people at their generous and courageous best -- rather than always leading with the depths to which we have allowed ourselves to sink -- you have given us something to hopeful to aspire to.  modeling a world we would like to see is at least as important as chastising us with the pitiful one we have created. please make it a habit.  tim house  upton, mass., jan. 21, 2007  to the editor:  kudos to coach luma mufleh of the fugees for her dedication to the boys on her team and their families -- and the principles at stake. it takes a jordanian immigrant to remind us what our democracy is supposed to be about: equality and opportunity for all.  i taught in liberia for nine years before the civil war, and i've supported liberian refugees who arrived in this country traumatized by their experiences. the self-esteem, inclusiveness, camaraderie and positive values being instilled in this international group of legal immigrants cannot be overestimated.  ironically, those hurling epithets and trying to keep mohammed mohammed and his brothers from practicing will be in the stands waving old glory and thumping their chests in 10 years when they're scoring goals for our national team!  robert j. schwarz  new york, jan. 23, 2007  to the editor:  clarkston, ga., epitomizes the true heart of america in its diversity. it would make our founding fathers proud. so it is very disappointing to read of the crass bias and prejudice of its mayor and some of its citizens. clarkston deserves a better mayor, one with an open mind and welcoming, generous disposition. one who knows and appreciates the ''melting pot'' history of our country.  julia humphreys  daly city, calif., jan. 21, 2007  to the editor:  while reading your article, i did not know whether to smile or cry. my emotions ran the full spectrum from hope to anger, from enthusiasm to hopelessness. how can a mayor or a community in the united states turn their back on this group of kids?  you quote the town's mayor, lee swaney, as saying about the town park, ''there will be nothing but baseball and football down there as long as i am mayor.''  i think the only appropriate response to the people of clarkston, ga., particularly mr. swaney, is to put together a group of people and go to the park, to play -- what else? -- the american version of football.  maybe take it a step further, and encourage the brave young men of the fugees to stand on the sidelines while throwing a baseball back and forth.  david strasser  new york, jan. 21, 2007  to the editor:  the story of the clarkston, ga., refugee children's soccer team is a compelling one, but it could have been told without unfairly demonizing my hometown and its leaders.  rather than examining the tremendous fiscal and social challenges heaped upon clarkston by the refugee influx, you take the easy way out by falling back on the tired old southern cracker stereotype.  yes, there are those who disdain the refugees -- and most of those people have long ago fled to the exurbs. yes, there are tensions between the remaining ''old timers'' and the refugee agencies, but that is a two-way street, with prejudices and misunderstandings on both sides.  mayor lee swaney, emanuel ransom and many other longtime residents, both white and black, have worked tirelessly to improve the city for the benefit of all. the learning curve has been steep, and not every decision, action or statement has been ideal, but it has been a good-faith effort.  meanwhile, many american-born professionals like me have moved to the city by choice, attracted by the small-town atmosphere, the mind-boggling diversity and the absence of pseudo-sophisticated gentrification.  susan m. garrett  clarkston, ga., jan. 24, 2007  to the editor:  coach luma mufleh is an inspiration and a treasure. how quickly a community that used to be mostly white forgets why most of their relatives came to this country -- seeking safety, opportunity and a chance to flourish.  the movement of people that has created the current rich diversity in clarkston, ga., today is just what emboldens me to believe that america may eventually join the global community rather than acting as a unilateral, self-interested country willing to check its ethics at the door to make the next arms deal with a regime we'll later decide we hate.  it's time for clarkston, and america as a whole, to embrace the richness the world has to share with us, and for communities and governments at every level of this country to support our children with the resources they need to succeed in our neighborhoods and schools. this generation is our future.  keep fighting for the future of our newest americans, ms. mufleh. you are what is wonderful about america.  melanie peterson-nafziger  st. paul, jan. 21, 2007  to the editor:  thank you for ''outcasts united.''  as a pioneering school bringing together child survivors of war and local children living in or near clarkston, ga., we provide a school home for a number of coach luma mufleh's players.  some of these students arrived at international community school so traumatized and with such extreme behavior problems they could barely function in our classrooms. one by one, the chance to play soccer with the fugees has turned their lives around. kudos to your reporter for capturing with compelling accuracy the struggle and opportunity facing clarkston's refugee children.  william l. moon  principal  international community school  decatur, ga., jan. 23, 2007  to the editor:  the vivid examples of our nation's strengths and weaknesses described in ''outcasts united'' are striking: we can be a model for the shrinking earth as a resourceful melting pot, full of opportunity. we can also be ignorant and fearful of other cultures.  the role of the world's most popular team sport is no accident: soccer's free form and improvisational nature lend themselves to many interpretations; this is an international language that we are only just beginning to learn.  rob schneiderman  new york, jan. 23, 2007  