campaign spotlight: this campaign thinks pink   an organization that has fought breast cancer for 25 years is marking its anniversary with a new name and a new logo as well as a new campaign that demonstrates a new attitude.  the organization, known as the susan g. komen breast cancer foundation, is planning to spend more than $1 million to market its rebranding as susan g. komen for the cure. the foundation is working with three agencies on its initiatives: duffy & partners in minneapolis; tracylocke in dallas, part of the omnicom group; and the irving, tex., office of weber shandwick, part of the interpublic group of companies.  the campaign began last week in print, outdoors and online, on a new dedicated web site (25komen.org).  the new name for the foundation is intended to capitalize on the fact that, according to research, it is increasingly becoming known for fund-raising events like the race for the cure.  the name change is accompanied by a logo redesign, intended to convey a much more contemporary look. gone is a profile in silhouette, evocative of a bygone century, next to the words "the susan g. komen breast cancer foundation" written in pink.  in their place are a stylized pink ribbon, the symbol for breast-cancer awareness, next to the words "susan g. komen for the cure" and an additional phrase, "we're on a mission."  the campaign also takes a far more modern and assertive approach. gone, for instance, are ads that showed a woman tying a shoe to take part in a race for the cure, which carried this headline: "for over 20 years, we've operated on a shoestring."  contrast that with an ad appearing in newspapers and magazines and on posters, which declares: "we only focus on one thing. or, depending on how you look at it, two."  or take another print and poster ad, showing a woman wearing a tank-style undershirt on which these words appear: "when we get our hands on breast cancer, we're going to punch it, strangle it, kick it, spit on it, choke it and pummel it until it's good and dead. not just horror movie dead but really, truly dead. and then we're going to tie a pink ribbon on it."  if that does not sufficiently convey the foundation's new spirit, try the message that will appear on t-shirts to be sold to raise money for its work against breast cancer.  "if you're going to stare at my breasts," the t-shirts read, "you could at least donate a dollar to save them."  the campaign is indicative of how nonprofit organizations are significantly revamping the methods they use to reach out to consumers, not to mention the tone of their messages. just as marketers of consumer products have had to rethink the way they pitch a new breed of restless, cynical, hard-to-reach shoppers, so too have charities, foundations and other fund-raising organizations.  "the last several years, we've been taking a look at where we are in the breast-cancer space, in the nonprofit space," says chris orzechowski, director for brand marketing at the foundation, which is based in dallas. "it's like taking a step back before you can move forward," she adds. the research showed that "we had a good place in the market," ms. orzechowski said. "we wanted to go from good to great."  "we felt there were missed opportunities, opportunities to affect lives in a greater way and be more inclusive," she adds. "we felt like we weren't serving younger audiences and more ethnically diverse audiences."  "what i love about the new name and logo is that they're a call to action," ms. orzechowski says, "an opportunity to remind people what we're about."  she acknowledges that "there sure is" risk involved in making such sweeping changes, but explains: "when you take a trip, you don't take everything you own when you pack your bags. what we realized was that we wanted to take the equity we had, susan g. komen, and leverage the race for the cure and the many other 'for the cure' programs we have, which people really connect with."  susan g. komen, who died of breast cancer at age 36, is the sister of nancy g. brinker, the founder of the organization. her name being at the heart of the foundation's name helped to create perceptions of it as "a personal and human organization," says tricia davidson, managing partner at duffy.  "but awareness among the general public was much lower than what i had hoped," ms. davidson says, citing a conversation she overheard while taking part in a race for the cure event a couple of years ago: "one woman behind me said to the other, 'i wonder what the american cancer society does with the money they're raising?'"  duffy told the foundation that the 25th anniversary was a chance, ms. davidson says, "to stand up and get credit for what you've done and prepare for the next 25 years of your history."  taking advantage of the popularity of the "for the cure" events was "obvious," she adds, "so we married komen, and in particular the personal aspects of susan g. komen, with their activation points, the 'for the cure' events." activation points is a term brand marketers use to refer to events and other ways that the public intersects and interacts with an advertiser.  and while it was deemed important to add the pink ribbon to the logo, "the ribbon is universal," ms. davidson says, "so we needed to make a proprietary version."  that is the reason the logo uses a representation of the ribbon. the way it swirls and the dot atop the ribbon make it look like a person who is moving forward perhaps participating in a race for the cure.  the foundation's leaders "really want to break the mold and do something exciting," says craig cooper, chief creative officer at tracylocke, to "establish komen as "the voice in the fight against breast cancer." "what holds this all together is 'we're on a mission,' which just resounded the right way," he adds, suggesting the foundation wants to "take the gloves off" in the battle against the disease.  another reason the line is effective, says janet bustin, president at tracylocke, is because it implies that "we're so far along with fighting breast cancer, but we're not done yet."  the print ads are running in people magazine and usa today. the posters are going up in these major markets: atlanta, boston, chicago, dallas-fort worth, los angeles, new york, orange county in california and metropolitan washington, including montgomery county, md.  the microsite at 25komen.org, which is separate from the foundation's regular web site (komen.org), features a new fund-raising effort, centered on what is called the promise ring. the rings are being sold in sets of two, at $5 the pair, representing the promise made between the two sisters to eradicate breast cancer.  "one to wear, one to share," as ms. orzechowski puts it.  if you like in advertising, be sure to read the advertising column that appears monday through friday in the business day section of the new york times.  campaign spotlight  