after 8 hours on the taxiway, you might want a bill of rights   the air traffic system around dallas basically snapped on dec. 29.  bad thunderstorms caused flight disruptions. some airplanes were stranded on taxiways for hours, their passengers unable to get off. flight crews were forced to deal with passenger fury while airline flight operations managers worried about the consequences of returning to the gate or canceling a flight outright, stranding passengers.  some outraged passengers have gotten together to demand federal legislation to hold the airlines more accountable for service disruptions.  the worst case that day occurred on american airlines flight 1348, bound to dallas from san francisco. it was diverted to austin, tex., where the weather was also bad. passengers were kept on the plane for over eight hours. as time passed, passengers say, the toilets became unpleasant or unusable. and the only food was pretzels and peanuts. the pilot finally commandeered a gate in frustration.  it was a peak holiday travel time. unusually bad weather and inflexible schedules forced operations managers to make tough calls.  in all, american airlines -- which took the brunt of the criticism for the new year's weekend mess that centered on its hub at dallas-fort worth international airport -- said it diverted 88 flights from dallas on dec. 29 to other airports in the region. american has apologized to inconvenienced passengers and issued them vouchers for future travel.  but flight 1348 got most of the attention because of the extraordinary length of time the passengers were kept on board, and, i suspect, because kate hanni was among them.  ms. hanni, a real estate broker in the napa valley of california, was furious about what she calls the indifference that american airlines officials in austin showed her and more than 100 other passengers who were unable to leave the plane from about 1 p.m. until about 9:20 p.m.  ''we were basically held captive for almost nine hours,'' she said. ms. hanni was bound for a resort in alabama with her husband, tim hanni, and their two children. mr. hanni, a well-known wine expert, was to give a seminar at the resort.  since dec. 29, ms. hanni has been rounding up support from other aggrieved passengers. she has scheduled appointments in congress today through thursday to push for a so-called passengers' bill of rights that would require airlines to provide specific redress for inordinate delays and other customer service problems.  ''we've reached the tipping point of consumer dissatisfaction with how customer service is being handled by the airlines,'' she said. ms. hanni and others have complained that no food was available, the cabin air became foul and toilets were overflowing.  tim wagner, an american spokesman, said that in a typical bad thunderstorm situation, ''we might divert 40 flights from dallas,'' rather than the 88 diverted that day.  for an airline, it's a tough call to decide whether to cancel a flight or keep it in line for a takeoff opening. on dec. 29, passengers on eight american flights were kept on airplanes in austin for at least three hours. but keeping the passengers on board flight 1348 for over eight hours was a mistake, mr. wagner acknowledged. ''the call to cancel that flight should have come earlier,'' he said yesterday.  he added: ''there is some dispute over exactly how dire the circumstance were on that flight. i do have flight attendants reports saying no toilets overflowed. we ran out of bottled water but we still had plenty of drinking water.''  on heavy travel days during bad weather, when all available aircraft and crews are in use and delays are mounting, cancellations of flights can strand passengers for several days in airports, he said. but, he added, after dec. 29 the airline ''re-emphasized'' to operations managers that ''after three hours we have to make a decision, and approaching four hours, we need to bring them in and cancel, and work on getting those passengers to their destinations.''  federal legislation to address what he called an ''anomaly'' would be ''an overreaction,'' he said.  in 1999, when northwest airlines passengers in detroit were stranded in a plane for seven hours in a blizzard, there was a similar move to introduce federal legislation. but the legislation died after heavy lobbying by the industry and, some said, because the proposed legislation sought to apply federal law to too broad an array of problems in air travel.  ms. hanni said the passengers' bill of rights now being proposed is more narrowly focused. ''i'm concerned about the ability to push it through unless we keep it simple and to the point,'' she said.  you can judge for yourself. the draft of the proposal is at www.strandedpassengers.blogspot.com.  on the road e-mail: sharkeyj@nytimes.com  