giving squirrels the heave-ho   squirrels are cute enough when they are providing acrobatic entertainment swiping seeds from your bird feeder. but they can also be equally determined at getting into your house.  ''squirrels aren't just mean -- they're vicious,'' said thomas barnes, an extension professor of forestry at the university of kentucky in lexington.  squirrels will rarely enter a house at ground level; they almost always go in at the roof line. in finished attics, they will nest in the walls or ceilings, where they sometimes hold noisy acorn-rolling tournaments. in unfinished attics, they will often nest between the attic floor and the ceiling of the room below.  dr. barnes said that while holes or gaps around the roof provide easy access for a squirrel that prefers your warm house to the scant comfort of a hollow tree, easy access hardly matters. ''heck, they can chew through hardware cloth and chicken wire,'' he said. ''vinyl's not even a challenge.''  squirrels typically breed at the end of winter, and that can create additional problems if they have nested indoors. ''you can't remove mama and leave the babies there,'' dr. barnes said. ''and you don't want to mess with the nest while the mother is around. i've seen people who've had the tip of their finger taken off.''  while squirrels will gnaw beams, tear out insulation and transport nuts, fleas and ticks into a house, the most serious threat they pose is chewing on electrical wires, which could cause a fire.  james dreisacker, the owner of westchester wildlife control in brewster, n.y., says his squirrel strategy depends upon the circumstances. since squirrels leave the house in search of food during the day, he often uses single-catch traps that fit right over whatever hole the squirrels are using.  when a squirrel family is involved, he will set out one or more ''multi-catch'' traps on the roof. the most enticing squirrel bait, mr. dreisacker said, is store-bought peanuts.  bob meakin, the president of the new york state wildlife management association, a trade group in syracuse, said that since it was illegal to release captured squirrels on public or private land without permission, most experts euthanize any animals they capture, which is legal. (homeowners can do the same.)  chuck kaczyk, the owner of animal and wildlife control in saddlebrook, n.j., holds the patent on a device that provides one-way access to squirrels, and that one way is out.  ''the one-way door is a cylindrical tube with a flapper valve that the squirrel can crawl through,'' mr. kaczyk said. ''it's kind of like a check valve on a sewer line.''  the one-way door is affixed to the opening the squirrels are using, and once a squirrel goes out, it can't get back in.  after all the squirrels have left, all potential entry points must be sealed tightly with plywood, heavy-gauge aluminum flashing or steel mesh. the cost to eliminate a family of squirrels from an average house starts at about $300, mr. kaczyk said.  the common gray or black squirrels are not the only nuisances. douglas stern, the owner of the stern environmental group, a pest-control company in secaucus, n.j., said, ''we're seeing more problems with flying squirrels,'' a smaller cousin that has a flap of skin between its front and back legs that allows it to glide long distances.  the problem, mr. stern said, is that flying squirrels, which are nocturnal, act more like mice than squirrels. as a result, pest-control people often use poisons to eliminate them. and that, he said, is illegal because rodenticides are not labeled for use on squirrels.  the best way to get rid of flying squirrels, mr. stern said, is to use chipmunk traps baited with peanut butter. ''eliminating flying squirrels can take a while,'' he said, ''because you're basically catching them one at a time.''  your home  