citigroup to expand in britain by buying online bank for $1.1 billion   citigroup agreed yesterday to buy egg banking, a british online bank owned by prudential p.l.c., for $1.13 billion, the latest in a series of small deals to expand its retail presence abroad.  with the acquisition, citigroup will quadruple its number of credit card customers, to 2.9 million, and broaden its reach by the use of an internet site to open savings accounts and mortgages in a country where it has five retail branches.  but at a time when the british banking sector has been hurt by a barrage of bad loans and bankruptcies, some analysts are questioning the deal.  the cash transaction, which appeared to be at little more than twice book value, follows a string of small deals by citigroup to buy or acquire stakes in banks in china, turkey and central america as well as quilter holdings, the british wealth management arm of morgan stanley.  under pressure from investors, the chairman and chief executive of citigroup, charles o. prince iii, has turned to acquisitions to accelerate the growth he promised from a longer-term strategy focused on internal and international expansion. he has significantly cut back on investment spending and has moved to rein in expenses.  the changes seem to indicate that mr. prince is listening to investors at a time when many outsiders have questioned how long he will hold onto the job. amidst a management shake-up last week, the bank giant is now searching for a chief financial officer who might be seen as mr. prince's potential successor. they also highlight the tightrope that mr. prince walks. while an acquisition strategy will deliver earnings faster, one driven by internal growth could have a much bigger payoff.  wall street analysts, meanwhile, have asked whether a series of small acquisitions is enough to move the profit needle at a bank that generated more than $21 billion in net income last year.  reports of a potential acquisition of egg emerged last month, but yesterday's announcement caught some by surprise. at a year-end presentation in december, mr. prince said that on the consumer side, western europe was far less ''an attractive acquisition territory for us in light of our opportunities in the emerging markets.'' mr. prince made similar comments over the weekend at the world economic forum. executives said that mr. prince was referring to the prospects of a major european retail bank acquisition, not a smaller deal.  egg is a pure online bank that could operate side-by-side with a branch network like citidirect, citigroup's high-yield savings and loan internet offering that it introduced last spring in the united states.  citigroup is betting that its lending practices and broader set of products like checking accounts might spur egg's turnaroud. besides being a widely recognized brand, egg will give citigroup a stronger foothold for expansion. citigroup is also planning more citibank branches in britain.  but egg itself, which was among the first online banks when it was established in 1998, has struggled as of late. the bank tried to expand into france but was forced to abandon the effort. and along with other major british banks, it has suffered from a number of bad loans that caused substantial operating losses.  in late 2005, prudential paid more than £211 million to buy its remaining 21 percent ownership stake and later vowed to restore egg to profitability. that never happened, and citigroup scooped the entire operation up for £575 million, or $1.13 billion, in yesterday's deal.  still, questions about the quality of egg's loans persist.  ajay banga, a co-head of global consumer business at citigroup, suggested that citigroup's lending practices could help engineer egg's turnaround.  ''they certainly have had an increase in losses over the past couple of years -- it's mostly from a couple of years of customer booking,'' mr. banga said, suggesting that the bad loans were made in 2004 and 2005.  