harvard analysis casts doubt on works said to be pollocks   a yearlong scientific analysis by the harvard university art museums of three paintings discovered in 2003 and considered to be possible works by jackson pollock has found that some of the pigments used in the paints were not patented or commercially available until long after pollock died in 1956.  the examination of the chemical makeup of the paintings -- conducted with the consent of alex matter, who found the works among the possessions of his late father, herbert, a close friend of pollock's -- does not conclusively end the debate over whether pollock had a hand in the works.  but the findings cast doubt on that possibility. and they suggest that at the very least, the paintings, taken from a cache of 32 works found by mr. matter in a long island storage bin, may have been substantially added to or altered after pollock's death.  in the case of one of the three paintings, which is dominated by bright orange drips and splashed curlicues, the analysis found a pigment in the orange paint that was not available until 1971. that work and another of the three also contained substances within the paints that were ''most likely'' not available until 1962 or 1963, the report said. a third painting, which was badly damaged and heavily restored, was found to contain a brown paint that was developed in the early 1980s and did not come onto the market until 1986. (herbert matter died in 1984.)  to examine the paintings, harvard relied on some of the latest technology to be trained on disputed works of art, including an electron microscope. even before the analysis was complete, however, the paintings had been the subject of an intense scientific and scholarly debate.  after viewing the works, ellen landau, a professor at case western reserve university in cleveland and one of the world's most respected pollock scholars, decided that they were authentic and agreed to help with scholarship for an exhibition of them, now scheduled to open on sept. 1 at the mcmullen museum of art at boston college.  but after dr. landau's role in supporting the works was announced in 2005, the pollock-krasner foundation, which had declined to enter into authentication disputes for almost a decade, became involved. it enlisted eugene v. thaw, a veteran art dealer, and francis v. o'connor, an art historian, who wrote the four-volume catalogue raisonné, or complete listing, of pollock's work. both scholars disagreed strongly with dr. landau, with whom they had previously served on a board that examined paintings to determine whether they were genuine.  in early 2006, a physicist at the university of oregon also examined some of the paintings, using a computer to identify fractal patterns, which recur on finer and finer magnifications, like those of snowflakes. he determined that six of the paintings did not show the same patterns as those of indisputably authentic pollock paintings that he had examined earlier.  but in december, two physicists published an article disputing those findings and questioning the use of fractals as a way of authenticating pollock paintings.  the harvard art museums said yesterday that no one involved in the examination of paintings would be available to comment until today. a statement posted last night on a web site where mr. matter and mark borghi, a manhattan art dealer, have promoted the discovery of the newly discovered paintings took issue with the harvard findings.  it questioned the dating of some of the pigments and suggested that the use of varnish might have contaminated some results. the statement also noted that the pieces of blue-coated cardboard that were used for each of the three paintings were shown by carbon dating at harvard to have been made before 1955, suggesting that they could have been used by pollock.  ''the authentication of works of art is still more art than science,'' the statement said. ''scientific analysis can attempt to eliminate a work of art as genuine, but it can't determine if it is indeed the work of any given artist. that has been, and remains, the job of the scholar.''  