cooking under pressure, that's reality   the final two contestants on ''top chef'' didn't get this far on character or charm.  marcel vigneron's self-love is as garish and repellent as his winged hairdo, which looks like an attempt to evoke ''the flying nun'' without a headdress or a habit.  only in contrast does ilan hall seem humble and winsome. don't be duped. in this season's first episode he flatly declared, ''i want to be famous.'' and as he inched ever closer to his goal, he sometimes regarded his adversaries with a look of unalloyed contempt.  no, mr. vigneron, 26, and mr. hall, 24, aren't the most likable of the 15 chefs who participated in the competition. could it be that they're the last two standing because they're actually the most talented?  it's possible. definitely possible. and that's a big part of why ''top chef'' works so well and why so many food lovers will tune in to the season finale tonight on bravo.  for all its generically hyped-up drama, cheesy gimmickry and abject fealty to the tropes of reality television, ''top chef'' really is about cooking: what goes into it; what comes out of it; what reliably succeeds in the kitchen and on the plate; what predictably doesn't.  it's not just ''the apprentice'' with the chef tom colicchio subbing for the emperor donald trump, not just ''america's next top model'' with a much higher calorie count. it's a look at the imagination, desperation, judgment and serendipity that inform any great meal.  its narrative arc and razzmatazz editing may take it a long way from julia child's ''the french chef'' and the beginnings of food television, but it's a recognizable member of the same family, an engine of culinary education and inspiration as well as ''ten little indians''-style suspense.  it's an unusually successful member, too. ''top chef'' came into its own this season, its second, as it found a kind of traction that many other cooking-related shows -- a bloated field at this point -- haven't.  its contestants and judges wound up in gossip columns. its twists and turns fueled chatter on the internet, including the possible disclosure of the victor in tonight's episode, which was taped a while back. its ratings rose to an average of nearly two million viewers a week, according to bravo, and that number put it well ahead of the second season of ''project runway,'' bravo's runaway reality hit, which will embark on its fourth season this year.  the reasons are many and varied. ''top chef'' did a deft job assembling a racially and ethnically diverse cast of characters, a shrunken high school in which every clique had a representative. there was the peevish whistleblower (marisa), the priggish a student (elia), the good-time blonde (betty), the disheveled slacker (michael), the laconic hunk (sam), the trash-talking spitfire (mia).  ''top chef'' offers the reliable, although perhaps not always intentional, hilarity of its blunt product endorsements and of its host, padma lakshmi, a k a mrs. salman rushdie, a model-turned-actress whose epicurean musings are less riveting than her sluggish, mouth-full-of-molasses style of speech and strenuously come-hither poses.  as she makes her costume changes you can almost read her thoughts: ''does this skirt go with hamachi?'' ''is this too much cleavage for a chicken liver canapé?''  but you can get similar sorts of comedy and sociology elsewhere in the world of reality television. ''top chef'' marries them to real tests of culinary skill and to real insights into cooking.  contestants had to make an entire lunch, including dessert, of under 500 calories, and it somehow had to be appealing to the overweight children at a place with the unfortunate name of camp glucose. as the contestants fashioned their recipes under nutritionists' watchful eyes, you learned that there are nearly 2,000 calories in a cup of olive oil, which was pretty much off-limits for that reason, and that there are serious structural consequences to baking with splenda in lieu of sugar.  contestants had to come up with one dish that made use of snails, artichokes, peanuts and american cheese, and another that made use of frogs' legs, chicken livers, eggplant, cornflakes and peanut butter.  they had to concoct a sophisticated amuse-bouche using ingredients from vending machines. mr. hall's dish showcased a hard-boiled egg, retrieved from one of the machines, and a fig paste, whose source wasn't obvious.  where had he found it?  in a fig newton.  the contestants had not only ingredient constraints but also time constraints and expense constraints. in other words, they faced exaggerated versions of the same constraints that all cooks do, and there were lessons in their successes and failures.  there were lessons, too, in the judges' assessments of their food, assessments that added just enough verbiage to visual images to get around the problem with any televised food competition: you can't have your own firm opinion about what the judges are grading. while you can see an aspiring designer's outfit or hear an aspiring singer's voice, you can't taste an aspiring chef's soft-shell crab with seafood paella.  that dish, which mr. hall helped to make, drew raves from mr. colicchio and the other judges, who praised the way the rice had been baked so that it had a crunchy exterior and a soft interior, thereby echoing the texture of the crab.  textural contrasts, acidity levels, sensible proportions, logical and illogical flavor combinations -- ''top chef'' seriously explores all of these factors, providing ways to think about the construction of dishes, the orchestration of meals.  for a thanksgiving dinner, michael, the slacker, was in charge of the sides, and came up with two potato dishes and a corn dish. the judges -- including anthony bourdain, who described michael as the love child of betty crocker and charles manson -- noted an obvious flaw in the lineup: its excessive starchiness. they also noted a less obvious one: its nearly monochromatic paleness.  mr. colicchio, whose projected earnestness gives his opinions extra weight, offered one kitchen aphorism after another. ''when you start a dish and the choice you make is presentation before flavor,'' he told contestants, ''you're going down a dead-end street.''  and as one contestant after another was told to ''pack your knives and go,'' it seemed, for the most part, that the right people were being exiled from the kitchen.  while the selection of the two finalists, mr. vigneron and mr. hall, looked suspiciously tidy -- by the time it happened they had developed a fierce rivalry -- they certainly deserved to be near the head of the class. so did the other contestants who survived until the last few rounds.  as it happens, there's a special resonance to the face-off between mr. vigneron, who came to the competition from one of joël robuchon's restaurants in las vegas, and mr. hall, who came from the restaurant casa mono, partly owned by mario batali, in manhattan.  mr. vigneron prizes the technical derring-do of molecular gastronomy. mr. hall has a mediterranean sensibility, focused more squarely on ingredients themselves.  the battle being televised tonight is between not just two people but two philosophies. and that larger contest underscores the surprising seriousness at the heart of ''top chef.''  critic's notebook  