choice for no. 2 at state dept. defends bush's stance on iran   john d. negroponte, nominated as deputy secretary of state, defended the bush administration's more confrontational policy with iran in a senate confirmation hearing that was peppered with demands from both sides of the aisle that the united states show restraint in dealing with tehran.  in a sign that the debate over iraq is increasingly becoming a debate over iran, mr. negroponte, appearing before the senate foreign relations committee, found himself answering the same questions, over and over again.  ''do you think we are drifting toward a military confrontation with iran?'' demanded senator chuck hagel, republican of nebraska.  ''i don't think that has to be, senator,'' mr. negroponte replied. ''i think we would strongly prefer that the issues between us and iran be resolved peacefully.''  mr. negroponte maintained that an emboldened iran could harm american interests in the region.  ''we don't believe that their behavior, such as supporting shia extremists in iraq, should go unchallenged,'' said mr. negroponte, who is now the director of national intelligence.  in an interview with abc news on tuesday, president bush said stern measures aimed at iran should not be seen as a precursor to war. ''some are trying to take my words and say, 'well, what he's really trying to do is go invade iran,' '' he said. ''nobody's talking about that.''  the united states has refused to hold direct talks with iran over the two major issues of contention: its nuclear programs and its stance toward iraq. instead, the bush administration has increased pressure on iran. the administration has seized iranians in iraq and is trying to starve iran of international financing.  the pentagon announced tuesday that it had suspended the sale of spare parts for american-made f-14 fighter jets lest they end up in iran, the only nation whose air force still flies the vintage plane. many of the parts are common to other aircraft. the united states navy retired its last squadrons in 2006.  mr. bush announced this month that the united states would send another aircraft carrier and its supporting ships to the persian gulf, a response to the growing concern that iran is building up its own missile capacity and naval power to dominate the gulf militarily.  meanwhile, the administration has continued to resist calls for it to initiate talks with iran, and has said that it will do so only if tehran suspends its enrichment of uranium.  ''the view at the moment is that we are reluctant to initiate a high-level diplomatic dialogue with iran until there has been some progress on this nuclear issue,'' mr. negroponte said.  senator barack obama, democrat of illinois, warned him not to ''stumble into active hostilities with iran without having aggressively pursued diplomatic approaches, without the american people understanding exactly what's taking place.''  ''this committee is going to be paying attention,'' mr. obama said. ''we do not want to see precipitous actions that have not been thought through, have not been discussed, have not been authorized.''  if confirmed, mr. negroponte would become the second-highest-ranking diplomat behind secretary of state condoleezza rice. the deputy secretary of state job has been open since robert b. zoellick left to join goldman sachs in the summer.  mr. negroponte, who has spent 41 years in government service, speaks five languages fluently and has won senate confirmation for eight posts, including five ambassadorships. he was ambassador to iraq before president bush chose him for the intelligence job in february 2005.  several senators on the committee praised mr. negroponte as one of the most distinguished public servants of his generation, and there appeared to be no obstacle to his confirmation.  at a separate confirmation hearing on tuesday, the admiral picked to lead american forces in the middle east said iran was increasing its military capabilities and seeking to curb american influence. ''they are posturing themselves with the capability to attempt to deny us the ability to operate in this vicinity,'' adm. william j. fallon told the senate armed services committee.  