in the penalty phase, all one's secrets revealed   in the federal court system of the united states of america, duly recorded and transcribed by professional stenographers, there exists testimony documenting the fact that one ronell wilson, 24, of staten island, wet the bed into his teenage years.  kids might call that t.m.i., ''too much information.'' the law calls it evidence of a ''mitigating factor'' that could spare a defendant's life.  mr. wilson may or may not get the death penalty for killing two undercover detectives; jurors in brooklyn will be asked to decide this week. but in two weeks of testimony to determine his sentence, he has already endured an unenviable ordeal.  the degree of scrutiny afforded a capital defendant is enough to mortify anyone who has ever been a child, dated a girl, gotten a haircut or tried to dress fashionably. this is the full probe. all your secrets revealed. some defendants consider it either more agonizing than death, a sentence no federal jury in new york has prescribed for a half-century, or at least worth a big gamble to avoid.  in 2003, in the same court, a defendant named emile dixon took his chances, forbidding defense lawyers to call his relatives or dissect the circumstances of his upbringing. the strategy worked well for him, or as well as possible under the circumstances. six jurors wrote on a verdict sheet that mr. dixon had impressively ''exhibited concern for the privacy and dignity of his family.''  he is serving a life term for dealing drugs and murdering two people, including another dealer who had become a government witness.  a killer, and bad in math  in theory, this adversarial process known as the penalty phase, coda to a capital murder trial, informs jurors of the broader circumstances of the case. prosecutors argue that the convicted man is more rotten than other killers; defense lawyers suggest causes for mercy. in practice, it can produce some bizarre tableaus. after all, once it has been established that you murdered somebody, other biographical details can seem surreally picayune.  because of the youth of mr. wilson and his co-defendants, some of whom were teenagers at the time of the killings in 2003, the jury has already seen some jarringly boyish displays. in the first phase of the trial, one witness told of a clash after a school talent show. one enlarged evidence photograph showed mr. wilson making a gang hand sign for the camera, but the image was stamped with the logo of the six flags great adventure theme park.  on wednesday, a gallery of tv reporters, sketch artists and figures from throughout mr. wilson's life learned that his i.q. had once been measured at around 78. asked long ago how to respond if a younger, smaller child started a fight, he had answered, ''pick him up and throw him in the garbage.''  at p.s. 14 on staten island, he had done well in physical education, less so in math. those grades were projected on a giant screen in the courtroom. his lawyer, mitchell dinnerstein, said: ''we're talking about a kindergarten kid, right?''  ''everybody makes mistakes,'' cried constance wilson, aunt connie to the defendant, as she pleaded for his life from the witness stand. her choice of words sounded belittlingly off-key in the courtroom, as the mistake in question was the murder of two men with young families, but the jury also heard about other transgressions to better fit that bill.  prosecutors called a computer technician named jack marczewski to describe an encounter from june 1996, when he was 13 and mr. wilson was 14. with another boy, mr. wilson had demanded bus passes, rifled through young jack's book bag, stolen his calculator and punched him in the face.  cross-examination was brief. a defense lawyer asked mr. marczewski how he was doing these days.  ''ah, doing well,'' he said.  indignities left and right  seeking to portray mr. wilson as a sweet-hearted, wayward, neglected and possibly brain-damaged child, his own lawyers have subjected him to a catalog of humiliations.  they displayed a photograph of mr. wilson at age 12, thumb firmly in cheek.  they put his father, robert earl barnes, on the witness stand, then made a spectacle of his resplendent incoherence. they revealed that mr. wilson was originally called earl, presumably after this heavily sedated man who could not identify the year of his son's birth.  a former teacher at a juvenile detention center testified that mr. wilson had arrived at age 15, reading at a second-grade level. a counselor from the center, michael j. hall, who testified for the record that he liked mr. wilson, described him as ''immature,'' ''slow academically'' and ''a thumb sucker.''  a defense lawyer asked: ''did he also wet the bed?''  mr. hall said: ''oh, yes.''  then he recounted a time when mr. wilson had claimed to be a member of the bloods street gang. mr. wilson, he said, rescinded his claim when confronted by older boys who were known gang members.  the next witness, milton munroe, described mr. wilson's efforts to fill out a supermarket job application.  ''i realized pretty much that he only had his first and last name on the application,'' mr. munroe said, ''after 15 minutes of trying to fill it out.''  it remains to be seen what value the jurors will place on any of this. from the defense table, mr. wilson has watched the parade of counselors and teachers and parents and other relatives go by. he has registered no humiliation, no particular response at all. there is some indication he just appreciates the concern.  ''it's nice to know somebody still got love for me,'' he wrote in a jailhouse letter to a friend (who later betrayed him on the witness stand). ''i feel much better to know that.''  reporter's notebook  