take a stand even if it means not getting a seat   nothing gives your principles a workout like a business trip. taking a stand for your beliefs isn't easy when you're outside of your comfort zone, but the rewards can be significant.  a few years ago, i was flying from athens to dallas with my wife, who was several months pregnant. my company had paid for a business-class ticket for me, and my wife purchased her own seat in coach.  when we checked in, i asked if we could swap seats.  ''no problem,'' the ticket agent said. ''just ask the flight attendant once you've boarded.''  after takeoff, i asked a crew member for permission to switch. the attendant, a short, pale-skinned man with straw-blond hair, said that wasn't allowed -- unless my wife was willing to pay several hundred dollars for an upgrade.  ''my wife is several months pregnant,'' i said, hoping to persuade him to bend the rules.  he returned a blank expression.  ''but the ticket agent said it wouldn't be a problem,'' i continued. ''it's a terribly long flight. why don't you just let us change seats?''  ''sorry,'' he replied icily. ''rules are rules.''  it was time to take a stand. i packed up all of my carry-on bags and sat down behind my wife in the closest available seat in the coach cabin. if they weren't going to let her sit in my seat, then i didn't want to sit in it either.  it took only a minute for the rule-abiding flight attendant to find me.  ''why are you sitting here?'' he demanded. ''i thought i told you -- no swapping seats!''  ''and i haven't. i moved to coach to be with my wife.''  ''but that is not allowed.''  eventually, the captain had to be called to mediate our dispute. and after apologizing profusely, he ordered an upgrade for my spouse.  the reward for standing up for your principles isn't always immediate. or even immediately apparent.  not long ago, while i waited for my flight to leave from paris, i was watching tv with several other passengers in the business-class lounge. without warning, the lounge steward switched the channel on the television to a soccer match.  the passengers were baffled, but no one said anything. except me.  ''why did you change the channel?'' i asked. ''shouldn't we at least have been consulted?''  the steward refused to change the channel back, and a heated argument ensued. soon, the authorities arrived. but this time the outcome was different.  one of the airline managers ruled in the steward's favor and issued the following ultimatum: either apologize to him or you won't be allowed to board your flight. given that i had done nothing wrong -- except to question someone's choice in tv programming -- i took yet another stand by refusing. i spent an extra night in paris and caught the next flight.  so where's the reward in that? when i told the story to the prospective client i had planned to visit, he not only understood, he also respected my decision to stand firm, and ended up becoming a valuable customer.  frequent flier e-mail: elliott@nytimes.com  