russia turns to spin to redefine itself and reassure the west   russia's elite players came to the world economic forum high in the swiss alps with a mission. at a meeting as much about posturing and politics as it is about business and trade, moscow's emissaries were here to say loudly that their country was not the bully its detractors depicted it to be.  in truth, last year was a grim one for russia's reputation, tarnished by the unsolved murders of kremlin critics at home and abroad and by president vladimir v. putin's continued moves to tighten state control of economic and public life.  so the high-powered russian delegation of political and business leaders spent part of the past week trying to project a counterimage, buttressed by slabs of statistics to display economic growth and sober stewardship in the service of market freedoms that should not alarm the west.  ''russia today is a different country,'' said dmitry a. medvedev, the powerful first deputy prime minister, at a public session of the forum, which ended sunday.  the davos meeting has long been used by moscow to define itself to the world, beginning in the soviet era. not only has the russian image here -- more sober this year than festive -- reflected the nation at home, the conference has even provided a conspiratorial corner to help change the course of post-soviet history.  in the 1990s, russians here were known for flashy wealth, showy parties and backroom maneuvering as their nation rode a roller coaster of wild east capitalism after the collapse of the soviet union. and the so-called davos pact between russian oligarchs in 1996 is remembered as the secret deal that thwarted a communist resurgence. (the group got together amid the parties and debates and agreed to use money and mass media to support boris n. yeltsin against a growing communist challenge.)  then, after the 1998 financial crash, the number of russians at the yearly get-together dwindled.  this year the contingent has grown substantially again to 43, and although it may represent a small number of the 2,000 or so participants, the group includes some of the most powerful figures in the kremlin and in business, both private and state-controlled.  the higher numbers reflect the increasing political and economic muscle displayed by a land intent on parlaying huge oil and gas reserves into a growing international assertiveness. as if to underscore the differences in style that have emerged over the past decade, a well-subscribed russian dinner here friday night seemed an exercise in considered statements and relative sobriety in contrast to the vodka-fueled excesses of the '90s.  ''in the 1990s there was a big interest in russia,'' anatoly b. chubais, a former government minister from that era, said in an interview. ''then it became clear that russia is not going to become north korea or iran and the interest dipped.''  ''now it has risen again with the question of energy supplies, the cutting off of the supplies of gas,'' he said, referring to russia's standoff with belarus over gas supplies, which ended when belarus accepted higher, market-related prices.  ''russia became stronger,'' said mr. chubais, who heads the country's state-controlled electric power supply monopoly -- a monolith which, he said, is now set to be thrown open to investors through a range of stock offerings.  beyond projecting their country's power in a world that needs its energy supplies, delegation members spent much of their time defending russia against charges that it was not attuned to western ideals.  russian ministers, including first deputy prime minister medvedev, insisted that in squeezing belarus-- as it did in the past with ukraine -- gazprom, the state-controlled gas company, was merely bringing its prices closer into line with market prices (although those prices are not charged in russia itself).  ''there is nothing to be afraid of with gazprom,'' aleksandr medvedev, the deputy chairman of the company, said at a discussion here.  the first deputy prime minister, meanwhile, mounted a broader defense of russia's actions: ''we are not trying to push anyone to love russia. but we will not allow anyone to hurt russia.''  yet, at virtually every encounter with western reporters, academics and business analysts here, the russian leaders have encountered skepticism and the same series of questions: is russia a reliable trading partner? is its widening state control of the energy business a threat to russia's avowed commitment to free markets and to foreign investors doing business inside russia? is russian investment outside the country, equally, a threat to the steel, telecommunications and other companies that russian executives have sought to invest in? and has the kremlin moved back toward the centralized power that has dominated much of russia's history from the time of the czars to the communists?  at the dinner here friday night, joseph s. nye jr., a professor at the john f. kennedy school of government at harvard university, likened russian public life to a pendulum: ''under yeltsin, it swung too far toward chaos and it may have swung too much the other way.''  also at the dinner, timothy garton ash, a british historian from oxford university, raised a touchy issue, mentioning the name of anna politkovskaya, a reporter who was slain in moscow in october.  russia won praise, however, from some american executives whose companies do business in the country, like e. neville isdell, the chairman and chief executive of coca-cola. ''people do not understand how fundamentally changed russia is,'' he said. ''we need to help russia to project itself in a different way.'' he suggested that the russians themselves had not excelled in the spin doctor's arts. ''they have not always put the right face to the world,'' he said.  indeed, mr. chubais appeared to echo that thought in an interview when the subject of alexander v. litvinenko came up. mr. litvinenko, a former k.g.b. agent living in london who was killed in november, blamed the kremlin before he died for poisoning him with radioactive polonium 210.  mr. chubais ridiculed the idea that mr. putin might have had any interest in killing the former agent. but, he said, the very fact that mr. litvinenko's allegation had gained widespread currency ''means there's a very high level of mistrust of russia in the west'' -- a conclusion that seemed unlikely to change rapidly as a result of the gathering here.  memo from davos  