sports of the times   we fretted over this horse as if we all had a piece of him. the news media covered him like a saddle, from the moments after he shattered his right hind leg last spring in the preakness stakes. the country seemed to pause for reflection, and in many cases for prayer, with every bulletin from kennett square, pa., where barbaro was nursed for the past eight months and was finally euthanized yesterday in a medical surrender to the harsh realities of thoroughbred racing.  through it all, there has been this little voice in the back of my head wanting to know why.  horse's desperate struggle touched the nation  why this national obsession -- and, forgive me, but i don't quite know any other way to put it -- with a horse?  granted, not just any horse. barbaro was an unbeaten champion, runaway winner of the kentucky derby on that sacred first saturday of may.  it takes two minutes for the derby to do what ''american idol'' needs an entire television season for: to anoint an unknown. as always, there were more than a few contenders at churchill downs last spring, horses bred for greatness, unwittingly attached to tales of human frailty.  like barbaro's trainer, michael matz, who had survived a plane crash and rescued three children in the process, dan hendricks was a compelling story. after a motocross accident in july 2004 that left him with a crushed vertebra, paralyzed below the waist, believing his career was over, hendricks had made it to the derby for the first time, training one of the favorites, brother derek.  with his three sons and a few reporters crowded around his wheelchair, hendricks watched the race take shape on a small television in the tunnel connecting the paddock and the track. naturally, hendricks, the professional, recognized greatness first. he knew before the rest of us when the race was unofficially over.  ''he's running lights out,'' he said when the leader, barbaro, the horse brother derek had shared a barn with, the opponent hendricks had said he most feared, emerged.  but what if brother derek or another horse had won, if barbaro had broken down in the preakness after finishing tied for fourth in the derby, as did brother derek? would our hearts have gone out to an also-ran? if the answer is no, should we be proud of the fact that we worship and worry about winners more and especially those who have risen to the most venerated of occasions?  we cast them as special and then indulge ourselves in ascribing qualities to them that we wish for the gifted and talented to have. thus, the often-reported mantra these past few months that barbaro was staging a brave battle to live, outrunning the prohibitive odds against survival.  did we really know that? or was it more a case of the owners, roy and gretchen jackson, needing to believe it so they could continue investing -- emotionally and financially -- in this animal that had given them so much?  ''we just reached a point where it was going to be difficult for him to go on without pain,'' roy jackson said yesterday after the announcement. ''it was the right decision, it was the right thing to do.''  we didn't need a pet, much less a terminally ill one, to ache for the jacksons, in the way we would for a pedestrian run over a few feet ahead of us in the street. millions tuned in to watch barbaro go for the second leg of the triple crown, and instead we were forced to ponder the illusory notion of control or, worse, the random fragility of life.  it's been a while -- not counting seabiscuit's popular comeback in print and film -- since a racehorse galloped its way deep into the american psyche. if seabiscuit was the proletariat's four-legged champion of the great depression, barbaro's tragedy on the racetrack and months of struggle might have been steeped in symbolism as well.  maybe barbaro, as the fallen champion, was reminiscent of a country that was seriously wounded on 9/11 and has been wobbly ever since. maybe the horse's medical roller coaster struck a chord at a time when a great american city, ravaged by nature and neglect, still can't stand up. maybe only in such context can we rationalize such widespread passion for the health of a horse that has exceeded that for any single american soldier killed or wounded in iraq.  if you asked yourself any of these questions even as you read every twist and turn to the barbaro story, you weren't alone. why did we care, or care that much? was it an example of sports at its best, serving as a metaphor for life? hard to say for sure, only to acknowledge that until the news broke yesterday that barbaro was free of his burden, there was this inescapable feeling that -- to borrow from roy jackson -- it was the right thing to do.  sports of the times e-mail: hjaraton@nytimes.com  