now and then | jan. 21-27   president bush  now -- with polls showing his approval rating hovering at around 30 percent, president bush pleaded with congress in his state of the union address to give his plan to send more troops to iraq ''a chance to work.''  then -- the president mentioned iraq 34 times, the most ever in his seven state of the union addresses. mr. bush first brought up iraq in his annual report in 2002, referring to it twice, including as part of ''an axis of evil'' with north korea and iran. at the time, 85 percent of americans approved of his job performance. a year later, the united states invaded, and today, only jimmy carter and richard nixon have posted worse poll ratings in the last 35 years.  viagra  now -- an aids group sued pfizer, the maker of viagra, saying the company's marketing of the drug has led to an increase in sexually transmitted diseases.  then -- viagra was originally intended to alleviate angina. among its side effects, said some men who took it, were erections. the rest is history. viagra, approved by the f.d.a. in 1998 to treat impotence, has earned billions for pfizer. now the aids health care foundation contends that the drug company markets the pill as a performance enhancer to men who don't need it. pfizer, which is considering an over-the-counter version of the drug, says that claim is baseless.  a long-ago murder  now -- eight men, including seven described as members of the radical black liberation army, were arrested on charges of murdering a san francisco police officer in 1971.  then -- the 60s had ended, but revolution was still in the air. the black liberation army, thought to be a splinter group of the black panthers, was committed to an ''armed struggle'' to liberate blacks, as authorities described it. on an august night 35 years ago, the police say, an attack team stormed a police station and killed sgt. john v. young with a shotgun blast. new, unspecified evidence led to the arrest of the men, who include a janitor, job counselor and youth baseball coach.  ford motor company  now -- ford reported that it lost $12.7 billion in 2006, its worst year ever, with its greatest losses in north america.  then -- not so long ago, ford seemed to be the one detroit auto company with an answer for japanese competition with its profitable sport utility vehicles and f-series pickups. but high gasoline prices, quality problems and the lack of fuel-efficient small cars have sent ford's sales plummeting. toyota may unseat the company this year as the no. 2 carmaker in the american market. ford is trying to save itself. a new chief executive is at the helm, and its ''way forward'' plan calls for eliminating 44,000 jobs and closing 16 plants by 2008.  bill parcells  now -- bill parcells retired from coaching, giving up a $5 million salary and leaving the dallas cowboys after four seasons without a postseason victory.  then -- mr. parcells won two super bowls with the new york giants and has a record of 183-138-1, the ninth-most victories in n.f.l. history. but that understates matters. as michael lewis noted recently in play, a new york times magazine, he is the only n.f.l. coach to take four different teams -- all losers before he arrived -- to the playoffs. ''no n.f.l. coach has ever proven himself so clearly to be a device for turning a losing team into a winning one,'' mr. lewis wrote.  the week  