square feet: interview with scott latham; putting it together: the artist as deal maker   scott latham is one of the country's highest-paid commercial real estate brokers. but in the early 1980s, he was a struggling artist, exhibiting his paintings -- when he was lucky -- alongside more prominent artists like keith haring or jean-michel basquiat in group shows.  it was a difficult lifestyle, with mr. latham's meals consisting mainly of a couple of shish kebabs a day bought from a cart below the loft he shared with several roommates in the chelsea neighborhood of manhattan. to supplement his income, he worked intermittently as a commercial fisherman from canada to the carolinas.  his life would change forever one day in 1984, while he was scouring a newspaper for more part-time work and came across a help-wanted ad from wishnow, steinfeld & goldstein for selling commercial property in washington heights, harlem and the bronx.  ''i could get up early and paint, and then go into the office and work for a few hours, and then leave before the end of the day to go to the gallery openings,'' said mr. latham, who graduated from the rhode island school of design in 1981.  eventually, though, he found himself spending more time showing office buildings than artwork, until he decided to focus on real estate full time and joined cushman & wakefield's financial services group in 1987. he served as an executive director at eastern consolidated from 1991 to 1995, followed by a stint leading the new york capital markets team at cb richard ellis. he rejoined cushman & wakefield in 2002.  today he and his team of brokers at cushman & wakefield are involved in some of the most notable building sales around. his team's biggest transaction was just last month: the sale of 666 fifth avenue for $1.8 billion. in 2005, the group worked on the $1.72 billion sale of the metlife building at 200 park avenue.  mr. latham, now 48 and an executive director at the company, says his past work life helped to build character as well as guide his approach to real estate today.  ''if you're going out fishing, you don't want to catch the little things,'' he said. ''you want to catch something bigger and bigger, because it's satisfying. and it's more challenging.''  colleagues and associates say they think that mr. latham brings rare abilities to the job.  ''he's got a great personality, and i'm sure that the eclectic experiences that he's had in his life are part of that,'' said rob speyer, a senior managing director at tishman speyer properties. tishman sold 666 fifth avenue in partnership with pramerica property funds to kushner properties with mr. latham's assistance.  richard baxter, another executive director at cushman & wakefield, who has known mr. latham for a decade and worked with him for the last three years, says his colleague ''knows where to go to fish, and that's the ability that scott brings that very few brokers have.''  but it is the experience of creating a deal, not just ushering one along, that excites mr. latham. he said he has been particularly proud of some of his smaller building sales handled ''off market,'' meaning that the property was never listed for sale.  mr. latham handled such a transaction in 2004 with the $675 million sale of the landmark plaza hotel. he said that he recognized that the owners of the plaza at the time, a partnership of prince alwaleed bin talal of saudi arabia and millennium & copthorne hotels, might be willing to sell the hotel if the right offer came along. he then approached el-ad properties, a company specializing in condominium conversions. that same year, in fact, mr. latham had convinced the owner of the gift building at 225 fifth avenue, green stamp america of japan, to sell to el-ad properties.  mr. latham says the creation of a real estate deal is ''a similar process to creating artwork.''  ''you have an idea, and you work with it, and the idea talks back to you,'' he said. ''eventually, it evolves into whatever the piece of art is at the end of the creative process.''  both sales garnered accolades from competitors of mr. latham, like craig evans, a senior managing director in institutional investment sales at the brokerage firm colliers abr. mr. evans said he admired the ''agility'' of mr. latham and his team in closing the plaza deal.  in a more conventional transaction in december, mr. latham represented the museum of modern art in a sale of its last vacant parcel in midtown manhattan to the houston-based developer gerald d. hines. the land is anticipated to sell for more than $250 million, mr. latham said. as part of the deal, mr. hines agreed to create a building on west 54th street that will include space for the adjoining museum to house painting and sculpture galleries and to add offices, according to mr. latham. he said the rest of the new building could become condos or a hotel.  ''weird that after so many years, out of all the gin joints in town, i'm doing business with moma,'' mr. latham said. ''with my background in art, it's something very satisfying.''  mr. latham said he would someday like to return to his artwork, which, before he began focusing on real estate, had evolved from painting to collage constructions to sculpture carved out of found wood with a chainsaw. he said much of his work was influenced in mexico by the colorful art of muralists and indigenous artists, whom he was first exposed to when he lived in mexico city as a child.  but there are other forces tugging at mr. latham. a brand new art studio sits, with a dozen stretched canvases, all blank, at a second home he carefully redeveloped in a rhode island beach community with his wife, julie, five years ago.  mr. latham said he became so obsessed by the aesthetic process of rebuilding the home that property development might become a future career path. mr. latham says he believes that the large amounts of capital available for real estate investment in new york city are creating an office market where trophy office buildings like the hearst tower will trade more like pieces of art than real estate commodities.  ''you're going to see that office market break away from the real estate market as a whole and react more like the art market,'' he said. ''you're going to have a line of people who want to own that asset because of what it is, not for how much money it can make them.''  square feet | interview with scott latham  