citigroup and cnbc cozy up   commerce runs on the favor bank. that is simply how things work when the body shop owner notices that your car is running a little loud and sends you to his pal ricky the muffler guy, or when big drug companies play nice with friendly doctors. when it comes to business, it's a natural reflex to favor those who favor us.  it happens in journalism, too, no matter what anyone tells you. from the first school board meeting a young reporter covers, she learns to ally herself with the faction that has the interests of the citizenry at heart (in her estimation) and tilt that way for articles and sources. valuable tips soon follow, along with friendly articles, and if one of her sources steps in it, well, we're a little short on space today anyway.  buy, sell, trade -- journalism is one more form of commerce. and when the favor bank goes airborne, it captures the imagination in a new way. like $6,000 shower curtains and the nickname kenny boy, the corporate jet lives large in the public imagination.  which brings us to the question: why was maria bartiromo, the popular anchor on the business news channel cnbc, making command appearances at the request of citigroup -- and many other companies -- that sit dead center in ms. bartiromo's beat as the daily host of ''closing bell with maria bartiromo'' and the host of ''the wall street journal report with maria bartiromo,'' a nationally syndicated television show?  on the surface, these kinds of appearances at corporate events -- sponsored by the companies she covers -- would be considered unsightly, if not unethical, by many in her chosen field. but perhaps nobody would have noticed if a corporate jet wasn't involved.  the question arose last week when todd s. thomson, chief of citigroup's wealth management unit, lost his job after it was revealed that in addition to the usual profligate expenses, he spent way too much time and money scrambling the jets for ms. bartiromo.  she had attended a number of client functions at mr. thomson's request -- she was trotted out like bill murray at a celebrity golf tournament -- most notably during a trip last year in which other citigroup executives were bumped from a plane bound home from the far east while mr. thomson and ms. bartiromo flew back together.  this should not be about gender or sex. many successful journalists who happen to be women are subject to scrutiny in a way that their male counterparts never are. the real issue is professional conduct -- on all sides.  although they would say nothing beyond a corporate statement, cnbc officials insisted that each trip had been vetted for legal and ethics implications, and that cnbc paid for ms. bartiromo's flight, depending on how you view a payment in the thousands -- the going commercial fare -- for a seat on a corporate jet that is worth tens of thousands. just file the asia trip under ''source development,'' flip them a couple thousand to cover a token commercial fare, and kick back with the big boys.  cnbc is probably standing by its reporter because there is nothing factual to indicate that she did anything the company did not endorse. quite the contrary. cnbc told the new york times that ms. bartiromo had made 46 promotional appearances on behalf of the cable news channel, three of those for citigroup.  while she wasn't paid for any of these appearances, it is clear from those numbers that apart from her duties as host, ms. bartiromo is a fundamental part of the marketing strategy of the cable news channel.  no wonder. when it comes to the favor bank, ms. bartiromo possesses a rarefied commodity, the kind of celebrity that even the most wizened, moneyed investor can't resist. everyone wants to tell the boys back home that he had dinner with ''the money honey,'' as she has come to be known (and a phrase that, according to the blog tv newser, she trademarked on jan. 16).  besides, like lou dobbs at cnn, a newsman who uses much of his airtime to be one of the nation's chief advocates for immigration reform, ms. bartiromo is too big to fail. cnbc is riding a comeback, and ms. bartiromo is the unchallenged public face of the cable news channel. ask the average joe daytrader about cnbc, a cable channel with its share of obscure personalities and low-rated programs, and he will quickly invoke ms. bartiromo.  and in case cnbc forgets her value, the news corporation, owner of fox news, continues to quietly develop its own financial news channel. a splashy acquisition like ms. bartiromo might be just the thing a fox business news channel needs to jump in the game, and odds are fox executives would not spend a lot of time worrying about whose jet she was on last year -- or in the years to come.  when the thomson-bartiromo story broke, officials at cnbc issued a reflexive defense of its biggest star, saying, ''maria bartiromo is one of the most prolific and well-respected financial journalists in the industry, who works tirelessly around the world in the service of business journalism.''  yesterday the company added a further statement: ''maria bartiromo's journalistic integrity was never compromised nor would she or cnbc allow it to be. any implication to the contrary is inaccurate.''  hyperbole aside, the statement is true as far as it goes. but it ignores the reality that there is an implicit contract at play here. by making huge advertising buys on cnbc, citigroup obtained access to its biggest star. clearly, an exchange of brands was under way.  cnbc has positioned itself as an adjunct to business, the glowing friend in the corner with the sound off and a ticker at the bottom. in that respect, cnbc has roughly the same relationship to wall street that ''entertainment tonight'' has to hollywood: boosterish, gossipy and more than a little starry-eyed.  it is companion media rather than the source of oversight or rigorous coverage that you might expect from, say, the wall street journal. by demonstrating that it was able to deliver ms. bartiromo for important functions, citigroup was able to use her fame as an adjunct to its marketing. it didn't own her so much as rent her through its ongoing advertising on cnbc.  if there's a price to be paid, the bill will be sent to ms. bartiromo's reputation. after all, what are all those day traders going to think the next time she opens her show with a look at citigroup? it may be hard to keep their minds on their ''trade'' buttons.  all that said, it's hard to blame ms. bartiromo for going native and taking a seat on the corporate jet. after all, the two corporate entities that traded her like a joe dimaggio rookie card both make millions. why should she have to fly coach? isn't that how the favor bank is supposed to work in the first place?  the media equation  