cheney and critics: no love lost   to the editor:  re ''the bait-and-switch white house'' (editorial, jan. 27):  when vice president dick cheney was asked what his response would be concerning any vote in congress that expressed disapproval of white house policies in iraq, he replied, ''it won't stop us.''  what i want to know is, who is ''us''?  if it's not the american electorate or the united states congress, which was elected to represent american citizens, who is it?  or maybe the question should be, who is this administration and what has it done with my country?  stephanie nicholas acquadro  westfield, n.j., jan. 27, 2007  to the editor:  regarding iraq, vice president dick cheney said the biggest threat is that americans may not ''have the stomach for the fight.'' one has to wonder if he feels that the failure in vietnam was merely a result of the american people's not having ''the stomach'' for 10 years of combat and 58,000 american dead.  in classic republicanspeak, mr. cheney obfuscates the premise of why we are at war and narrows the argument to a misplaced matter of courage.  the nauseating irony of someone who did not have the ''stomach'' to go to war himself accusing the rest of the country of the same failing serves to reveal the extent to which this conflict is without true rationale.  pier giacalone  ridgewood, queens, jan. 27, 2007  to the editor:  your editorial asks a good question: ''does the vice president simply feel free to cut the ground out from under mr. bush?''  it helps to remember that in 2000, after heading up the search for a running mate, dick cheney looked in the mirror and picked himself. why would a self-selected vice president on a ticket that lost the popular vote defer to the popular will or even the judgment of his president?  robert stein  weston, conn., jan. 27, 2007  to the editor:  vice president dick cheney defends a war that he started without iraqi provocation and that continues without the possibility of american victory not because he is ''delusional,'' as maureen dowd says (''daffy does doom,'' column, jan. 27), but because the war itself serves his interests and the interests of his constituents.  dick cheney has spent his life working for military suppliers, american energy corporations and the republican party. the war has earned billions of dollars for his former employer, halliburton, disrupted the supplies of foreign oil and allowed his party to rise to unprecedented power.  during this time the power of the executive branch of government grew, and mr. cheney, at the center, exercised more influence over the nation than any vice president in united states history.  this is not ''perversity.'' it is the work of a mercilessly effective politician.  gabriel brownstein  brooklyn, jan. 27, 2007  to the editor:  maureen dowd tells us that president bush and vice president dick cheney rushed into ''a war halfway around the world for no reason.'' actually, they had a very good reason.  they invaded iraq in march 2003 because they deduced that being at war with a country americans didn't like (led by a despised dictator) would provide their administration with the best chance of getting re-elected the following year.  and guess what? they were right.  norman charles  new york, jan. 30, 2007  