with quad, lysacek gives u.s. men a lift   with his spectacular performance in the long program at the united states figure skating championships on saturday night, evan lysacek did far more than wow a crowd and a set of judges to win a national title. he helped the men's field upstage the women's, a rarity in a sport in which tiny girls generally dominate the spotlight.  by landing a quad jump for the first time and posting the third-highest score ever under the sport's new judging system, lysacek became a serious threat to win at the world championships in march in tokyo. (no american man has won a world title since todd eldredge in 1996.)  to that, the newly confident lysacek said, ''bring it on.''  the american women are not shrinking from the scene, and kimmie meissner, 17, may well successfully defend her surprising world championship from a year ago. but meissner's victory at the national championships was not close to the level of lysacek's. meissner needed emily hughes to fall midway through her long program to hold on for victory.  and without the veteran skaters sasha cohen and michelle kwan -- who are sitting out competition, at least for this season -- the united states women's team heads to tokyo with little in the way of international swagger.  but lysacek, 21, has given the men a shot of adrenaline. until saturday, he had labored to topple the three-time united states champion johnny weir at nationals, although he has been more successful than weir internationally, winning bronze medals at the past two world championships.  but even lysacek said he had not been a legitimate contender, watching the skating of evgeni plushenko of russia and stéphane lambiel of switzerland while in awe.  ''it's kind of like, honestly, i don't really know what i'm doing,'' lysacek said. ''i'm out there thinking maybe this will work, maybe this will get me some points. so i was trying to learn, trying to learn from evgeni plushenko, trying to learn from the swiss guy, lambiel, all these guys who have been doing it longer than me.''  neither plushenko nor lambiel will compete at the world championships, having taken the post-olympic year off. the current world leader is brian joubert of france.  the biggest hurdle lysacek has had to clear is the quad jump, which is considered a necessity for winning at the worlds or at the olympics. joubert has done as many as three in a program. lysacek attempted one in last year's world championships, but he two-footed the landing.  at nationals, he not only landed it cleanly in his long program, but he also did it in combination with a triple toe loop.  now that lysacek has the quad in his arsenal, he says he feels confident he can defeat joubert, who is less than graceful between his huge jumps.  ''i think that he has sort of dominated international skating this season, but only because i think it's sort of a transitional period for a lot of countries and he came out like gangbusters and he's been doing the quad for probably four seasons,'' lysacek said. ''i know i have scored much higher than him in presentation almost every time we've competed against each other. there are areas of my skating that are stronger than his.''  lysacek's success with the quad has pushed weir to accomplish one. he two-footed the landing on his attempt while finishing third saturday night, but he said he was encouraged.  ''going into it, i wasn't sure: should i do a triple, should i do a flourish, should i do a biellmann, what should i do?'' weir said. ''and i went for the quad and ended up on my feet and that was good.''  ryan bradley did not attempt a quad in his second-place performance, but said he hoped to add it soon as well.  bradley, 23, arrived relatively late to the top tier of american men -- finishing eighth at nationals last year and nearly quitting in discouragement a few years ago. but he is an energetic crowd-pleaser, and he will see how well that style goes over with international judges for the first time in tokyo.  lysacek, a known quantity internationally, is eager to raise his profile nationally and may borrow a bit of glamour from his new girlfriend, the ice dancer tanith belbin. she and ben agosto won a silver medal in last year's olympics and won their fourth national title here.  but lysacek's first title was the talk of the championships. even the women had to step aside.  figure skating  