tbr: inside the list   pop/lit: what would you rather write this year, if you could: a great, lasting pop song or a strong but unmemorable novel? that question came up at dinner, in a loud downtown restaurant, about a decade ago. i was there, as were two novelists: one has gone on to win major awards and become well known, the other hasn't but deserves to. it was late; there were wine bottles; you could still smoke inside. i'd thrown out the question after hearing something good -- was it ''(don't go back to) rockville''? -- on the sound system. but these guys went at the question as if their lives depended on it. the debate quickly ratcheted up from the fundamental worth of, say, brian wilson's work versus j. d. salinger's to beethoven's versus tolstoy's. i can't remember who won. but punches were on the verge of being thrown. and i dimly recall thinking i should hide the pointy silverware.  brain on music: why is music so potent, anyway? two recent books that have flirted with making this list -- daniel j. levitin's ''this is your brain on music'' and a paperback called ''rock the sat'' -- skulk around that question. levitin's is a real, and very readable, book. he's a former music producer (chris isaak, blue oyster cult) who runs the laboratory for musical perception, cognition and expertise at mcgill university. but the people behind ''rock the sat'' are putting his ideas into action, promising teenagers they can ''trick your brain into learning vocab while listening to slamming music.'' cole porter, this ain't. (''lately i feel salacious / lecherous, lascivious.'') but i bet it works.  do this at home: the oxford american may be the liveliest literary magazine in america, and 2007 will bring its 10th annual ''southern music'' issue. these arrive with cds so smart and eclectic they probably belong in the smithsonian. you can't buy most of the back issues anymore, and a lot of the songs aren't easily available anywhere else. but after combing through my set of these things, i realized you can approximate the sublime buzz they put in your head. here's a track list, culled from earlier oxford american cds (all songs available on itunes): ''oxford town,'' by bob dylan; ''last kind word blues,'' by geechie wiley; ''he's got you,'' by dean martin; ''i love you,'' by asie payton; ''99 '' by dorothy love coates; ''i take it on home,'' by charlie rich; ''down to the well,'' by kevin gordon and lucinda williams; ''grits ain't groceries,'' by little milton; ''it sure was better back then,'' by steve forbert; ''the good and the bad,'' by ted hawkins; ''this room for rent,'' by sammi smith; ''matthew 7:7,'' by graceland mccollough tigers; ''ring of fire,'' by earl scruggs with billy bob thornton; ''fish ain't bitin','' by corey harris; ''how long do i have to wait for you,'' by sharon jones; ''your lips,'' by olu dara; ''single again,'' by gary stewart; ''is you is or is you ain't my baby,'' by louis jordan; ''leaving loachapoka,'' by marshall chapman; ''goodnight moon,'' by will kimbrough. thank them, not me. and it's not too late to subscribe in time to get this year's music issue.  dwight garner  tbr  