falling in love with a house and its history   when it comes to affairs of the heart, robert romano's newest romance is proving to be his most expensive. the object of his affection -- his wife, regina, describes it as an obsession -- is the couple's 1920s colonial style home, a house where norman rockwell lived and painted many memorable covers for the saturday evening post.  in all, the artist lived here for 23 years, 13 of them on lord kitchener road in the north end, in a tidy colonial with white shingles and a slate roof. it cost mr. and mrs. romano $1.6 million to buy and $500,000 to restore, so far -- and their work has just begun.  special homes and intense feelings often go together, according to bruce macdonald, an architectural preservationist from tarrytown, who said mr. romano is not alone in falling in love with a house.  even when a structure is not serving as a museum or listed on a historic register, owners are sometimes moved to honor its original design or history, mr. macdonald said. his firm, ashwood restoration, is overseeing the rehabilitation of the jay mansion in rye, a greek revival house built in the 1850s by peter augustus jay, the son of john jay, the first chief justice of the united states supreme court.  ''the rockwell house is a notable building, and just because it doesn't have a landmark designation now doesn't mean it won't someday,'' said mr. macdonald, who has been hired by mr. and mrs. romano as a consultant for the section of the house that was the artist's studio.  obtaining landmark status, however, often entails returning parts of a building to their original state. and although the new owners are intent on faithfully restoring sections of the rockwell home, they have not yet decided how much to do and whether to apply for such a designation.  for the romanos, longtime new rochelle residents, the story of their relationship to this rockwell home -- during his lifetime, the artist also lived in vermont and massachusetts -- began two years ago.  to gain more space for entertaining, the couple, who have two children -- a daughter, tessa, 19, who is a college student, and a son, andrew, 25, who lives at home -- had drawn up plans to expand their previous home. ''we had been working for six months with an architect,'' said mr. romano, 55, a corporate lawyer in manhattan. ''but then one sunday afternoon we saw this house, and we couldn't resist it because it had had so much light and so much history.''  they knew the property had belonged to rockwell -- tessa had once done a school project about him -- and they liked his work. but it was the details of the house itself that initially won them over.  the 5,300-square-foot two-story home, which has four bedrooms and four and a half baths, is in an established neighborhood of older tudors and colonials, where houses have recently sold for $869,000 to around $2 million, according to kathleen mcateer, the manager of century 21 wolff in new rochelle.  ''we moved here in november 2005,'' mr. romano said, pointing around the artist's studio, ''and as you can see, we've been in some form of renovation and reconstruction ever since. everything in this house has turned out to be a big project.''  the costly slate roof on the house had to be replaced, and the aluminum siding (which the couple considered out of character with the residence of a painter of homespun american scenes) was torn away, revealing the original, but rotting, shingles, which also had to be replaced.  window frames around the house were in various states of decay. and in the artist's studio, a sill underneath the largest window, which allowed the north light to flow in, was rotting.  ''my contractor kept saying, 'tear the place down!' '' mr. romano said. ''he said it would be cheaper and less trouble. and maybe he's right, but that's not what we're doing.''  mr. romano has spent many hours researching the history of the house, and he and his wife say they plan to continue restoring whatever they can afford to do.  explaining why owners sometimes lose their heads over a house, audra brecher, a preservation specialist for stephen tilly architect in dobbs ferry, said: ''often, people are captivated by living in a famous person's home. our buildings tell us stories, and people have romantic notions about the past.''  researching the architecture of southern westchester during the early part of the 20th century, mr. and mrs. romano unearthed a 1926 article in good housekeeping magazine about their house. from the text and photos, mr. romano was able to design new garage doors that matched the originals.  to replace the rotting sill in the studio, the large window above it had to be broken, but the romanos replaced it with a window that looks the same, although the new glass is insulated.  in the main part of the house, the large brass lock on the front door had long been broken, workable only from the inside. the hardware was repaired and the brass restored by accurate lock in stamford, conn.  leaving as much in place as possible in the studio -- including the large brick hearth and the wagon wheel chandelier -- mr. and mrs. romano will turn mr. rockwell's former quarters into a media room.  aside from all the high-minded reasons for buying this house, mr. romano admits to another consideration: sitting unplugged in his living room is a four-piece set of high-powered cherry-wood bowers & wilkins speakers designed to be used in home media centers.  as mrs. romano remembers it: ''for 15 years, i wanted to move to a bigger home, and my husband always resisted. then, when he bought the speakers, which were too loud for our old house, i told him we had to either move to a larger place or get rid of them.''  someday, when all of the work is completed in the studio, mr. romano said, he will finally plug in the speakers, pull down a screen, sink into a comfortable chair and experience some of his favorite films in their full glory.  in the region | westchester  