oh, the rivalry! and that's off the field.   the happy couple, indianapolis colts fans, bounded into the tattoo shop on the main square of this small city, unaware they had just crossed into enemy territory.  ''we're getting married,'' ruben cantu exclaimed with his fiancée, maranda riley, at his side. soon, wedding talk turned to super bowl talk, as so much conversation here does these days.  little did mr. cantu and ms. riley know that despite his indiana address, the shop's owner, tim gross, professes undying allegiance to the chicago bears, the colts' opposition in super bowl xli this sunday.  ''so, congratulations,'' mr. gross told them. ''now get out.''  where chicago bears territory and indianapolis colts territory collide, as they often do here, it is hard for fans to know exactly where even their neighbors stand.  never have two teams so geographically close competed for professional football's ultimate prize. culturally, they are midwestern siblings. physically, they are but 180 miles apart along interstate 65. around here, sunday's game has become better known as the ''i-65 super bowl,'' a slugfest between neighboring states.  the north-south border between illinois and indiana extends from the lower tip of lake michigan to kentucky. the border between colts and bears territory is less clear, but many fans agree it runs right through this town in northwest indiana. ''we are torn, we really are,'' said the mayor, herbert arihood.  the dividing line is as fluid as it is invisible, snaking at odd angles through homes, restaurants, offices and bars, turning husband against wife, brother against sister, shop owner against customer.  ''you're either one or the other,'' mr. arihood said. ''in my position i have to retain neutrality, and it's hard to do, because the people really like their football.''  only four other super bowls have been played by teams within geographic proximity, none as close as the bears and the colts. in 1991, the new york giants met the buffalo bills, whose home is roughly 300 miles from giants stadium. in 1995, the san diego chargers played the 49ers, from san francisco, about 500 miles north. and in 2000, the st. louis rams tussled with the tennessee titans, who play in nashville, about 300 miles away. the closest up to now was super bowl iii, which was between the new york jets and the colts, who, back in 1969, were based in baltimore, 190 miles away.  ''it's like the planets aligned in a weird way and we got what we'd been hoping for for years,'' said shane crownover, an artist in the tattoo shop who defended mr. cantu and ms. riley by announcing, ''hey, i'm for the colts, too.''  that is when the boss, mr. gross, who is by all accounts a pleasant man when not talking football, made an announcement of his own: ''anybody who doesn't want the bears to win is fired!''  mr. crownover was undeterred, saying he was used to a house divided. his wife roots for the bears.  ''it's totally unbelievable,'' he said. ''you couldn't ask for a more exciting game.''  for some people, it is also a welcome bit of what they say is unaccustomed attention for the midwest and its teams. ''it's always the yankees and the lakers; i'm so tired of it,'' said george kuhel, a retired electric company manager from st. john. ''the media just pounds on the east coast and the west coast, and we never get our credit due even though we play great ball.''  david b. klenosky, an associate professor at purdue university in west lafayette, agreed, saying: ''this is good for a change, equity in sports. spread the wealth around.''  in ordinary times, illinois and indiana, which share a good bit of commuter traffic and extended family ties, are not known as antagonists.  but when it comes to football, ''we're talking two neighboring states but two different reputations and styles,'' said robert p. schmuhl, the chairman of the american studies department at the university of notre dame, near south bend.  the bears, from the city of big shoulders, are a rough and tough team, not afraid to play in a blizzard. they are known for their strong defense. the colts are an offensive powerhouse led by one of the league's marquee players, the quarterback peyton manning.  the colts have star power. the bears have grit.  ''but when you get down to brass tacks,'' dr. schmuhl said, ''there's one winner, and fans recognize that.''  the colts' fortunes began to rise just as the bears were in a dry spell in the 1990s. some midwestern fans were looking for a winning team and drifted toward indianapolis. on the other hand, many older football fans in indiana feel strong ties to the bears because the team practiced at st. joseph's college in rensselaer from 1944 to 1974.  and some fans will be content no matter who wins.  over dinner in a mexican restaurant, marie perez said that she and her family, bears fans all, would ''be bummed not to win.''  ''but we would also say, hey, it's the colts,'' ms. perez said. ''they're so close, it's really o.k.''  rensselaer journal  