the endlessly maddening (for liberals) case of ralph nader   early in the documentary ''an unreasonable man,'' it is noted that ralph nader is more likely to be remembered for his 2000 presidential campaign than for the decades of advocacy that preceded it. and the movie, an admiring but hardly uncritical portrait of mr. nader, confirms this suspicion by devoting nearly half of its more than two-hour running time to the 2000 election and its aftermath.  that event seems at once irrelevant and urgent, lost in the mists of pre-9/11 history and painfully topical. certainly the passage of time has not cooled tempers or settled arguments. and so, much of the second half of ''an unreasonable man,'' directed by steve skrovan and henriette mantel (a former associate of mr. nader, she is also interviewed on camera), consists of talking heads talking past one another.  to liberal media critics like eric alterman and todd gitlin, mr. nader is ''self-deluded,'' ''intellectually dishonest,'' a ''megalomaniac'' and worse. his moral vanity, in their view (which is hardly theirs alone), cost al gore a decisive margin of victory over george w. bush. spoiling it for the democrats, mr. nader's detractors (among them some former allies) contend, was his intention all along.  this charge is disputed by members of his campaign staff, who also repeat his central claim that the republicans and the democrats are basically a two-headed corporate oligarchy, rather than genuinely distinct political forces.  the argument goes in circles, and while it makes for interesting, vexing viewing, it also throws the film somewhat off balance. the family quarrel on the american left that mr. nader's candidacy continues to provoke threatens to overshadow the larger debates that his earlier career as a consumer advocate placed at the center of american civic life. these have to do with the power of corporations, the regulatory authority of government and the limits of the free market -- issues that have hardly faded away, and that aren't readily summed up in ''did so!''/''did not!'' back-and-forthing.  in promotional materials, ''an unreasonable man'' has the ungainly tagline ''ralph nader: how do you define a legacy?'' -- a question that mr. nader insists does not concern him in the least. while giving him and his supporters ample time to justify his run for the presidency, the filmmakers also seek to balance the historical ledger. alongside those 97,000 contentious florida votes, they suggest, must be reckoned the hundreds of thousands of lives saved by improvements in automobile safety, environmental protections and safeguards on consumer products, causes mr. nader and his colleagues championed for years.  his impact on these areas of modern life is the focus of the movie's riveting first hour, which is as much the biography of a movement as the story of a single man. not that there is much of a distinction: from the mid-1960s on, mr. nader's cause was his life. his exposé of the ''designed-in'' dangers of the chevrolet corvair, published first in the new republic (in articles written by james ridgeway) and later in ''unsafe at any speed'' were followed by congressional hearings that brought both fame and influence. money from a settlement with general motors -- which had hired private detectives to snoop around mr. nader's personal life, something even his close associates doubt exists -- became the seed for future advocacy and activism.  mr. nader attracted a cadre of young idealists whose approach to politics was both a product of the times and a departure from it. the point, as they saw it, was not to overthrow the system, but rather to bring it into line with its stated principles, a goal that was rational rather than romantic and pursued by means of research and reporting rather than demonstrations or direct actions.  for a while, especially during the carter administration, mr. nader's commitment to using the legal system and the apparatus of government to check the influence of corporations brought him into alliance with the democratic party. his subsequent entry into electoral politics is presented in the movie, persuasively enough, as a result of the fraying of this concord. some degree of disappointment was probably inevitable. for better or for worse, the engine of democracy is compromise, and mr. nader is uncompromising to the very core of his being.  and ''an unreasonable man,'' a conventional collage of archival clips and retrospective interviews, works hard to do him justice. its ideological leanings are evident and unsurprising, but more screen time for mr. nader's pre-2000 (or pre-post-2000) adversaries would have made a richer film. as it is, the filmmakers and their interlocutors make much of mr. nader's popularity with the american public in the 1970s, but seem unable to acknowledge that, in the next decade, much of that same public embraced ronald reagan, whose ascendancy is treated, with wearying predictability, as the result of elite conspiracy and public delusion.  the standoff over the 2000 presidential election is handled with a better feel for unresolved tensions and contradictions. to these must be added a curious and telling footnote. ''an unreasonable man'' was shown at the 2006 sundance film festival, alongside another documentary featuring mr. gore, davis guggenheim's ''inconvenient truth.'' that movie, now contending for an academy award, is almost entirely about the challenges of the future. this one, for all its invocations of the progressive spirit, concerns itself mainly with the battles of the past.  an unreasonable man  opens today in manhattan and on video on demand.  written and directed by henriette mantel and steve skrovan; directors of photography, mark raker, leigh wilson, john chater, matt davis, steve elkins, melissa donovan and sandra chandler; edited by alexis provost and beth gallagher; music by joe kraemer; produced by kevin o'donnell; released by ifc first take and red envelope entertainment. at the ifc center, 323 avenue of the americas, at third street, greenwich village. running time: 122 minutes. this film is not rated.  film review  