from tech workers to nurses, an employee's market   unemployment is low and the job market is strong, according to surveys. but just where are the jobs in 2007?  as the population ages, jobs continue to go wanting in health care. and as more products and services go digital, competition for information technology workers is intense. demand is also increasing for workers in the sales, clerical, education, financial services, accounting and customer service categories.  ''unemployment is at a historically low level,'' said brent rasmussen, chief operating officer at careerbuilder.com, an online job site that surveyed employers about where they expected to add jobs this year. ''i think in 2007 we'll see steady growth, much more of an employee market.''  and nearly half the employers surveyed said they expected to increase initial salary offers to new employees -- about one-sixth of those by 5 percent or more.  with baby boomers starting to retire and shortages of skilled workers in some areas, demand is expected to result in not only higher salaries, but also in more career advancement and opportunities for flexible work environments.  mr. rasmussen noted that 40 percent of the more than 2,600 employers surveyed for his company by harris interactive currently had job openings for which they could not find qualified candidates.  competition is particularly fierce for nurses, with thousands of openings that paid $51,000, on average, in 2006. tenet healthcare, for example, currently has about 4,000 nursing positions open.  ''the reality is there are more nursing positions in this country than there are qualified nurses,'' said carol maxwell, senior director of executive recruiting for tenet, which is based in dallas and owns 64 hospitals in 12 states.  ''we are trying new strategies every day to recruit and retain our employees,'' ms. maxwell said.  that means reaching out to people looking for second careers and offering training to help them refocus their skills.  demand for health care workers stretches beyond nursing into a number of areas like pharmacology, radiology and many types of therapy, including physical and occupational. salaries for available jobs in the field vary significantly. for example, according to the bureau of labor statistics, a midrange salary for a pharmacy aide is about $18,900 while a pharmacist may make more than $89,000 a year.  according to the labor department, the fastest-growing occupations in the next seven years will be in health and technology. the department, which makes its predictions every 10 years, projected in 2004 that the biggest growth rate would be in the number of home health aides -- up 56 percent, to 974,000, by 2014. a group with much higher pay, network systems and data communications analysts, was expected to grow by 55 percent, to 357,000. next were medical assistants, physician assistants, computer software engineers, physical therapist assistants and dental hygienists.  ''the fastest-growing jobs are dominated by a lot of technical level occupations that one can qualify for with limited post-secondary education,'' said jon sargent, an occupational outlook economist with the bureau of labor statistics. ''in this day and age of expensive education, they represent affordable opportunities to get into a reasonably well-paying occupation in high demand.''  after the technology boom and bust of the late 1990s and early 2000, information technology jobs have rebounded, and salaries are increasing along with opportunities.  ''i get at least one call a month from a recruiter outside of my own firm trying to fill a job,'' said rachelle turner, a technical writer and trainer who works for robert half technology, a recruitment and staffing firm in menlo park, calif., specializing in placement of technology professionals.  ''right now, based on my experience, it's an employee's market. there are more jobs than there have been in a very long time,'' she said. ''people who are good, who have kept their skills sharp, generally don't stay available very long.''  a survey conducted for robert half on i.t. hiring found that 16 percent of 1,400 chief information officers planned to add technical staff in the first three months of the year. only 2 percent said they were planning to cut back.  another robert half survey also found that the average starting salary for technology professionals would increase 2.8 percent in 2007, while starting pay for high-demand positions like software and web developers is expected to climb by at least 4 percent. salaries for chief information officers are expected to range from $120,250 to $200,000 in 2007; those for senior web developers, from $71,000 to $102,000; and those for entry-level help desk operators, from $27,500 to $37,000.  the technology skills in greatest demand, according to the survey, were windows administration, followed by network administration and database management. companies also said that web developers and programmers were highly prized, as well as people with network security and project management skills.  ''we're seeing companies investing in technology to make them better, faster and stronger,'' said katherine spencer lee, executive director of robert half technology. ''they need people who can help them get the technology to work.''  another high-growth area is energy, said nariman behravesh, chief economist at global insight, a consulting firm. refinery and drilling jobs have increased, he said, as have jobs in alternative and synthetic fuels. while the overall number of added jobs may be small when compared with other sectors, he said, the growth has been significant.  doors are also opening for executives, said chris ohlendorf, a senior partner at the mckinley group, an executive search firm based in minneapolis.  ''what's been missing over the past few years is the ability for managers and others in leadership positions to have a productive job search,'' mr. ohlendorf said. ''everybody was filling soldier roles.''  but recently, companies have been looking for people to manage those workers.  ''hiring is much more aggressive, much more real,'' he said.  the hottest areas for executive jobs, according to mckinley, are sales, engineering and accounting and finance (particularly for those familiar with accounting changes in the sarbanes-oxley act of 2002 or with compliance reporting to the securities and exchange commission) with strong growth in marketing and information technology. mr. ohlendorf said that in information technology, there was particularly strong demand for senior-level project managers, professionals with experience in software quality assurance and microsoft's .net technology.  for college graduates in general, the job outlook is also good, according to the national association of colleges and employers, an organization of college career advisers and staffing professionals.  a recent survey found that employers hope to hire 17.4 percent more graduates in 2007 than in 2006. employers in the service sector predicted the largest increase, 19.8 percent, with manufacturers planning to increase hiring of graduates by 9.5 percent. for government and nonprofit employers, the projected gain was 9 percent.  but that doesn't mean finding a job is effortless. jonathan g. sugar, who later this year will be graduating from a master's program in mechanical engineering at the university of california, los angeles, said that pounding the pavement or, perhaps more aptly in 2007, hitting the job boards, was still crucial for graduating college students.  a recent visit to a job fair that included many of themajor military contractors was little more than a meet-and-greet, he said.  ''all the big companies just tell you to go online and apply,'' he said. ''i just go to the job fairs for the free pens.''  office space  