lost souls, and puppets, in a tour of the afterlife   walk into a new york theater at random and you have a decent chance of encountering a story about sex and its consequences, or a parody of some pop-culture phenomenon, or a tale of war and power. you have very little chance of encountering a play that looks beyond the earthly realm to the spiritual one. life after death? puh-lease; don't be so unfashionable.  the magis theater company, though, is daring to be different with a thought-provoking adaptation of ''the great divorce,'' c. s. lewis's story about a bus ride through heaven and hell. with a template that seems drawn from dante's ''divine comedy,'' swedenborg's ''heaven and hell'' and assorted other sources, lewis planted himself as an observer of a series of vignettes in which souls struggling to find their proper place in the afterlife are led by more experienced spirits to confront their ruling loves. the viewpoint is christian, of course, but the ideas carry across religious boundaries.  trying to translate such a book to the stage could easily result in something resembling a rickety christmas pageant, but the magis version is long on theatrical skill and remarkably short on preachiness. ten actors bring the scenes to life, among them george drance, who did the adaptation and directed. the show begins with the audience on the stage, helping to form the crowd waiting for the aforementioned bus. a smattering of intriguing music by elizabeth swados enhances the journey, and there are even a few (happily, only a few) puppets.  thomas piper makes a fine lewis, with everyone else in multiple roles. by the end of the 90-minute show, you're feeling the limits of the form; even well-staged vignettes can be only so involving. still, these various characters -- the artist who is dismayed that what she thinks of as fame does not exist in heaven; the wife who realizes that what she felt for her husband was not love, but the love of domination -- have plenty to say to those interested in matters of the spirit.  ''the great divorce'' continues through feb. 11 at theater 315, 315 west 47th street, clinton; (212) 686-4444.  theater review  correction:  february 10, 2007, saturday  a theater review on jan. 31 of ''the great divorce'' at theater 315 in manhattan, which closes tomorrow, gave an incorrect telephone number for tickets. it is (212) 868-4444.  