joining china to find a yao who can hit   two of the world's most closely watched empires signed a deal here tuesday. china wants a half-decent national baseball team. the yankees want a toe in the chinese sports market, and the chance to find -- better yet, develop -- major league baseball's yao ming.  in a ceremony at china's national sports ministry, the yankees' president, randy levine, committed the team to helping the chinese baseball association train and develop young talent while also trying to promote baseball in a country in which it remains virtually unknown.  the yankees agreed to help establish baseball academies in china and also send coaches, scouts and ''player-development people'' here in a few months.  for the yankees, the agreement represents a bet on the future, placing the team in the vanguard of major league baseball's continuing effort to establish the sport in china.  the national basketball association is already hugely popular here, and the national football league is planning a preseason game here as it searches for new fans. baseball has never really taken off since its introduction by chinese exchange students returning from yale in 1877.  ''obviously, to make a new sport relevant in a new market like china, it's going to take a lot of work,'' said jim small, major league baseball's point man in japan.  levine said the yankees would make a significant investment in china, but offered few specifics as he expressed enthusiasm about the country as a potential fan base and, eventually, as a source of talent.  ''this is a great, great market,'' he said. ''it's growing.  ''and there will be ample opportunity for all parties at this table to reap the benefits.''  chinese officials tend to have a weakness for pomp and ceremony, and the yankees' brass seemed to get into the spirit. baseball caps were exchanged, and levine and general manager brian cashman slipped on china baseball association jackets.  cashman praised the new yankees' star, the taiwanese pitcher chien-ming wang, and even showed a subtle understanding of chinese political sensitivities when he referred to wang's island homeland as chinese taipei.  asked for a time frame in which the yankees might field a mainland chinese player, cashman was more blunt.  ''i can't give an optimistic date,'' he said. the team looks forward to having players from china in a yankees uniform, he said, but he did not say when. ''you can call this the great push,'' he said.  major league baseball is already helping china prepare a team for the 2008 beijing olympics. in 2003, it sent jim lefebvre, a former major leaguer and manager, to manage the chinese team. the former boston left-hander bruce hurst is the team's pitching coach.  lefebvre said in a telephone interview that he was pleased that the yankees were coming to china.  ''they bring a lot of swagger, they bring a lot of prestige,'' he said.  he added that in his four years of involvement in chinese baseball he had seen a lot chinese players who could play class aa ball, but none with the talent to play in the major leagues. at the world baseball classic last year, lefebvre's team lost games to japan, korea and taiwan by a combined score of 40-6.  in march, chinese players will travel to the united states to participate in spring training with several major league teams. rather than compete as a team, they will split up and train separately.  ''let them play with other players,'' lefebvre said. ''it is not always about china against the world.''  baseball  