egyptian paper accuses iranians of complicity in envoy's death   a front-page article in egypt's semiofficial state newspaper on sunday accused iranian intelligence of involvement in the 2005 killing of egypt's ambassador to iraq.  the report, which was denied by the egyptian foreign ministry and the iranian foreign ministry, comes at a time of heightened concern in egypt and other arab states about iran's growing influence in the region. egyptian officials have said they are upset and worried that iraq is moving away from the arab world and coming under the influence of iran, a shiite and non-arab state.  the article, which appeared in egypt's most widely circulated newspaper, al ahram, was attributed to anonymous sources and stated that iran's goal was to ''cut off the legs'' of egypt from iraq.  it said the belief that iran was involved in the killing helped explain egypt's support for president bush's plan to send additional troops into iraq. it offered no evidence to support those claims.  in 2005, in an effort by egypt to support iraq's newly elected, shiite-dominated government, ihab al sharif was sent to iraq in june as the first resident ambassador from a sunni arab state. one month later, mr. sharif was abducted, and he was killed four days later.  the egyptian foreign ministry issued a statement on sunday denying the newspaper report. ''we have no relationship to what was published, and we don't have any information to this effect,'' alaa el hadidy, spokesman for the ministry, added in a telephone interview. ''this is an old story buried and closed.''  an unidentified person at the iranian foreign ministry told the islamic republic news agency, iran's official news agency, that the article was ''baseless and completely false.''  still, the report on sunday could strain already tense relations between the countries. while al qaeda in mesopotamia took responsibility for the killing of mr. sharif in 2005, his killers were never caught. the killing was seen by arab states as an attempt by sunni insurgents to discourage their governments from fostering ties with the mainly shiite iraqi government.  but the article contributed to concerns about iran's seeming quest for influence in iraq. speaking on the news channel al jazeera on sunday, mustafa el-fiqi, chairman of the foreign affairs committee in the egyptian parliament, said, ''now we are starting to hear this new tale that could be influenced by the tense nature of iranian-arab relations at this stage because of the sectarian war in iraq, and perhaps in lebanon and other areas.''  egypt has not sent another ambassador, and no other arab state has posted one to iraq.  