florida gators on top of supercharged sec   the basketball was a blur as it was passed among the florida gators. they were looking for the best shot, not merely a good shot. open 18-footers were surrendered for open 10-footers, and florida shot 58 percent in a rout of host auburn last saturday.  similar to the 2005-6 season, when they were on their way to winning the national title, the gators can fit their egos in a thimble. the familiar stars -- joakim noah, corey brewer, al horford, taurean green, lee humphrey -- do not seem consumed with turning florida's games into solo auditions for the n.b.a.  the 91-66 victory at auburn was the latest evidence that the gators were not resting on their laurels.  the first pass is never the last pass for florida (19-2, 6-0 southeastern conference), which is ranked no. 1 in both major polls. after the 25-point victory over auburn, which four days earlier defeated 12th-ranked alabama by 24 points, the gators' next obstacle is no. 24 vanderbilt (15-6, 5-2) tonight.  ''i don't know if we were ready to defend our title three weeks ago, but we are now,'' brewer said. ''we had some guys out, but now we're 100 percent; we have all our parts.''  around the corner from the florida locker room last saturday, fans were lined up five-deep along security barriers, waiting for the gators to walk to their bus. the attention florida receives has hardly abated as the season has progressed -- perhaps because the team has lost only twice in the last 32 games.  ''compared to this point last season, we're a better team,'' horford, a junior forward, said.  the sec is stronger this season, too, with the improvement of teams like auburn (13-9, 3-4), georgia (13-6, 4-2) and mississippi (14-8, 3-5), which tested florida's ball-handling with full-court pressure and lost by 79-70 in gainesville on jan. 20. then, on jan. 24, mississippi state (11-9, 2-5) tried to limit florida's outside shooting. the gators went inside and drew fouls but made 23 of 34 free-throw attempts while squeaking out a 70-67 victory in starkville, miss.  ''the league this season is like no other i've seen looking at it from the inside or looking from the outside,'' georgia coach dennis felton said after the bulldogs' 57-54 victory at home over louisiana state (13-7, 2-4) last sunday. ''it's powerful. we're better, ole miss is better, auburn is better. the three of us are supposed to be three of the bottom teams in the conference and we beat l.s.u. and kentucky, and look what auburn did to alabama.''  felton said one of the reasons the sec was deeper this season was the return of so many players who could have opted for the n.b.a. draft.  l.s.u. center glen davis, who was projected to be a second-round pick or better, stayed for his junior season, along with kentucky center randolph morris and alabama forward jermareo davidson. the crimson tide's all-sec point guard, ronald steele, also decided against entering the draft, even after shining in the n.c.a.a. tournament in march.  ''i don't know of another league that kept so many good players,'' felton said.  the team that kept most of its players, of course, was florida, which returned its starting lineup. noah, brewer, green and horford are juniors, and humphrey is a senior. all five have scoring averages in double figures.  noah, the 6-foot-11 forward/center who emerged as the star of the n.c.a.a. tournament last season, is now the target of opposing fans at road games. he pranced through the pregame layup line at auburn as fans shouted insults at him. he responded by sticking out his tongue. they mocked his toothy grin and hair pulled into a ponytail, and noah simply smiled wide.  still weak from the flu, noah did not have the usual bounce in his legs against auburn and made 2 of 5 shots, but when one player struggles for florida, others manage the load. the 6-8 brewer made only 4 of 14 shots, but horford, humphrey and green combined to shoot 16 of 20 from the field.  the bench contributed 21 points, with 8 each from guard walter hodge and forward chris richard.  ''florida, i think, is one of the best teams i have seen in five years,'' auburn coach jeff lebo said. ''they have answers at every spot. they have depth. they are experienced. they take everyone's best shot in tough environments, and they still win.  ''i think last year, they knew they were good, but they didn't know how good they were. this year, they know.''  college basketball  