nasty fall isn't keeping her down   it has been almost a year since lindsey kildow had one of the ugliest olympic downhill crashes since hermann maier flew upside down into worldwide fame at the 1998 winter games in nagano, japan. she returned to competition a few days later, but was badly bruised and failed to win a medal.  with the men's circuit in kitzbühel on sunday and the women in italy, the fearless kildow returned to san sicario and exacted a measure of revenge by winning a world cup super-g race on the same slope where her olympic dreams were dashed a year ago.  ''in ski racing, you're going to have crashes,'' kildow, 22, said sunday night in a telephone interview. ''you have to get up and keep going. that's what the difference is between being a long-term winner and a short-term winner.''  kildow's victory came a week before the start of the alpine skiing world championships. the 15-day event takes place every other year, this time in are, sweden.  kildow and her united states teammate julia mancuso, the olympic giant slalom champion, are expecting big things. they have been a force on the world cup circuit this season, each winning three races and remaining in the top five in the overall standings.  mancuso, who finished eighth sunday, had an operation to repair hip problems last spring, limiting the time she could spend training and testing equipment before the season.  as nasty as her olympic fall was, kildow is no stranger to crashes. twice this year she has taken hard falls. in october, while training on a glacier in austria, she sustained a bruised bone below her knee. and a week ago, while racing in cortina d'ampezzo, italy, she crashed into the safety nets and missed a day of racing.  ''she crashes because she is always going to her limits, and sometimes a little bit above it,'' said alex hoedlemoser, the austrian-born coach of the united states women's downhill and super-g team. ''that's why she's so fast. if she always skis in the comfort zone, she would always be slow.''  to avoid acknowledging their fragility, the fastest american ski racers have adopted a mordant euphemism for the violent accidents that can occur while racing across bumpy ice at high speed.  they talk about ''visiting the red room,'' a reference to the red safety netting that lines world cup downhills and wraps around racers in a scary blur as they plow through it toward trees, fans or television cameras.  kildow recently became engaged to thomas vonn, a retired racer from newburgh, n.y., who competed for st. lawrence university before spending several years on the world cup circuit with the united states team.  kildow has made a determined effort to learn german, reading children's books to increase her vocabulary. on sunday, she gave a long and confident interview to austrian television.  ''the language of skiing is german, and i want to be a part of it,'' kildow said. ''i'm in the sport for a long time, so i might as well be able to communicate.''  in kitzbühel, the historic hahnenkamm races, first held in 1931, took place without the notoriously dangerous streif downhill.  for the first time since 1971, the weekend event consisted of slalom races. jens byggmark of sweden, an unheralded 21-year-old who had raced in only four world cup events before this season, won both of them.  byggmark, a cherub-faced laplander from the same tiny village as ingemar stenmark, the career leader in world cup wins with 86, was overwhelmed by the prizes and attention that came with winning at the most celebrated site on the circuit.  ''i have no idea what this will lead to; it's really hard to describe,'' said byggmark, who was overcome by apparently uncontrollable fits of giggling after each of his victories.  the american ted ligety, the olympic combined champion who was seventh sunday, said of byggmark: ''he's got a sweet style, a little wild and crazy. it's kind of daunting to think of what we'll have to do to beat him.''  the men's world cup has one more race before the world championships -- a slalom tuesday night at schladming, austria.  three slaloms over four days is a unique ordeal for bode miller, who has had an outstanding season in the downhill and the super-g but who retains a sentimental attachment to slalom.  miller wants to formally qualify for the world championship slalom, to try to win that race and become the first racer to win a world championship gold medal in each of the five disciplines. he won the other four in 2003 and 2005.  five years ago, miller brought a wacky and effective new style to slalom racing, but he lost his magic as he diversified into an all-event skier, packed on muscle and switched ski manufacturers four times.  he has since found it almost impossible to finish slalom races, but he commands a rapt audience from the top-ranked skiers as he stubbornly starts in every event, suffering through the late start position that comes with his plummeting ranking.  on sunday, he managed one unblemished performance in the first leg of the race and was less than 10 seconds from the finish on the second when -- in perfect counterpoint to the encouragement of the stadium announcer -- he sprung off course.  skiing  