taking a two-century voyage through the music of france   there's something unfairly disarming about an all-french vocal recital. both the language and the way french composers have woven music around it are so inherently seductive that, given a singer who has internalized both, resistance -- or even detatchment -- is futile. this repertory has always been high ground for the mezzo-soprano susan graham, and for her recital at carnegie hall on monday evening she and her pianist, malcolm martineau, explored it in an unusual way.  instead of the standard model -- four or five composers, a dozen songs each -- ms. graham and mr. martineau assembled a historical tour of the 19th and 20th centuries, with the intermission dividing them. twenty-two composers were represented, each by a single song, except for debussy and fauré, who had a song on each half, and reynaldo hahn, who had a well-merited return among the encores.  it seemed, at first, an idea that might work better on paper than on the stage. several among the first group of 19th-century songs -- bizet's ''chanson d'avril,'' and franck's nocturne, for example -- though amply charming, lacked the allure of later french music. but within a handful of works, that qualm evaporated. allure may still have been in french music's future, but these songs have other attractions.  lalo's lively ''guitare,'' among them, has an almost jazzy piano part that a singer must wiggle into. saint-saëns's ''danse macabre'' is the kind of vividly picturesque, dramatic piece that suits ms. graham, not least because its imagery invites her to draw on her considerable (and flexible) coloristic range. in chabrier's ''cigales,'' similarly, she conveyed a surprising range of emotion (ending with a growl of frustration) in a brief comic song about cicadas.  others -- Émile paladilhe's pained ''psyché'' and duparc's wrenching ''au pays où se fait la guerre'' (''to the war-torn land'') -- let her demonstrate a more constricted but deeper emotional palette.  the program depended to a great degree on ms. graham's persuasiveness as both a comic and dramatic singer. often the juxtapositions were stark: in the first 20th-century group, her wry account of andré caplet's ''corbeau et le renard'' (''the crow and the fox'') was followed immediately by the dark intensity of roussel's ''réponse d'une épouse sage'' (''response of a virtuous wife'') and messiaen's haunting ''fiancée perdue'' (''lost fiancée'').  ms. graham made these odd sequences work by carefully shading every phrase, sometimes every word. at times, she didn't need words at all: her lovely account of fauré's vocalise-étude was one of the program's highlights.  the encores were better still. after a magnificently velvet-toned performance of ''À chloris'' by reynaldo hahn, ms. graham stepped outside the theme, sort of, to sing a noël coward song, ''there's always something fishy about the french.''  music review  