digging past the familiar to find beethoven treasures, some knotty and some nice   beethoven's three most famous piano sonatas have names. you know what they are. the more-than-casual listener will identify three, arguably four more, also with poetic titles attached. add to these the last three sonatas, which no one interested in this composer's late period will have avoided. this leaves 22 beethoven piano sonatas that, aside from music students, hardly anyone knows at all.  garrick ohlsson's three-recital series at alice tully hall, which began on sunday afternoon, is valuable, among other reasons, for its use of this underused resource. classical-music recording executives and programmers comb the past for fresh repertory, but these splendid products of a great man's workshop seem rarely to make it outside the teacher's studio.  mr. ohlsson used two of the big three as bookends for sunday's program, the ''pathétique'' and the ''appassionata,'' with lesser-known works (op. 22 and op. 10, no. 2) in between. the opus 22 sonata in b flat is a maze of virtuosity, its acrobatics and intricacies capable of publicly humiliating established performers. other musicians, i am sure, keep its difficulties (and unfortunately its charms) to themselves. certainly beethoven must have been a very good pianist.  the opus 10 sonata in f, light as a feather, is more manageable and was treated here as a kind of comedy routine, with cross-handed passages as rim shots followed by pratfalls. for 14-year-old pianists wondering what the racing finale really ought to sound like, mr. ohlsson offered instruction. elsewhere the playing offered drama without histrionics and heart-on-sleeve feelings with no loss of dignity. mr. ohlsson remembers that beethoven the wild-eyed revolutionary was also a spiritual child of haydn and a more decorous time.  this was pianism technically clear and confident, and unafraid to turn the finale of the ''appassionata'' into a calculated frenzy. the last movement of opus 22 seemed almost perversely slow, as if some point about oneness of tempo were being made. i'm also not used to the heavily accented, long appoggiaturas at the end of the slow movement of the ''pathétique,'' but maybe mr. ohlsson has some musicology up his sleeve i'm unaware of.  the second program, on feb. 25, offers the splendid early sonata in c; the endearing, much later two-movement f sharp sonata, of which beethoven was fond; and liszt's arrangement of beethoven's fourth symphony. for a little ''moonlight,'' you will have to wait until april 1, but to judge from sunday's big crowd, getting in might be hard.  garrick ohlsson performs at lincoln center on feb. 25 at alice tully hall and on april 1 at avery fisher; (212) 721-6500, lincolncenter.org.  music review  