following a blue-collar dude, on the road and in the nude   ''the naked trucker & t-bones show,'' which has been appearing on comedy central for the last few weeks, is a kind of road and variety show, a cousin, in spirit, to the blue collar comedians. but it's a dopier, unwelcome cousin -- more wayward and unhinged -- with far less investment in the virtue of common sense.  the show, which jumps back and forth from a stage in front of a live studio audience to filmed clips of its two characters driving around in a truck, revolves around the naked trucker, portrayed by dave (gruber) allen, and t-bones, an idiot drifter played by david koechner, formerly of ''saturday night live,'' whose sideburns curve around his jaw and look like inverted pistols.  that the 50-ish-looking character with long hair and no clothes on -- the naked trucker wears only shoes and a guitar slung over his shoulder to conceal his midsection -- is the straight man, the voice of reason, tells you all you need to know about just how strained the efforts at comedy are going to become. why is the naked trucker naked? it is impossible to know. nakedness doesn't make him funnier. he is simply not funny. presumably, someone at comedy central noticed the guy who plays a guitar in times square wearing only his briefs and cowboy boots and hat and determined that the future was a weekly television appearance by a bare-chested middle-aged man who looks like backup for lynyrd skynyrd.  the appeal of the so-called blue collar comedians -- jeff foxworthy and the rest -- is that they ground their humor in the trials of averageness. but mr. allen and mr. koechner don't seem to think of themselves as average. they appear to think of themselves as brilliant eccentrics playing the part of simpletons, geniuses whose nonsensical digressions are really not nonsensical at all.  here is a sampling of some of the banter from t-bones: ''hey trucker, you know when you're going through a car wash and a couple of guys pull you out of the car, steal the change from your ashtray, put it in a tube sock and beat you with it?''  nothing in ''the naked trucker & t-bones show'' glides off the tongue. and all the quaker state motor oil in the world couldn't silken the delivery.  the naked trucker & t-bones show  comedy central, tonight at 10:30, eastern and pacific times; 9:30, central time.  dave (gruber) allen, david koechner, norman hiscock, donick cary, j p williams, executive producers; scott landsman and zoe friedman, executives in charge of production for comedy central.  with: dave (gruber) allen (naked trucker) and david koechner (gerald t-bones tibbons).  television review  