big trouble for a small-town ingénue   as sopranos age, it is natural to expect their voices to mature, to grow darker and thicker. karita mattila is now 46. and, as her riveting portrayal of the title role of janacek's ''jenufa'' on monday night at the metropolitan opera made vibrantly clear, ms. mattila's artistry is maturing.  yet she projects youthful sensuality and restlessness better than most sopranos half her age. and it's not just that ms. mattila is so lovely and agile. though she has ample power and can send her cool nordic voice soaring over the orchestra, she can also shape phrases with beguiling grace and girlish lightness.  playing the winsome and foolishly trusting jenufa, a young woman in a remote rural moravian village in the late 19th century who favors plain country dresses and hates shoes, ms. mattila conveyed that youth is a time of rampant confusion and extreme emotions. her portrayal was even richer and more complex than it was four years ago when the met introduced this production by olivier tambosi.  for this revival of the opera, performed in the original czech and in janacek's 1908 version, the met is presenting the legendary soprano anja silja as jenufa's severe stepmother, the kostelnicka buryja. this character serves as the sacristan in the local chapel and sees herself as enforcer of the town's morals. talk about ageless artistry; depending on which biographical sources you trust, ms. silja is in the vicinity of 70. if some of her top notes and softer high-lying singing sound somewhat strident and unstable, her performance was an object lesson in how determination and intensity are what matter. despite the occasional roughness, her singing had a deep and true beauty.  jenufa has fallen for her gregarious cousin steva, the town rake and the owner, by birthright, of his family's mill. pregnant with steva's child, she is desperate to marry. but the boorish steva has a half-brother, laca, a mere worker in the mill, who is filled with fraternal resentment and jealousy over jenufa. and the kostelnicka, whose dead husband was a drunken blowhard, does not want her stepdaughter to make the same mistake.  the tenor raymond very brought a robust voice and hardy presence to his dynamic portrayal of steva, while ms. mattila's finnish countryman, the tenor jorma silvasti, was an impulsive and pitiable laca. in the horrific end to act i, as he seethes with impotence, furious that jenufa still intends to marry the cavalier steva, laca slashes jenufa's rosy cheek, which scars her badly and causes steva to reject her. what could be an implausibly melodramatic stroke is made searingly real through janacek's music, which conveys first laca's longing, then arousal and then unhinged anger.  the production is loaded with symbolism: a huge boulder, signifying, it would seem, the oppressive, small-minded morality of the townspeople, is plopped in the middle of the kostelnicka's house. still, there are some striking images, as in the opening scene, when between high, bare rustic wooden walls we see a golden wheat field and a cloudless blue sky.  janacek's unconventional score sets the vocal lines with a singsong naturalism, while in the orchestra cyclic motifs and melodic fragments swirl in a wash of thickly chromatic harmony, prodded along by obsessive rhythmic figurations. the czech conductor jiri belohlavek was especially sensitive to the music's lyrical outpourings and folkloric touches. with his approach, the rich, wistful and glowing music in the final scene seemed especially humane.  in a desperate fit to expunge the family dishonor and liberate her trapped stepdaughter, the kostelnicka drowns jenufa's infant boy in an icy river. the body is discovered, and the guilty woman is led away by the stunned villagers. jenufa and laca agree to marry, taking comfort in their unromantic but reassuring devotion.  additional performances of ''jenufa'' at the met will be on friday, and on feb. 6, 10, 14 and 17; (212) 362-6000.  music review  